PROPOSITIONS CONTAINING ANSWERS TO CERTAIN demands in diverse spiritual
matters, specially concerning the Conscience oppressed with the grief of sin.

WITH AN EPISTLE AGAINST hardness of heart, made by that worthy Preacher of
the Gospel of Christ, M. R. GREENHAM Pastor of Drayton.

MATTHEW. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are loaded, and I will
ease you, etc. EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT Waldegraue Printer to the Kings
Majesty. ANNO 1597.

Cum Privilegio Regio.

CERTAIN DEMAVNDS answered by M. GREENHAM a learned man.
1 IT is harder to believe in the abundance of worldly means, than it is in
the want of them; for they as it were are vailes set betwixt God and us, they
stay our sight in them that it cannot pearce to God.

2 Heathen men were humbled by their dreams, we are not humbled by the word:
they that will not profit by Gods judgments in other, shall feel themselves: we
have no claim to Gods mercy offered in the Gospel, until we be humbled by
his threatening in the Law.

3 If we go on still in sin, God will go on still in judgment: but if our
hearts relent from sin, God will release his sentence of punishment.

4 As the Gospel first began by simple Fishermen to be preached, but
afterward being received in love, grew to the other more learned sort: so,
for not receiving the word in love, but having our ears tickling to new
doctrine, heresies and sects beginning now amongst us but in the simpler sort,
and ignorant men of the cuntrie, are like to invade the best learned. And God
purposing to punish the coldness of our age, can as well now send an heretical
spirit, not only into the common people, but into 400. learned Preachers, as
he did in times past send a lying spirit into 400. Prophets.

5 If we think we may speak, we will speak toe soon: if we may keep silence,
we will hold our peace toe long, when we much love the persons to whom we
speak, we flack our zeal in rebuking of sin: if we be zealous against
sin, we flack our love to the person.

6 As in marriage, though the parties met in the flesh without any sanctified
means, to assure themselves to be joined of the Lord: yet if God afterward
give them grace to live holilie in their meetings, he shows not only that
their corrupt meeting is pardoned, but that now their meeting is blessed. So,
if entering into a calling for want of gifts and affections, we have no
assurance at the first of a warrantable calling: yet if GOD afterward furnish
us with able gifts, and sanctify us with pure minds, he does not only show
us that our former sin is pardoned, but also that he is well pleased with
this calling whereunto he has blessed us.

7 Satan under the color of repentance, brings many into an extreme
sadness, and stricktnes in using the creatures of God: again, under pretense of
Christian liberty, and delivering of men from extreme griefs, he allureth
them to an vnmoderate and an unsanctified mirth and intemperate use of the
creatures of God: so blinding judgment, he after corrupts affection.

8 The best art of memory, is to be humbled at Gods threatening, and comforted
at his promises: for sure it is, that exceeding griefs or exceeding joys,
leave great impressions in us.

9 The best art of Logic is to reason E converso, out of that saying of PAVL.
There is no Temptation has overtaken you, but it has overtaken others. And to
say thus, There has no temptation overtaken others, but the same may overtake
us: This will teach us to speak charitablie and profitably of other men's
infirmities.

10 We may not go to see ungodliness to breed a greater detestation of it in us:
for first, in respect of our selves, for presuming o^ a thing not warranted, it
is the just judgment of God, that we should learn to fall into that sin
whereof before we were ignorant. Secondly, in respect of our brethren it is
unlawful: for if they be strong, we offend them; if they be weak, we mis-lead
them. Thirdly, in regard of Gods glory, it is unlawful; for such should be
our zeal thereunto, if not having heretical spirits, by the motions of Gods
spirit to speak against it, yet that we should not once see such a thing.

11 As natural men use Gods creatures to stir up a natural comfort, so
spiritual men should use them to stir up some spiritual comfort, and to stir up
godly joys in themselves: for as Satan seeing men of a sanguine complexion
and sanctified, labors to mix with their spiritual joy a carnal joy: so
seeing some of a malancholick complexion sanctified, to have spiritual
sorrows, he striveth to bring upon them carnal sorrows.

12 If you desire to hear the word with profit, observe these things; before
you go to the Church humble your self in prayer to God, that he may prepare
your understanding, affection, and memory, to receive; and that the Preacher
may speak to your conscience.

13 After in hearing with some short prayer, apply the several thretnings,
promises, and instructions, to your own estate: when you are come home from
hearing, change all that you remember into a prayer, and desire God that you
may remember it most, when you should practice it, and use to teach others, and
to confer of all things remembered: It is a good thing, to remember a thing
diligently and the reason of it.

14 Let us not complain of the want of Discipline, but be thankful for the
discipline we have: it is the Lords will, even in this want of Discipline to
advance his own glory, in taking that to himself, which otherwise we would
attribute to Discipline: for besides that, he does that by his word and prayer,
which may be done by Discipline: it may be discipline would hide many
hypocrites which now are discovered, and cover many christian true hearts which
now are known: for they that are godly now are godly of a conscience, being a
discipline to themselves; but many may seem godly in discipline, which do it
of fear and not of love.

15 No trouble should hinder us in our calling, unless it be in case of meare
ungodliness: for if for every troble or for many troubles a man may forsake his
calling, he should be out of any calling, forasmuch as every calling has his
lettes and troubles.

16 Though all exercises of pure Religion purelie used, do strengthen judgment
and whet up affection, yet reading hearing, and conferring, do most strengthen
judgment, and in part whet on affection: But praying, singing, and meditation
do most chiefly whet up affection, but in part strengthen judgment and
understanding.

17 As a loving husband will not take away his love from his wife for some
particular wants, so long as she keeps her love wholly and truly unto him:
So the Lord will not cast off his loving kindness to us for special wants, or
frailty in particular commandments, so long as we generally labor to please
him.

18 One being courteously saluted, and worthelie commended of a Gentlewoman,
who said, she heard a very good report of him; he answered her, the like have I
heard of you; but God make our after fruits of his spirit more effectual
tha^ the former; or else we shall not answer the glory of God, and good opinion
of his Saints conceived of us.

19 The wicked that dare not boldly profess iniquity, redeem times secretly
to commit it, so though we have not the strength to profess Religion
publictlie, yet let us redeem times secretly to frequent the exercises of
Religion.

20 To a Courtier complaining of the occasions of evil, he said: Though you
have occasions of sin offered, yet the cause of sin is still in your self.

21 Sometimes in a good action, using good means with an upright heart to a
lawful end, yet our prayers be unfruitful and our labors want success: then
let us remember, that in all these there were secret imperfections, and that
the Lords deferring is, that we being better prepared by humility to be
thankful, he may grant our requests in richer manner and measure.

22 Where there is an immoderate care of outward things, there commonly is
little care of inward good things; for if one have inward good things, they so
content the persons that have them, that they labor not much for outward
things: if they want them and desire them, the careful seeking of them,
brings a godly neglect of outward things.

23 Ministers should most frequent those places, where God has made their
ministry most fruitful: they should herein be like the covetous man, that
where they have once found the sweetness of gaining of souls, thither they
should be most desirous to resort.

24 Let their advice be a general praescription of Physic: First, the parties
afflicted, are to labor to have peace of their consciences, and joy of the holy
Ghost, through the assurance of their sins pardoned in Christ; then careful
must they be to use the means, which may nourish their inward peace and joy:
Thirdly, they must rejoice and recreate themselves in wisdom and well doing
with the Saints of God, and holy company; and lastly, they must refresh
themselves with Kitchen physic, and a thankful using of the creatures of God.

25 When one said to him after long conference and prayer; Sir, I have
troubled you, oh my brother: Not so, said he, I never felt it by well doing,
and if I may pleasure you, it is as joyful to me as ever it was to you to
receive money; for, for this cause I live.

26 His love ever grew to a man, as he knew the man to grow in godliness, and
his love decayed as the graces of God decayed: first he was greeved, and then
his love was flacked.

27 Unto one that was tempted with much unbelief, he gave this counsel; When
the temptation comes, either fall down in prayer, and say, Lord thou make
me to possess the sins of my youth, and this temptation is very equity;
howbeit, oh Lord, grant I may by wisdom herein, make this temptation an holy
instruction, and suffer me to possess my soul in patience: oh turn this to
thy glory and my salvation: I see and confess what has been in me a long
time, by that which now shows itself in me, and that thy grace has
altogether hitherto kept under this corruption: yet Lord I believe, Lord yet I
will believe, help Lord my unbelief, thy name be praised, for this seal of
thy love, and pledge of thy spirit; that in this unbelief I am grieved as in
my belief I am wont to be comforted, and though my former old and secret
sins, deserve that I should not only be given over to infidelity, but also
that it should be in me without grief and remorse, yet Lord forgive my sins
new and old, forgive my unthankfulness, Lord increase my faith, and grant
good Father, when thou shall restore to me this gift of grace again, that I
may use it in fear; and show it by fruits. Or if this do not prevail, give
your self with all humblenes to read the word of God, especially, his
promises, and be still attending upon the means, waiting when the Lord shall
enlarge your heart. Or if this do not help, go to some faithful brother,
confess yourselfe to him, acknowledge your weakness to him, and be not ashamed
to give God the glory by shaming your self, and opening your corruption to
him, that so he may pray for you, whose prayer according to the promise of
God, made to his holy ordinance, herein James 5. undoubtedly shall be heard in
the appointed time: Thus having prayed by yourselfe, and with another, and used
the means of reading for your recoverie, though you have not present relief,
yet in meeknes of mind and patience of your spirit, go to your calling,
knowing that your prayers and the word of God, being as seed, must have some
time between the sowing of them, and the reaping of the increase and fruit of
them. Above all: reason not with your temptations, dispute not with the Devil,
as though you could prevail of yourselfe, and as I would not you should
dispute with your temptation, so I would not you should despise it and make
no account of it; for in both are extremities. If you take it toe much to
heart, or marvel how you should overcome such a temptation, it will make you
dull or desperate: If you account of it toe little, and marvel how such
things should come into your head, which was not wont to be so, it will make
you not to strive, and you shall be swallowed up before you be aware: If you
account of it toe fearfully, Satan will oppress you before you begin to
fight; If you account of it toe lightly, the devil needs not to wrestle with
you, you will overcome yourselfe? Fight boldly in Christ, tremble at your own
corruption; but rest and trust in Christ your salvation: If still you ar
tempted, and no body by you, write your temptation, and offer it to God by
prayer, and promise to him, that you will ask counsel at his word, at the
mouth of his Minister, when he shall give you just occasion: If all this help
not, comfort your self with this pledge of Election, that you are joyed when
you feel your belief, and you are grieved, lest you should displease God by
your unbelief; and know, that as there is a vicissitude of the means of
salvation, which you must use; so there is also a vicissitude of temptations,
whereof this is one, against which you must strive.

28 Unto one that was tempted with worldly shame, and thought the
distemperature of his mind proceeded thereof, he said on this sort; first
know, that Satan has no absolute power, but a power by permission to try
us, against which, we must arm our selves by faith, which will assure us, that
either the Lord will mitigate our temptation if our power and patience be not
great; or else, if he enlarge the trial, he will increase our strength
according to the portion of our temptation; we must also pray, that the Lord
give not out that measure of leave to the devil, which we give out to sin to
work rebellion in us against his majesty; but that he would rather make
Satan a Surgeon to show us our sins, than Sergeant to confound us for them.
It is the policy of the adversary, to persuade many, that the weakness of
their body, and feeblenes of their brain proceeds of their temptations,
when indeed it comes of their unstaid minds, wandering toe much after the
motions of the devil, in that they not resting on the word, nor depending on
Christ, nor contenting themselves to be tried, nor comforting themselves by
meditation, attend toe much, and confer with the devils illusions and
temptations, being more greved for their present sufferings, than for their
sins past. The root of this wordly shame, is pride and haughtines of mind,
which is a privy evil, and hardly will be beaten into the head of them that
are infected with it; but sure it is, that we would never be so grieved for the
loss of a thing, if we did not toe much desire it, and toe immoderatlie use
it, whilst we had it. John 12. 42. Which sin of haughtines, the Lord seeing
in his children, that they are more humbled, with the loss of worldly credit,
than with the sense of their sins, and loss of his glory; he strikes them
with the want of that thing which is most precious unto them, because they
made no conscience of that honor which is most precious unto him: wherefore
this is the best remedy, rather to be greved that we feel not our sins to
be pardoned with God, than that we are known to be sinners amongst men, and
that we be ready to shame our selves that God may have the glory;
acknowledging, shame, and confusion, and the whole hell of temptations to be
due unto us; and glory, praise and compassion, to be the Lords: for this is a
special mark of the child of God by temptations rightly humbled, when he is
ready to shame himself for his sin, and to glorify God in his mercy.

29 Unto one that thought himself to have sinned against the holy Ghost, he
said, Satan's temptations follow our affections: for if we lightly account of
sin, he bleres our eyes still with Gods mercies; if we begin to make a
conscience of sin, he loadeth us with the judgments of God, being as ready now
to aggravate the sin, more than it is in it self, as before he would extenuate
it to make it seem less than it was; howbeit, said he to the man thus
afflicted. I will say unto you as Samuel said to the people after they had
confessed themselves to have sinned against God with a great sin. True it is
said Samuel, not flattering them in their iniquities; Ye have sinned greatly:
notwithstanding, if ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and hear his voice,
and not disobey the word of the Lord, ye shall follow the Lord your God; but
if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but disobey the Lords mouth, then
shall the hand of the Lord be upon you. 1. Sam. 12. 14. So I will not lessen
your sin, but I say you have sinned with a great sin before the Lord, in
that you made a mock of the word which you knew; yet if you turn to the Lord
in fear and serve him, your sin is remissable, howsoever Satan charges your
conscience, in that you have done evil against your own knowledge, and in
that you are affraide lest that sin be in you, and would rejoice in God, if it
were not in you: If you purpose to leave your former sins, and in truth to
turn unto the Lord; I dare assure you, that as yet you are free from that
sin.

30 When a gentlewoman asked him if he were not sometimes merry: Yes says
he, we are often merry, and sometimes we are afraid of our mirth.

31 When we distrust of Gods promises, let us set before us the example of his
mercy done to others; that we may be the more assured to obtain faith; and
when we begin to presume, let us set before us the examples of Gods judgme^ts,
that we may pray for humility.

32 Being desired to give his judgment of a weighty matter, he answered: Sir,
neither am I able to speak, nor you to hear; for that we have not prayed:
indeed I may talk and you answer, as natural men; but we are not now prepared
to confer as the children of God.

33 We may thus try our mourning for the sin of others: First this sorrow
for sin must be bred for our own sins, and from our selves proceed to the
sins of others. Secondly, the measure of our mourning must be agreeable and
proportionable to the sins. Lastly, our grief must to be for the person,
that we be moved, rather to pity and pray for him, than to hate or despise
him.

34 Unto one that with many words disabled himself; he said meekly: oh, why
do you seek so much your own praise; for by this, ye bewraie the privy
corruption of nature, that by toe open a dispraise, desires toe privy praise.

35 It is not good to use that for a diet, which is prescribed for Physic; for
that will not work in the extraordinary need of the body, which is used in
the ordinary cause of health.

36 Seeing a godly man having his son in his arms, whom he loved
tenderly; he said to him, Sir, there is the matter of your rejoicing, God make
it the matter of your thanksgiving.

37 After one had asked his advise for sitting, or kneeling at the Lords Table;
he said, as for such things, let us do as much as we can for the peace of the
Church; lest we make the remedy of the evil, worse than the evil it self.

38 To one that said he was possessed of a devil; he answered, as hoping that
he was the child of God, and rather deluded than afflicted: True it is, that in
as much as lies in you, you have given your self over to the devil: but it is
not in your power, to give over your self to him; neither is it in his
jurisdiction to possess you.

39 He rebuked publicly a public offense of a private man in this manner.
My brethren, such a sin has passed from this place, the guiltles need not
to be offended, the person guilty is to repent of it.

40 Because God works the sense of sin by degrees in his children, he
suspected them, who at every sin named, would show themselves forthwith
troubled.

41 Many having escaped out of the gulf of superstitions, are toe deep plunged
in profaneness.

42 Being asked how a man might reprehend, he answered: First, look that you
have a ground out of the word for reproving, then look if it stand with your
calling to reprove; afterward consider if some other man may do it more
profitably than you; then look before whom you reprove, lest ye hinder the
credit of the party with his friends, and increase his discredit with his
foes: and again, if by all occasions of calling, person, time, and place, the
Lord has put you in this place to rebuke sin; consider you must put on you
the person of the offender, that as you spare not his sin, because of the
zeal of Gods glory, so you press it not toe far, because of compassion to a
brother: then look that with these, your heart be right in zeal and love, and
so call for Gods assistance, before you speak his grace in speaking, and for
his blessing after your speaking, if any thing be left out that might have
been profitable: please not your self in it, but be humbled for it, though
some infirmities be in you: yet shall they not do so much hurt, as Gods
ordinance shall do good.

43 Because great natural and worldly sorrow and joye, will cause a man to
break his sleep at midnight: he would try himself, whether sorrow for sin, and
joy in salvation had caused him to do the like.

44 He rejoiced to see his friends, but he was humbled in that he rested so
much in that joye, that he forget to do the good to their salvation, or to
receive good from them to his salvation, which he thought he should do.

45 One asking what he thought of Fayries: he answered, he thought they were
spirits; but he distinguished between them and other spirits, as commonly
men distinguish between good witches and bad witches.

46 His greatest sorrow was, when either he spoke of some good thing that was
not on himself, and the greatest joy he had was in the contrary.

47 He used this trial in his affections, as of anger, grief, joy, or such
like in this manner; if by them he was made less fit to pray, more unable to
do the good he should do, less careful to avoid sin, then he thought it
carnal and filthy, and not of God: but when his anger, love, grief, and other
affections provoked him more to pray, made him fitter to do good, than he
thought his affections sent to him, to be as the blessing of God.

48 He said, whenever he suspected and feared any evil to come upon
another, he ever had a desire to be delivered and deceived of his opinion, and
that he would be glad to bear the shame of his privy jealousy, so as the
person suspected might turn to God.

49 He thought all afflictions, to be puttings of him to God from slothfulnes.

50 Unto one afflicted in mind, he gave this comfort: First, if you have
knowledge, be thankful for it, and desire the Lord to give you faith: if you
have faith, which undoubtedly you may have though not rightly discerning your
self, you presently perceive it not: you must wait on the Lord for feeling of
it; and though it may be you shall tarry the Lords leisure long, yet surely
he will give it you in time: in the mean time, assure your self, that the
greatest faith is when there is least feeling; because it is easy for every
one in glorious feelings, and joys unspeakable to believe: but when a man
feeling no sensible comfort in the Lord, can notwithstanding believe in the
Lord, and by faith wait on him, this man's faith is most great.

51 To one that asked his advise, whether he might avoid the doing of a thing
whereunto he was called, because he felt corruption in himself: he said, In
avoiding society, you shall cover but not cure your infirmities; and though you
depart from men, yet you cannot go out of your self.

52 He gave this advise to one, against the deadnes of the mind that overtaketh
the godly: First, search the cause, whether it be for some evil thing done, or
for some good thing not done, so leaving some means of salvation unused;
whether for some sin seen, but not repented of; or some sin repented of,
but not soundly, or for unthankfulness: Secondly, use the remedy, please not
your self in it, but rouse up your self as from a slumber, which willingly
you would shake from you: call to mind the special and greatest mercy of
God, use the means. Thirdly, in the means offer thy self to God, waiting,
humbly, and patiently for the time of deliverance, neither esteeming toe much
or toe little of thy afflictions.

53 He said to one that for want of feeling was loath to pray; you must not
tarry to pray until you find feeling, but offer your self up into the hands
of Jesus Christ; and so humbling your self before him, pray on; and continue
in a prayer of faith, though not of feeling.

54 When one asked him concerning Marriage, whether it were good to marry;
seeing sometimes when concupiscence pricked him, he was moved to it; and some
other times when he felt no such thing, he thought he might abstene from it: he
answered, Many came hastily into that calling, not using the means of trying
their estate thoroughly before; as namely, whether they by prayer, fasting, and
avoiding all provocations of Concupiscence, have the gift of Chastity or not
Many use some of the means, but not (...) many use all the means, but a (...)
therefore it is good to use first the mean^ not part of them, but all of them;
not for a while, but long; and attend upon the Lords ordinance, if so be that
all these things will not prevail, wait when the Lord shall give just
occasion of using that estate to his glory and for our comfort.

55 He said, the best way to have comfort in any of our friends, was to pray
for them: and that he never had more joy in any, than in them for whom he
most prayed; and in them most, when he prayed the ofter and vehementliar for
them whom we love, whether present or absent: for this is a token of true
love, to pray for them whom we love.

56 To one that complained of hardness of heart, he said; you must wait for
comfort, and know, that you can now no more judge of your self, than a man
sleeping can judge of things which he did waking: or a man wandering in the
dark, can discern of bright colors; who though environed with fresh
colors, and yet for want of light, can have no use of his eyes, nor pleasure
in the objects; so you have done great good things whilst God gave you a waking
heart to put them in practice, and the light of his spirit, to discern his
graces in you: though now, you have neither the sight nor sense of them: even
as he which sleeps whilst he waked, might do excellent things, and yet now,
neither he himself knows of them, nor another can discern them in him: and
this is the thing that deceives and disquieteth many; they look for that
remiss in them, which they had when Gods spirit wrought in the sweetest and
fullest measure in them: and beeause there is some intermission of the work of
new birth, they think it is a flat amission in them of the spirit of God; but
as it is a toke^ of a mind toe presumptuous, and insituated in time of dead
security, to persuade our selves still of that saftie, in having those graces
which some times we had: so it is a sign of a mind abject, and toe much
dispairing; to think that because we have not even present feelings of these
joys, glorious and unspeakable which we have had; therefore we never had them
heretofore, or that we shall never have them again hereafter.

57 Unto one that was willing to change his seat, for the corruption of the
place where he dwelt; he said, wheresoever he purposed to live as a Christian,
the cross of Christ would follow him: because on the earth are some good men,
and some evil; but when we come to Heaven, all would be good; and therefore
there should be no trouble.

58 He said, although he was subject to many and grevous reproaches, yet two
things did ever comfort him; the one, that his heart was well, and not evil
affected to any man: secondly, that going alone, he could humble himself and
willingly pray to God, that the authors of such reproaches might be forgiven
to him.

59 He said to a godly Christian, much invaying against her unbelief; I do not
now suspect your estate, when you seem to me rather to have faith, than when
you seem to your self to have it; for faith being the gift of God, is then
most obtained and increased of God, when you thirsting after the increase of
present feelings, are humbled under the mighty and merciful hand of God for
it; rather I suspect you, when you say you have faith, because then you can
least fear and suspect your self, and by that means lie open to unbelief
again, and surely experience proves, that then we show we have belief, when
we mourn for our unbelief, and then our faith may be least, when we think
it to be most: besides herein you are to comfort your self, with show of
increase of faith; because faith grows by these two means, either by some
great feeling by the word, and the spirit, and humble thanksgiving joined
thereunto, or else by humbling our selves before the mercy seat of God for
want of our faith.

60 Admonishing one to prevent hardness of heart in his child, by godly and
discreet correction: he said, that because children have often the sins of
their fathers: Parents correcting, should in wisdom first considder, if it
were not a sin which they gave them, as it were, which now they are about
to correct, and finding it so, that they should be humbled in themselves; and
being humbled, proceed to correction, in prayer, in the fear of God, in
wisdom, in love, of their conversion, and with that measure, as correcting
their own sins, after a sort in their own children: so men begetting their
children with regeneration, give a natural propagation of their sins,
without some special blessing of God: and none in regeneration begets any
with such gifts of nature; but unless they become new born, they have no good
thing in them.

61 He was wont rather to win men, with a loving admonition, than to goare
them with a sharp reprehension; that he might easily work upon them
afterward.

62 When one was troubled in mind he gave this comfortable note: that
although it came to pass, that after some travel in new birth, Gods graces
were not so sweet, and our sins not so sour and grievous unto us, as they
were to our first entrance into regeneration: but we are now weaker in less
assaults, having before been stronger in greater temptations: we were not to
despair, but to considder, from whence this gracious progress did come;
namely, of God, and not of our selves; who showed himself more favorable in
the beginning, both because he would not discourage us, newly coming unto
him, and for that we forsaking our selves, with a godly suspecting of our
weakness in the least temptations, did fly unto Gods help by prayer; who in
wisdom can hide himself under a cloud: partly, for that he will look to see
some trial of strength at our hands, coming to some age in new birth; partly,
for that we now less forsake or suspect our selves, no not in greater
temptations; and for presumpteouslie wrestling with our own strength, and
staying our selves with our own staff, we do not call to God for help, and
not calling, do not obtain, and not obtaining help, we take the foil in the
conflict, that the Lord may make known unto us, that notwithstanding our
proceeding in Christianity, we are still but men, and God alone is God.

63 He said, he never looked for a better estate, than that wherein he was,
but often prepared himself for a worse.

64 Some labor more for knowledge, less for affection; some more for
affection, less for knowledge; some busy them selves in Church discipline,
and are slender sighted in their privy corruptions: some delight to epsy
things in others abroad, and negligently to try themselves at home: but it is
good to match both together.

65 In the most abrupt and disordered speeches of men; he thought God disposed
them for his profit: and though presently reason, could prompt no reason, why
they should speak so: yet long after he would; for he was much affected with
the fact of Josias, who would not be moved with the speech of wicked
Pharaoh, but entering battle was slain; whereupon he would say, that no man
was so good, but the Lord would some time let him slip into some evil, for his
further humbling: and no man of evil, but the Lord did convay goodness into him
at some time, to make his condemnation the juster.

66 He said to one troubled in mind, for a secreet and small sin: I do not
so much fear this sin in you, as the policy of Satan by it, either in
that he will not stick to show you the less sins, and hide from you the
greater; or else by the quick sight of your secreet and small sins, to cast
upon you an open and gross sin of vain glory and privy pride.

67 Having received a token from a godly woman, which for some inconvenience he
was willed to bestow it upon some other, rather than to use it himself; Nay,
says he, I will both keep and wear the thing, though in another fashion; that
so often as I shall see the gift, I may be stirred up and put in mind to pray
for her.

68 Though he was most severe to his friends and kindred, so long as they were
not reconciled to God: yet once being wearied with one, he shut up the matter
with this sentence; It is wonderful, that diverse hearing the same word of
God spoken, one should believe, and an other should not believe: but I am
rather to thank God that I believe, than to search out a reason why another does
not believe; and as I am to be thankful for my self, so am I pitiful for
the other.

69 Being in a place, where a woman through extreme affection, forgetting all
woman hood, fell down before him, in so much that they would have had him
depart; he rather turning his face from the woman, and his back to her, fell
on his knees, and prayed to the Lord for her.

70 As good natures do not help of necessity to regeneration, so evil natures
cannot hinder Gods purpose in calling, if the means with his mercy and
blessing be purely and painefully used.

71 When a maid was so sore troubled, that two or three held her in her fit:
he charged her in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that when the agony
came, she should not willingly yield to it, but in the Lord resist it: for
both experience teaches, that the over much fearing of temptation before it
comes, and little purpose to resist it when it comes, mightily incourageth
Satan: and also the holy Ghost bids us to resist the devil, and he will
fly from us; to draw near to God, and he will draw near to us: and the maid
was never after afflicted.

72 He would say, I fear not the time of the visitation of them, that thereby
do grow in the gifts and graces of God? but rather I fear the time of their
deliverance, lest it should be overtaken with unthankfulness; and so woefullie
they should loose the fruit of that good, which so dearly they had purchased
of the Lord.

73 Being asked whether a Christian might use the help of a Papist that had
done many cures: he answered, that the circumstances were to be considered of:
First, whether the patient dealt before with good Christians, of knowledge,
judgment, experience, and faithfulness, or no? Secondly, whether asking the advice of such, he has followed the same rightfullie. Thirdlye, whether having
used right counsel by right means, he has therefore used spiritual means,
prayer, fasting, searching the inward causes of visitation. Fourthly, whether
there be not some faithful and experienced man, whom he has used in advise.
Fiftlie, whether the disease be so dangerous, or the party so weak, as asking
counsel of a Papist may not be deferred, and some better means in time be
enquired for. Sixthly, whether he has not his heart toe greedily set on the
Physician, or whether he does principally seek unto the promises and
providence of God. Seventhlie, whether the Papist be an open blasphemer, and
whether he be a Papist of conscience or no? Eighthly, whether he use not his
physic for a cloak of sorcerie? Ninthly, whether he has ever healed any good
professor? And lastly, whether the patient be of strength, able to suffer him
to minister unto him?

74 Sin in such a canker, that it spredeth secretly, and there is such a chain
of untruth that yields to one, and it draws on another; grant a little one,
and a great one will follow: wherefore as it is good wisdom, not only to
avoid the plague, but to eschew every little ragge that may seem to carry the
plague; so it is heavenly wisdom, not only to avoid gross sins, but all
such shows of sins, as may draw on the other: and as we count it policy,
not to go as near the rivers bank as we can, lest suddenly or at unawares we
should slip in; so it is spiritual policy, not to go toe near sin, lest
we be overtaken of it before we be aware of it.

75 It is good to take up the opportunity of the morning for the worship of
God: for first, who so will see the Image of his heart, he shall by observing
his first thoughts in the morning come to some light of it: Again, of all
times it is most fit to do any thing in, and we by reason of the alacrity
which comes upon us after our rest, are most fit to do any thing in it:
Besides, if we be seriously minded on good things in the morning, other vile
thoghts shall the more feeblie fasten on us all the day after: and again, delay
the morning, with suffering worldly thoghts to seize on us; our mind will be
so forestalled, and praeoccupated with them, that we cannot easily and
roundly gather up our affections afterward to Gods worship: for this is a sure
note, that he which consecrateth the first fruits of the day in truth to the
Lord, and shuts up the day with sacrificing to him; if he have any sin
falling on him on the day time, he is checked, either with his first morning
sacrifice, because he has not done as he prayed, and promised unto the Lord;
or he is controulled by the latter and Evening sacrifice, in that fear and
shame of his sin makes him appalled to come in the presence of God.

76 As we are carefully to use the means of our salvation, so must we wholly
refer the blessing of the means to the grace of God: neither as some do
think, that we can obtain or continue the graces of God in us without using
of the means: for that is but a dream of fantastical spirits? neither as the
manner of some is, so to trust to the means, as neglecting to pray for the
grace of God in them; which is but a praeposterous zeal of such as are not
rightly instructed in the way of their salvation.

77 It is a most certain thing in Gods Children, that the more their
afflictions grow, the more their faith grows: the more Satan striveth to
draw them from God, the more they draw near to God; although indeed in
feeling, they cannot see so much.

78 It is a profitable note to observe, when extraordinary gifts of God be for
our good, and when for our hurt. If our extraordinary blessings drive us more
carefully to seek to the ordinary means, then it is of Gods mercy: but if
they slacken our care in the ordinary means, and puffing us up with a
spiritual pride, cause us to rest in them; then they are for our farther
condemnation: as if God bless us marvelouslie without prayer in any thing, if
we are driven more to prayer by it, this is of God: if it cause us to leave
prayer, it is perrelous.

79 As the Lord does feed poor prisoners, even with a little food, who
though they desire more food, can have no more; and do not refuse more
ordinary means: and the same God suffers many to be pyned, who having
abundance, think themselves rather clothed with the means, than nourished be
Gods providence. So the Lord extraordinarily does nourish the souls of them,
who having few means, do look for the ordinary means more plentifully:
and suffers some to rot in ignorance, who being at the full measure of the
means, have no reverent regard of the necessity of the^: and hereof it
comes to pass, that some hungry souls have been filled with more grace at
one Sermon, than the proud, who having heard many sermons, are sent empty away.

80 Of all sacrifices, most acceptable is that of thanksgiving; and therefore,
in many words the Saints of God have vowed, and entered into bands with the
Lord to pay this oblation; both to prevent the untowardness of nature which is
so unwilling of this, as also to shame themselves more, if happily they grow
herein negligent; in which repetition of their vows and promises, which
argues their great desire of their hearts (for, look what one delights in,
he often speaks of it, and in many words) they declare, that as even in
things agreeable to nature, we will help our delight by often speaking and
repeating of them; so much more this help is requisite in things above nature,
and among all the parts of godliness which are above nature; and chiefly in
thankes-giving; which is more contrary to nature: for we will pray often for a
thing, but hardly give thanks once, and yet experience proves in civil
things, that of all arguments to persuade one to give us a gift, none is more
eloquent or forcible, than to promise our selves to be thankful and mindful
of that we shall receive.

81 The cause why our meditations and prayers are no stronger in the night, is
because we join not with meditation, the examination of our hearts upon our
beds, which if we did in some truth, it would keep us from drowsines, and
want of reverence in our prayers; as well as worldly men ar kept waking, by
thinking on worldly matters: here we are taught by David's example, when we
want the more solemn and glorious means in dignity, to make a supply by
often and sinceere using of such private means as we can.

82 It is very hurtful, that abuses have so long time been declaymed, and the
true uses of things so slenderly urged: for though holy days have justly been
spoken against, yet the reverent use of the Sabbath has been little defended;
though superstitious fasts have been defaced, yet true fasting is not
embraced: though the carnal presence of Christ has been confuted, yet the
real and true presence of Christ has not been established: though popish
discipline has been misliked, yet who so maintains true Discipline, is
thought to be a Pope in his own parish: though popish confession has rightly
been banished, yet christian confession is neither known nor acknowledged.

83 Though we find not the spiritual joye which we should feel, yet let us
not be toe much cast down; so that our conscience tell us, that we are ready
to withdraw somewhat from our outward pleasures, for want of this inward
pleasure; and that we have not prevented or smothered out these spiritual
joys, but are grieved that we have them not, and wait for the time to feel
them: for of al things, we must beware, that we draw not into their stead
carnal joys, and so drive as it were exile the working of Gods spirit in us
by them.

84 As it argues great height and willingness to sin, when men fearing to sin
in the day, redeem, and steal time to sin in the night: so it shows a great
height and willingness to godliness, when men being not sufficiently contented
to do good in the day, stretch their well doing even to the night also; wherein
they show themselves to be free from vain glory; that none seeing them, yet
they do good for love of God, and not for outward things.

85 As by nature we are long and hard to be brought to be grieved; so being
once down, we are hard to get up, and to rise out of our grief again: for
two extremities attend upon us, the one to be grieved and feared toe little;
the other, to be grieved and feared toe much: the one makes us secure, and the
other dead and dull. To meet with these two, it is good in time of joye to
think what judgments have befallen us heretofore, what may befall us
hereafter. In time of humbling, we are to consider what mercies we have
received, and what mercies are stored up, and tarry for us again: and
surely, no one thing makes grief more to waste us, than the forgetfulness of
Gods mercies past, and the carfulness of them that are to come: though
mercies succeed mercies, yet the sea of Gods mercies is never drawn dry, if
we claim hold of them by our former experience.

86 Two things especially may warrant both the speakers and the hearers of
their doctrine, if their calling be good and godly; if the general course of
their doctrine be sound and pure. Iere. 17.

87 If the health of body be such a thing, as is rather with comfort enjoyed,
than in words to be expressed; how great is the peace of Conscience and joye of
the holy Ghost, which may be tasted, but cannot be uttered.

88 Because we will not observe one another which is godly Discipline; others
shall observe us, even the wicked, which is a near discipline.

89 There be some which have peace neither with God nor with themselves, as
desperate heretics: some have peace with themselves, but not with God, as
secure sinners: some have peace both with God and with themselves, as repentant
Christians.

90 As in prosperity nothing is a greater token of Gods favor than to fear
our selves, so in adversity there is a pleasant pledge of our conscience, when
we wait and attend on the Lord for the time, the manner and the measure of our
deliverance: There be four properties of this waiting: The first, to wait in
our souls. Many will not outwardly murmr, and yet inwardly they boil and
fret: but where is quietness of heart, there can be no great disquietnes in the
tongue or in the hand. The second, is to wait on the word; for some will wait,
but it is to obtain something the sooner, not to show their faith and
obedience to the word. The third, is to continue in it; if we had a definitive
determination, how many days, or months, or hours we should wait, the end
of our term drawing near would sustain us: but it is hard to leave all
moments and conditions to the Lord, and to be in a continual expectation: but
let us consider how justly God may suspend his answer in helping us; either
in that our sins are not sufficiently bewailed, or our faith not sufficiently
purified, or his grace not sufficiently wrought in us. The fourth is by
vehemency in waiting, to be kept from faultring or fainting in hope: to be
vehement in hope for a while is easy, but not to slake the heat of our
affections, and not to be remiss and dead in the suite of our desire, though
no appearance of deliverance be seen; this is hard indeed: vehemency argues
faith, and deferring of our desire, does not break our zeal in waiting; it
bewraieth want of faith, when without al hope we are greedy, and ravenous to
have our requests, or else we cast all away.

91 Satan has two buffetings, when by example we are provoked to patience:
First, he smells of despair, and tells us that true it is; so did such men
abide trouble, but they were rare men, of rare faith, of rare feelings, of rare
patience; God has not called us to that measure of grace; we are unworthy,
by reason of our sins, to hope for the like faith, or the like fruits of
faith. This other temptation smells of pride, when he will make us equal in
dignity, with the highest of Gods Saints, but unequal in duty with them;
then he persuades us, God is as good to us, as he has been to others; but
he keeps us from using those means whereby they had, and we should have the
goodness of God convaied unto us: wherefore, as we must not distrust God, that
we shall obtain the like mercies with other, if we use the same means; so we
must not dream, that we shall have the like fruits with them, except we
have also the like faith with them, though not in quantity, yet in quality.

92 Many despair of help, because of their own unworthiness, as though there
were no hope of Gods mercy, unless we bring in our gift, and pawn in our
hands to him; but this were to discredit the Lords mercies, and to bring in
credit our merits; and rather to bind the Lord to us, than us unto him: but
if our sins be great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be
beggarly, Gods mercy is a rich mercy: If our case be not desperate, and
we past hope of recoverie, our redemption should not be so plentiful, but
when all seems to go one way; when Heaven and Earth, the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars go against us; then to ransom us, and to make a perfect
restitution, is to draw something out of nothing: even as in sickness, to
have either little danger, or in great danger; deliverance by present
means, is nothing; but in extreme perrell, when Physic can do nothing, and
nothing makes for us but the Grave, then to be rescued from the grave, and to
recover our life from the pit is Redemption.

93 There is nothing so precious, as Gods grace; which changes the face of
Heaven and Earth; and nothing so vile as sin, who opens hell, and staineth
the Earth, and shuts up Heaven.

94 There are two working of Gods Spirit in us: the one inferior, which
brings but certain fruits of the Spirit, without any special fruit of
grace: the other superior, and more certain, when the spirit works an
infallible sanctification: the first, may totally be darkened and fully
quenched: the other has but particular Eclypse, and in measure may be dimned,
as it was in DAVID Psalm. 51. But this is not finally quenched. As God made man
so that he might fall, though afterward he had mercy upon him: so he
regenerateth us so, that we may fall, though afterward he may raise us up
again, and will. And it is fearful enough, that there may be such
particular decays of it in us, as to feel less comfort in the word, less
fear of sin, less care of well doing, less zeal in praying, less fruits
in the means; so that all our actions are turned to be bitter, which were
sweeter unto us than any worldly increase to the worldly man, or honey can be
to them that love it: these are evident tokens of the sanctifying spirit, to
love good, because it is good; and to hate sin, because it is sin: the more
we grow in gifts, the more to hunger, the more to complain of our
unworthiness, the more to be humbled in our selves, the more meeklie to judge
of others: when we are most quiet with all things, then to think our selves
least quiet, and then most to fear out selves; so to feel the graces of God
in us, and yet our sense and feeling of sin is not lessened, and to fear and
quake at the first degrees and motions of sin; not lest they fully quench,
but lest they cool the heat of the spirit in us.

95 They whose knowledge is in swelling words, and painted eloquence of humane
wisdom, being but a doctrine of the letter, in their death they are as if they
knew nothing of Christ crucified: and whereof comes it, that there is so much
preaching, and so little learning? but because men preach and delight to hear
plausible novelties to please the ear, rather than the simple power of the
word to pearce the heart; they take the bone, and refuse the marowe; they are
content with the shell, but want the kernel; and not only the Law kills,
but even the Gospel also; that is, the letter of the Gospel, being ministered
without the spirit: Ask the wounded conscience, what comfort it is, to hear
that Christ died for our sins: nay, ask if this gall not as much as the Law
it self, so long as it is rather conceived by reason, than received by faith.

96 As of all gifts, the gift of Gods spirit is the dearest, so the loss of
it is most dangerous: for besides that, we know how few taste of it, and with
what pain they that have gotten it keep it; and with what hard brunts they
that lose the graces of it recover them again, we may conjecture the greatness
of the loss, by our experience in other things: they that have been in
reputation for their riches, and are become bankrupts, are grieved and ashamed;
how much more then should their grief be, who by the riches of Gods graces
have been comfortable to themselves, and honorable amongst others; and now by
the decay of those gifts, have lost both the sweet peace and joye in
themselves, and their credit with God, and in the conscience of the godly.

97 We must be like Children in three things chiefly: First in respect,
little babes. Secondly, in regard of innocents. Thirdly, in respect of the^
that are growing from childhood. First, babes are never quiet, except the
pappe be in their mouth; or else having late been at it, they are well fed:
so ought we still to desire to lie at the food of our souls, and to find
unquietness in our souls, if we be long from it. Secondly, wained children,
though they are not without natural corruption; yet this corruption does
rather show it self by imitation, than by action: and if they do any evil,
it is rather violent, than permanent: Thus should we be: Not making an
occupation of sin, but are occupated of sin; not forecasting patterns of
sin, but bend our minds how we may not sin; we are violently drawn thereunto
by another; rather than voluntarily commit it our selves. Thirdly, they that
grow out of childhood do things beseming manhood rather than childishnes: so
though babish things both in life and doctrine become us being babes, yet
having passed our childhood, the Lord looks for more manly ripenes both in
knowledge and godliness of life; though our perfect age be not consummated before
the resurrection.

98 As little children, whether in teachablenes to good, or reformablenes from
sin, are either woone by afaire word, or allured by a trifling benefit, or
awed by a check, or feared by a frowning look, or stilled by seeing another
beaten before them, or else quieted with the rod: So if we be children, either
the promises of God must affect us, or the mercies of God must allure us, or
his threatenings in his word must awe us, or his angry countenance must fear
us, or his correcting of others must humble us; or else the corrections of God
upon ourselves, must pull us down: but as those children are of most liberal
and ingenious natures, who are rather allured with fair words, than driven to
duty with the rod; for they are most gracious, which are most broken with
the conscience of their unkindness; more provoked by the promises of God, than
by all the curses, thunderings, and threatenings of the Law: but they that are
affected with neither degenerate yet from the affection of children.

99 As milk moderately yielded out of the dugge, is natural milk and good
nurishment; but being unnaturally pressed, it is mixed with corrupt matter, and
is unwholesome meat: so a similitude meeklie handled, gives forth some
doctrine, but being hardly strained, it fills the receivers, not with
natural milk, but with unnatural blood, as many have abused similitudes, with
reverence and fear be it spoken (as a ship man's hose) sucking out poison in
steed of honey.

100 Though it be the good mercy of God, both to mourn at John Baptists
dolfull threatenings, and to dance at Christ Jesus his sweet promising and
piping; yet it is better to offer a voluntary and free sacrifice in respect of
Gods mercy, as do the Angels; than a violent and constrained obedience, as do
the devils: and this dare I say, that though the fearful pronouncing of the
curse, the wrath and the judegment of God be fearful in the Law, yet the
denouncing of our separation from Gods kingdom, of the gnawing worm, of the
second death, is far more fearful in the Gospel; which, by how much it is
the more proper seat, and treasury of Gods mercies: so when thunderings and
lightnings do proceed from thence, they are the more fearful.

101 To know when the use of the doctrine is general, and when particular;
which is set down in singular examples, (because we bring our neck out of
the yoke, or else tie the mercies of God only to them) three rules ar to be
observed: First, if we read of any thing in particular, we are to search
whether in some other places of the Scriptures, the same thing is not set down
generally; that is, whether that which is commended, or discommended in some
proper person, be not commanded or forbidden to all; if it be, the use of it
is general, not particular; but if it be a particular precept joined to some
one, and noe warrant found in the word, that it is to be done of another;
then it is a thing personal, proper to some, not general, appertaining to
all. The second rule is, that wheresoever there is a general equity of a
thing, there is a general practice to be had; howsoever we see it set down
but in particular. The third is, wheresoever by the scope of the place there
appears a general drift, either by something going before or coming after,
though the present place seems to be particular, yet there is a general use
of the doctrine to be gathered out of it.

102 Some think this is a high point of patience, to exempt themselves from
all grief: others eat up their hearts with grief, as the flesh of the body is
eaten up with a corrosiue; and so make themselves dull stones, rather then
feeling members: the mean is not to be to quiet, as without all grief; or to
be unquiet toe much, as being without a GOD. For the first is marvelous, that
Satan in times past being made known, only by colors, by a flaming breath,
by a hollow voice, by horns and claws, and such sensible things, was much
more feared, than now by the clearer sight of the truth being described, to
be a spiritual and greater adversary, felt before he be seen, at hand
before we be aware of him, and bold to set upon the best, even in their best
estate; and yet is less feared than before he was. For the second, it is
marvelous he should be toe much feared, seeing he has but a derived power,
and therefore a limited power; and therefore a power least to be feared. If we
fear him toe little, he makes account of us without taking any great pains:
if toe much, he is the prouder and bolder to take some pains about us.

103 In afflictions we must search the cause, first by ascending to God, then
by descending into our selves: first, we must ascend to God, pleading guilty,
craving mercy, and not stand quarelling with the malice of men, or hatred of
the devil against us: for as it were no good wisdom for a man condemned to
dye, to make any long suite to the Iaylor, or to the Executioner; (for they be
but under officers and can do nothing) but he must labor to the Judge, who
can either repriue or release him: so it is no good policy to stand about
Satan in our temptations, who does all by constraint and restraint under the
Lord; but we must go to the principal, that is God; in whose hands, are both
the entrance and the issues of our sufferings. Secondly, we must search our
selves, how far either reason is unreformed, or affections unrenewed; knoing
that the devil himself can never hurt us, until we have hurt our selves; and
in what measure our reason is corrupt, or our affections disordered; and in
that measure are we weak, either to be overcome of men, or of Satan; and in
what measure our reason is sound, and our affections sinceere; in that measure
we remain invincible.

104 We must pity them that are in grief of spirit, though they be unquiet;
it is an easy matter, when one desires much to be quiet with God, to be
unquiet with men, who often hinder our quietness with God. Psalm. 42. 5.

105 Some afflicted consciences after some deliverances, look no more to be
delivered: for as God is most liberal, so we must not weary or make taedious
his bountiful dealing with us: but the Lord has many deliverances in store,
which it is as impossible to waste, as it is, that the Lord himself should be
lessened, he will make an end of his own work in us, for his own glory;
which as he has appointed to be endless in our deliverances, so the means
thereunto are also endless; yea when we seem as it were in a whirlepit, and
to be carried in a violent gulf of troubles we know not whither, and are
constrained often to diue and plunge down, the waters of affliction running over
our head; yet the Lord will recover us and set our feet in steadie places: if
we be cast down, so we can but scraule up again: if we be resisted of
Satan, so we can but kick against him; if we can but open our lips,
and accuse his malice before the Lord, there is sound hope of comfort to be
found of him.

106 As it is but a small pleasure, so long as we are in the Garden, to be
delighted with the smell of herbs, unless we gather of every kind some to
carry with us; that so we may have the benefit of the garden, though we be
far from it; and as it is but a small comfort, to be ravished with sweet
odours, so long as we are in the Apothecaries shop, and afterward to want
them: so it is but a flattering joye, nay rather a starting joye, no longer to
be affected with the word and exercises of Religion than we are in the
Church: therefore we must gather here and there, somewhat of the things we
hear, that may work on our affections, when we be far from the place
where they grew.

107 As the arm being soundly knit to the body, receives pith and strength
from the body to resist all evil, and to draw all good things unto it, and
being but out of joynte, and the veins which did knit it to the body being
loosed, it has no such force: so our faith being the means spirituallie to
join us unto the Lord, receives strength so long as it is sound, both to
resist evil and to accomplish good: but if it decay, and fall as it were out
of joint; then we cannot draw that full strength from the Lord for our
defense and strength, which we were wont.

A LETTER AGAINST hardness of heart.
I Beseech God, the Father of Jesus Christ, to give me his good spirit; in
writing to give advice, and you in reading to receive it. Amen. Since the time
that I received M. S. Letter, wherein he declared his careful compassion over
your estate: I have been not a little grieved, because partly for want of a
convenient messenger, and partly because of my manifold distractions with the
like occurrances, and other weighty affairs, I have been hindered from
writing hitherto unto you. And albeit even still I be in the same case, yet
conscience toward God, and love and compassion toward you, forces me to
overcome letts, which hardly I could otherwise prevail against. And albeit I
cannot speak as I would, yet of that which I shall write, proceeding from the
forenamed grounds; I look for some blessing of God through Jesus Christ: If
you will not toe much faint in faith, and yield to the Adversary; yea if you
will but hope so well of your self as (in the fear of God I write it) I hope
of you. First, whereas it seems you are sometimes grieved, because you
tarryed not still at Cambridge, according to my advice; you must know, that I
advised it not as a thing necessary, but more convenient as I then supposed;
but yet as I advised you to obey your Father, if his pleasure still continued
to have you home, whereunto you yielding, I cannot see how you offended, it
being your Fathers pleasure you should so do. And who knows whether being
here, you might not as much have been troubled, there being no privilege for
persons and places in such cases. And who knows whether it be the Lords
pleasure for the example and instruction, and I hope the consolation of others
in the end. And albeit, you wish that here you were nearer the more and
stronger means, yet know you and be persuaded, that God can and does in such
cases, work by fewer and weaker means, according to his good pleasure:
besides, it is in our corrupted nature to make much of such means as we cannot
have, and not so to esteem those which God does offer us as we should do. I
beseech you therefore in the name of Jesus Christ, humbly to praise God for
those means which he offers in mercy unto you, and to use them in faith
accordingly; and so God will bless you by them: and then by such conference as
you may have from hence by Letters, wherein if I may stand you in any stead,
rather for the good opinion you have of me, than for any great matter I am able
to perform: I shall be ready to offer my office of love unto you, as God shall
enable me, and so far forth as I shall be instructed in your particular
estate, by some letters sent from you by convenient messengers: by which I
presently perceive by M. S. Letters, that you are afflicted with the blindness
of your mind, and hardness of your heart, which cannot be moved, either with
the promises of Gods mercies, or fear of his Judgments; nor affected with
love and delight of the things which be good, or with hatred and loathing of
the evil: great cause you have of grief I confess, but no cause of despair
do I grant; because I am persuaded, that your persuasion is somewhat false;
partly for want of a sound judgment in your estate, and partly for some
defect of faith, somewhat through your own default. First therefore, know you
for a certainty, that this is noe other temptation, than such as diverse of
Gods children have for a time been humbled with, and afterward have had good
issue thereout: and if it please God to move you to credit me, I my self have
known others as deeply this way plunged as you can be: Remember therefore,
that God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that which
you shall be able to bear. 1. Cor. 10. 13. and yet further to confirm you
herein, the holy Scriptures do record, that this way God heretofore has
humbled his own people, in whose person the Prophet Esaias lamentably thus
complains, 63. 15. O Lord, look down from Heaven, and behold from the
dwelling place of thy holiness, and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy
strength? the multitude of thy mercies and of thy compassions are restrained
from me: And afterward, O Lord, why have thou made us err from thy ways,
and hardened our heart from thy fear: And in the next Chapter, verse 6. We have
been all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes,
and we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquity like the wind takes us
away, and there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee; for thou have hid thy face from us, and have
consumed us because of our iniquities. And in the 59. Chapter, verse 10. We
grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes, and we
stumble in the noone day as in the twy-light, we are in solitary places like
dead men, we roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves. So complains
Hezechias in the bitterness of his soul 34. 14. of Esaias. Like a Crane, or a
swallowe, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a Dove. And Psalm. 51. 10. where
David cries, Create in me, O God, a clean heart, and renew in me a right
spirit: restore to me the joye of my salvation, and stablish me with thy free
spirit. Does he not declare, that his heart was unclean, that his spirit was
crooked, that the way of his salvation was lost, and himself subject to the
spirit of bondage: so that wanting the spirit of liberty or adoption, he
could not cry Abba Father, nor have any power against sin. Thus you see how
Gods children may be blinded in mind, and hardened in heart for a time: so that
they feel in themselves the graces of the holy spirit, to be as it were
perished and dead. Further, to relieve the infirmity of your judgment in this
part and point, (because I know it may much distress you) you must understand
there be two kinds of hardness of heart: the one which is not perceived and felt,
the other which is perceived and felt: and of the former, that there be two
sorts: the first, which is most fearful, when any do purposely resist the
motions of God his spirit, and willingly refuse the means of their salvation:
of the which Zachary speaks, 7. 11. They refused to harken, and pulled away
the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear; yea they made
their heart as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the
words which the Lord of Hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry of his
former Prophets. The outrageous sin of these men, the Prophet Esaias expresses
in these their own fearful terms. 28. 15. We have made a covenant with
death, and we are at agreement with hell; though a scourge run over and pass
through, yet it shall not come at us; for we have made falsehood our refuge, and
under vanity are we hid. This was a fearful estate indeed: yet for all that,
no man can say, but some of them having hardened their hearts, might be, and
were afterward converted: the other kind of hardness of heart, which is not
felt nor perceived, or if perceived, yet not felt, (which albeit is less
fearful, yet is dangerous enough) is in such, who although they wilfully
resist not Gods spirit in good means, yet securely, carlesly, and willingly
they ly in sin; and that without any remorse of it, or any taste of good things.
Such was David's state by the space of a year, before Nathan the Prophet came
to reprove him, and rouse him from his lulled sleep: both these kinds I am
persuaded you are free from; other ways than in temptation, Satan may
sometimes move you thereunto. The other kind of hardness of heart, which is
perceived and felt, is of two sorts: the one in them who are desirous of
means, whereby to be releeved; although they do find small or no grace in
themselves for a time: In this kind the Prophet Esaias, in the want of some of
Gods people, complains. Esaias 63. 15. And such was David's state after Nathan
had reprooved him, and Gods spirit began to work with him; yet cries he out as
ye heard before, of the loss of Gods graces: and when he says, that God will
accept of no sacrifices, be they never so many or precious, without a contrite
heart and broken spirit: he showed, that for a time (even after the Prophet had
reproved him) he wanted both. This is your case, and therefore in the state of
salvation: for David was in this case even after he had confessed his sin (as
my trust is you do) and after he had received absolution and pardon from God
by the ministry of Nathan, although he never felt any joy thereof, nor true
grief for the other: yet because in truth of heart he confessed his sin, as
I hope you do; and was certainly persuaded of the pardonablenes of it by Gods
mercy, as you must be if you will have mercy (although he was far of from
feeling it, or applying it to his woeful conscience) his state was good and
very well to be hoped of, and you must know, and be persuaded of Gods Saints;
namely, of David and Peter, and such others, that they are ensamples for us, if
we will stay our selves upon the word of God in the ministry of his servants,
and wait upon the Lords good time, until he come nearer unto us by his spirit;
nearer I say, for he was come already unto you (or it may be he never went from
you) because to be grieved and humbled with blindness of mind and hardness of
heart, to believe certainly the servants of God which bring unto us glad
tidings of salvation, and the truth of Gods promises in general; and to long
after comfort, using the means of the word, and prayer; the Sacrament of the
supper, and the company of Gods children, contrary to hope under hope; yea
without any present feeling: all this is a certain argument that Gods spirit
is with such, and therefore with you. This estate though it be very grievous,
yet it is never dangerous, much less is it fearful, unless any be so wilful,
that they do persevere and continue in desperate refusing of all good means.
Unless they persevere I say, for that through the subtle sleights of the
spiritual adversary and his forcible power, whereby God suffers him
sometime for a season to winnow them as wheat: they are so bewitched and
intoxecated, that they are carried with violent force of temptation to wax
weary of it, or to refuse all kind of comfort by fittes; yea almost to have no
desire at all unto them, yea sometimes even to speak evil of them: but all
this is but in temptation, therefore God will be merciful unto them for
Christ's sake. Thus Job cursed the day of his birth, and wished to be
strangled. Jeremiah almost repented that ever he preached in the name of the
Lord: both scarsely abslaind from blasphemy. David moved with the spirit of
ambition, though dutifully admonished, yet wilfully went on in numbering the
people. Peter also vaine-gloriouslie presuming of his own strength, being
most wisely and effectually praemonished of his weakness, even by our Lord
Jesus: yet vvittinglie rusheth as an horse into the battle, and then very
cowardly yields and doubly denies, yea strengthens his sin with a
threefolde cord, and fastneth it with banning and cursing; and yet all these
obtained mercy bountifully: for why, as Satan had desired to winnowe them, so
our Savior Christ prayed for them; that their faith, although it was battered,
yet it should not be destroyed; although it were sore oppressed, yet it should
not be extinguished. And here be you fully persuaded, that though Luke 22.
the words seem to run as belonging to Peter (I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith should not fail) yet that he prayed as well for the rest of the
Apostles, yea for all the faithful: for first he says not, Simon, Satan
has desired to winnowe thee, but you: why then says he, I have prayed for
thee? Verily, because he should more grievouslie offend than the rest (although
their offense was very great) therefore his and our most blessed Savior
applied to him the promise, but did not appropriate it to him only and
restrain it from the rest: and compare with this place, John 17. 20. and you
shall see that the heavenly verity affirms, that he prayed not only for
the Apostles, but for all those that should believe through their word: Yea
further, our Lord Jesus Christ was yester day, and to day, and shall be for
ever. And as the Forefathers were baptized into him, and did eat his flesh
and drink his blood; so was his prayer effectual, even to them under the
Law, much more unto us under grace: and when you can find testimony of your
heart, that when you would do well, yet evil is present with you, and that you
do the evil you would not: then do not you it, but sin in you, when it
leads you captive. Romans 7. Much more then, when Satan works with all,
buffeting you, assure your self that God has pity on you, and that the
virtue of his power shall be perfect in your weakness. 2. Cor. 12. 9. If you
believe, according to your faith be it unto you; but you will say, you cannot
believe, that this vile and crooked hardness of heart, can be remitted and
renewed. And this was the second point, within the former part of my Letter, I
gave you to understand, what was the cause of your excessive distress. I
beseech you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will not willingly
lie, nor offer injury to Gods spirit, nor to your self, who have received it:
tell me what is the reason why you think you have no faith? verily because you
have no feeling nor noe other fruits thereof as you think: well, first then
agree with me herein (as you must if you will not disagree with the truth)
that feeling is but an effect and a fruit of faith: and therefore there may be
faith without feeling, as the cause may be without the effect, and the tree
without any appearance of fruit, yea of sap for a season. And as a man sore
wounded or diseased, may for a season be deprived almost of al operations of
the natural life to the outward show, and his own judgment and feeling: so
may a spiritual man be sore wounded by Satan, and be diseased by present
sight and feeling of his sinful corruptions; specially, in that the life of
the spirit ts not in him. Thus Peter's holy fail (as you have heard) or else
the prayer of our Savior prevailed not. Thus when David Psalm. 51. 12.
declared that his heart was unclean, and his spirit crooked and unstable: and
verse 14. that he had lost the joy of his salvation, and the spirit of
liberty or adoption: yea verse. 13. he prays that God would not take his holy
spirit from him: therefore he was not deprived of the spirit of sanctification.
Here seems repugnance, but there is none: he was deprived for a season of
the graces of the sanctifying spirit, but not of the holy Ghost, wherewith he
was sanctified: which graces as God restored unto him, so I am persuaded that
he will unto you: yea I doubt whether you are deprived of them; but only that
partly melancholy, and partly Satan working therewith, makes you do injury
to your self, and to the graces of the spirit in you, which I beseech you take
heed of. But the Messenger cannot stay, I therefore cannot write as I would,
either of this, or of the remedies you should use: which hereafter I will, if
God shall enable me. And I pray you, let me understand as I requested in the
beginning, of your estate in particular somewhat more, and that by this bearer
if you can: because he is of your acquaintance, and will bring it unto me
faithfully. Only I add now unto that which I have written of hardness of
heart at large, that you must diligently observe the word Create, which David
uses, Psalm. 51. declaring how he had no feeling of his heart. To this join
that which the Prophet Esaias speaks in the person of God. 57. 3. I create the
fruit of the lips to be peace, as well to him that is far off, as to him
that is near. Therefore, in Faith you may as well pray with the hope to
obtain, as did David: therefore say with him often, and with Gods people,
Esaias 64. 12. O Lord, thou art our Father, we indeed are clay; but thou art
our maker and we are the work of thine hands, etc. Know you, that God can
cause Wolves, Lions, and Leopards, etc. wallowing with lambs, calves, and kyne.
Esaias 11. 6. And that which is impossible unto men, is possible unto God, even
to cause a cable rope to go through a needels eye: that is, to change the heart
of the unbelieving, covetous, and vvretched man; much more yours: yea, know
you, that all things are possible to him that believes: Cry then, I believe,
oh Lord help mine unbelief: and I do promise you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you shall have your desire in goodness. Thus abruptlye I
must make an end, I commend you unto God, and the word of his grace which is
able for to build you up, and to give you the right of inheritance amongst
them which are sanctified. And the very God of Peace, sanctify you
throughout, that your whole spirit, soul, and body, may be kept blameless
until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Faithful is he which has
called you, and will do it. I pray you pray for me, and I trust as I have, so
I shall pray for you and much more.

Yours in Jesus Christ to use in any need R. GREENHAM.


