Short Rules sent by Master Richard Greenham to a Gentlevvoman troubled in
mind, for her direction and consolation, also very necessary for every
Christian to be exercised withal: With directions for a Christian life.
1 THose Temptations shall be laid to your charge, whereunto you have yielded,
etc. yield not therefore, but resist, as S. James bids. 2 No motion shall
hurt you, whereunto you give not consent in heart: You have no sin, which in
heart you long to be freed from; you want no goodness which in heart you covet
to have, Romans 7. 3 Where sickness is at the highest, there is hope of
diminishing: so likewise in temptation. 4 It is a great mercy of God to
discern a temptation in time of temptation. 5 When you would do any good, or
receive any good, offer up your endeauours, actions, and means, in a Sacrifice
to God in Christ, beseeching God to give his holy Spirit to sanctify his own
Sacrifice. 6 If you have received but a little release of temptation, give
thanks, and you shall have more. 7 It is a sin as well to deny Gods gifts as
to presume of them. 8 Temptation smothered, as fire, burns more inwardly. 9 Be
persuaded always you are in the presence of God and his Christ, and frame your
actions accordingly. 10 Be more afraid of secret sins, then of open shame,
lay this foundation sure, that there is mercy with Christ Jesus. 11 Remember
the former mercies you have received, and think your present estate to be none
other then the estate of Gods Children: if you be grieved, pray to God, if
relieved, praise him: there is a vicissitude of grief and comfort, as of light
and darkness. 12 Beware of a discontented mind in any case: yea, be contented
to have your desires denied you of God: and if your prayer be not heard of God,
vex not your self too much, neither vehemently covet, nor be grieved for any
thing, saving the having or loss of the favor of God. 13 Labor for
meekness and patience, and be ready to kiss the rod, and to offer up all to
him of whom you have received your self: for if you struggle, it will fare
with you as with a Byrd in a Grin, the more she strives, the faster she is. We
must use the word in troubles and temptations, as a sick man does his Meat,
which though he eat against his stomach, and presently feels no benefit of
it, yet we know by experience it does him good, and himself afterward shall
perceive it. 14 The patient bearing of misery is an acceptable sacrifice to
God, for when the Goldsmith puts a piece of gold into the fire to make
better use of it, it seems to the unskillful, that he utterly marreth it: So
the children of God in affliction, seem to the judgment of the natural man
undone and brought to nothing: but spiritual things are spiritually discerned.
15 Believe always your estate to be the work of God, and vary not therein:
for your humiliation, your consolation, the glory of God, and the good of many
others. 16 Beware that you do not often alter your judgment of your estate;
as saying, sometimes it is Gods work, sometimes melancholy, sometimes your
weakness and simplicity, sometimes witchery, sometimes Satan: for these
diverse thoughts will much trouble you: you may think melancholy to be an
occasion, but no cause, and so of the rest. Therefore look steadfastly to the
hand of God, surely trusting on this, that he not only knows thereof, but
that whatsoever is done directly, or indirectly, by means or immediately; all
is done and governed (by his divine providence) for your good. 17 Say not you
cannot be helped, for that may hinder the work of God. Say not if I were in
such a place and such a place, I should do well, for God is infinite, and
therefore every where, as well where you are, as where you would be. 18 Whereas
in consideration of the falling away of many; excelling you both in the ages
and graces of the new birth, you fear you shall not persevere unto the end:
your meditation and collection is good, so long as it preserues you from the
carelessness of the flesh, but it is evil when it should dissolve the
assuredness of your faith: Indeed, so long as you look upon your self, you
have cause of fear, because you are unable to prolong, as you are to begin new
birth; but if you look to God, you have nothing but matter of faith, for that
whom he once loves he loves for ever. Again, as a man that swimmeth in the
deep waters is never in danger of drowning so long as his head continues
above the waters: So though you swim in deep seas of dangerous temptations,
yet are you sure and secure, because Christ Jesus your head is still above all
troubles, and therefore is able to draw you his member to the shore of
salvation, without all peril of perishing. 19 Believe that God the Father does
govern your temptation, that the holy Ghost shall and does assist you, that
Jesus Christ was tempted to overcome in you, that the Saints on earth, do pray
for you, even those which never knew you, but do pray for the tempted ones. 20
None can judge of the work of the spirit, but by the light of the spirit, as
none can judge of the Sun but by it self. 21 Dispute not with God, least you
be confounded, nor with Satan, least you be overcome. 22 Be ever persuaded
your punishment is far beneath your sin. 23 In such multitudes of Gods
mercies as you enjoy, marvel not you have some Crosses: God sends blessings
with crosses, least we should despair: likewise, crosses with blessings, least
we shoud presume. 24 In any outward blessing which you see you cannot have,
beseech God you nay never be vexed for it. 25 No shame, grief, or sorrow,
pleases the Lord, which goes altogether separated from a sweet persuasion of
his favor. Again, our pleasing our selves in the assurance of pardon, is not
acceptableto God, which altogether rejects the care of espying, bewa^ling and
avoiding of sin: Wherefore let this be the bar and bond of your affection in
these cases, so long as Christ goes with you, so long as the mercies of God
accompany you, so long as the grace of the spirit shines upon you, be dea^^ng
with your sins, and condemn them unto death. Likewise, while you are tender of
conscience, afraid of sin, reverently persuaded to walk holily with your God,
laugh at Satan's accusation, despise destructions, and set at naught the
terrors of Hell. You never err one way nor other, but by failing of one or
both these points: That is, either in your griefs, you are grieved without
comfort, or in your joys, you rejoice without reverence: whereby it falls out
in the end, that as in unnecessary griefs you can find no spiritual pleasure,
so in unadvised joys you can find no spi^^tuall profit. 26 It is the policy
of Satan to blind and beset with a quiet possession of an unjust mirth,
thereby to keep them from the true sight of their sins, so to oppress the
sweet flock of Christ with false and causlesse fears, thereby to keep them
from the glorious feeling of their ^demption. He knows to his grief, that
joy may be temporally interrupted, but not finally or eternally be denied.
Therefore he applies himself though he cannot extinguish it, yet to diminish
your just and royal right in your Christ: In regard whereof you stand guilty
of not maintayning the Lords royalty given to the elect, if in the least
measure you yield to these slavish fears of the adversary. This subtle
Serpent is not ignorant that by these pensive practices, he does wear to a
dulnes the edge of your prayers, and that he draws from you with an
uncomfortable tediousness, the fruits of your faith, and consequently by these
means you are deprived of the fruit of a more comfortable service to your God.
The weak ones fearing also by your example, the profession of Christ to be
strict and comfortless. 27 A straight course of Religion is somewhat an
uncomfortable companion, but blessed be that mortification which so far
estrangeth us from the world, that it changes us to the similitude of Christ,
to whom we must be confirmed in sufferings, that we may be like him in glory.
Suffer not your heart to be straight, narrow, and uncomfortable in heavenly
things. This draws away both the breath, blood, and life, of our godliness.
The Lord keep you from evil, the Lord satisfy you with gladness, the Lord
give you the spirit of Prayer, and hear your prayers, the Lord be your
teacher, and your comfort. Oh pray, pray, pray: It is the best sacrifice to
God, and the most comfortable duty you can do. I am not loath to put you in
mind of these things, you have many careful for you in other things, oh
pardon me if I be bold in this one thing, I trust I rejoice more in the good
of your soul, then ever I should rejoice in the fruit of mine own body. It
would be a thousand deaths, yea a thousand hels unto me, to see your souls
miscarry. Oh let me be accepted more then a civil friend, more then a friend
of the world. Give me this benefit to be thought further then a friend of the
flesh.
FINIS.
A Scoare of wholesome Precepts, or Directions for a Christian life.
1 Account not of your self better then you are, for the more base you are in
your own conceit, the more glorious are ye in the sight of God; for God
regards a lowly mind, as the poor Publican that did deny himself had more
favor in the sight of God, then the proud Pharisie, that boasted of himself.
2 Speak not of God but with reverence, knowing that we are not worthy to take
his name in our mouth, much more we ought not to take it vainly. 3 Hold fast
to God, as well in prosperity, as in adversity; for in adversity we can come
to God, but in prosperity we forget our selves often: Also, if you be in
adversity despair not, but stick to God, and weight upon him for deliverance,
and he will send it when there is no hope of it, to the glory of his own name,
and for the good of his children; as Daniell from the Lions. 4 Buy and redeem
the time past with repentance; look to the time present with diligence, and to
the time to come with providence. 5 Let not malice make you to reveal that
which friendship bound you once for to conceal. 6 In Praising be discreet: In
Saluting courteous: and in admonishing brotherly, not hastily and angerly. 7
Read something of Gods word daily, and do not only count it sufficient that
you serve God truly your self, but also look that all your charge and
household do the same truly. 8 Whatsoever blessings ye crave of God, ask
them in the name of Christ. For no man comes to the Father but by me, says
Christ, in John 14.6. 9 Whatsoever you take in hand to do, before you do it
ask counsel of God, whether it be lawful to be done, and then do it with
peace of heart, if it be lawful. 10 Look that Meat, Apparel, and
Recreation, be needful, lawful, and moderate. 11 Take heed of presumptuous
sins, for though many presume that God is a God of mercy, yet though he be a
God of mercy to the penitent, yet he will not show mercy to them that do
presume of his mercy. 12 Forsake the World, and fly to God; for it is
impossible, that a man loving the World, should have any comfort from God, for
the love of the World is enmity with God; besides keep not any thing of the
World to you, that may draw you from God; for God will not have part of the
Man, but the whole Man. 13 Be always armed against temptations, for those that
belong to Christ must look for temptations always: and think not if that ye
have overcome any temptation, or trouble, once, or twice, or often, that then
you are freed: for Christ was tempted often, so were the Apostles, they had one
time peace, and then persecution, and then peace and after persecution, so
always an intercourse: and when they were in peace, they made ready to be
armed for temptation, knowing that they should have temptation: therefore this
life is called a Christian warfare. 14 Besides, if ye are tempted and tried,
it shows manifestly that ye belong to God: for God scourges every Son that
he receives: Besides, those that have no temptation, or trial, it shows
manifestly they belong to the Devil, for what need has he to tempt them
which he has already in bondage? 15 Fly from all sins in general,
endeavor, and then God will accept your endeavors, though weak and
imperfect, through the perfection of Christ; and stick to no darling Sins:
for the Devil can as well hold a man in subjection by one sin, as by all
sins. 16 Let the words that you speak proceed from the good spirit, and not
from the flesh, for if they do, God abhors them. 17 As God does abound in
mercy and goodness toward you, so be you enlarged to him in obedience. 18
When ye are tempted at any time by the Devil, or his Ministers, be sure to
have the word of God to answer him: for the Word is compared to a two edged
sword, that does not only defend us, but also offend our enemies. 19 Christ he
used scripture to repel the devil, he could have driven the Devil away with
the breath of his nosthrils, but he did answer him with Scripture, to show us
exsample, that if we were tempted at any time, we should with scripture repel
him. And that every one may know them the better, they must read them often,
use conference, and marking the true meaning of the words, and conferring one
place of Scripture with another and praying to God for to give thee the
blessing of understanding it truly, and the like. 20 Follow your Betters,
observe and mark the Wise, accompany the honest, and love the Godly.
FINIS.
Printed at London by T.S. for T.P. and are to be sold at the entering of the
Exchange. 1612.


