THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF Dorastus and Fawnia. Wherein is discovered, that
although by the means of sinister Fortune, Truth may be concealed; yet by
Time, in spite of Fortune, it is manifestly revealed.

Pleasant for age to avoid drowsy thoughts, Profitable for Youth to avoid
other wanton Pastimes: And bringing to both a desired Content.

Temporis filia Veritas. By ROBERT GREEN, Master of Arts in Cambridge.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. LONDON, Printed for Francis
Faulkner, and are to be sold at his shop in Southwarke, near Saint Margarets
Hill. 1636.

THE HISTORY OF DORASTVS AND FAWNIA.
AMongst all the passions wherewith humane minds are perplexed there is none
that sogalleth with restless despite as that infectious sore of jealousy.
For all other griefs are either to be appeased with sensible persuasion, to be
cured with wholesome counsel, to be relieved in w^nt or by tract of time to be
worn out, Jealousy only excepted which is sauced with suspicious doubts, and
pinching mistrust, that who so seeks by friendly counsel to raze out this
hellish passion, it forthwith suspecteth that he gives this advice to cover
his own gui^tines. Yea, who so is pinched with this restless torment,
doubts all disturbeth himself is always frozen with fear, and fired with
suspicion, having that wherein consists all his joy, to be the breeder of his
misery. Yea, it is such an heavy enemy to that heavy estate of matrimony sowing
between the married couples such deadly seeds of secret hatred, as love being
once razed o^t by spightfull distrust, there often ensues bloody revenge, as
this ensuing History manifestly proves wherein Pandosto (furiously incensed by
a causeles jealousy) procured the death of his most loving and loyal wife,
and his own endless sorrow and misery.

IN the Country of Bohemia, there reigned a King called Pandosto, whose
fortunate success in Wars against his foes, and bountiful courtesy toward
his friends in Peace, made him to be greatly feared and loved of all men. This
Pandosto had to wise a Lady called Bellaria, by birth, Royal, learned by
education, fair by nature, by virtues famous: so that it was hard to judge,
whether her beauty, fortune, or virtue, w^n she greatest commendations. These
two linked together in perfect love, led their lives with such fortunate
content, that their subjects greatly rejoiced to see their quiet disposition.
They had not been married long, but fortune (willing to increase their
happiness) lent them a Son, so adorned with the gifts of Nature, as the
perfection of the Child greatly augmented the love of the Parents, and the joy
of their Commons: in so much, that the Bohemians, to show their inward joys by
outward actions, made Bone-fires and Triumphs thorowout all the Kingdom,
appoynting Iusts and Turneis, for the honor of their young Prince: whether
resorted not only his Nobles, but also diverse Kings and Princes, which were
his neighbors willing to show in their friendship they ought to Pandosto, and
to win fame and glory by their prowess and valor. Pandosto whose mind was
fraught with Princely liberality entertained the Kings, Princes, and Noblemen
with such submisse courtesy, and magnificall bounty, that they all saw how
willing he was to grat^fie their good wills, making a general feast for all
his Subjects, which continued by the space of twenty days; all which time the
Iusts and Turneis were kept, to the great content both of the Lords and Ladies
there present* This solemn Triumph being once ended, the assembly taking their
leave of Pandosto and Bellaria, the young Son (who was called Carinter) was
n^rsed up in the house, to the great joy and content of their Parents. Fortune
envious of such happy success, willin^ to show some sign of her inconstancy,
turned her wheel and darkened their bright Sun of prosperity, with the misty
clouds of mishap and misery. For so it happened* that Egistus King of Sicila, who
in his youth had been drought up with Pandosto, desirous to show, that neither
tract of time* or distance of place could diminish their former friendship,
provided a Navy of ships, and sailed into Bohemia to visit his old friend and
companion: who hearing of his arrival, went himself in person and his wife
Bellaria accompanied with a great t^aine of Lords and Ladies, to meet Egistus
and es^ying him, alighted from his horse, embraced him very lovingly
protesting, that nothing in the world could have happened more acceptable for him
then his coming, wishing his wife to welcome his old friend and acquaintance;
who to show how she liked him whom her husband loved) entertained him with such
familiar courtesy, as Egistus perceived himself to be very well welcome. After
they had thus saluted and embraced each other they mounted again on
Horseback; and rode toward the City devising and recounting how being
children, they had passed their youth in friendly pastimes: where, by the
means of the Citizens, Egistus was received with triumphs and shows, in such
sort that he marvelled how on so small a warning they rould make such
proparation. Passing the Streets thus with such rare sights, they rode on to
the Palace* where Pandosto entertained Egistus and his Sicilians, with such
b^nque^ing and sumptuous cheer so royally, as they had all cause to commend
his princely liberality: yea* the very basest flaue that was known to come
from Sicilia, was used with much courtesy, that Egistus might easily pereiue,
how both he and his were honored for his friends sake. Bellaria (who in her
time was the flower of courtesy) willing to show how unfeignedly she loved her
husband by her friends entertainemet used him like wise so familiarly that her
countenance bewraied how her heart was affected toward him* oftentimes coming
her self into his bed chamber to see if nothing should be amiss to dislike
him. This honest familiarity increased daily more and more betwixt them* for
Bellaria noting in Egistus a Princely and bountiful mind, adorned with sundry
and excellent qualities, and Egistus finding in her a virtuous and courteous
disposition, there grew such a secret uniting of their affections, that the one
could not well be without the company of the other: insomuch, that when
Pandosto was busied with such urgent affairs that he could not be present with
his friend Egistus, Bellaria would walk with him into the garden, and there
they two in private pleasant devices, would pass away their time: to both
their contents. This custom still continuing betwixt them a certain
emelantholy passion entrring the mind of Pondosto drove him into sundry and
doubtful thoughts First he called to mind the beauty of his wife Bellaria* the
comelines and bravery of his friend Egistus thinking that love was above all
Laws, and therefore to be stayed with no law, that it was hard to put ^^re and
flax together without burning; that their open pleasure might breed his secret
displeasure. He considered with himself that Egistus was a man, and must needs
love: that his wife was a woman, and therefore subject to love: and that where
fancy forced friendship was of no force. These and suchlike doubtful thoughts
a long time smothering in his stomach, began at last to kindle in his mind a
secret mistrust, which increased by suspicion, grew at last to flaming
jealousy that so tormented him, as he could take no rest. He then began to
measure all their actions and misconstrue of their too private familiarity,
judging that it was not for honest affection, but for disordinate fancy: so as
he began to watch them more narrowly, to see if he could get any true or
certain proof to confirm his doubtful suspicion. While thus he noted her
looks and gestures, and suspected their thoughts, and meanings, they two silly
souls, who doubted nothing of thishis, treacherouas intent, frequented daily
each others company: which drove him into such a frantic passion, that he
began to bear a secret hate to Egistus, and a lowering countenance to Bellaria;
who maruelling at such unaccustomed frowns, began to cast beyond the Moon,
and to enter into a thousand sundry thoughts, which way she should offend her
husband: but finding in her: self a clear conscience, ceased to muse; till
such time as she might find opportunity to demand the cause of his dumps. In
the mean time Pandostos mind was so far charged with jealousy, that he no
longer doubted, but was assured (as he thought) that his friend. Egistus entered
a wrong point in his tables, and so had played him false play. Whereupon
desirous to revenge so great an injury he thought best to dissemble the grudge
with a fair and friendly countenance: and so under the shape of a friend, to
show him the trick of a foe: devising with himself a long time how he might
best put away Egistus, without suspicion of treacherous murder, concluded at
last to poison him. Which opinion pleasing his humor, he became resolute in
his determination, and the better to bring the matter so pass he called to
him his Cup Bearer with whom in secret he brake the matter? promising him for
the performance thereof* ^to give him a thousan^ Crowns of yearly* revenue*
His cup bearer, either being of a good conscience be willing for fashions sake
to deny such a (...) request, began with great reasons to persuade Pandosto
from his determinate mischief: showing him what an offense murder was to the
gods, how much unnatural actions did more displease the heavens, then men: and
that causeless cruelty did seldom or never escape without revenge: he laid
before his face, that Egistus was his friend, a King, and one that was come
into this Kingdom, to confirm a league of perpetual amity betwixt them, that
he had, and did show him a most friendly countenance: how Egistus was not
only honored of his own people by obedience, but also loved of the Bohemians
for his courtesy: And that it he now should without any just or manifest
cause, poison him, it would not only be a great dishonor to his Majesty, and a
means to sow a perpetual enmity between the Sycilians and the Bohemians, but
also his own subjects would repine at such treacherous cruelty. These and such
like persuasions of Franion (for so was his cap-bearer called) could no whit
prevail to diswade him from his devilish enterprise: but remaining resolute
in his determination (his fury so fixed with rage, as it could not be appeased
with reason) he began with bitter taunts to take up his man, and to lay before
him two baits, preferment and death: saying, that if he would poison Egistus,
he would advance him to high dignities: if he refused to do it of an
obstinate mind, no torture should be too great to requite his disobedience.
Franion, seeing that to persuade Pandosto any more, was but to strive against
the stream, consented as soon as opportunity would give him leave, to
dispatch Egistus: wherewith Pandosto remained somewhat satisfied, hoping now
he should be fully revenged of such mistrusted injuries, intending also as
soon as Egistus was dead, to give his wife a sop of the same sauce, and so to
be rid of those which are the cause of his restless sorrow: while thus he
lived in this hope, Franion being secret in his chamber, began to meditate with
himself in these terms.

AH Franion, treason is loved of many, but the traitor hated of all, unjust
offenses may for a time escape without danger, but never without revenge. Thou
art servant to a King, and must obey at command: yet, Franion, against law and
conscience it is not good to resist a tyrant with arms, nor to please an
unjust King with obedience. What shall thou do? Folly refused gold, and frenzy
preferment; wisdom seeks after dignity, and counsel looks for gain:
Egistus is a stranger to thee, and Pandosto thy Sovereign: Thou have little
cause to respect the one, and ought to have great care to obey the other.
Think this Franion, that a pound of Gold is worth a Tun of lead: great
gifts are little gods; and preferment to a mean man is a whet-stone to
courage. There is nothing sweeter than promotion, nor lighter than report: care
not then though most count thee a traitor, so all call thee rich. Dignity,
Franion, aduanceth thy posterity, and evil report can but hurt thy self. Know
this, where Eagles build, Faulcons may prey; where Lions haunt, Foxes may
steal. Kings are known to command, servants are blameless to consent: fear
not thou then to lift at Egistus, Pandosto shall bear the burden. Yea, but
Franion, conscience is a worm that ever biteth, but never cease. That which
is rubbed with the stone Galactities, will never be hot. Flesh dipped in the
Sea Aegeum, will never be sweet. The Herb Trigion, being once bit with an
Apsis, never grows: and conscience once stained with innocent blood, is
always tied to a guilty remorse. Prefer thy content before riches, and a
clear mind before dignity: so being poor, thou shall have rich peace, or
else rich, thou shall enjoy disquiet.

FRanion having muttered out these, or such like words, seeing either he must
die with a clear mind, or live with a spotted conscience: he was so cumbred
with diverse cogitations, that he could take no rest, until at last he
determined to break the matter to Egistus: but fearing that the King should
either suspect, or hear of such matters, he concealed the device till
opportunity would permit him to reveal it. Lingering thus in doubtful fear,
in an Evening he went to Egistus lodging, and desirous to speak with him of
certain affairs that touched the King, after all were commanded out of the
Chamber, Franion made manifest the whole conspiracy which Pandosto had devised
against him, desiring Egistus not to account him a traitor for bewraying his
Masters counsel, but to think that he did it for conscience: hoping that
although his Master inflamed with rage, or incensed by some sinister reports,
or slanderous speeches, had imagined such causeless mischief, yet when time
should pacify his anger, and try those tale-bearers but flattering Parasites,
then he would count him as a faithful servant, that with such care had kept
his Masters credit. Egistus had not fully heard Franion tell forth his tale,
but a quaking fear possessed all his limbs, thinking that there was some
treason wrought, and that Franion did but shadow his craft with these false
colors: wherefore he began to wax in choler, and said, that he doubted not
Pandosto, since he was his friend, and there had never as yet been any breach
of amity: he had not sought to invade his Lands, to conspire with his enemies,
to dissuade his Subjects from their allegians: but in word and thought he
rested his at all times: he knew not therefore any cause, that should move
Pandosto to seek his death, but suspected it to be a compacted knavery of the
Bohemians, to bring the King and him at odds. Franion staying him in the midst
of his talk, told him, That to dally with Princes was, with the Swannes to
sing against their death, and that if the Bohemians had intended any such
mischief, it might have been better brought to pass, than by revealing the
conspiracy: therefore his Majesty did ill, to misconstrue of his good meaning,
since his intent was to hinder treason, not to become a Traitor: and to confirm
his promises. If it pleased his Majesty to fly into Sycilia, for the safeguard
of his life, he would go with him: add if then he found not such a practice
to be pretended, let his imagined treachery be repayed with most monstrous
torments. Egistus hearing the solemn protestations of Franion, began to
consider, that in Love and Kingdoms neither Faith nor Law is to be respected:
doubting that Pandosto thought by his death to destroy his men, and with
speedy War to invade Sycilia. These and such doubts thoroughly weighed, he
gave great thanks to Franion, promising, if he might with life return to
Syracusa, that he would create him a Duke in Sycilia: craving his counsel how
he might escape out of the Country. Franion, who having some small skill in
Navigations, was well acquainted with the Ports and Havens, and knew every
danger of the Sea, joining in counsel with the Master of Egistus Navy, rigged
all their ships, and setting them afloat, let them lie at anchor, to be in the
more readiness, when time and wind should serve. Fortune, although blind, yet
by chance favoring this just cause, sent them within six days a good gale of
wind: which Franion seeing fit for their purpose, to put Pandosto out of
suspicion, the night before they should sail, he went to him, and promised,
that the next day he would put the device in practice; for he had got such a
forcible poison, as the very smell thereof would procure sudden death. Pandosto
was joyful to hear this good news, and thought every hour a day, till he
might be glutted with bloody revenge: but his suit had but ill success: for
Egistus fearing that delay might breed danger, and willing that the grass
should not be cut from under his feet, taking bag and baggage, by the help of
Franion conveyed himself and his men out at the Posterne gate of the City, so
secretly, and speedily, that without any suspicion they got to the Sea shore:
where, with many a bitter curse taking their leave of Bohemia, they went
aboard, weighing their Anchors, and hoysting sail, they passed as fast as
wind and Sea would permit toward Cycilia: Egistus being a joyful man that he
had safely passed such treacherous perils. But as they were quietly floating on
the sea, Pandosto and his Citizens were in an uproar: for seeing that the
Cycilians without taking their leave were fled away by night, the Bohemians
feared some treason, and the King thought that without question his suspicion
was true, seeing the Cup bearer had bewrayed the sum of his secret pretense.
Whereupon he began to imagine that Franion and his wise Bellaria had conspired
with Egistus, and that the fervent affection she bare him, was the only mean
of his secret departure, insomuch, that incensed with rage, he commanded that
his wife should be carried straight to prison, until they heard further of his
pleasure. The Guards unwilling to lay their hands on such a vertu^us Princess,
and yet fearing the Kings fury, went very sorrowfully to fulfill their charge:
coming to the Queens Lodging, they found her playing with her young Son
Garinter, unto whom with tears doing their message, Bellaria, astonished at
such a hard censure, and finding her clear conscience a sure advocate to plead
in her cause, went to the Prison most willingly: where with sighs and tears
she past away the time, till she might come to her trial.

But Pandosto, whose reason was suppressed with rage, and whose unbridled Folly
wks incensed with fury, seeing Franion had bewrayed his secrets, and that
Egistus might well be railed on, but not revenged, determined to wreake all his
wrath on poor Bellaria. He therefore caused a general proclamation to be
made through all his Realm, that the Queen and Egistus had by the help of
Franion, not only committed most iucestuous adultery, but also had conspired
the Kings death: whereupon the traitor Franion was fled away with Egistus, and
Bellaria was most justly imprisoned. This Proclamation being once blazed
through the country, although the virtuous disposition of the Queen did half
discredit the contents, yet so sudden and speedy message of Egistus, and the
secret departure of Franion induced them (the circumstances thoroughly
considered) to think that both the Proclamation was true, and the King greatly
envied: yet they pitied her case, as sorrowful that so good a Lady should be
crossed with such adverse Fortune. But the King, whose restless rage would
admit no pity, though that although he might sufficiently requite his wives
falsehood with the bitter plague of pinching penury, yet his mind should never
be glutted with revenge, till he might have a fit and opportunity to repay the
treachery of Egistus with a fatal injury. But a cursed Cow has oftentimes short
horns, and a willing mind but a weak arm. For Pandosto, although he felt
that revenge was a spur to war, and that envy always proffereth steel,
yet he saw, that Egistus was not only of great puissance and prowess to
withstand him, but had also many Kings of his alliance to aid him, if need
should serve: for he married the Emperous daughter of Russia. These and the
like considerations something daunted Pandosto his courage, so that he was
content rather to put up a manifest injury with peace, then hunt after revenge,
dishonor and loss: determining, since Egistus had escaped scot-free, that
Bellaria should pay for all at an unreasonable price.

Remaining thus resolute in his determination, Bellaria continuing still in
prison, and hearing the contents of the Proclamation, knowing that her mind
was never touched with such affection, nor that Egistus had ever offered her
such discourtesie, would gladly have come to her answer, that both she might
have known her just accusers, and cleared her self of that guiltless crime.

But Pandosto was so enflamed with rage, and infected with jealousy, as he
would not vouchsafe to hear her, nor admit any just excuse: so that she was
feign to make a virtue of her need, and with patience to hear these heavy
injuries. As thus she lay crossed with calamities (a great cause to increase
her grief) she found her self quick with child: which as soon as she felt
stir in her body, she burst forth into bitter tears, exclaiming against
Fortune in these terms.

ALas, Bellaria, How unfortunate art thou, because fortunate! Better thou had
been borne a Beggar then a Prince, so should thou have bridled Fortune with
want, where now she sporteth her self with thy plenty? Ah happy life, where
poor thoughts, and mean desires live in secure content, not fearing Fortune,
because too low. For Fortune, thou see now, Bellaria, that care is a
companion to Honor, not to poverty: that high Cedars are crushed with
tempests, when low shrubs are not touched with the wind: precious Diamonds are
cut with the File, when despised Pebbles lies safe in the sand: Delphos is
sought to by Princes, not Beggars: And Fortunes Altars smoke with Kings
presents, not with poor men's gifts. Happy are such, Bellaria, that curse
Fortune for contempt, not fear: and may wish they were not sorry they have
been. Thou art a Princess, Bellaria, and yet a prisoner: borne to the one by
descent, assigned to the other by despite: accused without cause, and
therefore ought to die without care: for patience is a shield against
Fortune, and a guiltless mind yields not to sorrow. Ah, but infamy galleth
unto death, and lives after death: Report is plumed with Times Feathers, and
Envy oftentimes sounds Fames Trumpet: the suspected Adultery shall fly in
the Air, and thy known virtues shall lie hid in the Earth: one Mole staineth
a whole Face; and what is once spotted with Infamy, can hardly be worn out
with Time. Die then, Bellaria, Bellaria, die, for if the gods should say, thou
art guiltless, less, yet Envy would hear the gods, but never believe the
gods. Ah, hapless wretch, cease these Terms: Desperate thoughts are fit for
them that fear shame, not for such as hope for credit. Pandosto has darkened
thy Fame, but shall never discredit thy Virtues. Suspicion may enter a false
Action, but proof shall never put in his Plea. Care not then for Envy since
Report has a blister on her Tongue: and let sorrow bite them which offend, not
touch thee that art faultlesse. But alas, poor Soul, how can thou but
sorrow? Thou art with Child, and by him, that in stead of kind pity, pincheth
thee in cold Prison. And with that, such gasping sighs stopping her breath
that she could not utter any more words, but wringing her hands, and gushing
forth streams of tears, she passed away the time with bitter complaints.

THe Iaylor pitying those her heavy passions, thinking that if the King knew
she were with child, he would somewhat appease his fury, and release her from
prison, went in all have, and certified Pandosto, what the effect of Bellaria's
complaint was: who no sooner heard the Iaylor say she was with child, but as
one possessed with a frenzy, he rose up in a rage, swearing that she, and
the bastard brat she was withal should die, if the gods themselves said no:
thinking surely by computation of time, that Egistus, and not he, was father to
the child. This suspicious thought galled afresh his halfe-healed Sore,
insomuch as he could take no rest, until he might mittigate his choler with
a just revenge, which happened presently after. Bellaria was brought to bed of
a fair and beautiful* Daughter, which no sooner Pandosto heard, but he
determined that both Bellaria and the young Infant should be burned with fire.
His Nobles hearing of the Kings cruel sentence, sought by persuasions to
divert him from his bloody determination: saying before his face, the innocence
of the child, and virtuous disposition of his wife how she had continually
loved and honored him so tenderly, that without due proof he could not, nor
ought not to appeach her of that crime: and if she had faulted, yet it were
more honorable to pardon with mercy, then to punish with extremity, and more
Kingly to be commended of pity, then to discredit her. And as for the Child,
if he would punish it for the mothers offense, it were to strive against nature
and justice; and that unnatural actions do more offend the gods, then men:
how causeless cruelty, nor innocent blood never escapes without revenge. These
and such like reasons could not appease his rage, but he rested resolute in
this, that Bellaria being an Adultresse, the child was a bastard, and he
would not suffer that such an infamous Brat should call him Father. Yet at last
(seeing his noble men were importunate upon him) he was content to spare the
child's life. and yet to put it to a worse death. For he found out this device,
that seeing (as he thought) it came by Fortune, so he would commit it to the
charge of Fortune, and therefore he caused a little cock-boate to be provided,
wherein he meant to put the babe, and then send it to the mercies of the seas,
and the destinies. From this his Peers in no wise could persuade him, but that
he sent presently two of his Guard to fetch the child: who being come to the
prison, and with weeping tears recounting their Masters message, Bellaria no
sooner heard the rigorous resolution of her merciless husband, but she fell
down in a swound, so that all thought she had been dead: yet at last being
come to her self, she cried and screeked out in this wise.

ALas, sweet unfortunate Babe, scarce borne before envied by fortune, would
the day of thy birth had been the term of my life: then should thou have
made an end to care, and prevented thy Fathers rigor. Thy faults cannot yet
deserve such hateful revenge, thy days are too short for so sharp a doom:
but thy untimely death must pay thy Mothers debts, and her guiltless crime
must be thy ghastly curse. And shall thou sweet Babe, be committed to Fortune,
when thou art already spighted by Fortune? Shall the seas be thy harbor, and
the hard boat thy cradle; Shall thy tender mouth, in stead of sweet kisses, be
nipped with bitter storms? Shall thou have the whistling winds for thy
Lullaby, and the salt sea some in stead of sweet Milk? Alas, what destinies
would assign such hard hap? What father would be so cruel? Or what gods will
not revenge such rigor? Let me kiss thy lips (sweet Infant) and wet thy
tender cheeks wilh my tears, and put this chain about thy little neck: that
if Fortune save thee, it may help to succor thee. Thus, since thou must go
to surge in the gastfull Seas, with a sorrowful kiss I bid thee fare well,
and I pray the gods thou may farewell. Such and so great was her grief, that
her vital Spirits being suppressed with sorrow, she fell again down in a
trance, having her senses so stopped with care, that after she was reuined, yet
she lost her memory, and lay for a great time without moving, as one in a
trance. The Guard left her in this perplexity, and carried the child to the
King: who quite deuoid of pity, commanded that without delay it should be put
into the Boat, having neither Sail nor Rudder to guide it, and so to be
carried into the midst of the Sea, and there left to the winds and the waves,
as the Destinies please to appoint. The very Ship-men, seeing the sweet
countenance of the young Babe, began to accuse the King of rigor, and to pity
the child's hard Fortune: but fear constrained them to that which their nature
did abhor: so that they placed it in one of the ends of the Boat, and with a
few green boughs made a homely Cabin to shroud it, as well as they could,
from wind and weather. Having thus trimmed a Boat, they tied it to a Ship, and
so haled it into the maiue Sea, and then cut in sunder the Cord: which they had
no sooner done, but there arose a mighty Tempest, which tossed the little Boat
so vehemently in the waves, that the Ship-men thought it could not continue
long without sincking: yet the storm grew so great, that with great labor and
peril they got to the shore. But leaving the Child to her Fortunes, we will
return to Pandosto: who not yet glutted with suffcient revenge, devised which
way he should best increase his wives calamity. But first assembling his Nobles
and Councillors, he called her (for the more reproach) in open Court, where
it was objected against her, that she had committed adultery with Egistus, and
conspired with Franion to poison Pandosto her husband; but their pretense being
partly spyed, she counseled them to fly away by night, for their better
safety. Bellaria (who standing like a prisoner at the Bar, and feeling in her
self a clear conscience to withstand her false accusers) seeing no less then
death could pacify her Husbands wrath, waxed bold, and desired that she might
have Law and Justice: (for mercy she neither craved nor hoped) and that those
perjured wretches, which had falsely accused her to the King, might be brought
before her face to give in evidence. Pandosto (whose rage and jealousy was
such, as no reason nor equity could appease) told her, that for her accusers,
they were of such credit, as their words were sufficient witness and that the
sudden and secret flight of Egistus and Franion confirmed that which they had
confessed; and as for her, it was her par to deny such a monstrous crime, and
to be impudent in forswearing the fact, since she had passed all shame in
committing the fault: but her countenance should stand for no coin: for as the
bastard which she bare was served, so she should with some cruel death be
requited. Bellaria no whit dismayed with this rough reply, told her Husband
Pandosto that he spoke upon choler, and not conscience; for her virtuous life
had ever been such, as no spot of suspicion could ever stain it. And it she
had borne a friendly countenance to Egistus, it was in respect he was his
friend, and not for any lusting affection: therefore if she were condemned
without any further proof, it was rigor and not Law. The Noblemen which sat
in Judgment* said that Bellaria spoke reason, and entreated the King that her
accusers might be openly examined, and sworn: if then the evidence were such
as the Jury might find her guilty (for seeing she was a Prince* she ought to
be tried by the Peers) then let her have such punishment as the extremity of
the Law will assign to such malefactors. The King presently made answer that
in this case he might, and would dispense with the Law. And that the Jury
being once pannelled, they should take his word for sufficient evidence
otherwise he would make the proudest of them repent it. The Noblemen seeing
the King in choler were all whist, but Bellaria, whose life hung in the
balance, fearing more perpetual infamy, then momentany death, told the King,
if his fury might stand for a Law, that it were vain to have the Jury yield
their verdict, and thereupon she fell down upon her knees, and desired the
King, that for the love he bare to his young Son Garinter, whom she brought
into the world that he would grant her request, the which was this, that it
would please his Majesty to send six of his Noblemen whom he best trusted to
the Isle of Delphos, there to inquire of the Oracle of Apollo, whether she had
committed adultery with Egistus, or conspired to poison him with Franion: and
if the god Apollo, who by his divine essence knows all secrets, gave answer
that she was guilty, she was content to suffer any torment, were it never so
terrible. The request was so reasonable, that Pandosto could not for shame deny
it, unless he would be counted of all his Subjects more wilful then wise.
He therefore agreed, that with as good speed as might be, there should be
certain Ambassadors dispatched to the Isle of Delpos: and in the mean season
he commanded that his wife should be kept in close Prison. Bellaria having
obtained this grant, was now more careful of her little Babe that floated on
the Seas, then sorrowful for her own mishay; for of that she doubted; but of
herself she was assured: knowing that if Apollo should give sentence according
to the thoughts of her heart, yet the sentence should go on her side, such was
the cleerenesse of her mind in this case. But Pandosto (whose suspicious head
still remained in one song) chose out six of his Nobility, whom he knew were
scarce indifferent men in the Queens behalf, and providing all things fit for
their journey, sent them to Delphos. They willing to fuffill the Kings command,
and desirous to see the situation and custom of the Island, dispatched their
affairs with as much speed as might be, and embarked themselves to the
voyage, which, (the wind and weather serving fit for their purpose) was soon
ended. For within three weeks they arrived at Delphos: where they were no
sooner set on Land, but with great devotion they went to the Temple of Apollo
and there offering sacrifice unto the god, and gifts to the Priest, as the
custom was, they humbly craved an answer of their demand. They had not long
kneeled at the Altar, but Apollo with a loud vo^ce said: Bohemians what ye
find behind the Altar, take and depart. They forthwith obeyed the Oracle, found
a scrowle of parchment, wherein were written these words in letters of Gold.

The Oracle.
Suspicion is no proof: Jealousy is an unequal Judge: Bellaria is chaste:
Egistus blameless: Franion a true Subject: Pandosto trech^rous, his Babe
innocent, and the King shall die without an heir, if that which is lost be not
found.

AS seen as they had taken out this scrowle, the Priest of the god commanded
them, that they should not presume to read it before they came to the presence
of Pandosto, unless they would incur the displeasure of Apollo. The Bohemian
Lords carefully obeying his command, taking their leave of the Priest, with
great reverence departed out of the Temple and went to their Ships: and as
soon as Wind would permit them, sailed toward Bohemia, where in short time
they safely arrived, and with great Triumph issuing out of their ships, went to
the Kings Palace, whom they found in his Chamber, accompanied with other
Noblemen. Pandosto no sooner saw them, but with a merry countenance he
welcomed them home, asking, what news? They told his Majesty, that they had
received answer of the god, written in a Scrowle: but with this charge, that
they should not read the contents before they came in the presence of the King:
and with that they delivered him the Parchment. But his Noblemen entreated him,
that since therein were contained either the safety of his Wifes life and
honesty, vr her death and perpetual infamy; that he would have his Nobles and
Commons assembled in the Judgment Hall, where the Queen, brought in as a
prisoner, should hear the contents: If she were sound guilty by the Oracle of
the god, then all should have cause to think his rigor proceeded of due
desert: if her Grace were found faultlesse, then she should be cleared before
all, since she had been accused openly. This pleased the King, so that he
appointed the day, and assembled all the Lords and Commons, and caused the
Queen to be brought in before the Judgment Seat, commanding that the
Judgment should be read: wherein she was accused of Adultery with Egistus, and
of conspiracy with Franion. Bellaria hearing the contents, was no whit
astonished, but made this cheerful answer.

IF the Divine powers be privy to humane Actions, (as no doubt they are) I hope
my patience shall make Fortune blush, and my unspotted life shall stain
spiteful discredit. For although lying report has sought to appeach mine
honor, and suspicion has intended to soil credit with infamy: yet where
Virtue keeps the Fort, report and suspicion may assail, but never sack. How
I have led my life before Egistus coming, I appeal ( Pandosto) to the gods,
and to thy conscience. What has passed between him and me, the gods only
know, and I hope will presently reveal. That I loved Egistus, I cannot deny,
that I honored him, I shame not to confess. To the one I was forced by his
virtue; to the other, for his dignities. But as touching lascivious lust, I
say, Egistus is honest, and hope my self to be found without spot. For
Franion, I can neither accuse him, nor excuse him: I was not privy to his
departure: And that this is true which I have here rehearsed, I refer my
self unto the Divine Oracle.

BEllaria had no sooner said, but the King commanded that one of the Dukes
should read the contents of the Scrowle, which after the Commons had heard,
they gave a great shoute, rejoicing and clapping their hands that the Queen
was clear of that false accusation. But the King, whose conscience was a
witness against him of his witless sury, and false suspected jealousy, was
^o ashamed of his rash folly, that he entreated his Nobles to persuade
Bellaria to forgive and forget these injuries, promising not only to show
himself a loyal and loving Husband, but also to reconcile himself to Egistu
and Franion: revealing then before them all the cause of their secret flight,
and how trecherously he thought to have practiced his death, if the good mind
of his Cup Bearer had not prevented his purpose. As thus he was relating the
whole matter, there was word brought him, that his young Son Garinter was
suddenly dead: which news so soon as Bellaria heard, surcharged before with
extreme joy, and now suppressed with heavy sorrow, her vital spirits were
stopped, that she fell down presently dead, and never could be revived. This
sudden sight so appalled the Kings senses, that he sunk from his Seat in a
swound, so as he was feign to be carried by his Nobles to his Palace, where
he lay by the space of three days without speech. His Commons were as men in
despair, so diversely distressed there was nothing but mourning and lamentation
to be heard throughout all Bohemia: their young Prince dead, their virtuous
Queen bereaved of her life, and their King and Sovereign in great hazard:
this tragical discourse of Fortune so daunted them, as they went like
shadows, not men: yet somewhat to comfort their heavy hearts, they heard that
Pandosto was come to himself, and had recovered his speech: who, as in sury,
brayed these bitter speeches.

O Miserable Pandosto! what surer witness then conscience? What thoughts more
sour then suspicion? what plague more bad then Jealousy? Unnatural actions
offend the gods, more then men: and causeless cruelty never scapes without
revenge. I have committed such a bloody fact, as repent I may, but recall I
cannot. Ah Jealousy a hell to the mind, and a horror to the conscience,
suppressing reason, and melting rage: a worse passion then frenzy, a greater
plague then madness. Are the gods just? then let them revenge such brutish
cruelty: my innocent Babe I have drowned in the Seas: my loving wife I have
slain with slanderous suspicion: my trusty friend I have sought to betray: and
yet the gods are siacke to plague such offenses. Ah unjust Apollo, Pandosto is
the man that has committed the fault; why should Garinter, silly Child abide
the pain? Well, since the gods meaneto prolonge my days to increase my dolor,
I will offer my guilty blood a sacrifice to those guiltless souls, whose
lives are lost by rigorous folly. And with that he reached at a Rapier to have
murdered himself: but his Peers being present stayed him from such a bloody
act: persuading him to think, that the Commonwealth consisted on his safety,
and that those sheep could not but perish that wanted a Shepherd: wishing
that if he would not live for himself, yet he should have a care of his
Subjects, and to put such fancies out of his mind, since in sores past help,
salues do not heal, but hurt: and in things past cure, care is a corrosiue.
Withthese and such like persuasions the King was overcome, and began some what
to quiet his mind: so that so soon as he could go abroad, he caused his wife
to be imbalmed, and wrapped in Lead, with her young Son Garinter: erecting a
rich and famous Sepulcher, wherein he intombed them both, making such solemn
obsequies at her Funeral, as all Bohemia might perceive he did greatly repent
him of his fore-passed folly: causing this Epitaph to be engraven on her Tomb,
in Letters of Gold.

The Epitaph.
Here lies intombde Bellaria fair,
Falsely accused to be unchaste:
Cleared by Apollo's sacred doom,
Yet slain by Jealousy at last.
What ere thou be that passest by,
Curse him that caused this Queen to die.
THis Epitaph being engraven, Pandosto would once a day repair to the Tomb,
and there, with watery plaints bewail his misfortune: coveting no other
companion but sorrow, and no other harmony but repentance. But leaving him to
his dolorous passions, at last let us come to show the tragical discourse of
the young Infant.

WHo being tossed with wind and waves, floated two whole days without succor,
ready at every puff to be drowned in the Sea: till at the last the tempest
ceased and the little Boat was driven with the tide into the Coast of Cicilia:
where sticking upon the Sands, it rested, Fortune minding to be wanton,
(willing to show that as she has wrincles on her brows, so she has dimples
in her cheeks) thought after so many sour looks, to send a fained smile; and
after a pufting storm, to bring a pretty calm, she began thus to dally. It
fortuned a poor mercenary Shepherd, that dwelled in Sicilia, who got his
living by other men's Flocks, missed one of his sheep, and thinking it had
straied into the covert that was hard by, sought very diligently to find that
which he could not see, fearing either that the wolves or Eagles had undone
him, (for he was so poor, as a Sheep was half his substance) wandered down,
toward the Sea-cliffes, to see if perchance the Sheep was browzing on the
Sea-Iuy, whereon they do greatly feed. But not finding her there, as he was
ready to return to his Flock, he heard a child cry: but knowing there was no
house near, he thought he had mistaken the sound, and that it was the bleating
of his sheep. Wherefore looking more narrowly, as he cast his eye to the Sea,
he espied a little Boat, from whence (as he attentively listened) he might
hear a cry to come. Standing a good while in a maze, at last he went to the
shore, and wading to the Boat, as he looked in, he saw a little Babe lying all
alone, ready to die for hunger and cold, wrapped in a Mantle of Scarlet, richly
embrothered with Gold, and having a Chain about her neck. The Shepherd, who
before had never seen so fair a Babe, nor so rich Jewels, thought assuredly
that it was some little god, and began with great devotion to knock on his
breast. The Babe, who writhed with the head to seek for the Pap, began again
to cry afresh: whereby the poor man knew that it was a Child, which by some
sinister means was driven thither by distress of weather: maruelling how such
a silly Infant, which by the Mantle and Chain could not but be borne of Noble
parentage, should be so hardly crossed with deadly mishap. The poor Shepherd
perplexed thus with diverse thoughts, took pity of the Child, and determined
with himself to carry it to the King, that there it might be brought up,
according to the worthiness of the birth: for his ability could not afford to
foster it, though his mind was willing to further it. Taking therefore the
Child in his arms, he folded the Mantle together, the votter to defend if
from the cold, there fell down at his foot, a very fair and rich purse,
wherein he found a great sum of gold: which sight so revived the Shepherds
spirits, as he was greatly ravished with joy, and daunted with fea^e: joyful
to see such a sum in his power; fearful, if it should be known, that it
might breed his further danger. Necessity wished him at the least to retain the
gold, though he would not keep the child: the simplicity of his conscience
feared him from such a deceitful bribery. Thus was the poor man perplexed
with a doubtful Dilemma, until at last the covetousness of the coin
overcame him: for what will not the greedy desire of gold cause a man to do?
So that he was resolved in himself to foster the child, and with the sum to
relieve his want. Resting thus resolute in this point, he left seeking his
sheep, and as covertly, and secretly as he could, went a by way to his house,
least any of his neighbors should perceive his carriage. As soon as he was
got home; entering in at the door, the child began foiery, which his wife
hearing, and seeing her husband with a young babe in his arms, began to be
some what jealous: yet maruelling that her husband would be so wanton abroad
since he was so quiet at home. But as women are naturally given to believe the
worst so his wife thinking it was some bastard began to ^^^w against her good
man, and taking up a cudgel (for the most master went breechlesse) swear
solemnly, that she would make Clubs trump, if he brought any bastard brat
within her doors. The good man seeing his wife in her majesty, with her ^^^e
in her hand, thought it was time to bow, for fear of blows, and desired her
to be quiet, for there was no such matter: but if she could hold her peace they
were made for ever* And with that he told her the whole matter: how he had
found the child in a little boats without any succor, wrapped in that costly
mantle, and having that rich chain about her neck: But at last when he showed
her the purse full of gold, she began to simper some what sweetly. And taking
her husband about his neck, kissed him after her homely fashion: saying that
she hoped God had seen their want and now meant to relieve their poverty, and
seeing they could get no children had sent them this little babe to be their
heir. Take heed in any case (faith the shepherd) that you be secret; and
blab it not out when you meet with your Gossips For if you do, we are not
like not only to lose the gold and Jewels, but our other g^^^s and lives. Tush
(quoth his wife) profit is a good hatch before the door: Fear not, I have
other things to talk of, then this, but I pray you let us lay up the money
surely; and the Jewels, least by an^ mishap it be espied. After that they had
set all things in order the Shepherd went to his sheep with (...), and the
good wife learned to sing Lullaby at home with her young babe, wrapped it in a
homely blanket instead of a rich mantle, nourishing it so cleanly and
carefully, as it began to be a iollie Girl* insomuch that they began both of
them to be very fond of it, and as it waxed in age, so it increased in beauty.
The Shepherd every night at his coming home, would sing and dance it on his
knee, and prattle, that in short time it began to speak, and call him Dadde,
and her Mam. At last, when it grew to riper years, that it was about seeuen
years old, the Shepherd left keeping of other men's sheep, and with the money
he found in the purse, he bought him the Lease of a pretty Farm, and got a
small flock of Sheep: which when Fawnia (for so they named the child) came to
the age of ten years, he let her to keep sheep, and she with such diligence
performed her charge, as the sheep prospered maruellously under her hand.
Fawnia thought Porrus had been her father, and Mopsa her mother (for so was
the Shepherd and his wife called) and honored and obeyed them with such
reverence, that all the neighbors praised the dutiful obedience of the child.
Porrus grew in short time to be a man of some wealth and credit. For Fortune,
so favored him, in having no charge but Fawnia, that he began to purchase
Land, intending after his death to give it to his daughter: So that diverse rich
Farmours sons came as wooers to his house. For Fawnia was something cleanly
attired, being of such singular beauty, and excellent wit, that who so saw her,
would have thought she had been some heavenly Nymph, and not a mortal
creature. In so much that when she came to the age of sixteen years, she so
increased with exquisite perfection both of body and mind, as her natural
disposition did bewray that she was borne of some high parentage. But the
people thinking she was the daughter to the Shepherd Porrus, rested only
amazed at her beauty and wit. Yea she won such favor and commendations in
every man's eye, as her beauty was not only praised in the Country, but also
spoken of in the Court. Yet such was her submisse modesty, that although her
praise daily increased, her mind was no whit puffed up with pride* but humbled
her self as became a country maid, and the daughter of a poor Shepherd.
Every day she went forth with her sleep to the field: keeping them with such
care and diligence, as all men thought she was very painful, defending her
face from the heat of the Sun with no other veil, but with a Garland made of
boughs and flowers. Which attire became her so gallantly, as she seemed to be
the goddess Flora her self for beauty. Fortune who all this while had showed
a friendly face, began now to turn her back, and to show a lowering
countenance: intending as she had given Fawnia a slender check, so she would
give her a harder mate. To bring which to pass, she laid her trains on this
wise: Egistus had but one only son called Dorastus about the age of twenty
years: a Prince so decked and adorned with the gifts of Nature, so fraught
with beauty and virtuous qualities, as not only his father ioyed to have so
good a son, but his Commons rejoiced that God had sent them so noble a Prince
to succeed in the Kingdom. Egistus, placing all his joy in the perfection of
his son (seeing that he was now marriageable) sent Ambassadors to the King
of Denmark, to entreat a marriage between him and his daughter. Who willingly
consenting, made answer, that the next Spring, if it pleased Egistus with his
son to come into Denmark, he doubted not, but they should agree upon
reasonable conditions. Egistus resting satisfied with this friendly answer,
thought convenient in the mean time to break it unto his son. Finding
therefore on a day fit opportunity, he spoke to him in these fatherly terms.

DOrastus, thy youth warns me to prevent the worst, and mine age to provide
the best. Opportunities neglected, are signs of folly: actions measured by
time, are seldom bitten with repentance. Thou art young, and I old: age has
taught me that, which thy youth cannot conceive.

I therefore will counsel thee as a Father, hoping thou will obey as a child.
Thou see, my white hairs are blossoms for the Grave: and thy fresh colors,
fruit for time and Fortune: so that it behooves me, to think how to dye: and
for thee, to care how to live. My Crown I must leave by death, and thou enjoy
my Kingdom by succession. Wherein, I hope, thy, Virtue and prowess shall be
such, as though my subjects want my person, yet shall see in thee my
perfection. That nothing either may fail to satisfy thy mind, or increase
thy dignities: the only care I have, is to see thee well married before I die,
and thou become old.

Dorastus (who from his infancy, delighted rather to die with Mars in the
field, then to dally with Venus in the chamber) fearing to displease his
father, and yet not willing to be wed, made him this reverend answer.

SIr, there is no greater bond then duty, nor no stricter Law then Nature:
disobedience in youth, is often galled with despite in age. The commend of the
father ought to be a constraint to the child: so parents wills are laws, so
they pass not all Laws. May it please your grace therefore, to appoint whom I
shall love: rather the* by denial I should beappeached of disobedience, I rest
content to love, though it be the only thing I hate.

Egistus hearing his son to fly from from the mark, began to be some what
chellericke, and therefore made him this answer.

What Dorastus, can thou not love? Comes this Cinicall passion of proud
desires, or peevish frowardnes? What, do thou think thy self too good for
all, or none good enough for thee? I tell thee Dorastus, there is nothing
sweeter then youth: nor swifter decreasing while it is increasing. Time past
with folly, may be repented, but not recalled. If thou marry in age, thy wives
fresh colors will bred in thee dead thoughts and suspicion, and thy white
hairs her loathsomnes and sorrow. For Venus affections are not fed with
Kingdoms or treasures, but with youthful conceits, and sweet a^ours. Vulcan
was allotted to shake the tree, but Mars allowed to reap the fruit. Yield (
Dorastus) to thy fathers persuasions, which why prevent thy perils. I have
chosen thee a wife* fair by nature, Royal by birth by virtues famous, learned
by education, and rich by possessions: so that it is hard to judge whether her
bounty or fortune, her beauty or virtue be of greates force: I mean (
Dorastus) Euphania, daughter and heir to the King of Denmark.

Egistus pausing here a while, looking when his son should make him answer:
and seeing that he stood still, as one in a trance, he took him up thus
sharply.

Well ( Dorastus) take heed, the tree Alypa wastes not with fire, but
withers with dew: that which love nourishes not, perishes with hate. If
thou like Euphania, thou breedest my content, and in loving her thou shall have
my love: otherwise: and with that he flung from his son in a rage, leaving
him a sorrowful man, in that he had by denial displeased his father: and
half angry with himself, that he could not yield to that passion, whereto
both reason and his father persuaded him. But see how fortune is plumed with
times feathers, and how she can minister strange causes, to breed strange
effects.

It happened not long after this, that there was a meeting of all the Farmors
daughters in Sicilia, whither Fawnia was also bidden as the mistress of the
feast: who having attired her self in her best garments, went amongst the rest
of her companions to a merry meeting: there spending the day in such homely
pastime as Shepherds use. As the Evening grew on, and their sport ceased, each
taking their leave of other: Fawnia desiring one of her companions to bear her
company, went home by the flock, to see if they were well fowlded. And as they
returned, it fortuned that Dorastus (who all that day had been hawking, and
killed store of game) incountred by the way these two maids, fraring that with
Acteon he had seen Diana: for he thought such exquisite perfection could not
be found in any mortal creature. As thus he stood in a maze, one of his Pages
told him that the maid with the garland on her head, was Fawnia, that fair
Shepherdess, whose beauty was so much talked of in the Court. Dorastus
desirous to see if nature had adorned her mind withany inward qualities as she
had decked her body with outward shape, began to question with her whose
daughter she was, of what age, and how she had been trained up? Who answered
him with such modest reverence and sharpness of wit, that Dorastus thought her
outward beauty was but a counterfeit to darken her inward qualities: wondering
how so courtly behavior could be found in so simple Cottage; and cursing
Fortune, that had shaddowed wit and beauty with such hard Fortune. As thus he
held her a long time with chat, beauty seeing him at discouert, thought not to
loose the vantage, but struck him so deeply with an inuenomed shafte, as he
wholly lost his liberty, and became a slave to Love, which before contemned
Love, glad to gaze upon a poor shepherdess, who before refused the offer of
rich Princess. For the perfection of Fawnia had so fixed his fancy, as he
felt his mind greatly changed, and his affection altered; cursing Love, that
had wrought such a change and blaming the baseness of his mind, that would
make such a choice. But thinking these were but passionate toys that might be
thrust out at pleasure: to avoid the Siren that enchanted him he spurs his
horse, and had his fair Shepherdess farewell.

Fawnia (who all this while had marked the Princely gesture of Dorastus) seeing
his face so well featured, and each limb so perfectly framed, began greatly to
praise his perfection, commending him so long, till she found her self faulty:
and perceived that if she waded but a little further, she might slip over the
shoes She therefore seeking to quench that fire which never was put out went
home and faining her self not well at ease, gother to bed: where casting a
thousand thoughts in her head, she could take no rest: for if she had waked,
she began to call to mind his beauty: and thinking to beguile such thoughts
with sleep, she then dreamed of his perfection. Pestered with these
unacquainted passions she passed the night as she could in short slumbers.

Dorastus (who all this while rode with a flea in his ear) could not by any
means forget the sweet favor Fawnia, but rested so bewitched with her wit
and beauty, as he could take no rest. He felt fancy to give the assault, and
his wounded mind ready to yield as vanquished: yet he began with diverse
considerations to suppress his frantic affection, calling to mind, that
Fawnia was a Shepherdess, one not worthy to be looked at of a Prince: much
less to be loved of such a Potentate: thinking what a discredit it were to
himself, and what a grief it would be to his father: blaming fortune, and
accusing his own folly, that should be so fond, as but once to cast a glance
at such a Country slut. And as thus he was raging against himself* Love
(fearing if she dallyed long, to lose her Champion) stepped more nigh, and gave
him such a fresh wound, as it pierst him at the heart that he was feign to
yield maugre his face, and to forsake the company, and get him to his chamber,
where being solemnly set, he burst into these passionate terms.

AH Dorastus, art thou alone? No, not alone, while thou art tired with these
unacquainted passions. Yield to fancy thou can not by thy fathers counsel:
but in a frenzy thou art, by just destinies. Thy father were content, if thou
could love: and thou therefore discontent, because thou do love. O divine
Love; fear of men, because honored of gods: not to be suppressed by wisdom,
because not to be comprehended by reason: without law, and therefore above law.

How then Dorastus? why do thou blaze that with praises which thou have cause
to blaspheme with curses? Yet why should they curse love, which are in love?

Blush Dorastus at thy Fortune, thy choice, thy love: thy thoughts cannot be
uttered without shame, nor thy affections without discredit. Ah Fawnia, sweet
Fawnia, thy beauty Fawnia.

Shamest not thou, Dorastus, to name one unfit for thy birth, thy Dignities,
thy Kingdoms? Die, Dorastus, Dorastus, die. Better had thou perish with
high desires, then live in base thoughts. Yea, but beauty must be obeyed,
because it is beauty: yet framed of the gods to feed the eye, not to fetter the
heart.

Ah, but he that strives against love, shoots with them of Scyrum against
the wind, and with the Cockatrice pecketh against the steel. I will therefore
obey, because I must obey. Fawnia yea Fawnia shall be my fortune, in spite of
fortune. The gods above disdain not to love women beneath. Phoebus liked
Daphne; Jupiter, Io: and why not 3 then Fawnia? one something inferior to
these in birth, but far superior to them in beauty: borne to be a
Shepherdess, but worthy to be a goddess.

Ah, Dorastus, will thou forget thy self, as to suffer affection to suppress
wisdom, and love violate thine honor? How sour will thy choice be to thy
father, sorrowful to thy subjects, to thy friends a grief, most gladsome to
thy foes? Subdue then thy affection, and cease to love her whom thou could
not love, unless blinded with too much love? Tush, I talk to the wind, and in
seeking to prevent the causes, I further the effects, I will yet praise Fawnia,
honor, yea and love Fawnia, and at this day follow content, not council. Do
Dorastus, thou can repent: and with that his Page came into the chamber:
whereupon he ceased from complaints, hoping that time would wear out that
which fortune had wrought. As thus he was pained, so poor Fawnia was diversely
perplexed. For the next morning getting up very early, she went to her sheep,
thinking with hard labors to pass away her new conceived amors, beginning
very busily to drive them to the field, and then to shift the folds. At last,
wearied with toil, she sat her down, (where poor soul) she was more tired
with fond affection. For love began to assault her, insomuch that as she sat
upon the side of a hill, she began to accuse her own folly in these terms.

IN fortunate Fawnia, And therefore unfortunate, because Fawnia, thy Shepherds
hook shows thy poor estate, thy proud desires an aspiring mind: the one
declares thy want, the other thy pride. No bastard Hawke must sore so high as
the Hobby, no foul gaze against the Sun but the Eagle: Actions wrought against
nature, reap despite: and thoughts above fortune, disdain.

Fawnia thou art a Shepherdess, daughter to poor Porrus: if thou rest
content with this, thou art like to stand if thou climb, thou art like to fall.
The herb Anita growing higher then six inches, becomes a weed. Nilus
flowing more then twelve cubits procures a dearth. Daring affections that
pass measure, are cut short by time or fortune. Suppress then Fawnia those
thoughts which (...) shame to express. But ah, Fawnia, Love is a Lord who will
command by power and constrain by force.

Dorastus, ah Dorastus is the man I love: the worse is thy hap, and the less
cause have thou to hope. Will Eagles catch at flies? Will Cedars stoop at
Brambles? Or mighty Princes look at such homely Truls? No, no, think this
Dorastus, disdain is greater then thy desire. He is a Prince, respecting his
honor: Thou a beggars brat forgetting thy calling. Cease then not only to
say, but to think to love Dorastus; and dissemble thy love, Fawnia. For better
it were to die with grief then to live with shame. Yet in despite of Love, I
will sigh to see if I can sigh out Love. Fawnia, some what appeasing her
griefs with these pithy persuasions, began after her wonted manner to walk
about her sheep, and to keep them from straying into the Corn, suppressing
her affection with the due consideration of her base estate, and with
impossibilities of her love, thinking it were frenzy (not fancy) to covet that
which the very destinies deny her to obtain.

But Dorastus was more impatient in his passions: for love so fiercely assailed
him, that neither company, nor Music could mitigate his martyrdom: but did
rather far the more increase his malady. Shame would not let him crave
counsel in this case: nor fear of his fathers displeasure, reveal it to any
secret friend: but he was feign to make a secretary of himself, and to
participate his thoughts with his own troubled mind. Lingering thus a while in
doubtful suspense, at last stealing secretly from the Court without either men
or Page, he went to see if he could epsy Fawnia walking abroad in the field.
But, as one having a great deal more skill to retriue the Partridge with the
Spaniels then to hunt aster such a strange prey, he sought, but was little the
better. Which crosse-lucke drove him into a great choler that he began both
to accuse Love and Fortune: But as he was ready to retire, he saw Fawnia
sitting all alone under the side of an hill, making a Garland of such homely
flowers as the fields did afford. This sight so revived his spirits that he
drew high, with more judgment to make a view of her singular perfection: which
he found to be such* as in that Country attire she stained all the Courtly
Dames of Sicilia. While thus he stood gazing with piercing looks on her
surpassing beauty, Fawnia cast her eye aside, and espied Dorastus. Which sudden
sight made the poor girl to blush, and to dye her crystal cheeks with the
vermillion red: which gave her such a grace, as she seemed far more
beautiful: and with that she rose up, saluting the Prince with such modest
courtesies, as he wondered how a Country maid could afford such comely
behavior. Dorastus repaying her courtesy with a smiling countenance, began to
parle with her on this manner.

Fair maid (quoth he) either your want is great, or a Shepherds life is very
sweet, that your delight is in such country labors. I cannot conceive what
pleasures you should take, unless you mean to imitate the Nymphs, being your
self so like a Nymph. To put me out of this doubt, show me what is to be
commended in a Shepherds life, and what pleasures you have to counteruaile
these drudging labors. Fawnia, with blushing face, made him this answer.

SIr, what richer state then content? or what sweeter life then quiet? We
Shepherds are not borne to honor, nor beholding unto beauty: the less care
we have to fear fame or fortune. We count our attire brave enough, if warm
enough, and our food dainty, if to suffice nature: our greatest enemy is the
Wolf: our only care in safe keeping our flock: in stead of Courtly Ditties,
we spend the days with Country songs: our amorous conceits are homely
thoughts, delighting as much to talk of Pan and his country pranks, as Ladies
to tell of Venus and her wanton toys. Our toil is in shifting our folds and
looking to the Lambs, easy labors, of sitting and telling tales; homely
pleasures: our greatest wealth not to covet: our honor, not to climb: our
quiet, not to care. Envy looks not so low as Shepherds: Shepherds gaze not
so high as ambition: we are rich, in that we are poor with content: and proud,
only in this, that we have no cause to be proud.

THis witty answer of Fawnia, so inflamed Dorastus fancy that he commending
himself for making so good a choice: thinking, if her birth were answerable to
her wit and beauty; that she were a fit mate for the most famous Prince in the
world. He therefore began to sift her more narrowly on this manner.

FAwnia, I see thou art content with country labors, because thou know not
Courtly pleasures: I commend thy wit, and pity thy want. But will thou leave
thy fathers Cottage, and serve a Courtly mistress?

Sir (quoth she) beggars ought not to strive against fortune, nor to gaze
against honor, least either their fall be greater, or they become blind. I am
borne to toil for the Court not in the Court: my nature unfit for their
nature: better live in mean degree, then in high disdain.

Well said, Fawnia (quoth Dorastus) I guess at thy thoughts, thou art in love
with some country Shepherd.

No sir (quoth she) Shepherds cannot love, that are so simple and maids may
not love, that are so young.

Nay therefore (quoth Dorastus) maids must love because they are young: for
Cupid is a child, and Venus, though old, is painted with fresh colors.

I grant (said she) age may be painted with new shadows, and youth may have
imperfect affections: but, what art concealeth in one, ignorance reuealeth in
another. Dorastus seeing Fawnia hold him so hard, thought it was vain so long
to beat about the bush: therefore he thought to have given her a fresh charge;
but he was so prevented by certain of his men, who missing their matter, came
posting to seek him, seeing that he was gone forth all alone: yet before they
drew so nigh, that they might hear their talk, he used these speeches.

Why, Fawnia, perhaps I love thee, and then thou must needs yield: for thou
know I can command and constrain. Tush Sir (quoth she) but not to love, for
constrained love is force, not love: And know this, Sir, mine honesty is such,
as I had rather dye, then be a Concubine, enen unto a King: and my birth is so
base, as I am unfit to be a wife unto a poor Farmor. Why then (quoth he) thou
can not love Dorastus. Yes, said Fawnia, when Dorastus becomes a Shepherd.
And with that, the presence of his men broke off their parle, so that he went
with them to the Palace, and left Fawnia, sitting still on the hill side: who
seeing that the night drew on, shifted her Folds and busied her self about
other work, to drive away such fond fancies as began to trouble her brain.
But all this could not prevail; for the beauty of Dorastus had made such a
deep impression in her heart as it could not be worn out without cracking, so
that she was feign to blame her own folly in this wife.

AH Fawnia why do thou gaze against the Sun, or catch at the wind? Stars
are to be looked at with the eye, not reached at with the hand: thoughts are to
be measured by fortunes, not by desires* falls comes not by sitting low, but by
climing too high. What then shall all fear to fall, because some hap to fall?
No, luck comes by Lot, and Fortune windeth those threeds which the Destinies
spin. Thou art favored, Fawnia, at a Prince, and yet thou art so fond to
reject desired favors. Thou have denial at thy tongues end, and desire at thy
hearts bottom. A woman's fault, to spurn at that with her foot, which she
greedily catches at with her hand. Thou love Dorastus, Fawnia; and yet
seem to lowre. Take heed, if he retire thou will repent* for unless he
love, thou can but dye. Dye then Fawnia* for Dorastus does but jest. The Lion
never preyeth on the Mouse: nor do Fawlcons stoop to dead stales. Sit down
then in this sorrow: cease to love and content thy self, that Dorastus will
vouchsafe to flatter Fawnia, though not to fancy Fawnia. Heigh hoe: Ah fool,
it were seemlier for thee to whistle as a Shepherd, then to sigh as a Lover:
and with that she ceased from these perplexed passions, folding her sheep, and
hying home to her poor Cottage. But such was the unconstant sorrow of
Dorastus, to think on the wit and beauty of Fawnia, and to see how fond he
was, being a Prince: and how froward she was being a beggar: that he began to
lose his wont dappetite: to look pale and wan: in stead of mirth, he fed on
melancholy: for Courtly dances, to use cold dumps. Insomuch that not only his
own men, but his father, and all the Court began to marvel at his sudden
change, thinking that some lingering sicknessehad brought him into this state.
Wherefore he caused Physicians to come. But Dorastus neither would let them
minister, nor so much as suffer them to see his urine: but remained still so
oppressed with these passions as he feared in himself a further
inconvenience. His honor wished him to cease from such fosly: but love forced
him more to follow fancy; yea, and in despite of honor, Love won the
conquest, so that his hot desires caused him to find new devices. For he
presently made himself a Shepherds Coat, that he might go unknown, and
with less suspicion, to prattle with Fawnia; and conveyed it secretly into a
thick Grove, hard adjoining to the Palace: whither, finding fit time and
opportunity, he went all alone, and putting off his Princely apparel, got on
those Shepherds robes, and taking a great hook in his hand (which he also
had gotten) he went very anciently to find out the Mistress of his
affection. But as he went by the way, seeing himself clad in such unseemly
rags, he began to smile at his own folly, and to reprove his fondness in
these terms.

Well said, Dorastus, thou keep a good decorum, base desires, and homely
attires; thy thoughts are fit for none but a Shepherd, and thy apparel such
only as becomes a Shepherd. A strange change, from a Prince to a Peasant.
What, is it thy wretched fortune or thy wilful folly? Is it thy cursed
Destinies, or thy crooked desires that appoint thee this penance: Ah, Dorastus,
thou can but love, and unless thou love, thou art like to perish for love.
Yet, fond fool, choose flowers, not weeds: Diamonds, not Pebbles: Ladies which
may honor thee, not Shepherds, which may disgrace thee. Venus is painted in
silks, not in rags, and Cupid treads on disdain, when he reaches at
Dignity. And yet Dorastus, shame not at thy Shepherds weed: the heavenly gods
have sometime earthly thoughts: Neptune became a Ram: Jupiter a Bull: Apollo a
Shepherd: they gods, and yet in love: and thou a man appointed to love.

Devising thus with himself, he drew nigh to the place where Fawnia was
keeping her sheep: who casting her eye aside, and seeing such a manerly
Shepherd, perfectly limmed, and coming with so good a pace, she began half
to forget Dorastus, and to favor her pretty shepherd, whom she thought she
might both love and obtain. But as she was in these thoughts she perceived
then it was the young Prince Dorastus; wherefore the rose up, and reverently
saluted him. Dorastus taking her by the hand, repayed her courtesy with asweet
kiss, and praying her to sit down by him, he began thus to lay the battery.

IF thou marvel, Fawnia at my strange attire, thou would more muse at my
unaccustomed thoughts: the one disgraceth but my outward shape: the other
disturbeth my inward senses: I love Fawnia, and therefore what love likes, I
cannot mislike. Fawnia thou have promised to love, and I hope thou will
perform no less. I have fulfilled thy request, and now thou can not but
grant my desire. Thou were content to love Dorastus, when he ceast to be a
Prince, and became a Shepherd: and see I have made a change, and therefore not
to miss of my choice.

TRuth, quoth Fawnia: But all that wear Cowles, are not Monks. Painted Eagles
are pictures, not Eagles: Zeuxis Grapes were like Grapes, yet shadows; rich
clothing make not Princes, nor homely attire beggars: Shepherds are not
called Shepherds, because they wear hooks and bags, but they are borne poor,
and live to keep sheep: so this attire has not made Dorastus a Shepherd,
but to seem like a Shepherd.

WEll Fawnia, answered Dorastus, were I a Shepherd I could not but like thee;
being a Prince, I am forced to love thee. Take heed Fawnia, be not proud of
beauties painting; for it is a flower that fades in the blossom. Those which
disdain in youth, are despised in age. Beauties shadows are trickt up with
times colors, which being set to dry in the Sun, are stained with the Sun,
scarce pleasing the sight: yet they begin not to be worth the sight: not much
unlike the herb Ephymeton, which flourishes in the morning, and is withered
before the Sun setting. If my desire were against love, thou might justly
deny me by reason: but I love thee, Fawnia, not to misuse thee as a Concubine,
but to use thee as my wife; I can promise no more, and mean to perform no
less.

Fawnia hearing this solemn protestation of Dorastus, could no longer
withstand the assault, but yielded up the fort, in these friendly terms.

AH, Dorastus, I shame to express that thou forcest me with thy sugared speech
to confess: my base birth causes the one, and thy high dignities the other.
Beggars thoughts ought not to reach as far as Kings, and yet my desires reach
as high as Princes. I dare not say, Dorastus, I love thee, because I am a
Shepherdess: but the gods know, I have honored Dorastus (pardon if I say
amiss) yea, and loved Dorastus, with such dutiful affection, as Fawnia can
perform, or Dorastus desire: I yield, not overcome with prayers but with love:
resting Dorastus handmaid, ready to obey his will, if no prejudice at all to
his honor, nor my credit.

DOrastus hearing this friendly conclusion of Fawnia, embraced her in his
arms, swearing that neither distance, time, nor adverse fortune, should
diminish his affection: but that in despite of the destinies he would remain
faithful to death. Having thus plight their troth each to other, seeing they
could not have the full fruition of their love in Sicilia, for that Egistus
consent would never be granted to so mean a match: Dorastus determined, as
soon as time and opportunity would give him leave, to provide a great mass of
money, and many rich and costly Jewels, for the easier carriage; and then to
transport themselves and their Treasure into Italy, wherethey should lead a
contented life, until such time as either he could be reconciled to his
father, or else by succession come to the Kingdom. This device was greatly
praised of Fawnia: for she feared, if the King his father should but hear of
the contract, that his fury would be such, as no less than death should stand
for payment. She therefore told him, that delay bred danger: that many
mishappes did fall out between the cup and lip; and that to avoid danger, it
were best with as much speed as might be, to pass out of Sicilia, least
fortime might prevent their patience with some new despite. Dorastus, whom
love pricked forward with desire, promised to dispat^h his affairs with as
great haste, as either time or opportunity would give him leave: and so resting
upon this point after many embracings and sweet kisses, they departed.
Dorastus, having taken his leave, of his best beloved Fawnia went to the Grove
where he had his rich apparel, and there uncasing himself as secretly as
might be, hiding up his Shepherds attire, till occasion should serve again to
use it, he went to the Palace, she wing by his merry countenance, that either
the state of his body was amended, or the cause of his mind greatly addressed.
Fawnia, poor soul, was no less joyful, that being a Shepherdess, fortune
had favored her so, as to reward her with the love of a Prince: hoping in time
to be advanced from the daughter of a poor Farmour, to be wife to rich a King.
So that she thought every hour ayeere, till by their departure they might
prevent danger: not ceasing still to go every day to her sheep: not so much
for the care of the flock, as for the desire she had to see her Love and Lord,
Dorastus: who oftentimes, when opportunity would serve, repaired thither to
feed his fancy with the sweet content of Fawnia's presence. And although he
never went to visit her, but in these Shepherds rags, yet his often repair
made him not only suspected, but known to diverse of their neighbors: who for
the good will they bare to old Porrus, told him secretly of the matter, wishing
him to keep his daughter of home, lest she went so long to the field, that
she brought him home a young son. For they feared that Fawnia being so
beautiful, the young Prince would allure her to folly. Porrus was stricken in
a dumpe at these news, so that thanking his neighbors for their good will, he
hyed him home to his wife: and calling her aside, wringing his hands and
shedding forth tears he brake the matter to her in these terms.

I Am afraid, wife, that my daughter Fawnia has made her self to sin, that
she will buy repentance too dear, I have news, which if they be true, some
will wish they had not proved true. It is told me by my neighbors, that
Dorastus the Kings son, begins to look at our daughter Fawnia: which if it
be so, I will not give her a halfe-peny for her honesty at the years end. I
tell thee, wife, now a days beauty is a great sta^e to trap young men, and
fair words and sweet promises are two great enemies to maids honesty: and
thou know* where poor entreat, and cannot obtain, there Princes may
command, and will obtain. Though Kings sons dance in nets they may not be
seen: yet poor men's faults are espied at a little hole. Well, it is a hard
care where Kings lusts are laws, and that they should bind poor men to that
which they themselves wilfully break.

Peace, husband (quoth his wife) take heed what we say: Speak no more then
you should, least you hear what you would not. Great streams are to be
stopped by sleight, not by force: and Princes to be persuaded by submission,
not by rigor. Do what you can, but no more then you may, least in saving
Fawnia's maidenhead, you lose your own head. Take heed, I say, it is ill
jesting with edged tools, and bad sporting with Kings The Wolf had his skin
pulled over his ears, for but looking into the Lions den.

Tush, wife (quoth he) thou speak like a fool: If the King should know that
Dorastus had gotten our daughter with child (as I fear it will fall out little
better) the Kings fury would be such, as no doubt we should both lose our goods
and lives: necessity therefore has no law, and I will prevent this mischief
with a new device that is come into my head, which shall neither offend the
King, nor displease Dorastus. I mean to take the chain and the Jewels that I
found with Fawnia, and carry them to the King; letting him then to understand,
how she is none of my daughter, but that I found her beaten up with the water
alone in a little boat, wrapped in a rich mantle, wherein was enclosed this
treasure. By this means, I hope the King will take Fawnia into his service,
and we, whatsoever chance shall be blameless. This devise pleased the
good-wife very well, so that they determined as soon as they might know the
King at leisure, to make him privy to this case.

In the mean time, Dorastus was not slack in his affairs, but applied his
matters with such diligence, that he provided all things fit for their journey.
Treasure and Jewels he had gotten great store, thinking there was no better
friend then money in a strange Country. Rich attire he had provided for Fawnia:
and because he could not bring the matter to pass without the help and
advice of some one, he made an old servant of his called Capnio, who had served
him from his child hood, privy to his affairs: who, seeing no persuasions
could prevail to divert him from his settled determination gave his consent,
and dealt so secretly in the cause, that within short space he had gotten a
ship ready for their passage. The Mariners seeing a fit gale of wind for
their purpose, wished Capnio to make no delays, lest if they pretermitted this
good weather, they might staylong ere they had such a fair wind. Capnio
fearing that his negligence should hinder their journey, in the night time
conveyed the truncks full of treasure into the ship, and by secret means let
Fawnia understand, that the next morning they meant to depart. She upon these
news slept very little that night, but got her up very early, and went to her
sheep, looking every minute when she should see Dorastus: who tarryed not
long, for fear delay might breed danger: but came as fast as he could gallop,
and without any great circumstance took Fawnia up behind him, and rode to the
haven where the ship lay, which was three quarters of a mile distant from that
place. He no sooner came there, but the Mariners were ready with their
cock-boat to set them aboard: where being coucht together in a Cabin they past
away the time in recounting their old loves, till their man Capnio could come.

Porrus, who had heard that this morning the King would go abroad to take the
air, called in haste to his wife, to bring him his holi-day-hose, and his best
Jacket, that he might go like an honest substantial man to tell his tale. His
wise a good cleanly wench, brought him all things fit and spunged him up very
hansomely, giving him a chain and the jewels in a little box: which Porrus for
the more safety put in his bosom. Having thus his trinkets in a readiness,
taking his staff in his hand he bade his wife kiss him for good luck, and so
he went toward the Palace. But as he was going, Fortune (who meant to she whim
a little false play) prevented his purpose in this wise.

He met by chance in his way Capnio, who trudging as fast as he could, with a
little coffer under his arm to the ship, and spying Porrus, whom he knew to
be Fawnia's father going toward the Palace: being a wily fellow, began to
doubt the worst, and therefore crossed him the way and asked him whither he was
going so early in the morning.

Porrus (who knew by his face that he was one of the Court) meaning simply,
told him that the Kings son Dorastus dealt hardly with him: for he had but
one daughter, who was a little beautiful, and that his neighbors told him,
the young Prince had allured her to folly: he went therefore now to complain to
the King how greatly he was abused.

Capnio (who straight way knew the whole matter) began to sooth him in his
talk, and said, that Dorastus dealt not like a Prince, to spoil any poor
man's daughter in that sort: he therefore would do the best for him he could,
because he knew he was an honest man. But (quoth Capnio) you loose your labor
in going to the Palace: for the King means this day to take the air of the
sea, and to go aboard of a ship that lies in the haven: I am going before, you
see, to provide all things in a readiness: and if you will follow my counsel,
turn back with me to the haven where I will set you in such a fit place, as
you may speak to the King of your pleasure. Porrus giving credit to Capnio's
smooth tales, gave him a thousand thanks for his friendly advice, and went with
him to the haven, making all the way his complaint on Dorastus; yet concealing
secretly his chain and the Jewels. As soon as they were come to the seaside,
the Mariners seeing Capnio, came to land with their cocke-boat: who still
dissembling the matter, demanded of Porrus, if he would go see the ship: who
unwilling, and fearing the worst, because he was not well acquainted with
Capnio, made his excuse that he could not brook the sea, and therefore would
not trouble him.

Capnio, seeing that by fair means he could not get him aboard commanded the
Mariners that by violence they should carry him into the ship, who like sturdy
knaves holsted the poor Shepherd on their necks, and bearing him to the boat
lanched from the land.

Porrus seeing himself so cunningly betrayed, durst not cry out, for he saw
it would not prevail: but began to entreat Capnio, and the Mariners to be
good to him, and to pity his estate, he was but a poor man that lived by his
labor: they laughing to see the Shepherd so afraid, made as much have as
they could to set him aboard. Porrus was no sooner in the ship but he saw
Dorastus walking with Fawnia, yet he scarce knew her: for she had attyred her
self in rich apparel, which so increased her beauty, that she resembled
rather an Angel, than a creature.

Dorastus and Fawnia, were half astonished to see the old Shepherd;
maruelling greatly what wind had brought him thither, till Capnio told them all
the whole discourse: how Porrus was going to make his complaint to the King, if
by policy he had not prevented him; and therefore now since he was aboard, for
the avoiding of further danger, it were best to carry him into Italy.

Dorastus, praised greatly his man's device, and allowed of his counsel: but
Fawnia, (who still feared Porrus as her father) began to blush for shame, that
by her means he should either incur danger or displeasure.

The old Shepherd hearing this hard sentence: that he should on such a
sudden be carried from his wife, his Country and kinsfolk, into a foreign
Land among strangers began with bitter tears to make his complaint, and on his
knees to entreat Dorastus, that pardoning his unadvised folly, he would give
him leave to go home: swearing that he would keep all things as secret as he
could wish. But these protestations could not prevail, although Fawnia
entreated Dorastus very earnestly: but the Mariners hoisted their maine
sails, weighed anchors, haled into the deep: where we leave them to the
succor of the wind and seas, and return to Egistus.

Who having appointed this day to hunt in one of his forests, called for his
son Dorastus, to go sport himself, because he saw that of late he began to
lowre: but his men made answer that he was gone abroad none knew whither,
except he were gone to the grove to walk all alone, as his custom was every
day.

The King willing to waken him out of his dumpe, sent one of his men to go
seek him, but in vain: for at the last he returned, but find him he could
not, so that the King went himself to go see the sport: where passing away the
day, returning at night from hunting, he asked for his son, but he could not be
heard of, which drove the king into a great choler: whereupon most of his
Noblemen and other Courtiers posted abroad to seek him, but they could not
hear of him through all Sicilia: only they missed Capnio his man, which
again made the King suspect that he was not gone far.

Two or three days being passed, and no news heard of Dorastus, Egistus being
fearful that he was devoured with some wild beasts, and with that made out a
great Troop of men to go seek him: who coasted through all the Country and
searched in every dangerous and secret place, until at last they met with a
Fisherman, that was sitting in a little covert, hard by the sea side, mending
his nets, when Dorastus and Fawnia took shipping: who being examined if he
either knew or heard where the Kings son was, without any secrecy at all,
revealed the whole matter, how he was sailed two days past, and had in his
company his man Capnio, Porrus, and his fair daughter Fawnia. This heavy news
was presently carried to the King, who half dead for sorrow, commanded Porrus
wife to be sent for: she being come to the Palace, after due examination,
confessed that her neighbors had often told her, that the Kings son was too
familiar with Fawnia her daughter: Whereupon her husband fearing the worst,
about two days past, (hearing the King should go a hunting) rose early in the
morning, and went to make his complaint, but since she neither heard of him,
nor saw him. Egistus perceiving the woman's unfeigned simplicity, let her depart
without incurring further displeasure, conceiving such secret grief for his
sons wretchlesse folly, that he had so forgotten his honor and Parentage, by
so base a choice to dishonor his father, and discredit himself, that with
very care and thought, he fell into a quartaine fever: which was so unfit for
his aged years and complexion, that he became so weak, as the Physicians
would grant him no life.

But his son Dorastus little regarded either father, Country or kingdom, in
respect of his Lady Fawnia: for Fortune smiling on this young nouics, sent him
so lucky a gale of wind, for the space of a day and a night, that the Mariners
lay and slept upon the hatches: but on the next morning about the break of the
day, the air began to ouer-cast, the winds to rise, the seas to swell: yea
presently there arose such a fearful tempest, as the ship was in danger to be
swallowed up in every sea; the maine mast with the violence of the wind, was
thrown ouerboord, the sails were torn, the tackling rended a sunder, the
storm raging still so furiously, that poor Fawnia was almost dead for fear,
but that she was greatly comforted with the presence of Dorastus. The tempest
continued three days, all which time the Mariners every minute looked for
death, and the air was so darkened with clouds, that the master could not tell
by the compass in what coast they were. But upon the fourth day about ten of
the clock, the wind began to cease, the sea to wax calm, and the sky to be
clear, and the Mariners descried the coast of Bohemia, shooting off their
Ordinance for joy, that they had escaped such a fearful tempest.

Dorastus hearing that they were arrived at some Harbor, sweetly kissed
Fawnia, and bade herb of good cheer. When they told him that the Port
belonged to the chief City of Bohemia where Pandosto kept his Court, Dorastus
began to be sad; knowing that his father hated no man so much as Pandosto, and
that the King himself had sought secretly to betray Egistus: this considered,
he was half affrayd to go on Land, but that Capnio counseled him to change
his name and his Country, until such time as they could get some other Bark
to transport them into Italy. Dorastus liking this device, made his case privy
to the Mariners, rewarding them bountifully for their pains, and charging
them to say, that he was a Gentleman of Trapolonia, called Meleagrus. The
ship-men willing to show what friendship they could* to Dorastus, promised to
be as secret as they could; or he might wish: and upon this, they landed in a
little village a mile distant from the City: where after they had rested a day,
thinking to make provision for their marriage, the fame of Fawnia's beauty was
spread throughout all the City, so that it came to the ear of Pandosto: who
then being about the age of fifty, had notwithstanding young and fresh
affections: so that the desired greatly to see Fawnia: and to bring this matter
the better to pass, hearing they had but one man, and how they rested at a
very homely house he caused them to be apprehended as Spies, and sent twelve of
his Guard to take them, who being come to their lodging, told them the Kings
message. Dorastus no whit dismayed, accompanied with Fawnia and Capnio, went to
the Court (for they left Porrus to keep the stuff,) who being admitted to the
Kings presence, Dorastus and Fawnia with humble obeisance saluted his Majesty.

Pandosto amazed at the singular perfection of Fawnia, stood half astonished,
viewing her beauty, so that he almost forgot himself what he had to do: at
last, with stern countenance he demanded their names, and of what Country they
were, and what caused them to land in Bohemia? Sir (quoth Dorastus,) know that
my name is Meleagrus a Knight borne and brought up in Trapolonia, and this
Gentlewoman, whom I mean to take to my wife, is an Italian borne in Padua,
from whence I have now brought her. The cause I have so small a train with me,
is, for that her friends unwilling to consent, I intended secretly to convey
her into Trapolonia, whither I was sailing, and by distress of weather, I was
driven into these Coasts. Thus have you heard my name, my Country, and the
cause of my voyage. Pandosto starting from his Seat, as one in choler, made
this rough reply.

MEleagrus, I fear, this smooth ta^e has but small truth, and that thou
couerest a foul skin with fair paintings. No doubt, this Lady, by her grace
and beauty, is of higher degree, more meet for a mighty Prince, then for a
simple Knight: and thou like a perjured traitor have bereft her of her Parents,
to their present grief, and her ensuing sorrow. Till therefore I hear more of
her Parentage, and of her calling, I will stay you both here in Bohemia.

Dorastus, in whom rested nothing but Kingly valor, was not able to suffer the
reproaches of Pandosto, but that he made him this answer.

IT is not meet for a King without due proof to appeach any man of ill
behavior, nor upon suspicion to infer belief, strangers ought to be
entertained with courtesy, not to be entreated with cruelty; lest being forced
by want to put up injuries, the gods revenge their cause with rigor.

Pandosto hearing Dorastus utter these words, commanded that he should straight
be committed to prison, until such time as they heard further of his pleasure:
but as for Fawnia, he charged that she should be entertained in the Court, with
such courtesy as belonged to a stranger and her calling: the rest of the
ship-men put in the Dungeon.

Having thus so hardly handled the supposed Trapolonians, Pandosto contrary to
his aged years, began to be some what tickled with the beauty of Fawnia,
insomuch that he could take no rest, but cast into his old head a thousand new
devices: at last he fell into these thoughts.

HOw art thou desired ( Pandosto) with fresh affections, and unfit fancies,
wishing to possess with an unwilling mind, and a hot desire troubled with a
cold disdain? Shall thy mind yield in age, to that thou have resisted in
youth? Peace Pandosto, blab not out that which thou may be ashamed to reveal
to thy self. Ah, Fawnia is beautiful, and it is not for thine honor (fond
fool) to name her that is thy captive, and another man's concubine. Alas, I
reach at that with my hand, which my heart would feign refuse: playing like the
bird Ibis in Egypt, which hates serpents, yet feeds on their eggs.

Tush hot desires turn oftentimes to cold disdain: Love is brittle, where
appetite, not reason bears the sway: Kings thoughts ought not to climb so
high as the heavens, but to look no lower then honor: better it is to pecke
at the stars with the young Eagles, then to prey on dead carcasses with the
Vulture: it is more honorable for Pandosto to dye by concealing love, then to
enjoy such unfit Love. Does Pandosto then love? Yea, Whom? A maid unknown,
yea, and perhaps immodest, stragled out of her own Country: beautiful, but
not therefore chaste: comely in body, but perhaps crooked in mind. Cease then
Pandosto, to look at Fawnia, much less to love her: be not overtaken with a
woman's beauty, whose eyes are framed by Art to euamour: whose heart is framed
by nature to inchant: whose false tears know their due time, and whose sweet
words pierce deeper then sharp swords. Here ceast Pandosto from his talk, but
not from, his love for although he sought by reason and wisdom to suppress
this frantic affection, yet he could take no rest, the beauty of Fawnia had
made such a deep impression in his heart. But on a day walking abroad into a
Park, which was hard adjoining to his house, he sent by one of his servants
for Fawnia, unto whom he uttered these words.

FAwnia, I commend thy beauty and wit, and now pity thy distress and want:
but if thou will forsake Sir Meleagrus (whose poverty, though a Knight is not
able to maintain an estate answerable to thy beauty) and yield thy consent to
Pandosto, I will both increase thee with dignities and riches. No Sir, answered
Fawnia, Meleagrus is a Knight that has won me by love, and none but he shall
wear me: this smister mischance shall not diminish my affection, but rather
increase my good will: think not though your Grace has imprisoned him without
cause, that fear will make me yield my consent: I had rather be Meleagrus
wife, and a beggar, then live in plenty, and be Pandosto's Concubine.

Pandosto, hearing the assured answer of Fawnia, would notwithstanding
prosecute his suite to the uttermost: seeking with fair words and great
promises to scale the fort of her chastity: swearing that if she would grant
to his desire, Meleagrus should not only be set at liberty, but honored in
the Court amongst his Nobles. But these alluring baits could not entice her
mind from the love of her new-betrothed mate Meleagrus, which Pandosto seeing,
he let her alone for that time to consider more of the demand. Fawnia being
alone by herself, began to fall into these solitary meditations.

AH unfortunate Fawnia, thou see, to desire above fortune is to strive above
gods and fortune. Who gazeth at the Sun, weakeneth his sight: They which stare
at the sky fall of into deep pits: had thou rested content to have been a
shepherdess, thou need not to have feared mischance: better had it been
for thee, by sitting low, to have had quiet, then by climing high, to have
fallen into misery. But alas, I fear not mine own danger but Dorastus
displeasure. Ah sweet Dorastus, thou art a Prince, but now a prisoner, by too
much love, procuring thine own loss; had thou not loved Fawnia, thou had
been fortunate. Shall I then be false to him that has forsaken kingdoms for
my cause? ^o, would my death might deliver him so mine honor might be
preserved. With that fetching a deep sigh, she ceased from her complaints and
went again to the Palace enioyning a liberty without content, and proffered
pleasure with small joy. But poor Dorastus lay all this while in close prison,
being pinched with a hardrestraint and pained with the burden of cold and
heavy yrons, sorrowed sometimes that his fond affection had procured him this
mishappe, that by the disobedience of his parent, he had wrought his own
despite: another while cursing the gods and Fortune, that they would cross
him with smister chance, uttering at last his passions with these words.

AH unfortunate wretch, borne to mishap, now shyfolly has his desert: art thou
not worthy for thy vase mind, to have bad fortune? Could the destinies favor
thee, which have forgot thine honor and dignity? Will not the gods plague him
with despite that paineth his father with disobedience? Oh gods if any favor
or justice be left plague me but favor poor Fawnia, and shroud her from the
tyrannies of wretched Pandosto: but let my death free her from mishap, and then
welcome death. Dorastus pained with these heavy passions, sorrowed and sighed
but in vain; for which he used more patience.

But again to Pandosto, who broyling in the heat of unlawful lust, could take
no rest, but still felt his mind disquieted with his new love; so that his
Nobles and Subjects marvelled greatly at his sudden alteration, not being able
to conjecture the cause of this his continued care. Pandosto thinking every
hour a year till he had talked once again with Fawnia, sent for her secretly
into his chamber: whither Fawnia though unwillingly coming, Pandosto
entertained her very courteously, using these familiar speeches, which Fawnia
answered as shortly in this wise.

Pandosto. Fawnia are you become less wilful, and more wise, to prefer the
love of a King, before the liking of a poor Knight? I think ere this you
think it is better to be favored of a King, than of a subject.


Fawnia. Pandosto, the body is subject to victories, but the minds not to be
subdued with conquest: honesty is to be preferred before honor, and a dram of
faith weigh down a tun of gold. I have promised Meleagrus my love, and will
perform no less.


Pandosto. Fawnia, I know thou art not so unwise in thy choice, as to refuse
the offer of a King, nor so ungrateful as to despise a good turn: thou art
now in that place where I may command, and yet thou see I entreat: my power
is such, that I may compel by force, and yet I sue by prayers. Yield Fawnia,
thy love to him which burns in thy love: Meleagrus shall be set free, thy
Contrymen discharged, and thou both loved and honored.


Fawnia. I see Pandosto, where lust rules, it is a miserable thing to be a
virgin: but know this, that I will always prefer fame before life, and
rather choose death then dishonor.


Pandosto seeing that there was in Fawnia a determinate courage to love
Meleagrus, and a resolution without fear to hate him, fleeing away from her in
a rage, he swear that if in short time she would not be won by reason, he
would forget all courtesy, and compel her to grant by rigor. But these
threatening words no whit dismayed Fawnia; but that she still both despighted
and despised Pandosto. While thus these two Lovers strove, the one to win
love, the other to live in hate: Egistus heard certain news by Merchants of
Bohemia, that his son Dorastus was imprisoned by Pandosto: which made him
fear greatly, that his son should be but hardly entreated: yet considering
that Bellaria and he were cleared by the Oracle of Apollo, from the crime
wherewith Pandosto had unjustly charged them: he thought best to send with all
speed to Pandosto, that he should set free his son Dorastus, and put to
death Fawnia, and her father Porrus. Finding this, by the advice of counsel,
the speediest remedy to release his son, he caused presently two of his
ships to be rigged, and thoroughly furnished with provision of men and victuals,
and sent diverse of his Nobles Ambassadors into Bohemia: who willing to obey
the King, and receive their young Prince, made no delays for fear of danger,
but with as much speed as might be, sailed toward Bohemia; the wind and seas
favored them greatly, which made them hope of some good hap: for within three
days they were landed: which Pandosto no sooner heard of their arrival, but
he in person went to meet them, entreating them with such sumptuous and
familiar courtesy, that they might well perceive how sorry he was for the
former injuries he had offered to their King and how willing (if it might be)
to make amends. As Pandosto made report to them how one Meleagrus a Knight of
Trapolonia, was lately arrived with a Lady called Fawnia in his Land, coming
very suspitiously: accompanied only with one servant, and an old Shepherd:
the Ambassadors perceived by the half, what the whole tale meant, and began
to conjecture that was Dorastus, who for fear to be known, had changed his
name. But dissembling the matter* they shortly arrived at the Court* where
after they had been very solemnly and sumptuously feasted, the Noblemen of
Sicilia being gathered together, they made report of their Embassage: where
they certified Pandosto, that Meleagrus was son and heir to the King
Egistus: and that his name was Dorastus: and how contrary to the Kings mind he
had privily conveyed away that Fawnia, intending to marry her being but
daughter to that poor Shepherd Porrus. Whereupon the Kings request was, that
Capnio, Fawnia, and Porrus, might be murdered and put to death, and that his
son Dorastus might be sent home in safety. Pandosto having attentively and
with great marvel heard their Embassage, willing to reconcile himself to
Egistus, and to show him how greatly he esteemed his favor, although love and
fancy forbad him to hurt Fawnia, yet in despite of love he determined to
execute Egistus will without mercy, and therefore he presently sent for
Dorastus out of prison: who maruelling at his unlooked for courtesy, found at
his coming to the Kings presence, that which he least doubted of, his fathers
Ambassadors: who no sooner saw him, but with great reverence they honored
him, and Pandosto embracing Dorastus, set him by him very lovingly in a chair
of state. Dorastus ashamed that his folly was bewrayed, sat a long time as one
in a maze, till Pandosto told him the sum of his fathers Embassage: which he
had no sooner heard, but he was touched to the quick, for the cruel sentence
that was pronounced against Fawnia: but neither could his sorrow nor
persuasions prevail: for Pandosto commanded, that Fawnia, Porrus, and Capnio,
should be brought to his presence: who were no sooner come, but Pandosto having
his former love turned into disdainefull hate, began to rage against Fawnia in
these terms.

THou disdainefull vassal, thou currish kite, assigned by the Destinies to
base fortune, and yet with an aspiring mind gazing after honor: how durst
thou presume being a beggar, to match with a Prince? by thy alluring looks to
inchaunt the son of a King, to leave his own Country, to fulfill thy
disordinate lusts? O despightfull mind: A proud heart in a beggar, is not
unlike a great fire in a small cottage, which warmeth not the house, but
burns it: assure thy self thou shall dye: and thou old doting fool, what
folly hathbeene such, as to suffer thy daughter to reach above thy fortune:
look for no other meede, but the like punishment. But Capnio, thou which have
betrayed the King, and have consented to the unlawful lust of thy Lord and
Master, I know not how justly I may plague thee: death is too easy a
punishment for thy falsehood, and to live, (if not in extreme misery) were not
to show thee equity. I therefore award, that thou shall have thine eyes put
out, and continually till thou dyest, grind in a mill like a brute beast. The
fear of death brought a sorrowful silence upon Fawnia, and Capnio: but Porrus
seeing no hope of life, burst forth in these speeches.

PAndosto, and ye noble Ambassadors of Sicilia, seeing without cause I am
condemned to die. I am yet glad I have opportunity to disburden my conscience
before my death, I will tell you as much as I know and yet no more then is
true, whereas I am accused that I have been a supporter of Fawnia's pride and
she disdained as a vile beggar; so it is, that I am neither father unto her,
nor she daughter unto me.

For it so happened, that I being a poor Shepherd in Sicilia, living by keeping
other men's slocks, one of my sheep straying down to the seaside, as I went to
seek her, I saw a little boat driven upon the shore, wherein I found a babe os
six days old, wrapped in a mantle of scarlet, having about the neck this
chain: I pitying the child, and desirous of the treasure, carried it home, to
my wise, who with great care nursed it up, and set it to keep sheep. Here is
the chain and Jewels, and this Fawnia is the child whom I sound in the boat;
what she is, or of what Parentage I know not: but this I am assured, that she
is none of mine.

Pandosto would scarce suffer him to tell out his tale, but that he required
the time of the year, the manner of the boat, and other circumstances: which
when he found agreeing to his count, suddenly he lept from his seat, and
kissed Fawnia, wetting her tender cheeks with his tears, and crying, My
daughter Fawnia, ah my sweet Fawnia, I am thy father Fawnia: this sudden
passion of the King drove them all into a maze, especially Fawnia and Dorastus.
But when the King had breathed himself a while in this new joy, he rehearsed
before the Ambassadors the whole matter, and how he had entreated his wife
Bellaria for Jealousy, and that this was the child whom he sent to float in
the seas.

Fawnia was not more joyful that she had found such a father, then Dorastus
was glad he should get such a wife. The Ambassadors rejoiced that their young
Prince had made such a choice: That those Kingdoms which through enmity had
long time been disseuered, should now through perpetual amity be united and
reconciled. The Citizens and subjects of Bohemia (hearing that the King had
found again his daughter which was supposed dead, joyful that there was an
heir apparent to the Kingdom) made Bone-fires and shows throughout all the
City. The Courtiers and Knights appointed Iusts and Turneis, to signify their
willing minds in gratifying the Kings hap.

Eighteen days being past in these Princely sports, Pandosto willingto
recompense old Porrus, of a Shepherd, made him a Knight: which done, providing
a sufficient Navy to receive him and his retinue, accompanied with Dorastus and
Fawnia, and the Sicilian Ambassadors, he sailed toward Sicilia, where he was
most princely entertained by Egistus: who hearing this Comicall event, rejoiced
greatly at his sons good hap, and without delay (to the perpetual joy of the
two young Lovers) celebrated the marriage. Which was no sooner ended, but
Pandosto (calling to mind how he first betrayed his friend Egistus, how his
jealousy was the cause of Bellaria's death, that contrary to the law of
nature, he had lusted after his own daughter) moved with these desperate
thoughts, he fell in a melancholy fit, and to close up the Comedy with a
Tragical stratagem, he slew himself: whose death being many days bewailed of
Fawnia, Dorastus, and his dear friend Egistus, Dorastus taking leave of his
father, went with his wife and the dead corpse into Bohemia: where after it was
sumptuously intombed, Dorastus euded his days in contented quiet.

FINIS.

