TWO LEARNED AND GODLY SERMONS, Preached by that reverend and zealous man M.
RICHARD GREENHAM: on these parts of Scripture following.

The first Sermon on this text. A good name is to be desired above great
riches, and loving favor above silver and gold.

Pro. 22, 1.

The second Sermon on this text. Quench not the spirit.

1. Thessa. 5, 19.

LONDON. Printed by Gabriel Simson and William White, for William Jones,
dwelling near Holborne Condite at the sign of the Gunne: where they are to be
sold. 1595.

Two learned and godly Sermons, preached by that reverend and zealous man, M.
Richard Greenham: and the first of them is of this text following.
A good name is to he desired above great riches, and loving favor above
silver and gold.

Proverbs. 22.1.
ALl that is to be desired of a man, is this, that he be virtuous, godly, and
truly religious: this because it is in it self most excellent, and most
contrary to our nature, therefore the Scripture uses many arguments and
reasons to persuade us thereunto: as in this place, where the Wise man would
stir us up to the love of Virtue, by setting before our eyes two principal
effects and fruits, which we may receive by it. The first of these is, A good
name. The second is, Loving favor: both which, as they do proceed from
virtue and godlynes, so they do mainteyne and increase one another: for, as a
man finds much favor with those which do speak and report well of him, so
those that will show a man loving favor, will, or at the least ought to show it
in this, that they can willingly afforde him good report. Now, that both these
are preferred to great Riches, both these are accounted better then Gold and
much Silver: and surely, who so ever is truly wise, will make this account of
them: who so ever does rightly know to discern what is good, he will first and
especially labor for them: for, a good name, does commend us to God, and to
his holy Angels, in whose eyes those virtues, whereof a good name does arise,
are most acceptable: but Riches are not able to do this, no, the abundance of
silver, is often an occasion of sin, whereby we are cast out of the favor of
God. Again, where as riches (especially if they be euilly gotten) do cause
men many times to hate us: this good name, and this loving favor, does win the
hearts of many, yea, it does sometimes cause our enemies to be at peace with
us. And this ever has been, and ever will be most certain and true, whether we
look to prosperity or adversity, whether we look to the common callinges of
this civil life, or the calling of the Church: for such is the corruption of
man's nature, that naturally they do not love the Magistrates that God has
placed over them, but when the Magistrate has gotten a good report by the due
execution of justice, by his pitiful dealing with the poor, and by his
fatherly favor to all that be good; then will his subjects love him, then
will they embrace him, then will they wyllyngly commit their matters into his
hands, and then will they with faithful and friendly hearts cleave and stick
fast unto him. To be short, that Lawyer has most clyantes, that Physician has
most patientes, and that Merchant has most customers, whose virtuous and godly
dealing has gotten them a good report. In the callinges of the Church this
also is true: for, if any Preacher by the faithful discharge of his duty,
and by his godly life, have once gotten the favor and friendshyp of men, how
gladly will men hear him, how quietly will they be ruled by him, in what
simplicity will they make their griefs known unto him, and how careful will
they be to procure his good. That Schoolemaister also that has the name of
learning to teach, of discretion to rule, and of godliness to train up his
Scholars in the fear of God, he never wants Scholars, but the best men of all
sides will flock unto him. Contrary wise, if any of them be discredited
through an evil name, if the Magistrate be accounted an oppressor, or a
tyrant: if the Lawyer be reported to deal deceitefully, if the Minister be
corrupted either in doctrine or in life, if the Scholemaister be once known to
be insufficient in learning, unwise in governing, profane and of no religion,
then will all men be afraid to have any dealinges with the^: those things are
often found true in peace and prosperity; but in adversity, as in the time of
war, in the time of sickness, and in the time of want and poverty, they be
found most true. Will not all the poor commonly, in the time of war seek
some aid at the Magistrate, who in the time of peace did good unto them: nay
rather, will they not al with one consent come together to help and defend
with all their might, and with life it self, seeing he has used all good
means to save and defend their lives? Contrariwise, how many Kings, how many
Captains, how many Magistrates, have even in their greatest needs been left
and forsaken of their Subjects and soldiers, because they have too sharply
and unmercifully ruled them? And which is more then this, the Subjects have
procured the death of their Princes, the Soldiers have laid violent hands
upon their Captains, and the Tenantes have been the first that have laid
violent hands upon their Land-lordes; because no pity, no compassion, no
friendshyp, nor loving favor, has been showed unto them. Again, if
Magistrate, Minister, or Master, or any other man, by exerciseing or executing
the duties of love, have won the hearts of the people, and gotten a good name,
among them: then, in his sickness they will pray for him, they will visit him,
and they will bear with him a part of his grief. Again, what can be more
comfortable to a man, then this? This will glad him at the heart, and this will
turn his bed in all his sickness: in poverty also he is most and sonest
helped, which has the best name, and has obtained through virtue, most favor
with men: for, good men do consider their own cause in him; therefore are most
ready to help him: the evil and ungodly men, although they bare him no great
goodwill, yet they are forced to help him, partly, because his godly life does
witness unto their souls, that he does deserve to be helped, and partly,
because the Lord does turn their hearts to favor him. The Widow therefore
that came to Elisha for help, used this argument to persuade Elisha, O man of
God, says she, my husband is dead, and dyed in debt, but he feared God:
therefore help, I pray thee, seeing the creditours are come: and immediately
Elisha did help her. On the other side, if a man be euilly reported of, if he
be a thief, an adulterer, an athist, an idolalour, a riotous person, or a man
of hard dealing; if such a man be once brought to some low sail, if he once
fall into poverty and need, then the hearts of men are shut up against him,
no man does pity him, and all men will see, and say, that his own sin is
brought upon him: and this has the testimony of the Prophets, who did often
threaten such kind of punishment to ungodly men, so that no man shall say, Ah
my father, or, ah my mother: but the whole should be glad of their departure.
This did the heathen people see in some part, and therefore all of them did
greatly desire a good name: and as every one of them excelled in strength, and
in courage, or in wit, or any kind of knowledge, so they did labor by that
thing, to get some credit to themselves. And to conclude this point, though a
man have many good things in him, though a Magistrate do fear God greatly,
though a Minister be excellent in many points, though a Physician or Lawyer be
skillful in their profession, yet if they have not a good name, they can do
little good with their gifts. All this does teach us, that in deed it is true
which Solomon says here, that a good name, is to be chosen above great Riches:
and that loving favor, is better then silver and gold. Now the instructions
that we may gather out of this place, be these two: The fiirst is, that we
ought not to hurt our neighbor above all things in his good name: and
therefore the Lord in his law ordained, that he which does such a thing, should
have the same punishment which he purposed to bring upon an other. Men would be
loath to steal the goods of any man from him; and yet the good name of a man,
is more worth then all the Riches in the world: therefore, if any man by raising
up false reports, do impair his brothers credit, he does hurt him more, and
sins more grossly and grievously, then if he had taken away his lands and
his lyuinges, his corn or his cattle, or any other thing that he has: and
though the things be false which he reports, he sins never the less, for
after that time, even good men will be more suspicious, and the wicked will not
let it go out of their minds: but if it be against a Preacher, or a professor
of the truth, then it is a great sin, because the very gospel of God is
discredited thereby. The second instruction is this, That we must be careful
by all good means, to get and maynteyne our own good name. For, if it be a
sin to discredit an other man; then much more is it a sin to discredit
our selves. If we be charged to further the good name of our brother, then are
we straightly commanded to help forward our own, as much as we be able:
then it can not be without great sin, that a man should cast off al care of
his own credit. The very heathen saw this to be a fault, and they did
commonly say, That who so ever regards not the report of men, he is dissolute
in deed, and has in effect, lost the nature of man. And therefore we may well
say, that he is without all hope of amendment, which is not brought to some
remorse or sorrow, which with a shameless face, can face out sin, and which
has addars ears and will not hear, charm the charmer never so wisely: as
then, a shameless face opens a door to all ungodliness, so due care of
credit, causes a man to be careful of his ways. Who so ever therefore will
live godly, he must safely provide for his good name. Seeing these things be
so, it shall be profitable to consider how this good name may be gotten, and
preserved. And again, if we be discredited, what use and profit we must make
of it. For the first, it is certain, that seeing fame and honest report be
good things, and therefore they must needs arise and spring of those things
that are good; as of virtue, godlynes, and good religion. Now, whereas here
Turks, and such ungodly men have great favor amongst the people, and be well
reported of, this in deed is no good name, because it arises not of
goodness, it is only a vain applause of the simple people: Nay, it is the
great and fierce wrath of God upon them, though they neither see nor perceive
that, when they be well spoken off for their evil deeds: for, by this means,
they be hardoned in their sin, by this means they be hindered and holden
from repentance: then the which, there is not a greater punishment under the
Sun: Such a name then is not to be desired, nay, we ought rather to pray
against such a name. And if we will be famous and of good report, then let us
take heed that we seek it by goodness and virtue, and then it will be a good
name in deed. But let us weigh these things more particulerly, and let us
know, that the first step unto a good name, is the careful and continual
auoydance of evil, both outward and inward: in outward and gross euilles, we
must first beware of all evil general: which thing if we be not careful to
do, then will our good name be soon impaired. Secondly, we must narowly look
unto some special sins, whereunto our nature is most inclinable and subject:
for, as one dead Fly corrupts one whole box of ointment, though it be most
precious: so, some one sin, does often crack the credit of a man, though
otherwise he has been well reported off. And if it behooves all men thus
nearely to look to their ways, then much more it is needful, that every
child of God should do so: for, the world through the hatred it bears to
them, deals with them as it does with Witches and Physicians: the Witch
though she fail in twenty things, yet if she do some one thing aright,
though it be but small, the world loves and commends her for a good and a
wise woman: but the Physician, though he work five hundred cures, yet if
through the waywardnes of his patient, or for the punishment of his patientes
sins, he fail but in one, that one fail, does more turn to his discredit,
then his manifold, goodly, and notable cures, do get him praise: in this manner
does the world deal with men. If a worldly man have but an outward gift of
strength, of speech, of comeliness, he shall be greatly praised, and compted a
goodly man, though he swim and flow over in all manner of vices. But let the
child of God be truly zealous in true religion, let him be honest and holy in
conversation, yet if there be but some one infirmity in him; or, if he have
through weakness fallen once into some one sin, that one infirmity against
which he strives, that one sin for the which he is grieved, shall drown all
the graces of God in him, be they never so great, and the world will account
him a most wicked man. Seeing then that this is the enmity of the world
against Gods people, how warily ought they to walk in so crooked and so
froward a generation: and hereof they must be so much the more careful,
because the wicked by such slippes and infirmities, will not only take
occasion to discredit them, but even to speak evil of al their profession,
yea, and to blaspheme the glorious word of God, and his eternal truth. Then,
if we be careful of our own good name, if we have any zeal of God his glory,
if we have any care of the world, if we have any love of the saints, then
let us carefully shun all and every infirmity whereby Gods name is dishonored,
his glorious Gospel blasphemed, his children grieved, and we our selves
discredited amongst the wicked. And thus much for the open and outward sin.

As open and outward sin, committed in the sight of man, has always the
punishment of an ill name joined with it: so also secret sins, which are
hidden as it were, in the dark corners of our hearts, do bring us out of
favor and credit with God, and when we are out of credit with him, then does
he further make our sins known unto men, for our further discredit: For,
nothing is so hidden, which shall not be brought to light, and nothing so
secret, which shall not be discovered, even in the sight of the world. And that
we may be the further persuaded of this, let us all know of a surety, that the
Lord has many means to bring such things to light. For, he can make the
fields to have eyes to see our wickedness, he can make the woods to have
ears to hear our ungodly counselles: yea, he can cause the walls of our
bedchambers, to bear witness against us of our sins committed upon our
beds: if this will not serve, he can go further, and cause our friends to
fall out with us, and the men of our counsel to bewray our wickedness, and
though we had not any such purpose, when we make him privy to our devises, yet
in displeasure, the Lord does cause him all at once to break out the matter:
yea, rather then thou should bear no reproach for thy secret sins, the
Lord will cause thine own mouth to testify against thee, and thine own
words shall get thee discredit: For, either unawares thou shall bewray thy
self, or, in thy sleep by dreams, thou shall make the thing known, or, in
thy sickness thou shall rave of it, or in some fransie, thou shall vomit it
out, or else the torment of thy evil conscience shall be so sharp, that even to
thine own shame and confusion, thou shall confess thy fault. Last of all,
when thou think or deuisest evil against thy neighbor, though it be never
so secretly, yet besides all the former, the Lord has an other means, whereby
he will bring thee to discredit for it; and this is a very vehement suspicion,
raised up in the heart of him, of whom thou deemest this evil* for, as it often
comes to pass, that good motions which arise secretly in the mind, for the
good of others, do cause that other men do think well of thee, though they did
never hear of the^: so doubtless does it come to pass in evil motions. Thou
deuisest evil against another, he in some strange manner has a heart burning,
and ielowsie over thee. Thou think hardly of another man, and he also is
hardly persuaded of thee: Thus the lord does cause thee to be discredited in
the hearts of others, as thou meanest evil against others in thy heart. True it
is, that the party may sin, and do very ill, if he suspect without just
cause: and in as much as he does thus suspect, through an immoderate love of
himself: yet, the work of the Lord is here sometime to be considered, who
seeing the cause to be just, does stir up such suspicions in his mind. Then,
to return to our purpose; If we will avoid an evil name, then we must avoid
all evil surmises and devises against others: and this the Scripture does also
forbid us. For, Eccle. 7. the Wise man, from the mou^th of God, does forbid us,
to think ill of the King in our bed chambers, because that birds, and other
dumme creatures, shall disclose the thing, rather then it shall be kept close.
This then must make us afraid to do evil, or imagine ill on our bed, or to
declare our deep counselles, even unto them that lie in our bosoms: and this,
as it is a good means to provide for a good name, so it is a special rule of
all godliness, when we be afraid, not of open sins alone, but even of the
secret cogitations of the heart. Thus we have heard the first step that leads
to a good name. The second remains to be declared, and that is, a godly
ielowsie over a man's own doings, that they may not breed suspicion of evil.
For it does often come to pass, that albeit a man do not that, which is
simply evil: yet he may justly be suspected, and suffer some blemysh in his
good name: and for this cause does the Apostle charge us, To procure honest
things in the sight of God and man. For this cause he commands us, that If
there be any thing honest, or, If there be any thing of good report, that we
must follow, and that we must embrace. It is not enough therefore, that men do
say, I did think no evil, I mean no harm. For if through want of care, or
of discretion, thou have ventured upon the occasion, thou have given great
matter of evil speeches, to thy great discredit. If then we will avoid this
evil name, we must avoid all things that bring it: For, when men will care
little to give occasion, then the Lord does cause an evil report to be laid
upon them, that those which in deed are desperate, may suffer just discredit,
and they that be otherwise, may be reclaimed from the same. And surely, such is
the crookedness of man's nature, that if the Lord should not take this course,
even his children would fall into many sins: therefore it is most requisite,
that men be mindfullto avoid occasions, and so much the rather, because, as it
is commonly said, Either God or the Devil stand at thy elbow to work upon
thee. Let us see this in some example of our common life. Thou art a night
goer, walking abroad at inco^uenient times; at that time some thing is stolen,
and thou art burdened and charged with it. Again, thou use to deal too
familiarly and lightly with a Maid, she is gotten with child, and the fault
is laid on thee: hereof thou have given suspicion, because thou have bin a
night goer, and such a one as have dealt wantonly with the Maid, albeit thou
be free from the very fact. Now, if thou be the child of God, and if thou be
guyded by his good spirit, then will he teach thee to take profit by this
false report, and to say thus with thy self: Lord, thou know that I am
clear from this very act, yet it was my sin to give any such occasion,
whereby men might suspect me; this sin, O Lord, I am guyly of, and I know,
thou, for this sin have afflicted me justly, yet dear father, I see thy
mercy in this, that whereas in deed, I have committed many sins, thou have
passed over them, and taken this, whereof I am not so much guyltie: so that now
merciful father, I do rather suffer for righteousness, then for my
transgression and my sin: yea, holy father, I do behold thy tender mercy in
this toward me, that by this evil report, thou go about to stay me from
the sin, and to prevent me, that I may never fall into the same: wherefore,
seeing it has bin thy good pleasure to deal thus with me: behold Lord, I do
repent me of my former sins, and promise before thee, even in thy fear,
neither to do this, nor the like sin hereafter. See here, I beseech you, the
good profit which a good child of God, through Gods spirit, will take of
this slanderous reproach, after he has received some godly sorrow, for giving
the occasion of that report. But behold the contrary work of Satan in the
heart of unbelievers, for he will soon teach them their lesson, and cause them
to say thus: What, does the churl accuse me without a cause, does he father
such a villainous act upon me, who never deserved it at his hands? surely he
shall not say so for naught, I will make his saying true, and will do the thing
in deed. Consider then this, you that fear the Lord, and see in how tickelysh
state they do stand, which have given occasion, and in what great danger they
be to be brought to, to commit the same, or like sin afterward. Therefore,
if any man will be sure to keep his good name, then must he keep him self from
all such occasions, as in any wise might impair or hinder it. And this much
for this second step, whereby we rise to a good name.

Thus we have heard of two degrees toward a good name, in the avoiding of
evil, and the occasions thereof. And these in deed, have a great force to stay
an evil name: but surely, they be not able to build up a good name, and
credit among men. To these therefore there must be added a third thing, which
has most special force to this purpose, and that is, that we be plentiful in
good works. This does our savior charge us to be careful of, when he says,
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works. Many
men repine at the good report of an other man, and they be greatly grieved,
because they them selves be not in the like, or some greater credit: But alas,
they should rather be grieved at them selves, because the fault is in them:
For, they regard not to do good, they are careless of good works, and
therefore the Lord is careless of them and their credit. Well then, he that
wylbe commended, must do the things that be commendable; he must do good
works, yea, he must do good, and pursue it: yet we must know, that it is not
one good work, nor two, nor three, that can gain us a good name in deed: but
it is required of us, that we be Rich in well doing, and continually given to
every good work. For as precious ointment (whereunto a good name is lykoned)
is made of many and most excellent simples: so a good name cannot be gotten,
but by many and most excellent virtues. Now when we feel our selves affected
to good, and to all manner of goodness, then are we warely to see to two
things. First, that all our works be done with a simple and sinceere
affection: secondly, that they be done with good discretion. For when a thing
is done undiscreetly, and without advice, it loses the grace and beauty of
the deed: and therefore, though the thing be good, yet no great praise does
come of it, because it was not done with good discretion: likewise, when men do
things with sinister affections, and to some other end, then to the glory of
God, they do commonly loose the price of their doings: and hereof it comes
to pass, that many men, which do good works to merit by them, or to win the
favor of their superiors, or to be of good report amongst the people, or to
some such other end: when I say, men do things to this end, the Lord
punishes them with the contrary: and in stead of deserving glory, he powers
confusion upon them: in stead of honor, he gives contempt: and in stead of
riches, beggarie. And albeit men may pretend the glory of God, and face out
their wickedness with a fresh color, yet the Lord will bring their
wickedness to light. And truly it is marvelous to see, how the Lord lays
folly upon such men, so that although that in their wisdom, they think to
bleare the eyes of all men, yet the simple sort does behold their foolysh
shyftes, to their discredit: therefore when thou have done well, and yet art
ill reported off, do not straight way storm against him which has raised up
this report on the: neither do thou over hastily clear thy self; but rather
before the Lord examine thine own heart, and see with what affection thou have
done it. And if we find wickedness in our hearts, then let us be humbled
before the Lord, and know, that he has caused us to be thus evil spoken off:
first, to correct, and secondly to try us. For, when the Lord does see us, like
Scribes and Pharisees seeking rewards, then he does punish us, with the loss
of our labor, and with shame among men, to see if thereby he can bring us to
the fight of sin, which before, we neither would, nor could see. And again,
when we have thus done, he does try us, whether there be any goodness in our
hearts, which may move us to continue in well doing, notwithstanding we be evil
spoken off. Here then we see what fruit we must make of such reports,
namely, they must first bring us to a sight and feelyng of our sins: and
secondly, they must cause us with great uprightness to continue in well doing.
True it is, that a man may be accused, to have had this or that purpose in his
doings, although he have done the things in the simplicity of his heart: but
when a man through examination does find his heart upright, then he receives
great comfort by it, then he may commend him self unto the Lord, and his cause
into his hands, for the Lord maynteyneth good tongues and hearts: but he will
cut out the tongue that speaks lies. He will cause the righteousness of the
ryghteous to shine as the noone day, and as the Sun after a cloud: but the
wicked shall be covered with their own confusion, as with a cloak. This shall
the godly see, and rejoice therein: but the mouth of the wicked shall be stopped.
Thus we have run through these things, whereby a good name may be gotten:
and not only that, but whereby a man may be preserved in a good name, and
credit: and therefore surely more to be regarded and observed of us. For, first
of all we see what force the good credit of the reformed Churches has to
persuade men to embrace truth, and how soon men will be moved to continue
steadfast, when they see the steadfast continuance of good men in all
godliness. Again, we know what great offense is given to the weak, when
whole churches, or some particular persons, do not stand in credit, nor
maynteyne by goodness their good name, which they had gotten by great virtues.
The very heathen did see this, and therefore they say, it was as great a praise
to keep praise, as to get it: yea, and when they saw what great inconvenience
it would arise, when men did not satisfy the expectation of the people, they
thought much better never to have any good report among men, then to loose it
after it had bin gotten: therefore, to shut up this whole matter in one word;
if any man, if any household, if any town, if any country, be careful to
have an honest report amongst men, then they must eschew evil and do good,
then must they seek peace, and pursue it: and if once having gotten a good
name, they would gladly keep it, the^ they must use the same means. etc. so
shall they have it both of God and man. Now, because men do suffer much
discredit, and are very ill reported of amongst men, it shall be good to
consider what profit and use we may make of such reproaches, and evil
reports; and this we shall do the better, if we consider and know, upon what
grounds these reproaches do arise. First therefore we must learn, that men may
be ill reported of, either for evil, or well doing. When men therefore are
evil spoken of, they must try first whether it be for evil, or good: and, if
it be for evil, then must they go a degree further, to find whether it be for
some evil work which they have committed, or for some occasion which they
have given: When a man is evil reported of for some evil deed he has done,
that evil deene of his is either manifestly known, or else unknown. And sure
it is a thing most common amongst men, to suffer discredit for open and gross
sins, yet very few do rightly profit by it: For, some are shameless, and
care not what men say of them, and therefore in deed are unfit to receive
any profit by such reports: therefore after the most sharp and seueere
censure of the Church, they must be committed to the hands of the Magistrate,
to be punished in the purse and the body: and yet surely, such are their
whoryshe faces, that there is small hope of amendment in them. For, it does
often come to pass, that they which will not profit by the Church, can not
receive profit by the Magistrate. Therefore after all this, they must be left
to the Lord to work, if it be his will, by some extraordinary means upon
their hearts, which are exceedyngly hardoned. Other some there be, who being
put to open shame, are sorrowful in deed: but this sorrow is, because they
sustain open shame, rather then for this, that they have sinned against the
Lord. These are in some degree better then the former, and yet they come not
so far as they ought to do: For the devil having bewitched the^, does persuade
them, that it is no such matter as men would make it, and that as a wonder
lasts but nine days, so this shame shall be of no longer continuance. Thus
they are let, so that the shame can not sink into their hearts, there to
work godly sorrow, which may bring forth vnfeygned repentance. This is daily
seen in Thieves and Whores, and such like malefactors, who though they make
large promises of amendment, yet the punishment being passed, they fall into
their former filthiness again: but some think, that they do dissemble, and
deal deceitefully: but I think, that they think as they speak, and that
they speak with sorrow and grief. For, will a Thief purpose to steal again,
when he is to be hanged? Will a child purpose to play the wanton, when he is a
beating? no doubtless: but in the one, there is chyldishnesse to speak
without advice; in the other, is seruilenesse, to be moved with nothing but
present fear. I grant in deed, that there is hipocrasie in them: yet that
gross hipocrasie, whereby men labor to deceive others, is not in them: but
that most close and most dangerous hipocrasie, whereby the devil has beguyled
their own hearts through his subtlety. This witcherie of the devil, I say,
is the cause why many promysing amendment, do not perform the same. Thus we
see how men do miss of that profit, which ought to be reaped of open shame.
We therefore are to take a better course, and to labor, that as our faces do
blushe before men, so our souls may be confounded before the Lord: that being
thoroughly humbled under his hand by godly sorrow, it may please him in mercy,
to raise us up. Now, if we doubt whether our sorrow be sound or no, let us try
it by these two rules. First, whether we can with contented minds, take the
punishment as a correction from the Lord, and yet mourn and be grieved for the
sin: and yet in such manner, as giving place to Gods justice in punishyng, we
can labor for mercy in the forgiveness of sins. Secondly, either when we
could keep the sin close, we can yet with David, freely confess, and say,
Against thee O Lord, have I sinned. This if we can do, it is a sure argument
that our sorrow is godly, and that we have profited well by that reproach which
our sin did bring upon us. As the sin is sometime so evident, that it can
not be covered: so again, the sin in deed may be committed, and yet either
not known, nor suspected, or else probable by suspicions: when the sin is in
this case, the Lord may cause a man that has so sinned, to be accused, or
evil spoken of for that sin. Here the party offendyng, must first learn
to deal wisely, and in such manner, as the sin may be kept close still, if
it may be done without any other sin. But if an oath of the Lord be
required, then if we give God the glory, though it be with our own shame, and
confess the fault. Secondly, that for the profit that must be made of such
reports, we must learn with thankful hearts to receive this merciful
chastisement of the Lord, and acknowledge it to his praise, for he might have
punished us for those sins, which were manifest, yet he has passed over
them: he might have made these known, but he spared our name and our credit:
therefore, for a second fruit, this mercy of the Lord, must lead us to
repentance, and to an earnest sorrow for all our sins. For it were too too
gross, that we should continue in sin, because we can not be convicted of
sin: For if the Lord did not myslyke thy sin, why should he raise such a
report on thee? Why should he save thy good name, if he were not minded to
show thee mercy? And if he would not have thee, with all thy heart to repent
thee of all thy sins, why does he whippe thy naked conscience for sin?
Therefore if by this loving kindness, we be not led unto repentance, verily
it wylbe a sin that shall not escape unpunished. Thus we have heard, how an
evil name does arise of sin committed, and what profit must be taken
hereof. Now let us further consider, how a man must profit by an evil name,
not when he has deserved it by some sin, but when he has only failed in
this, that he has given occasion to be suspected of any evil. This occasion
is of two sort: First, when either good duties are either altogether omitted,
or done with a grudging mind, or as it were of constraynt. This report must
teach thee, that although thou be not so evil as men would make thee, yet
thou art not so good, as thou ought to be. Therefore by this thou must
learn to be more careful of doing good, so to do it with greater and better
courage: for the Lord loves a cheerful giver. The second occasion is
inward, which although no man can find out, yet the Lord for thy good, does
cause me to speak evil of thee for it. This inward occasion is, when thy
heart has either given some full consent to do evil, or at least has much
wandered in thinking of it. Here the Lord does take the time, and suffers
men to report of thee, that thou have done that, which in deene thou have not
done; yet in thy heart thou have taken pleasure in it. Then the way to profit
by this, is, to confess the goodness of the Lord, who will not have thee to
fall into such sin, as might deserve discredit. For, such is the nature of
man, that if an evil thought do long tarry in the mind, it will be hardly
restrained, before it come to the outward act. Again, by this report thus
raised on us, we must take occasion to call back our selves, if we have
consented to evil, and with grief to be sorrowful for it: or, if we have not
as yet consented, we must labor to repress the heat of our affections, and
quench them by the moisture of the word. And thus much shall be sufficient for
those reports, which arise of some just grounds and occasions. The last point
to be handled in this whole case is, to see what use must be made of those
reports, which be altogether false, and have neither ground nor good
beginning. For, it may come to pass, that when a man has avoided evil, and
done good: when he has shunned the occasion of evil, and done all good with a
cheerful heart, yet he may be very ill reported of, and his good name
hyndered. Now if this does befall any man, he must know, that it is the Lord
his doing, and that the Lord does it, either to correct sin, or else to
prevent it: the Lord I say, does by this means, sometime correct sin,
either in the same kind, or in some other. In the same kind he deals thus:
he suffers thee to be compted an adulterer, yet thou do now live chastely,
and hate that filthy sin. But, then he sees that thou have either been an
adulterer, and have not repented at all: Or, if thou have sodaynely repented,
yet now thou beginnest to fail, and to cool in the hatred of that sin.
Again, if after examination, thou find thy self clear in that sin: yet
know, that the Lord, by that report, does correct some sin quite contrary
unto it: as, if thou should be accused, because thou love not thy wife,
whereas in deed thou love her too well. Or else otherwise: He causes thee to
be counted an adulterer, that thou might be brought to see thy covetous
heart: and to say all in one word, we shall never make true use of reports,
until we have bin brought to see, and repent of some particular sin, which
either we saw not besore, or else had not thoroughly repented of. Furthermore, it
may come to pass, that we having done all good duties, avoided all evil, and
examined our repentance, even for particular sins, yet shall we be evil
spoken of amongst men: Here we must know, that the Lord by reports, does
forewarne us of evil to come. We are reported to be of the Family of love:
hereby we are warned to take heed, that we fall not into the sin: And so
forth of other reports, when any such reports are carried about of us, we
must be made so much the more wary, that we fall not into that sin: and
according to the Apostles rule, We must labor to finish the course of our
salvation in fear. Which, that we may do, the Lord grant for his Christ's
sake, to whom be praise for ever in the Church. Amen.

FINIS.
Richard Greenham.

Here follows the second Sermon, as it was preached by M. Richard Greenham.
The text as follows.
Quench not the spirit.

1. Thessa. 5.19.
ALl the doctrine of the Scriptures may be briefly referred to these two
heads. First how we may be prepared to reciue the spirit of God. Secondly,
how the spirit may be retained when we have once received it. And therefore S.
Paul having labored to instruct the Thessalonians, in the former part of this
Epistle, how they may receive the spirit, does here teach them how to keep
and continue this spirit unto the end: and this the Apostle does by giving
them a charge and commandment, that in no wise they do quench the spirit:
therefore doublesse teaching, that as the sunnyng of evil, is the first step
unto goodness; so the ready way to continue the spirit of God in our hearts,
is to labor that it be not quenched. Now the Apostle upon a great and weighty
consideration, does here deliver this precept. For first of all, though all
those be worthily and justly condemned, that never tasted of the spirit of
God: yet as our savior Christ says, A more just and fearful condemnation
is like to come upon them, that having once received it, does afterward
loose the same. Moreover, without this spirit of God, no holy exercise can have
his full effect: For, the word works not, where the spirit is wantyng,
prayers have no power to pearce before the presence of God, the sacraments
seem small and seely things in our eyes, and all other orders, and exercises
which God has granted and ordained for man. They are unprofitable to man,
where the spirit is not present to convey them into our hearts, there to sceale
up the fruit of them. Last of all, wear fit to reciue no good grace at Gods
hands: nay, we do not esteem Gods graces, when we have not the spirit to
teach us, to set a due price of them: for, speak of the Law, of the Gospel,
of sin, of righteousness: speak of Christ, or of our redemption, and
justification by him: yea, speak of that high and weighty heavens, of glory
wherewith the elect shall be crowned; all this moves not, we are little affected
therewith, unless God give us of this good spirit, to profit by the same.
The Apostle therefore with good reason, gave this precept, and we for many
causes, are to lysten unto it, least by any means the spirit of God be
quenched in us, and so we deprive our selves of all the fruits. Now whereas
the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit, it may appear he speaks to those
that had already received it. For, as the fire can not be said to be quenched,
where it is not: so they can not be said to quench or loose the spirit, which
have not as yet received the spirit. Then know, that this precept does properly
belong to them, that have received the spirit of God, and they especially are
to make a special use of it: for the other, it can not profit them, unless
that, as the seed lying in the ground a long time, does afterward budde and
become fruitful, so they continue in their minds, till they have tasted (in
some good sort) of the spirit of God, and then breed in them some carefulnes,
that they do not quench it. Well then, to them that have felt and found the
spirit of God in them, to them says S. Paul in this place: Take heed, that
ye quench not the spirit. Of this, if we do somewhat seriously consider, these
questions will offer them selves, and soon arise in our minds. First, how we
may know whether we have the spirit of God, or no. Secondly, if we have it,
whether it may be lost or no: which if they be well and sufficiently
considered, will doubtless give great force to this precept. For the first, if
we will know whether we have the spirit or no, we must surely understand, that
as he knows that he has life, which feels it in himself: so he best
knows whether he have the spirit of God, that feels the spirit working in
him. If we will further know, by the peculiar working and effects of the
spirit, then let us mark these. First of all, if there be nothing in man, but
the nature of man; if nothing but that may be obtained by the nature and
industry of a man, then surely in that man, is not the spirit of God: for the
spirit is from God, it is from above, it is above nature: and therefore the
Apostle does set the spirit of God, against the spirit of the world, when he
says: We have received the spirit not of the world, but of God. Beside, the
spirit of God is eternal, and endures for ever: but all the doings and
devises of men they perish, and in time have an end. Therefore though a man
have wisdom with great knowledge, though in wit and skill he pass and excel
the common sort of men: yet, if from above he have not bin inlyghtned, if from
heaven his wisdom be not sanctified, his knowledge shall decay, his wisdom
wyther like grass, and as yet he has not tasted of the spirit of God, that
endures for ever. And therefore says S. Paul: We teach the mysteries of God,
which none, no not the Princes, and the men of this world, which are above
others most excellent, are not able to understand. Secondly, consider whether
there be in thee any alteration or change: for the wise men that were expert in
nature, could say, That in every generation there is a corruption: so that as
seed in the ground, so sin in our natural body should decay, that the new
man might be raised up, the spirit of God taking possession in our souls.
Therefore the Evangelist John does make this, the first work of the spirit,
that it shall rebuke the world of sin: and this so needful, that without
it, there is not the spirit of God, neither yet can Christ come and enter into
that man. Hereof it was that Christ compared the Jews to Children in the
market place, who would not dance, though they were piped unto: and the
reason was, because they had not first learned with John to mourn: for they
that by the preaching of John, learned to lament their sins, for their sins
were pensive, nay rather their own souls, they received Christ, they daunced
and rejoiced to hear the joyful tydinges of the Gospel. Therefore Christ
says, That the Whores and Harlots entered into the kingdom of heaven (seeing
they lamented their sins) before the proud Pharisees, which with no remorce
were touched for their sins. And for the same cause it is, that Christ
calls unto him, them only that labor, and are heavy laden: teaching them,
that if they find not sin a heavy load and burden to them, they have not
the spirit of God, neither are they fit to receive Christ. Then to be rebuked
of sin, is the first work of the spirit, which the spirit works in us by
these degrees. First, it rayseth upon us a great and general astonishment,
because of all these great and grievous sins that we have committed, and this
does strike us down, it does terrify us, and hold us amazed woonderfully:
then it deals with us more perticularly; and besides that, it brings us
unto a special grief for special sins, does bereave us of our chief
desires, and brings us out of conceit of the best things that are in us:
for, then it does display unto us the vanity and darkness of our
understanding, how unfit and unmeet we are to understand and conceive the
things, that do above all others especially concern us: then does it let us
see the perverse corruption of our judgment, that before God, and in things
belongyng to God, we be brute beasts, not able to discern things that
differ, nor to put a sound difference between good and evil: then does it
let us see that our reason is unreasonable, nay that it is hurtful unto us, a
great enemy to faith, and a great patron of infidelity and unbelief. When
it comes to our affections, it turns the^ vpside down, it turns our
mirth into mourning, and pleasure into paynefulnesse, and our great delyght
into most bitter grief: If it proceed further, and come once to the heart, and
to the stomach and courage that is in us, then it cutteth us to the quick,
then does it at once throw us down in humility under the hand of God: for,
while we had to deal with men, we were as stout as any, and would not start
for the best. We had reason to see for our selves, and courage to defend our
selves against all them that did deal with us: but now the spirit draws us
into the presence of God, it lets us see that we have to do with God, and
that our strength is weakness in respect of him. Then our hearts begin to
fail us, then do we lay our hands on our mouths, and dare not answer, then
do we quickly take up our cross, because the Lord himself has done it.
Behold here now the spirit works, behold how sin is corrected: and who
so can behold here this in him self, may assuredly say, that the spirit of
God is in him, that it is not in vain in him, it is myghtie and lively in
operation in his heart. And the third note and effect, is the bringing forward
of this work unto justification: for when as the spirit has brought us thus
far, then does it begin to open unto us a door unto the graces and favor
of God: it does put it into our minds, that there is mercy with God, and
therefore styrreth us up to seek mercy at his hands: after that, it does let
us see how Christ suffered, to take away the sins of the world, that in the
righteousness of Christ, we may look to be justified before God: And this it
does not let us see only, but does effectually work a sure persuasion of it in
our hearts, and confirms the same by two notable effects. The first is, a
joy unspeakable and glorious, wherewith our hearts must needs be taken up and
ravished, when we see our selves by the righteousness of Christ, the free
mercy and grace of God, redeemed from death, delivered from hell, and freed
from the condition of the wicked. The second is the peace of conscience: which
in deed, passes all understanding. While sin, and the guilt of sin
remained, there was no peace, no rest, no quietness to be found, but fear,
with terrors without, and troubles on every side: But when sin is once
nailed to the cross of Christ, when the guilt of sin is taken out of our
consciences, and the punishment thereof far removed, then must needs ensue
great peace: for our enemies dare not proceed against us, our sins are
forgiven us, and God is at one with us: and for this, we have the warrant and
testimony of the spirit. Can flesh and blood persuade us of it? can any
creature assure us how God is affected toward us? no doubtless. And therefore
where this joy and this peace is, there must needs be the holy ghost, the
author and worker of the same: for as no man knows what is in man, but the
spirit of man which is in him: so none knows the will of God, but the spirit
of God, and therefore it is the spirit of God that must certify our hearts
and spirits of the same. And hereof does arise that, which we take as the
note, when we see in our selves, to wit, the baseness and unableness that is
in us to do good: for when a man does find favor with God, from the
forgiveness of sins, then the love of God co^strayneth him, that joy which
he conceiueth inforceth him, and puts life into him, for the performance of
these things, which are pleasing unto God: then he begins to find himself
not only retained from evil, but applied and framed to that which is good,
then is his understanding inlyghtened, to see into the mysteries of godliness,
and into the great rock of his redemption, and into whatsoever concerns the
saving health of his soul: then is his judgment reformed, and he is made able
to judge between false religion and pure, between the works of the flesh
and the spirit, that which is good and that which is evil, and displeasing in
the sight of God. Then are his affections in some good measure altered, his
desire is set, not upon earthly, but upon heavenly things, his joys are not
in the earth, but in the heavens, his anger is wasted and spent, not upon his
own private cause and quarrels, but upon his own sins, and whatsoever
hinders the glory of his God: This is the life of God in him; thus he lives
that has received the spirit, and thus he leads his life continually: for
they that have received the spirit, are led by the spirit, and do live
accordingly, brynging forth the fruits of the spirit. But this has weakness
joined with it, and men through frayltie may fall, and therefore their life is
said To be hid in Christ, because in full and perfect manner it does not
appear: therefore if notwith standing these fraylties and falls, we will know
whether we still retain the spirit of God, we must search our selves, and try
our hearts by these rules. First, if through frayltie we have fallen (for who
is he that falls not?) If we will then know whether by our fall we have lost
the spirit of God, let us see what lyking, or mislyking we have of sin: for,
if after our fall, we do hold our formed hatred of sin, and the more we
fall, the more through deadly hatred we conceive against sin, undoubtedly the
frayletie has not as yet deprived us of the spirit. Secondly, come and see
how it stands with thy sorrow: for so long as this sorrow increases for thy
sins, it cannot be thought that sin and the flesh, has utterly quenched
the spirit in thee. Thirdly, try thy care: and if thou groan in a godly care,
both how thou may be able to wage battle in the plain field with sin,
and how thou may prevent him in all his policies, thou have a further
assurance that sin, although it be as great as Goliath, yet it has not
prevailed against thy poor and little David, I say, against those few and
small graces, which the good spirtie of God has bestowed upon thee: but the
last, it is most certain: and that is this. When thou art careful to redeem
that, which by thy fall thou have lost, and have a care to run so much faster
forward, by how much more thou have been let by thy fall: then it does
appear that the spirit is in thee, yea lively and mighty in operation, and
such as shall never be taken from the, until the day of Christ. Thus may we in
some good and competent measure prove, whether we have the spirit of God or no:
for where the fruits are to be found, there is also the spirit of God. For
further confirmation whereof, we may note the manner of speech, where he
says, Quench not the spirit. We do commonly say, the fire is quenched, where
the light and heat there of is taken away, and in deed nothing can properly
be said to be quenched, but the fire. Now whereas the Apostle says, quench not
the spirit, he gives us to understand, that the spirit is in some respect
like unto fire: therefore if we do but a little consider of the nature of fire,
we shall the better judge of the spirit. And among others, we find these
properties of fire. First, it will consume things consumeable: and therefore
lyghting upon straw or stubble, or such like, it brings them to ashes.
Secondly, it does purge and purify those things that can abide to be purged:
and this it does, first by taking away the superfluity of dross, that has
over covered the thing to be purged. Secondly, by making the thing it self
purer and purer: Thirdly, it gives light in the darkest places: But last of
all, it gives heat, and does as it were withal, put life into those things,
which are capable of life: for whilst a man is frozen and starued for cold,
he is numbde, and as it were without life: but being brought to the fire, he is
hot, he is revived, he is cheared, and then become active and nimble: these are
the properties of fire, and these do in some manner part resemble unto us the
works of the spirit: for when the spirit of God seaseth upon a man, and then
enters into his soul, then it begins to wast and consume in him those
noisome lusts, and other stubble which is in him. Secondly, it does purge us
from gross sins, and daily more and more fume us, that we may be a clean
and holy Temple for him to dwell in. Thirdly, it is a shynyng light, ever
burning and continually giving light unto us, in that way which we have to
walk. And lastly, heateth and inflameth in us zeal of Gods glory, with a
care of our duty, and with a love of all mankind: yea, withal it puts
life and lust into us, to walk in that good way in which it does lead us, and
do all those good works by the which we may glorify God, and be commodious to
men. Thus we see what lykelihood there is between the spirit and fire, nay it
is called fire: for John says, That Christ should baptize with the holy ghost,
and with fire: that is, with the holy ghost, which is like fire: Therefore, as
truly as we may say there is fire, where we see straw and such like things
consumed, or gold and silver finely purged, or great light in dark places, or
great heat in bodies that were nummed before; even so certainly we may
persuade our selves, that the spirit of God is in us, when we see the
corruption that is in us consumed, our souls purged from the dross of sin,
our hearts inlyghtned and made hot in walking, and working according to the
light. The second question to be considered is, whether that man which has
once tasted of the spirit, may loose it, and have it quenched in him. To this
it may be said, that because the spirit of God comes to, and works in
diverse men, diuesly, in diverse measures: therefore we must consider of the
working of the spirit, and frame our answer accordingly. First then, there is
a lyghter and a lesser working of the spirit, which may be quenched in them
that have it: and that this inferior or lesser kind of working, may be taken
away, appears plainly by the parable of the seed which our savior Christ
propounds, for that besides them that receive the word into good ground,
and bring forth fruits, some an hundredth, some thirty, some sixty fold: he
does also make mention of some others that received the word, and yet
continued not: and what, had not these the spirit of God in them? yes
doubtless: for they received the word, yea, they received it gladly, and that
which is more, they believed it, when as they had received it. Behold then
three fruits of good spirits in these men, and yet they continue not: for
they believed in deed, but their faith was temperacie, it lasted but for a
time, and after a time it vanished away, and the spirit departed from them:
for, either the pleasures or the profits of this life did draw out the graces
of God, and dry them up, or else the fiery heat of persecution did quite
consume them. More plain and notable for this purpose is that, in that other
to the Hebrews, for there the Apostle says, That some may taste of the holy
ghost, and thereby be made to taste of the good word of God, to be enlightened
to receive heavenly gifts, yea, and the taste of the life to come: and what
then: surely the Apostle says, That if such fall, it is impossible they
should be renewed: giving us to understand, that even they that have bin
inlyghtned, and that have received heavenly gifts, and have tasted of the
power of the life to come, even such may fall away, and have the spirit
quenched in them. There is a second kind of working of the spirit, which is
a more effectual working, which is never taken from them that have received
it, this the Apostle describes, when he says, That the chosen of God, are
begotten again of the immortal seed of the word: that is, not a bare
receiving, or light tasting of the word; but it is the deep tasting of the
same, whereby we are begotten and borne again. The Apostle John sets down
an other note of that, saying, That they that are thus borne again, can not
sin: that is, can not make an occupation of sin, they can not fall flat
away by sin: and why? Because the seed of Gods word abides in them, even
that seed wherewith they were begotten to a lively hope of life, even that
seed does abide, and will abide, even to the end. Who so is begotten again
by this seed, and has it abiding in him, that the spirit has wrought in
him, which shall not be taken from him, for that the father is mightier then
all: and therefore our savior Christ said, The words that I speak, are
spirit and life: Therefore in an other place he says, It is impossible that
the elect should be seduced. Then we see the question is answered: namely,
that there is an inferior working, which may be lost; and a more effectual
working, which can not be taken from them that have it: And this must not seem
strange to us, neither must we be offended that the Lord does take some, and
leave some: or that he should begin in some, and not bring his work to
perfection: For he deals with them, as with Corn. Some Corn is sown and
never ryseth: some springs, and yet shortly wythereth: some grows up in the
ear, and yet is stricken and blasted: and other some (at his good pleasure)
come to a timely ripeness. In like manner, some trees are planted, and never
take root: some take root, and yet not blossom: some blossom, and never
bring forth fruit: and other some through his goodness do bring forth
fruit in good season. If the Lord deal so with the plant and herb of the
field, why may he not deal so with us, the sons of men? If we can not
conceive the reason of this, we must hold our peace: for all the works of God
are done in righteousness, and all our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore
we must accuse our selves rather of ignorance, then the Lord of
unrighteousness: nay, our selves do deal in like sort with those things
which are under our hands. In Colleges, Fellows are first chosen to be
probationers, and if they be then approved, they be made Fellows, otherwise
not. If a man (being chyldlesse) do take unto him some friends child, to make
him heir of all his goods, he will keep him upon lyking; if his manners be
honest, he shall be preferred, he may be set over all his family, and yet
afterward for some fact, be cast off. Some other man takes an other child for
the same end, and makes him heir in deed: Therefore we must think that it
is righteous with the Lord to deal thus with us, seeing we are in his hand:
and we must not be offended, though he call some, and do not inlighte^ them:
and although he do not inlyght them, and do not continue them, and do of his
great mercy continue some unto the end: let us rather see what use we may
have of this doctrine. First, we must take heed that we never quench any
grace, or gift that God bestows upon us. Secondly, we must labor to have
greater measure of gifts: for the wicked may come to have some small gifts,
and such may be quite taken away from us. Tastly, it does put a plain
difference between the godly, and the godles, between them that bear a show
of holiness, and them that are the Lords holy ones: for the one endures but
a time, and the other lasts for ever. Now if we require a further trial,
whereby we may know whether we have received the spirit of God, which lasts
but for a time, and that which lasts for ever with us: then let us mark
those rules, which put a plain difference between them. First we must mark
the inlightnyng and insight we have into the word of God. Certain it is, that
both the godly and wicked are enlightened, but the inlyghtning of the godly is
one, and the insight of the wicked is an other: for, the knowledge and insight
which the godly have received, is certain and distinct: therefore in particular
things, they be able to apply the threatening of Gods judgments, to the
humbling of them selves, and the promises of God to comfort them selves.
Again, their knowledge is sufficient to direct them generally, and
particulerly. And last of all, it never fails them, but directs them to the
end: but the knowledge of the wicked is not so, for it is a confused and a
general knowledge of the threatninges, and of the promises of God, yet can
they not make particular use of the same. Their knowledge is not sufficient,
nor able to direct them in particulars, and therefore does leave them in the
end. Therefore the knowledge of the godly for the clearenes, the certainty,
and the sufficiency of it, is compared to the Sun: so the knowledge of the
wicked, is compared to lyghtnyng, which does not give any light, it does not
continue any time, and when it is gone, men are worse then they were before. So
does it fall out with the wicked; for beside that their knowledge cloth soon
vanish, there is in them greater and more dangerous darkness, then there was
before: therein then we see our plain and manifest note of difference.
Secondly, we must come to our affections. Certain it is, that the wicked do
desire the help of God: but look to the cause, and it will show a difference
between the wicked and the godly. The wicked do only seek help, because of
some extremity which they suffer, they only defire to be in the favor of
God, because they would be freed from grief; and therefore it is common with
them to say (Oh that I were out of this pain, Oh that this sorrow were taken
from me:) by which speech they show, that so they might be at rest, or at their
ease, they would little weigh of the help and favor of God. But the godly
find such sweetenes in the favor of God, that for the desire thereof, they
can be content to suffer much, and endure the cross patiently, so that at the
last, they may enjoy Gods favor. Not the godly only, but the wicked also, are
grieved when they have sinned: but the wicked do therefore sorrow, because their
sin has, or will, bring some punishment upon them: And the godly sorrow,
because they have offended God, and given him occasion to draw his favor from
them, therefore his correction do they bear patiently: but the remembrance of
their sin, that touches them still at the quick: and so then in their joy,
and in their sorrow, may appear a second difference. The third difference
is in love, for though both of them love God, yet it is after a diverse manner;
the one of sincerity, the other of wages, A poor child that is taken up,
fed, and clothed, will love him that does thus feed and cloth him: but if he
received no more of that man then of another, he would like him, and love him
no better then another: Even so is it with the wicked, if their bellies be
filled, if their barnes stuffed, and they have their hearts desire, they love
God in deed, but it it only for their belly, and their barnes. Thus did Saul
love God, but it was for his kingdom: Thus did Achitophel love God, but it was
because he was a counselor: Thus did Judas love God, but it was because he
was chosen to be an Apostle, and carried the bagg: But what became of their
love, histories do testify. Saul was a little afflicted, and forsook God:
Achitophel somewhat crossed in his devises, hangs himself: Judas for gain
of money, betrayed Christ his master. Some experience we may see of this
among us; Courtiers will be professors, and Scholars will be religious, if
Courtiers may come to be Counselors, and Scholars may be preferred to
chiefest places: but if promotion come not, then their profession is forsaken,
and Religion laid aside. Do the children of God love on this manner? No, the
holy Ghost which they have received in effectual manner, does shed the seed
of love in their hearts, and does work in them a special lyking of his
goodness, of his righteousness, and of his holiness: and therefore of sinceere
affection they love him, as the natural child loves his father naturally,
although he beat him, yet bears he it, and still loves him: so do the
children of God deal. They have powered into them, as S. Peter says, a godly
nature, so that they freely love God the father: and though he afflict them, or
cross them in their desires, yet they love him, and in love perform obedience
unto him continually: therefore Job says, Though he kill me, yet will I trust
in him: they therefore are said to have received a free spirit, and to serve
God in the liberty of the spirit. And who seeeth not this to be a plain and
manifest difference between them: therefore we may take it as a third mark
or rule, to prove and try our selves. The fourth and last rule is, in
considering the work and effect which Gods mercy received, does work in us:
for, herein do the wicked show their wickedness two ways. First, on the right
hand the mercies of God do work in them wonderful contentation: but not
such as causes them to return all glory to God, nay, rather, it is such as
causes them to take all glory to them selves: for the graces of God do puff
them up, and make them proud, and conceyted in them selves. Hereof arises
great security, which brings neglect and contempt of all good means,
whereby they should grow up in godliness. On the left hand others offend, being
never pleased nor co^tended with the they have in deed, forgettyng and lightly
esteeming that they have, and still desiring new. These men besides that they
be unthankful, do also murmr and grudge against God, and are never pleased
with him. Between these two, the children of God hold a middle and even
course: and therefore we shall see these things in the^. First, a sight and an
acknowledging of the wantes which do move the^, as S. Peter says, Like newborn babes, to desire the sweet and sinceere milk of the word, that thereby
the graces they have, may be increased, and their other wantes may be supplied:
and so far are they from being puffed up with pride, that they rejoice when
their pripe may be pulled down, or their haughtines abated, either by some
sharp rebuke, or by some fearful threatening, or by some moderate correction
from the Lord: for they know, if it were needful for S. Paul to be buffited,
and that by the minister of Satan, to the end that his pride may be beaten
down: then it is much more needeful for the^, after more ways so to be
humbled. Besides that, they do not only desire the word, but they also wait
upon the Lord, until it pleased the lord to work further in them thereby: and
this waiting is as earnest as theirs, who have watched all the night, do wait
and look for the dawning of the day. Secondly, as they see their wantes, so
also they see that grace they have received, and for that time well appayde,
and contented therewith: and therefore as their wantes do humble them, so the
graces of God do comfort them: and as their wantes do call upon them, and cause
them to seek more: so that they have, does provoke them to be thankful for
that they have received. See then a quite contrary course of the wicked, and
those that do of sincerity worship God, I say how contrary the graces and
gifts of God do work in them, and therefore from the consideraton hereof, we
may well draw a fourth rule, whereby to make trial and examination of our own
selves: therefore to conclude this point in a word, when a man by the spirit of
God has bin enlightened unto a certain and sufficient knowledge of Gods will,
when he finds his affection, chiefly and above al other things set upon God,
when he finds a pure and sinceere love of God in his heart, not for wages, but
for that word of grace, which after an unspeakable manner does move him
thereunto: and when he does thankfully acknowledge mercies received, as he does
carefully attend and wait upon the Lord, till he bestow some great measure of
graces upon him, he may be undoubtedly persuaded, that he has found the spirit
working in him, in a more effectual manner, and therefore it shall never be
taken from him. But what then, may such men cast off all care? No, for unto
them does S. Paul give this charge: for though that the spirit can never be
taken utterly from them, yet doubtless, if they wax proud, if they grow secure,
if they fall into sin, the graces and gifts of the spirit may decay and die
in them, their clear love, their feeling, their affection, and all may be
gone, so that in their own judgment, and in the judgment of others, it may
seem that they have quite quenched, and put out the spirit. Neither must this
seem strange: for if the image of God, which was more perfectly placed in
Adam, the^ it is now in us. If I say, this image might quite be blotted out and
lost, as we see in was; then no marvel if the graces of the spirit be for a
time, as it were dead and drowned in us: and that we may be the less offended
herewith, the Scriptures do offer unto us examples of men, as having bin once
effectually and truly borne again, have yet afterward through some sins,
lost the graces of the spirit: such were the Galathians, for they were truly
called, and effectually regenerate, by the spirit and Gospel of God, as may
appear by this, that for the words sake they reverenced the Apostle as the
angel of God, yet they were snared with false doctrine, and fell very
dangerously to the choking and quenching the spirit in them, the spirit it
self was not taken from them, nay, Christ did still continue in their hearts,
yet for want of godly graces they were as it were without fashion and form, so
that the Apostle did as it were travel again, until Christ was fashioned a
new in them. David also upon the committing of his sin, was brought into the
like case, and therefore in the. 51. Psalm. he prays, That God will create in
him a new spirit: What, was the spirit quite gone? no, for by and by in the
same Psalm he prays, That the Lord would not take away his holy spirit from
him: how can these two stand together, first to pray, that a new spirit may be
created in him, and, that the spirit of God may not be taken from him? Surely
the spirit it self was still in him, and therefore he prays, that it may not
be taken from him: but the graces, and gracious working of the spirit they were
dead and gone, and therefore he prays that they may be renewed in him. By
this then we see, that the very chief graces of the spirit may be quenched,
even in the most godly, when they fall into sin. But yet that no liberty may
be taken hereby, let us consider what grief they bring to them selves, that do
by any means loose the graces of the spirit. First of all we must know, that
though the spirit of God cannot be gotten by our labor, yet it costeth us
much labor, and we must undergo much travel, and suffer much trouble, before
the spirit of God do take possession of us. Now when the graces of the spirit
are lost, all our labor seems to be lost, and come to nothing. Secondly,
when a man receaueth the spirit of God, and by the same spirit is assured that
his sin is forgiven him, and he is in the favor of God, there does arise in
his heart a great joy in the holy ghost, a joy I say, that is unspeakable and
glorious: and this joy is lost and gone, when the graces of Gods spirit are
gone: with how great grief and woe they know it, that in any measure have tasted
of it. Again, when the graces of the spirit are choked in men, they have no
haste to do good, they have no affection to goodness, but all is gone, and
they are made for the time, as it were an unprofitable burden of earth. What
grief can be greater then this? What sorrow cap sink more deep, then that a
good man should be clean withholden from doing good? Moreover it is sure, that
when the gifts of the spirit are in this sort gone, that he that was more
righteous before, may soon fall into greater sins, yea and which is more, they
shall also suffer the reproach of their sins: For this is a part of the
covenant that God made with his, That though he will not take his mercies
utterly from them, yet he will visit their sins with the rod, and their
iniquities with scourges: and what grief is this. The example of Gods
children. What heart breaking to David, by his own son to be thrust from his
kingdom, so grievous, that if without any respect of hell or heaven, we could
consider of them, we had rather want all the pleasure of sin, which David
enjoyed, then we would feel the pain which David suffered. Last of all, when
the graces of the spirit of God are decayed, they can never be repaired and
recovered, but with much sorrow and great danger: for it can not but breed much
sorrow of heart, to examine and see the greatness of them, to apply Gods
judgments to them, and to provoke himself to sorrow for them: This is as it
where to go through the pikes, and through purgatory in this present life; and
yet this must be done, before we can recover Gods grace. Again, it is a very
dangerous thing, for in such cases men are brought as it were with Jonas, into
the bottom of the sea: and as David says, into the deep waters, so that all
the surge and waves do pass over him. Now we know what danger it is for a man
to be thrust over head and ears into the deep waters: and therefore they that
are in such a case, are in great danger: wherefore all these things
considered, the loss of all our labor, the loss of all true joy, the
unfitness to do good, the readiness to sin; the grief and danger that
ensues thereof, will, or at the least wise may cause us to be ware, how we
quench the spirit. And this is (...) use of the doctrine, in humblyng us:
which also does further serve to ^^mfort us, knowing that we may suf^^^ a great
decay of Gods graces; yet the rod, or word of God, they ^ay be renewed in us
again. And thus much of this commandment that the Apostle gives here, that
we should not quench the spirit.

FINIS.

