THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND AND FAITHFVLL SERVANT OF JESUS CHRIST M. RICHARD
GREENHAM, MINISTER AND PREACHER OF THE WORD of God, collected into one Volume:
REVISED, CORRECTED, AND PVBLISHED, FOR THE FVRTHER BVILDING OF ALL SVCH AS LOVE
the truth, and desire to know the power of godliness.

By H. H.

THE FIFTH AND LAST EDITION: IN WHICH, MATTERS DISPERSED BEFORE THROVGH the
whole book, are methodically drawn to their several places, and the hundred
and nineteenth Psalm perfected: with a more exact Table annexed.

ECCLESIASTES 12. 21. The words of the wise are like goades, and like nails
fastened by the Masters of the assemblies, which are given by one Pastor. GOD
IS MY HELPER
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for WILLIAM VVELBY, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Swanne. 1612.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING OF Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
RIght gracious Sovereign, I do here humbly present unto your Highness, the
holy Labors of that worthy Servant of Christ Mr. RICHARD GREENHAM, painfully
collected, corrected, and published for the good of Gods Church, by my late
dear Husband Mr. HENRY HOLLAND, a Preacher of the Gospel in your Highness
City of London. Which I am bold to offer unto your excellent Majesty,
partly in respect of the Author, a man renowned for his rare piety and pains,
and for his singular dexterity in comforting afflicted Consciences: partly in
regard of the work it self, so well accepted and approved in the Church, that
this is now the fifth time it has been published. But chiefly because my husband
having a little before his death bestowed great care and pains in collecting
and preparing for the press, the fourth and last part of these works (which
in this edition is added to the rest) straightly and many times charged me
upon his death bed to present and dedicate the whole unto your Highness, as a
pledge which he desired to leave unto the world, of his most dutiful
affection, and earnest desire to do your Majesty all the honor, and the
Churches within your Highness dominions all the service that he could
Wherefore humbly praying that your excellent Majesty would be pleased to
accept the same at the hands of a poor widow, from him that is now at rest in
the Lord, and has (in part received the crown of his labors: I do earnestly
beseech the God of heaven abundantly to heap all graces and blessings upon
your Highness and your royal posterity in this life, and finally to set upon
your heads the crown of everlasting life and glory in the world to come.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject Elizabeth Holland widow.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADIES THE LADY MARGARET COUNTESS OF
CVMBERLAND, AND THE LADY KATHERINE Countess Dowager of Huntington: H. H.
wishes the increase of all true honor and comforts in this life, and after
death a crown of glory with Jesus Christ.
I May seem to pass the bounds of Christian modeslie, so to press into your
presence (Right Honorable and virtuous Ladies) without due regard of your
persons and places. But such is your wisdom, that you can, and your honorable
affection, that you will hear with patience the meanest servant of Jesus
Christ. I come (Right Honorable) as in the name of the faithful servant of
Christ, M. R. Greenham, a man well known unto your honors, and to those most
religious patrons of all piety and good learning, the right Honorable Earls
(of blessed memory) of Huntington, Warwick, and of Bedford, which now sleep
in the Lord. Of them much was he reverenced in his life time; of your Honors
much lamented after death, for that you know the loss of such, to be no small
wrack unto the Church and people of God. Now so it is (right Honorable and
virtuous Ladies) that piety in this declining age waxes daily very faint, and
impiety does much abound: and God has not only set before you those noble
examples for imitation, but also has enriched your hearts with his faith, fear
and love, (as it well appears (to embrace his blessed truth, and to be as
nursing mothers to the holy religion of Christ. Now then this good servant of
the Lord, God gave him (to recompense his want of natural children) many
sons and daughters begotten by the Gospel to the faith of Christ, and some
Or Posthumes.
orphans he left after him, which being cherished and accepted with grace
among men, shall truly resemble the Fathers heart which begat them, and stand
up for him to speak and preach piety, and the true faith of Christ to
posterity. One of which after a years travel in the nurcing and education,
coated and attired (in the best manner that I can) and now able to speak
distinctly and comfortably the fathers mind and meaning to all the spiritual
Sons and Daughters of God in our Church; here I do in love unfeigned unto
him, and in duty to your Honors, humbly present unto your Honorable
protection.

If the holy Ghost thought good to commend his great and most divine Oracles
(which have a singular kind of spirit, life, and power in them, known to all
true believers) to the Church and people of God under the Luke 1 3. 2 Ioh. 1.
patronage (as it were) of honorable and virtuous Nobility, (for that
Inferiors neglect even the best things, which their Superiors seem less to
account of, and examples do best prevail with unbelievers:) No marvel (right
Honorable Ladies) if the servants of God desire the like favor and patronage
for their labors, even of those whom the Lord has set as bright shining
stars among men.

Your Honors shall find in this first portion of this work, a delectable and
comfortable variety of grave experienced counsels, which may serve as precious
remedies (wisely applied) for many evils, and holy directions for the good
government of a Christian life, and most divine rules grounded upon Scriptures,
and well approved by his long practice, serving well to appease the rage, and
to quench the scorching flame and fiery darts of the devil, which so torment
all poor distressed consciences in this life.

Such experience and good liking have your Honors had of this man of God, of
his godliness and gravity, and of the manifold gifts of God in him, that I
need say no more, as any way doubting of your Honorable acceptance. I have
been bold thus to knit your Honors together in this one Epistle, because I
am well assured the spirit of Grace has knit your hearts together, in his
faith and fear: and for that you were so knit together in love unfeigned to
this holy servant of Christ: This work then I commend unto your Honors, and
your Honors and it to the good blessing and holy protection of the Almighty.

Your HH. to command: Henry Holland.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe lips of the righteous feed many. The true diet of the Prou. 10. 21.
soul is an Art most rare, a very divine faculty: It must be granted that
the lively voice of the Prophets feeds most effectually, searching even the
secret chambers of the soul, and working greatest impressions in the heart.
The holy books and monuments of the righteous are as strong chests and
storehouses; wherein God has ever reserved most precious food for posterity:
neither may we reject the industry of the heathen: for they have some food
meet for liberal men in matters natural and politic, serving well (if due
regard and choice be had) for our direction in things appertaining to this
present life. All wise men are circumspect what they feed upon, to preserve
their bodies; and ought they not much more to be respective wherewith they
feed their souls? Some regard only the lips of the righteous, and feed long
before they be strong men, or have their wits exercised to discern good or
evil. Some attend only the hand and books of the righteous, and these know
little how soundly and truly the believers minds and hearts be fed by the
breaking of the bread of life. Some regard neither: these men starve their
souls with ignorance, and are settled in Atheism and prophanenes. Some attend
both, and have well tasted of the good word of life, and go on from strength
to strength, Ephesians. 4. 13.
unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Some yet there are
which neither regard righteous men, nor righteous matter, but feed
Intemperantiae genus est. Seneca lib. 13. epist. 89. Non discentes necessaria,
quia superuacua didicerunt. Seneca.
indifferently upon all books alike, to the great hazard of their own souls:
these men are vain, and feed themselves with vanity. The devil in elder
ages, in the blind Papacy, fed blind souls with fables, and idle Friars
inventions: now men's wits be refined, they can no more feed on such dry
stubble. He feeds dainty ears with choice of words, and unclean hearts
with the unchaste and wanton loue-songs of Italian Poetry. Such food breeds
many unclean beasts in City and Country. Such men cannot love the truth and
holiness, because they are repleate with error and uncleanness.

Mr. Ascham, a man greatly to be commended for his learning and good affection
In his Schoolmaster.
to piety, of this matter writes on this manner. These inchanters of Circes
(says he) brought out of Italy, mar men's manners in England, much by
example of life, but more by precepts of fond books, translated out of Italian
into English. Again, ten Sermons at Paul's Cross do not so much good for
moving men to true doctrine, as one of those books does harm with enticing to
ill living. I say further, these books tend not so much to corrupt honest
living, as they do to subvert true Religon: More Papists be made by your
merry books of Italy, than by your earnest books of Louaine. This complaint
ought wise men to consider well of, for that the world was never more full of
Italian conceits, nor men more in danger for the long contempt of Gods truth to
be Italianated. The diet and cure of souls afflicted is a very great mystery,
wherein but few have traveled to reduce that matter into any good form of
art, or to give us any good method of practice. M. Luther, M. Beza, Vrbanus
Rhegius, M. Taffin, and others, have very excellent forms of consolation; and
many godly brethren in our times have ministered good help for the cure of
souls afflicted: but wanting art and good experience, we conceive the danger
to be great, and often (as blind Empyrikes) cause it to be greater; for that
we rather guess vncertainlie to apply good remedies, and speeches unto the
sick, than know how to proceed by any certain rule of art, and well grounded
practice. If the natural Physician might truly say, as touching his faculty,
(...). Hip. lib. 1* Aphor. 1.
Vita breuis, etc. much more assuredly may the spiritual Physician prefixe
such an Aphorism to all this mystery we have in hand. For herein the godly
learned know it a matter far more difficult to judge what secret causes
breed the hidden distemper of the soul: and here it is far more dangerous
to proceed only by experience, without art and skill. And here we must as
carefully respect all occasions and circumstances of time, place and persons:
For a word spoken in due time, is like an apple of gold with pictures of
silver: so the contrary, unseasonable and impertinent Pro. 25 11.
speeches be most dangerous.

The patient here must do his part, prout fides patientis adiuuat: and the
assistants Cypr tract 4. de Idolor* va^it.
must be of like tender affection, and good means must imforme, and time
convenient rightly be applied. Magnum esse solemn Philosophus probabit, quantus
sit Mathematicus, qui vsu quodam, and exercitatione procedit: sed vt procedat,
impetranda illi quaedam princifia sunt. Sen lib. 13 Epist. 89.
It fares here with us as with other men in humane sciences, we know the
afflictions of the mind to be very great and dangerous, but how great and
perilous, all men cannot so well conceive, much less how with art and skill to
proceed in the practice of this cure.

This reverend man of God, M. GREENHAM, was a man in his life time of great
hope, and could have given best rules for this unknown faculty: for that the
Lord by his good knowledge and experience, restored many from unspeakable
torments, and terrors of mind; of which some are asleep in Christ, and as yet
living not a few. If the Lord had not so soon translated him to rest, he was
no doubt as fit, and as willing as any in our age to effect this matter. Of his
knowledge this way, all the godly learned that knew him, both can and will
speak, I doubt not. Of his good will herein to posterity, let his own words
testify the good desires of his heart: for by a special occasion he speaks
of himself on this manner. He has had a long time a settled disposition (as he
trusts) of God, to study the cases of Conscience, to succor the perplexed
in them: he In his Apology.
has been so filled with compassion to the afflicted (which God wrought in his
heart) as if he had been distressed with them: He has seen the manifold
blessings of God upon his travel. Again, that many godly learned friends
would persuade him to the aforesaid study, by these and such like arguments.
First, that hereby he might train up some younger men to this end, and
communicate In the same Book.
his experience with them. Secondly, that he might leave unto posterity a
commentary of such particular maladies, as through Gods blessing he has
cured, together with the means used to that end: and because precepts are
wanting, rules of direction in such cases (by a through searching, with a
diligent and continual observation and conference with others learned and
experienced) might in this age, or in the age following, be brought to some
form of method and Art, whereby the knowledge and experience of these things
might be made common to many, not only to the fruitful curing, but also the
healthful preventing of manifold mischiefs. Thus far his own words.

Let these grave Counsels and fruitful observations in this first part of his
holy works (which I have here published) testify how mindful and careful
he was for many years, to give herein a comfortable direction for posterity.

I am the meanest and the weakest of many brethren to write of this reverend
man's life, and labors in the Church of God: yet had I rather be noted of some
for want of skill, than of any for want of love and affection to so loving a
father. I have known his life for many years, and rejoice in heart to have
known it, for that most rare graces of Gods spirit did shine in him, all
tempered as with faith unfeigned unto Christ, so with bowels of compassion and
love toward men. In his holy Ministry, he was ever careful to avoid all
occasions of offense, desiring in all things to approve himself as the
Minister of Christ; he much reicoyced and praised God for the happy government
of our most gracious Queen ELIZABETH, and for this blessed calm and peace of
Gods Church, and people under it; and spoke often of it both publicly and
privately, as he was occasioned, and stirred up the hearts of all men what he
could to pray, and to praise God with him for it continually: yea, this matter
so affected him, that the day before his departure out of this life, his
thoughts were much troubled, for that men were so unthankful for that strange
and happy deliverance of our most gracious Queen, from the dangerous
conspiracies and practices of that time. He was the special instrument and
hand of God to bring many, both D. Lopes.
godly and learned, to the holy service of Christ, in his Ministry, and to
restrain, and to reduce not a few from schism and error, striving always to
retain such in obedience of laws, and pretiouslie to esteem and regard the
peace of the Church and people of God.

When God had translated this Elias from us, then I sought to find him in his
works: for they do lively express the picture of his mind and heart, and
taste sweetly of that pure fountain of God, from whence they were derived.
Noct^s Attic^ Gellius and Phauorinus.
While he lived, his lips often refreshed my soul: when he was gone, I
lamented much that I had not in Christianity made that use of him; that a
Heathen does of a natural wise man in humanity. But now I praise God I have
found some good supply of that which (through mine own negl^gence) I wanted:
for of his works (which were then dispersed far and near, but now by Gods
providence the greatest and best part are come into my hands) I can say for my
content as much as Cyprian could say of his grave, ancient and learned
Tertullian, Da mihi M^strum.
both for special instruction and consolation.

He was no sooner gone from us, but some respecting gain, and not regarding
godliness, attempted forthwith to publish some fragments of his works, to the
grief (that I say no more) of many loving friends, which have long desired and
expected the impression of all his works. And here could I wish all the godly
learned were of In his Epistle before his notes on the Revelation.
M. Francis Iunius judgment, for he (to escape these hucksters handling)
endeavors wisely in his life time to prevent such a mischief. For this cause
M. D. Crook, (a reverend man for his learning and labor in the Church, well
deserving of Gods people) for the great love he bare him, and desiring the
good of many, perused and corrected some part of these works, intending to
reuiew the whole. Now the Lord has taken him also from us, and given him rest;
I have endeavored what I could to look over the rest of all these works; and
here I offer and recommend them to the Church of God, in the best manner that I
can, after some labor and wearines. I wanted not the help of diverse both
godly and learned friends, we have conferred sundry copies together, and by
good conference reuised and corrected all.

The Treatise of Counsels I found most distracted and corrupted. Of many
hundreds I selected these few, and have reduced them into this alphabeticall
order, desiring so to dispose them, as that every counsel might be set under
one special head or argument, whereunto it seemed to have most reference. As
for example, all of affections I couched under that title AFFECTIONS, and all
of afflictions, under that title, and so of the rest. Of these Counsels I may
anouch (Christian Reader) that thou shall find more experienced knowledge, and
more sound refreshing for thy soul in some one of them, than in some one whole
Sermon, full of humane eloquence, and affectation of style, which so many nice
ears do so much admire, and yet still be learning and come but to a poor and
mean taste and knowledge of the truth.

When this volume was finished and past the press, in reuiewing the whole, for
the correction of some verbal faults: I see and must confess we have
offended by our negligence, not only in the words, but also in the matter: yet
so as I trust the loving and Christian readers, will accept our endeavor
without offense. In the Counsels ye have often this addition, he thought this,
or he said that: here I must request thee (Christian reader) not to judge any
such speeches to proceed from any pride or singularity: for that such
observations (as I suppose) were collected and taken by M. Hopkins.
others, and not set down by himself. If his own hand had given these works
the last filing, they might have (no doubt) a far more excellent form and
beauty. But such were his travels in his life time in preaching and comforting
the afflicted, that he could not possibly leave these works as he desired. In
that one treatise of the Sabbath I found his own hand, with many He knew right
well the Poets witty counsel: Vos o Pompilius sanguis carmen reprehendite,
quod ^^n multa dies and multa litura coercuit, atque perfectum decies non
castigauit ad vnguem.
corrections, and yet not answering (I am well assured) his hearts desire.

There are four years past since I first purposed the collection and
publishing of all these works. Now thou have (good reader an impression of all
(which hitherto I have collected) in this form thou see, that so by Gods
good providence they may the better be reserved as a holy monument for
posterity. Concerning which, be advertised again (good Christian) that
whereas some books serve well for the increase of knowledge in divine
mysteries, in the causes and means of salvation, yet thou must remember not to
rest herein: for many be rich in knowledge which be very poor, and barren in
obedience, contented only to look on the end a far off, and thinking that
when like Snailes they creep in the way, they be too forward, and make too
much haste to follow Christ. And again, whereas others labor much and to good
purpose in books of controversies against all the professed enemies of the
Gospel: this study also has not the like fruit in all sorts of people, for
howsoever some profit much this way the Church of God, in the confutation of
all the adversaries of the Gospel: yet in very many, these books help little
to godliness, but rather fill the heads and hearts of men with a spirit of
contradiction and contention, as our common experience daily teaches us. This
good servant of Christ in all these works, does not only teach and inform
the mind in sundry arguments handled in this volume, concerning truth and
error, that so in judgment we might receive the one and reject the other: but
most principally respects in the whole, to edify the heart and conscience,
being well assured, that this part has most need in most Christians of
direction and consolation: and as we be in this part affected, so be we in
substance and verity before God. For this cause he desires and labors
most in all these works, to stir up the heart, and to quicken the affections
to embrace true godliness, that so being freed from sin by the blood of Christ,
and made the servants of God, we might have our fruit in holiness, Heb. 9. 14.
Romans 6. 22.
and in the end eternal life. In this Impression I have carefully reuised and
corrected in the whole work, all the faults, which either by mine own private
reading, or by the help of other loving friends, I could observe in word or
matter. Here I rest for a time, requesting thy prayers (good Christian Reader)
that now all these holy works thus knit together, may serve to Gods glory,
and to the further building of the Church of God in our Land.

Thine in the Lord Jesus HENRY HOLLAND.

CHristian Reader, thou have here all Master GREENHAMS works, as they have
been heretofore gathered and published by the industry of that worthy and
painful Preacher, Master Henry Holland. In this edition thus much is
performed, viz. the 119. Psalm perfected, a prayer of Master GREENHAMS in the
end of his works added, and the whole Book reduced into a more methodicall
order, which would have been d^^e by Master Holland if he had longer lived:
all which has now been thought fit to be published in this manner, as may
appear in the contents following.

A SHORT AND GENERAL VIEW OF ALL SVCH MATTERS AS ARE CONTAINED IN THE WHOLE
Works of Mr. Greenham: digested after a more Methodicall manner then
heretofore. The whole Book is divided into five several parts, as hereafter
follows, with their particular Titles contained under every one of the said
Parts.
THE FIRST PART: Wherein are contained these Titles hereunder following.
1 THE first portion is of grave Counsels. page 1 2 Another or second portion
of an hundred and one and fifty grave Counsels, or divine Aphorisms. page 44 3
A third portion likewise of an hundred grave counsels, and divine directions
for the attaining and retaining of faith and a good conscience. page 51 4 A
short form of catechizing. page 71
THE SECOND PART: Wherein are contained these Treatises following.
1 A Sweet comfort for an afflicted Conscience. page 95 2 A second Treatise of
the same argument. page 112 3 The marks of a righteous man. 118 4 Sweet and
sure signs of Election to them that are brought low. 122 5 A Treatise of
Contract before marriage. 122 6 A Treatise of the Sabbath. 128 7 Notes of
salvation, with the necessity and notes of a true and upright heart. 171. 172 8
A direction for the reading of the Scriptures. page 173 9 A Treatise of the
Resurrection. 178 10 A Treatise of examination before and after the Lords
Supper. 187 11 A Treatise of Gods fear. 194 12 A Treatise of Hypocrisy. 200
13 A Treatise of Anger. 204 14 A Treatise of Blessedness. 207 15 A Treatise of
Fasting. 210 16 A Treatise of sending the Holy Ghost. 216 17 A short treatise
of prayer, upon the words of the Prophet Joel, chap. 2. ver. 32. alleged by
Peter, Acts 2. ver. 21. 236
THE THIRD PART: Wherein are contained these Sermons following.
1 THE first Sermon, of Quenching the the Spirit, upon 1 These. 5. ver. 19. 241
2 Of murmuring, on Exodus 16. v. 2. 249 3 Of Zeal, Reave. 3. v. 19. 255 4 Of a
Good name, Prou. 22. v. 1. 259 5 Of Humility, Prou. 18. v. 12. 268 6 Of the
education of children, Prou. 17. ver. ^1. 276 7 Of Repentance and true sorrow
for sin, Acts 2. ver. 37. 281 8. 9. 10. Of the heavenly purchase in three
Sermons, on Mat. 13. 44. 287 11 Of Christian warfare, on Ephe. 6. ver. 10. 11.
307 12 Of diverse Christian instructions, on Psalm. 16. 316 13 Of flying ill
company, Idolatry, and Sweareing, on Genesis 42. v. 9. 12. 14. 15. 21. 332 14 Of
the mutual duties between the Ministers and the people, on Heb. 13. ver. 17.
339 15 Of the Confession of sins: how many kinds of Confession, how truly to
confess, and the necessary use thereof, on Pro. 28. 15. 359 16 Of the first
effect of Christ's cross, what is meant thereby, how rightly to profess this
Doctrine, the love that we should bear thereunto, the joy that arises
therefrom, on Gal. 6. ver. 14. 15. 363 17 Of the latter or second effect of
Christ his crosses which is the power of Christ's Resurrection, how and by what
means men are made new creatures, on Galat. 6. ver. 15. 370
THE FOVRTH PART: Wherein are contained certain Meditations on diverse portions
and parts of Scripture.
1 MEditations on the. 119. Psalm. 381 2 Meditations on Pro. 4. verse. 13. to 23.
609 3 Meditations on Prou. 14. ver. 5. 6. 7. 8. 622 4 The sum of the Epistle
to the Hebrews. 627 5 A brief sum of Ecclesiastes. 628
THE FIFTH PART: Wherein are contained godly instructions for the due
examination and direction of all men, to the attayning and retayning of faith
and a good conscience: reduced into diverse Chapters and common places, as
follows.
Chap. 1. OF Christian Admonition. 629 Chap. 2. Of the Form and Rules of
Christian Admonition. 631 Chap. 3. Of Adultery and youthful affections. 635
Chap. 4. Of Affection. 638 Chap. 5. Of Affliction. ibid. Chap. 6. Of Anger. 641
Chap. 7. Of Angels. ead. Chap. 8. Of Baptism. 642 Chap. 9. Of Covetousness
and the desire of Riches. 643 Chap. 10. Of Care, covetousness, and
Contentation. 644 Chap. 11 Of our general and special calling. 645 Chap. 12.
Of conference and godly wisdom in the government of the tongue. 647 Chap. 13.
Of the Church. ead. Chap. 14. Of the confession of sin. 649 Chap. 15. Of
Conscience. 650 Chap. 16. Of censure and correstion. 651 Chap. 17 Of
ceremonies, things indifferent, and of turning Christian liberty into
unchristian licentiousness. 652 Chap. 18. Godly Meditations concerning Christ's
power against Satan, love to the faithful, and how he is our wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and of our communion with him. 654 Chap. 19 Of Death
and Judgment. 656 Chap. 20. Of the shortness of our life, and the Meditation
of Death how profitable. 659 Chap. 21. Of dullness of spirit and of feeling.
662 Chap. 22. Of Catechizing and instruction of youth. 662 Chap. 23. Of
Examples, and how we must not sin upon Example. 666 Chap. 24. Of Examination
of our selves, and of all things by their issues: and how to govern the eyes.
671 Chap. 25. Of the Exercises of Religion, Fasting, etc. and of the careful
use of the means at all times. 673 Chap. 26. Of the Government of the Eyes.
675 Chap. 27. Of Faith, Justification by faith, of Justice, and just men, and
of Feeling. 678 Chap. 28. Of Fear. 682 Chap. 29. Of Friendship, Familiarity,
Family, and Fathers. 684 Chap. 30. How to profit and examine our selves, when
friends forsake us. 685 Chap. 31. Of Godliness, and by what means we must
draw near to God. 689 Chap. 32. Of Gods free Grace, Justice, and Mercy, and
how we may try our love to God. 692 Chap. 33. Of Gods wrath, Justice, and
Mercy. 695 Chap. 34. Teaching us why we are specially to keep watch and ward
over our hearts. 700 Chap. 35. Where is taught how we must narrowly watch over
our hearts, and over our affections for many causes. 703 Chap. 36. Of hearing
Gods word. 707 Chap. 37. Of Humility and pride. 711 Chap. 38. Of hypocrisy
and hardness of heart. 715 Chap. 39. Of Heresy and many corrupt kinds of
knowledge, and how the Devil pestereth the Churches with evil teachers. 720
Chap. 40. Of the Judgments of God, and how just he is in judgment, and how
his promises and threatenings to Israel appertain to us. 722 Chap. 41. Of Joy
and Sorrow. 724 Chap. 42. Of injuries, offenses and controversies. 727 Chap.
43. Of Judgment and Folly. 731 Chap. 44. Of Knowledge and Ignorance, and how
to seek God, and of Satan's Sophistris, etc. 733 Chap 45. Of Miracles, and how
God works without, and with means, and how we ought to attend on the means.
736 Chap. 46. Of Magistracy or government. 739 Chap. 47. Of Matrimony, and of
the Duties which belong to that state. 742 Chap. 48. Of the Ministry. 743
Chap. 49. Of the Ministry. 747 Chap. 50. Of Gods promises, excellency, and
truth of Gods word, and how the wicked abuse Scriptures. 753 Chap. 51. Of
Murmuring. 758 Chap. 52. Of patience under the Cross. 761 Chap. 53. Of
predestination, perseverance, and presumption. 764 Chap. 54. Of Prosperity and
Adversity, and of grief, and of the Temptations incident to it. 766 Chap. 55.
Of Prosperity and Adversity. 769 Chap. 56. Of Prophecy and Preaching. 770
Chap. 57. Of Gods Providence. 773 Chap. 58. Of Prayer and Meditation. 775 Chap.
59. Of Repentance. 779 Chap. 60. Of Riches and their abuse. 783 Chap. 61. Of
Sacraments. 786 Chap. 62. Of sin, and how to abstain from the least, and of
iniquity, and the punishments thereof. 788 Chap. 63. Of Physic and Diet. 794
Chap. 64. Of Satan's practices, and of Schism and security. 796 Chap. 65. Of
Parents, Education of Children, Governors of youth, and care of Posterity. 798
Chap. 66. Of Gods worship, and of Religion true and false. 801 Chap. 67. Of
Regeneration and Sanctification. 803 Chap. 68. Of the Sabbath. 809 Chap. 69. Of
Thanks giving, and the right use of the Creatures. 812 Chap. 70. Of Temptation.
813 Chap. 71. Of Truth and errors, sincerity and contempt of the word. 817
Chap. 72. Of Witchcraft and unbelief. 821 Chap. 73. Of the word of God: and of
the confirmation thereof by signs and wonders. 822 Chap. 74. Of good works,
and our obedience to Gods word. 826 Chap. 75. Of Zeal. 829
Next unto these follow other divine arguments, and common places in Religion,
contained in 22. Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF Conscience. 832 Chap. 2. Of Order how necessary in all things. 833
Chap. 3. Of hearing Gods word. 834 Chap. 4. Who be Swine, and who be Dogs.
837 Chap. 5. Of unmercifulness. ead. Chap. 6. Of Works. 838 Chap. 7. Of
Policy. ead. Chap. 8. Of special notes of a man truly righteous and
religious. 839 Chap. 9. Of the Sabbath. 839 Chap. 10. Of Discipline and
Excommunication. 842 Chap. 11. Of Means. 844 Chap. 12. Of diverse names applied
to the Devil in Scripture. 845 Chap. 13. Of the contempt of the Ministry.
846 Chap. 14. Of shame and shamefastness. 847 Chap. 15. Of Justification. 848
Chap. 16. Of Parables and Similitud^s ead. Chap. 17. Of Gods Providence. 850
Chap. 18. Of Seeking God. 851 Chap. 19. Of Sin. ead. Chap. 20. Of profit and
pleasure. 852 Chap. 21. Of Christ's power. 852 Chap. 22. Of Temptation. 853
A Short Direction for the comfort of afflicted consciences. 854 Rules for an
afflicted mind, concerning several Temptations. 855 Rules concerning the
power and privileges of Gods word. 857 A short direction for one troubled in
mind. 871 Lastly, diverse Letters, and a very zealous Prayer of M. Greenhams.
881
EPIGRAMMA IN OPERA Pijssimi, and doctiss. Theologi. M. Ric. Greenham, labor
ac studio. M. Hollandi, diuini verbi apud Londinates Ministri fideliss. edita,
post obitum Authoris, per F. Hering. D. Med.
MEntibus afflictis, grauis haec afflictio cessit,
Greenamum e medio tolli, qui saepe solebat
Eregius mentis Medicus, solatia mira
Dexteritate sacris virtus depromere chartis.
Sicque pias animas vitiorum mole grauatas,
Implicitas Satanae laqueis, misereque agitatas
Infernis furijs, exemit faucibus Orci.
Antidotos quippe hic varias, ac pharmaca norat.
Coelica, and antiqui technasque dolosque colubri:
Hinc tristes moerent mentes geminant que querelas,
Quod mala permaneant Medico pereunte: sed ecce
Hollandus pius, and (...) respicit illas,
Greenamumque loqui rursus post funera fecit:
Alloquio and duros solito mule^re labores.
Gaudete attonitae mentes lamentaque crebris
Suspirijs, alijsque remissa relinquite, vester
Grenamus praesto est vobis, pretiosaque secum
Balsama in Elysijs portat nascentia campis.
Floruit in terris olim Greenamus, in alto
Nunc floret coelo, terraque virescere rursus
Incipit Hollandi studio, curaque sagaci.
Scilicet haec verae merces pietatis, vt ipsam
Conculcet mortem, satanam, ruptisque Gehenna
Aeteroum vireat vinclis, post fata superstet.
IN OBITVM ET OPUS. Richardi Greenhami.
NOn erat hic celebri Greenhamus stemmate natus,
Ast pictate sua nobilitatus erat.
Huius ego lauds si forsan fingere credar,
Vita fiet testis, testis and istud opus.
Vita fiet testis, cuius radiante nitore,
Vtilitas populo, gloria nacta Deo.
Testis and istud opus mira pietate refertum,
Quod digito monstrat Religionis iter.
A. R.

ON THE DEATH AND WORKS OF MASTER GREENHAM.
SOme skillful Caruer help me to endorse
The blessed stone that hides Greenhams corse,
Make me a tree whose branches withered been,
And yet the leaves and fruit are ever green.
The more the stock dies let them flourish more,
And grow more kindly green than ^arst before.
Set Time and ^nuie gazing at the ro^e,
Cursing their ^ootlesse hand, and sliding foot.
Let all the Graces sit them in the shade,
And pull those leaves whose beauty cannot fade.
Greenham, if this cannot thy worth descriue,
That thou once dead, thy works are still alive,
Would I might say thy self could never die,
But emulate thy works eternity.
UPON HIS SABBATH.
WHile Greenham writes of the Sabbaths rest,
His soul inioyes not which his pen expressed:
His work inioyes not what it self does say,
For it shall never find one resting day.
A thousand hands shall toss each page and line,
Which shall be scanned by a thousand eyne.
That Sabbaths rest, or this Sabbaths unrest.
Hard is to say whether is the happiest.
I. Hall.

ANOTHER IN ENGLISH IN COMMENDATION of Master Greenham, and his godly and
learned works, set forth by Master Holland, Preacher of Gods word.
Green yet I am (may Greenham say) and green shall flourish still:
Though World, Sickness, Death, and the Grave, on me have wrought their will,
The Apostate world, me wore with grief, and troubles manifold,
Whilst that I sought with all my strength, her pillars to uphold.
Then Sickness came Deaths Sergeant grim, my ^arkesse crazed t'arrest,
And Death at sheeles with gaping grave received me for their guest.
But great Emmanuel marked, and smilde to see them take this toil
To root, and race out Greenham quite: and gave them all the foil.
My soul he plants in Paradise, there green to flourish aye,
And charged the grave my body safe, to keep till the last day.
And least Death should suppose on earth, he had blotted out my name:
He stirs up Hollands loving mind, for to renew the same.
So that as ointments precious, my works on earth do smell,
Refreshing poor distressed souls, whom Satan seeks to quell.
Lo here the fruit of godly zeal, and zealous piety,
In Greenham who triumphs against all Satan's tyranny.
In spite of world, Sickness, Death, Grave, and all the powers of Hell,
With godly Men, alive and dead, it always shall go well.
F. Hering.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR MARMADVKE DARRELL, AND SIR THOMAS BLOOTHER
KNIGHTS, SVRVEYERS GENERAL FOR THE VICTVALING OF HIS MAJESTY'S NAVY: Stephen
Egerton wishes increase of all true comfort in this life, and everlasting
felicity in the life to come through our Lord Jesus Christ.
PVblius Virgilius (Prince of Latin Poets) being Donat. in vit. Virgil.
demanded why he read the writings of old Ennius, made this answer, Aurum
colligo ex Ennij stercore: that is, I gather gold out of Ennius his dunghill;
meaning thereby, that though Ennius his Poems were not so exquisitely penned as
they might have been, by Virgil himself; yet much good matter might be picked
out of them. Surely (right Worshipful) if one heathen man could gather gold
out of the writings of another, how much more may we (being Christians) gather
not gold only, but pearls and precious stones out of the religious and holy
labors of Master Richard Greenham (though not all polished by his own pen)
being a most godly brother, yea more than a brother, even a most painful
Pastor, zealous Preacher, and reverend Father in the Church of God, of whom I
am persuaded that for practical divinity (which ought worthily to have the
pre-eminence) he was inferior to few or none in his time. Wherefore the same
providence of God, which moved that faithful Minister, Master Genesis 6. 9.
Henry Holland, to collect and publish so many of his worthy labors for the
good of the Church, does call and allure others to the reading of them; and
namely you right Worshipful, who have showed singular kindness (as Naomi says
of Boaz) both to the Ruth. 2. 20.
living, and to the dead: that is, both to good Master Holland while he lived,
and to his desolate widow and fatherles children since his death. In respect
whereof, she desired by my hand to testify her thankfulness to both your
Worships, as it were by these two mites Luke 21. 1. 2.
of this dedicatory Epistle; which office of love to my dear brother deceased,
and to his widow and children living, I do the more willingly tender to your
Worships, because I am partly privy to your kindness and bounty, both toward
them and toward others. The Lord give mercy (says Paul) to the house of
Onesiphorus, for he often 2 Timothy 1. 26.
refreshed me, etc. The same might faithful Holland say, and the same may his
widow and children say, The Lord give mercy to your houses and posterity, for
you have often refreshed them; which being done (as I doubt not) in faith, and
from love, out of a pure heart, shall be put to your reckning, and brought in
as a clear evidence, Mat. 25. 34.
for a comfortable sentence to pass on your side in the day of the Lord Jesus
Christ: To whose most gracious direction and blessing, I commit you both, with
the virtuous and Christian Ladies your wives, and whole families. From my house
in the Black Friars, this third day of April. 1605.

Your Worships ready to be commanded in the Lord: STEPH. EGERTON.

GRAVE COVNSELS, AND GODLY OBSERVATIONS: SERVING GENERALLY TO DIRECT ALL MEN IN
THE WAYS OF TRVE GODLINESS; BUT PRINCIPALly applied to instruct, and comfort
all afflicted consciences.
Affections.
HE used this trial of his affections; as of anger, grief, joy, or such like,
in this manner: If by them he was made less fit to pray; more unable to do the
good he should, less careful to avoid sin; then he thought Trial of
affections.
his affection carnal and evil, and not of God: but when his anger, love,
grief, and other affections provoked him more to pray, and made him fitter to
do good, then he thought his affections to be sent from God, as a blessing unto
him.

2 God shows us often in our affections, what we may do in our outward
actions.

3 Some labor more for knowledge, less for affection: some more for
affection, less How to labor for knowledge and affection.
for knowledge: some busy themselves in Church Discipline, and are slender
sighted in their privy corruptions: some be diligent to epsy things in others
abroad, and negligent to try themselves at home: but it is good to match both
together.

4 Rare good things are pleasant, but by use they are less esteemed: and rare
evil things are fearful, but by use they become less grievous. This comes
to pass, because we rather bring with us natural affections, of joy, and
sorrow, and fear, than spiritual Natural affections.
meditations, which are only of the true joy and sorrow.

5 We must ever learn to suspect our own opinion and affection, when the case
any When to suspect affection. See more in the title of judgment, sect. 1.
thing concerns us.

6 He said, that when for some causes natural affection deceived him: yet the
ordinance of God caused him to do duties.

7 He thought it not good at table to be extraordinary either in joy or
sorrow, unless it were for some special cause: but rather it were convenient,
privately to a godly friend or before the Lord to power out our hearts, and
after the example of Joseph to make our affections known as little in company
as may be.

Afflictions.
1 HE thought all afflictions, to be puttings of him to God from slothfulnes.
Slothfulnes.


2 It is a most certain thing in Gods children, that the more their
afflictions grow, the more their faith grows: the more Satan strives to
draw them from God, the more they draw near to God: although indeed in feeling
they cannot see so much. Feeling.


3 Many can speak fair things in the ears of God, so long as they be in
affliction: but afterward they will speak evil things in the ears of heaven
and earth.

4 He said to one complaining of sudden gripes and nips in the body, Of sudden
^eares Of sudden gripes and nips in the body, and fears in the mind.
in the mind, that we should make our use of them: and though it were hard to
search the particular cause of them, it was both easy and sure to attribute it
to our failing in religion, in not doing some good which God required at our
hands: or if we did it, because we were too ceremonial, and rested in the
thing wrought. If we have failed in not doing, it may be the Lord calls us to
some thing to be done. Again, by these sudden fears and griefs, the Lord
will sometime prepare a way to come unto us, not much unlike to a Prince, who
before his coming has a peale of gunnes as a warning piece, and then we are
to meet the Lord with prayer: for now is the time, now is the fit opportunity
of praying, because the Lord will shortly pass by us, and therefore we must
stir up our selves. And having prayed* it is good to make an holy pursuit
after him, as laying a godly claim to the promises of God, not in particular,
but in general: for who knows, but the Lord, what is good in particular for
our salvation. Here he showed by his own example, to commend the use of
prayer, how he being once feared with deceiuable and grievous visions, called
to mind (being alone in the dark night) the unbelief of the Disciples on the
Seas, where our Savior Christ was asleep: then he asked his own soul
whether he had prayed or no; or whether in prayer, he made not some haste out
of it, as being desirous to Prayer.
be rid of it. Then considering that he gave himself to God, who was the Lord
of the night as well as of the day; of darkness, as well as of the light, he
prayed again, and to the praise of God he spoke it, he slept more quietly than
before, after he did so strive in faithful prayer.

5 In afflictions we must search the cause: first by ascending to God, then by
descending In afflictions to descend into our selves, and to ascend to God.
Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 2. 3 4. Simile.
into our selves. First, we must ascend to God, pleading guilty, craving
mercy, and not stand quarrelling with the malice of men, or hatred of the
devil against us: for as it were no good wisdom for a man, condemned to die,
to make any long suite to the Iaylor, or to the executioner, (for they be but
under officers, and can do nothing) but he must labor to the Judge, who can
either reprieue or release him: so it is no good policy to stand about Satan
in our temptations, who does all by constraint and restraint under the Lord:
but we must go to the principal, that is God, in whose hands are both the
entrance, the continuance, and the issues of our sufferings. Secondly, we must
search our selves, how far either reason is unreformed, or affections
unrenewed: knowing that the devil himself The devil cannot hurt us, till we
have hurt our selves.
can never hurt us, until we have hurt our selves. And look in what measure
our reason is corrupt, or our affections disordered, in that measure are we
weak, and easier to be overthrown of men, or of Satan: and in what measure
our reason is sound, and our affections sincere, in that measure we remain
invincible. Before, and in all we must pray that the spirit may be given us,
that we neither add nor detract, that we go not too far, nor come too short.

6 If God bestow good gifts on a man, it were good to feel some cross to
seal and season The cross does seal and season Gods graces in us.
them in us. If God give us food and raiment, it were good to be exercised
with some cross.

7 He that will have comfort in his trial and travels, must have a good
conscience, a sound cause, and must be sure that he has used and does use
sound, discreet, and loving Three things in all trials.
means.

8 We must not like fools stumble at the cross, but profit by the grace
offered to us in it, by repenting our former state past, and by giving thanks
for our state present, and fearing our state to come.

9 It is a great corruption in men, to be more grieved when the cross privately
touches Public calamities must affect us most.
themselves, than when publicly it concerns the whole Church and
commonwealth.

10 Being in great pains and crosses which he suffered, he said, Blessed be
God that I suffer no more: for the Lord that in mercy lays this affliction
upon me, might justly punish me in my soul and body, and cast me into hell,
and as soon have taken away the life of my soul and body, as this thing.

11 To one complaining that his afflictions were extraordinary, he answered:
It is Extraordinary affliction in appearance.
not so, for your afflictions are far inferior to your sins: and therefore
howsoever it seems to you to be an extraordinary affliction, yet with God it
is but ordinary, or less than ordinary. Besides, this is a dangerous
temptation: for it will bring you to this conceit, that you shall reason thus
in your self, that an extraordinary cross must have an extraordinary
comfort, and therefore you must look for some wonderful and strange
consolation, whereby Satan will move you to contemn, or at least not so to
regard ordinary consolations, which have helped others, and may help you, and
by this means breed in you such unthankfulness, that before you are aware, an
extraordinary affliction shall be sent indeed.

12 He that will suffer great things in persecution, must suffer small things
in peace, and they that will suffer of Papists, must suffer of Protestants.

Anger.
1 THis is a good trial, whether our anger be spiritual or carnal; if our
anger hinders See Affections page 1.
not some other holy action, but stirs us up to good works; if it hinder us
not to pray with liberty of mind; if it interrupt not our meditations; if we
do not omit the doing of any duty to the party offending us; if we can deal
with others without peeuishnes, then our anger is spiritual, and will comfort
our consciences.

2 He was ever most grieved and angry, yet in love with them whom he tendered
most in the Lord, and who had given him most credit, by submitting themselves
wholly to his ministry.

Angels.
1 TO one, asking how the Angels of God watch over us, he answered: we are
rather Psalm. 91. Heb. 1.
to pray for the experience of their ministry unto us, than either to
describe it, or prescribe it. This is sure, if we be Gods children and walk in
his ways; the Angels of God do watch over us, and yet all see it not, and when
they see it, it is by the effect of their ministry: for though their
ministry be certain, yet the manifestation of it is extraordinary.

Atheism.
1 A Certain man being a Papist, though not so grounded as he desired to be,
took a view of the life of Papists, if it were as glorious in truth as they
pretended; which when he found not, he turned himself to the Protestants, and
looking into their conversation, he found himself not contented, until in the
end he met with Familists, in whom he so stayed himself, that he grew into
familiarity with their doctrine. The first principle that they taught him,
was, that there was no God: This boiled much in him, so that he began to add
conclusions to this precept on this sort: If there be a God, he is not so just
and merciful* as they say: if there be no God, there is neither heaven, nor
hell; or if there be any, the joys are not so eternal, nor the pains so
continual, as some have taught: Why then do I sell my certain pleasures in
this world, for uncertain pleasures A Papist became a ^amii^st and so an
Atheist; and his end.
in the world to come? This devilish illusion so far prevailed, that he
stole an horse, for which he was apprehended, imprisoned, arraigned, and
condemned: but, by the providence of God, he conferring with a godly Minister,
confessed himself an Atheist: whereupon suite was made and granted for his
reprieuing until the next Assise, in hope of his conversion, in which time, he
would willingly grant all general truths taught him, with liking of his
teachers, but could not by any thing be brought from his Atheism. The Assise
following drew near, he is to be executed, the place is assigned, the person
needs must be executed, who when he should be turned from the ladder, cried
thus, For Christ's sake stay my life: whereupon he spoke these or the like
words: Well, let the world say what they will; doubtless, there is a God, and
the same God is just for ever to his enemies, and everlastingly keeps his
mercies with his children; now turn me over: and so he made an end of his
speech, and of his days.

2 He feared rather Atheism than Papisme in the Realm: for many having
escaped Fear of Atheism to increase rather than Papisme.
out of the gulf of superstition, are now too far plunged and swallowed up
of profaneness, thinking either that there is no God, or else that he is not
so fearful and merciful, as his threatenings and promises commend him to be.

Calling.
1 A Certain man afflicted in mind, began, through the temptation of The
mistiking of our ordinary callings how dangerous.
Satan, to mislike his calling, and changed it, afterward he thought this
calling and that calling to be unlawful, and so was almost brought to mislike
all. He felt on a time a great pain in his leg, and being desirous to go
from his bed to his table for a book, he could not, his leg remaining sore:
Then remembering that it was said in the Scripture, If thy foot offend thee,
cut it off; he straight way laying his le^ge on a block, and taking a hatchet
in his hand, stroke off his leg, not feeling pain, the veins being so
torn, he could not but bleed to death, how be it he dyed very penitently: so
dangerous a policy, and so perilous a temptation is it, to leave our callings
as things unlawful. Meditations in labor.


2 A godly Gentlewoman said, that even in her ordinary labor, she tasted often
of as heavenly meditations, as if all things ordinary laid aside she had given
her whole mind to attend upon the spirit of God, in quietness of study. She
also said, that we are like children, who need not once to be bid to ask
things necessary, but twice to be thankful for mercies received.

3 As in marriage, though the parties met in the flesh without any sanctified
means, to Marriage.
assure themselves to be joined of the Lord: yet if God afterward give them
grace to live holily in their meeting, he shows that not only their corrupt
meeting is pardoned, but that now their meeting is blessed: so if entering into
a calling for want of gifts and affections, we have no assurance at the first,
of a warrantable calling: yet if God afterward furnish Entering into a calling
without gifts to discharge it.
us with able gifts, and sanctify us with pure minds, he does not only show
us that our former sin is pardoned, but also that he is well pleased with our
calling whereunto he has so blessed us.

4 No trouble should hinder us in our calling, unless it be in a case of mere
ungodliness: for if for every trouble, or for many troubles, a man may forsake
his calling, he should be out of all, for every calling has both lets and
troubles.

5 To one that asked his advice, whether he might avoid the doing of a thing
whereunto he was called, because he felt corruption in himself, he said: In
avoiding society you should cover, but not cure your infirmities, and though
you depart from men, yet you cannot go out of your self.

6 Unto one that was willing to change his feate for the corruption of the
place where Change of places.
he dwelt, he said: Wheresoever he purposed to live as a Christian, the cross
would follow him, because that Christ would follow him, and because on the
earth are some good men, and some evil: but when we come to heaven, all would
be good, and therefore there shall be no trouble.

7 He said he never looked for a better estate than that wherein he was, but
often prepared himself for a worse.

8 Whenever we are out of our place and calling, Satan has a fit occasion
of temptation.

Care.
1 Where there is an immoderate care of outward things, there commonly is
Immoderate or distracting cares. Matthew. 6.
little care of inward good things: for if one have inward good things, they so
content the persons that have them, that they labor not much for outward
things: if they want them and desire them, the careful seeking of them
brings a godly neglect of outward things, 1. Cor. 7. 30. 31.

Censures.
1 IT is a marvelous thing that many will make more of a small infirmity in
another, How blind many be in themselves.
although that they see, that the whole course of their life is truly to
please God; than they make of gross sins in themselves, notwithstanding they
take no course at all in their life to please God.

Conference.
1 BEing desirous to speak to the profit of others, he said, that he observed
such a silence in men, as none could well break into it, and often such a
liberty of speech, as A dead silence in meetings.
none can take hold of, to turn it to good; he observed the cause of such
silence, to be some great grief, or some deep meditation occupying the mind,
or some deadnes of spirit, or some worldly shame, or some desire to speak, and
the Lord staying the speech, or the carelesnes in them that should hear it, in
that they do not desire it: The remedy against this is either in humility to
ask some question, or to speak somewhat, and not to give place to such
deadnes.

2 In the most abrupt and disordered speeches of men, he thought God disposed
them for his profit, and though presently reason could prompt no reason, why
they should speak so, yet long after it would. He was much affected with the
fact of Josias, who would not be moved with the Josias hearkened not to the
words of Necho, which were of the mouth of God. 2* Chro. 35. 22.
speech of wicked Pharaoh, but entering battle was slain: whereupon he would
say, that no man was so good, but the Lord would sometime let him fall into
some evil, for his further humbling; and no man so evil, but the Lord did
convey goodness into him at sometimes, to make his condemnation the greater.

Conscience afflicted.
1 A Certain man some years afflicted in conscience, said, his continual
agonies were as great as the pains of a man ready to die, and that he felt so
small comfort in Gods countenance, that he would willingly have suffered his
body to have lived in burning fire until the appearing of Christ, so he might
then be assured of Gods favor toward him, yea his greatest comfort was this,
that though he should be in hell, yet he hoped therein of Gods favor to have
his torments mitigated with them that suffer The godly afflicted consciences
fear to displease God.
least. In all which troubles notwithstanding no world of reward, no terror of
tyranny, could cause him willingly to do the least thing displeasing to God:
whom when the Lord released, he would comfort himself in Christ, saying, that
the devil would take the advantage of his sorrow, to make him unthankful in
good things.

2 We are either as a Prince or as a peasant, either most mighty above all
Princes, or A good conscience, how sweet and comfortable Prou. 15. 15.
most vile among the sons of men. If all the Monarchs in the world withstood
us, our own consciences comforting us, we ruled above all. If the vilest
vassal in the world rise against us, our own heart condemning us, we seem to
be most miserable of all.

3 He said, howsoever men might deal with outward matters, yet when griefs
and fancies grew in the mind and grieved it, nothing could surely cure them,
but only the The word cures the conscience.
word of God.

4 Having to deal with diverse humbled consciences, he would mislike them that
would not abide to tarry the Lords leisure, but they must needs be helped at
once, even by and by, as soon as they heard him speak, or else they would
then think far worse of him than ever before, notwithstanding the good
report had, and the good opinion conceived of him: for besides that, he that
believes makes not have, this is a coming rather as it Esaias. 28. 16. The
true Ministers of Christ never cure nor comfort the sick hastily, as wizards
do.
were to a Magitian (who, by an incantation of words, makes silly souls look
for health) than to the minister of God, whose words being most Angelical
comfort not until, and so much as it pleases the Lord to give a blessing unto
them, which sometime he does deny, because we come to them with too great an
opinion of them; as though they were wise men, not unto such as using their
means, yet do look and stay for our comfort wholly from God himself.

5 Being asked how in the examining of our consciences for sin, we should
find out the special sin, he said, that could not easily be done (for who
does understand the errors of his life) but by often examining of our selves, by
acquainting of our selves with our To find out our special sins.
own estate, by earnest prayer that God would reveal us the sin, by often
hearing and reading the word, by marking the most checkes of our consciences,
and reproaches of our enemies, we might be led to the nearest sight of them. 1.
2.


6 Unto one afflicted in mind he gave this comfort: first, if you have
knowledge, be 3. 4.
5. 6.
thankful for it, and desire the Lord to give you faith: if you have faith,
which undoubtedly you may have, though not rightly discerning your self, you
presently perceive it Faith without feeling.
not: you must wait on the Lord for feeling of it: for many times he
exercises faith with temptations, before he sends feeling. And though it may
be you shall ^arrie the Lords leisure long, yet surely he will give it you in
time. In the mean time assure your self, that the greatest faith is when
there is least feeling. It is easy for every one in glorious feelings, and
joys unspeakable to believe: but when a man feeling no sensible comfort in the
Lord, can notwithstanding believe in the Lord, and by faith wait on him; this
man's faith is most great.

7 After some effectual working of Gods spirit in us, most commonly (in many)
not Causes of deadnes of mind.
long after comes deadnes and dulnes: against this evil we must first search
the cause, whether it be for some evil thing done, or for some good thing not
done, for leaving some mean of salvation unused: whether for some sin seen,
but nor repented of, or some sin 1. 2.
repented of, but not soundly, or for unthankfulness. Secondly, use the remedy,
please not 3. 4.
your self in it, but rouse up your self as from a slumber, which willingly
you would shake 5.
off from you: call to mind the special and greatest mercy of God, use the
means. Thirdly, in the means offer thy self unto God, waiting humbly, and
patiently for the time of deliverance, neither esteeming too much nor too
little of the affliction.

8 When one was troubled in mind, he gave him this comfortable note: That
although How it comes to pass* that Gods graces are more sweet unto us at our
first entrance into regeneration, than after.
it came to pass, that after some travail in the new birth, Gods graces were
not so sweet, and our sins not so sower and grievous unto us, as they were
at our first entrance into regeneration, but we are now weaker in less
assaults, having before been stronger in greater temptations: we are not to
despair: but to consider from whence this gracious progress did come, namely
of God, and not of our selves, who showed himself more favorable in the
beginning, both because he would not discourage us newly coming unto him, and
for that we forsaking our selves, with a godly suspecting of our weakness in the
least temptations, did fly unto Gods help by prayer: who in wisdom can hide
himself under a cloud, partly for that he will look to see some trial of
strength at our hands, coming to some age in new birth; partly for that now we
less forsake or suspect our selves, no not in greater temptations, and so
presumptuously trusting to our strength, and staying our selves with our own
staff, we do not call to God for help; and not calling, do not obtain; and
not obtaining help, we take the foil in the conflict, that the Lord may make
known unto us, that notwithstanding our proceeding in Christianity, we are
still but men, and God alone is God.

9 He said to one troubled in mind for a secret and small sin, I do not so
much fear A conscience touched for small sins.
this sin in you, as the policy of Satan by it, either in that he will not
stick to show you the less sins, and hide from you the greater; or else by
the quick sight of your secret and small sins, to cast upon you an open and
gross sin of vain glory and privy pride.

10 Afflicted consciences must not dispute too much against themselves, for
their own actions, for that being displeased with their own persons, they
cannot be pleased with their own doings.

11 He told in love, this observation and experience; when any came with a
troubled How to proceed in comforting the afflicted.
conscience for sin, wisely to discern, whether they be meanly grieved with
a general sight of their sin, or whether they be extremely thrown down,
with the burden of particular sins; if so they be, then it is good at the
first to show that no sin is so great, but in Christ it is pardonable, and
that there is mercy with God that he might be feared: so 1
on the other side shewiug the mercy to come from God, but so as they are
nothing fit to 2
receive mercy, unless they feel their particular and pricking sins. But
if their sorrow be more confessed in general things, then it is good to humble
them more and more, to 3
give them a terror of Gods justice for particular sins: for experience does
teach, that this is the best way to obtain sound comfort, both to see our
sin, and to be humbled to see our sin, because often, men will more readily
acknowledge greater sin they have been in, than that less sin they
presently lie in to be humbled, that being thoroughly thrown down, we may
directly seek Christ, and keep no stay, until we have found comfort in him,
who then is most ready to free us from our sin, and to comfort us with his
spirit, when we are most cast down with our sins, and most fear them.

12 If the health of body be such a thing, as is rather with comfort enjoyed,
than in Our joy in the holy Ghost we cannot express. Philip. 4. Romans 14. 17.
words to be expressed, how great is the peace of conscience and joy in the
holy Ghost, which may be tasted, but cannot be uttered.

13 There are some which have peace neither with God, nor with themselves, as
desperate heretics: some have peace with themselves, but not with God, as
secure sinners: some have peace with God and with themselves, as repentant
Christians.

14 We must learn to pity them that are cast down in grief of spirit,
though they be A threefolde pealce. Psa. 41. 1.
also pettish; for it is an easy matter when one seems much to be quiet with
God, to be in peace with men, who often hinder our quietness with God. Again,
we little know how great their desire is to feel peace, which when they cannot
feel, presently they are made To bear with impatiencie of the sick.
impatient: and yet see this was in David the man of God, who found in
himself, this diversity of affections, which we so much wonder at, and speak
of in the children of God in our days: he diuides himself as it were into two
parts, Psalm 43. 5. he thought himself sometime very strong in God, again at
another time so cast down, that he would on no side lay hold on any comfort in
the world: yet more then that, he was tumultuous and fretting within himself.
And therefore learn this, thou that art unmerciful, to stay thy impatiencie,
behold this thou that art afflicted, to stay thy grief, and say not, oh, David
indeed was humbled, but I find another quality in my self; besides, I am
pettish, I am uncomfortable and unquiet with them, with whom I live; for David
was both impatient and pettish. Here also learn of David for thy mind to
wait on God, for faith delivers both from grief and anger, and causes
comfortable waiting, and not to make too much haste, but to possess our souls
in patience, until God perform his promises unto us.

15 It is an usual temptation to afflicted consciences, to persuade them,
after some free A sweet consolation for weak consciences, after their often
falls. Romans 11.
deliverance, that they are not to look to be delivered again, because as the
Lord has been very liberal, so we must not weary and make tedious his
bountiful dealings with us: but we must know that the gifts of God are without
repentance, and the Lord has manifold deliverances in store, which is as
impossible by use and often receiving to waste, as it is the Lord himself
should be deceived: he will surely make an end of his own work in us, and
that for his own glory, which as he has appointed to be endless in our
deliverance, so the means thereunto are also endless: and therefore yet and
again, we are to learn against our unbelief the unmeasurable treasure of
Gods goodness in our salvation, yea, when we seem as it were to be in a
whirlepit, and to be carried with a violent grief and gulf of troubles, we
know not whither, and are constrained often to diue and plunge down (the waters
of affliction running over our head) yet the Lord will recover us, and set our
feet in steady places if we be cast down, so we can but scraule up again: if
we be resisted of Satan, so we can but kick against him, if we can but open
our lips and accuse his malice before the Lord, there is sound hope of comfort
to be found of him.

Covering of infirmities.
1 GOds children cover many infirmities in others under one good gift: the
ungodly bury many good gifts in others under one infirmity.

Confession of sins.
1 HE said unto one troubled in mind, that we should not much be troubled in
light things, but that rather in griefs we should make known our hearts unto
God, Simile. To power forth our griefs into Gods bosom.
than devour them privately: for if in carnal sorrows we find some ease when
we make things known to our faithful and loving friends, as to our parents,
or to our brethren, much more are we to think it an ease to our spiritual
griefs, if we power forth our griefs into the bosom of the Lord, who is
most faithful to conceal, most loving to take pity, and most able to help
us in all our griefs whatsoever.

2 He observes that men would make known many sins and infirmities, and yet
retain one which is the most secret, and oftentimes the most chief; as Moses
had many reasons of his tergiuersation, and yet there was one secret reason,
and that the greatest, Not to hide any one of our sins.
which he would not utter. Where observe the great mercy of the Lord, that
though he might have been displeased, especially after so great promises, for
his refusal, vet he rather pardons this one infirmity of fear, that
forgetting his manifold good things, would press him with this one want: and
therefore after many reasons, the Lord vouch^aseth to handle very gently his
privy sore, and to salve it on this manner. Nay Moses, there is one thing that
thou fear most, and that is thine evil entertainment with Pharaoh, and the
revenging of his blood whom thou sheddest: but let not this stay thee, for they
are all dead. This answer seemed to take away the greatest argument of
t^rgiuersation, though it was least known: for presently upon this comfort he
takes his calling in hand, wherein also is to be noted, that how fearful
soever man is in respect of himself, yet when God enableth, and incourageth
him, we see he shall be invincible, as Moses against Pharaoh himself.

Concupiscence.
1 ONe asking his advice how he might best avoid concupiscence, he said to
him, 1. 2.
that a continual examination of our selves by the law; a reverent and daily
meditation 3. 4.
of the word; a painful walking in our honest calling; a holy shaming of our 5.
selves, and fearing of our selves before our friends; a continual temperance
in diet, sleep, 6.
and apparel: a careful watching over our eyes, and other parts of our
bodies; a zealous 7.
jealousy to avoid all occasions of person, time and place, which might
nourish concupiscence; 8.
a godly frequenting of persons, times, and places, which may breed in us true
mortification; 9.
together with an humbling of our selves, with the shame of our sins past,
with 10.
the grief of sins present, and with fear of sins to come: lastly, a
careful using of fasting, 11.
prayer, and watching, when need required (for he still recommended a
religious fasting:) these are the means to mortify concupiscence, which being
wisely, and in some Fasting.
convenient time used with moderate exercise of the body: if they do not
prevail, it is like that God does call a man to the holy use of marriage:
howbeit, it is to be observed, that Marriage.
in watching and fasting we are not to prefixe certain set times, this day, or
that day, but then to use it when God calls us unto it by fit occasion,
without the which care the often use of these exercises will breed a want of
reverence of them.

Cause good.
1 THere is no greater enemy to a good cause, than he that by evil means
does both handle and maintain it.

2 He said that men must profit by this, if having had good causes in hand,
they have had ill success: because herein it pleases God often to deny that
unto us justly, which men deny unto us unjustly, either for that he corrects
some sin, wherein they live, or else for that they used not prayer, but
trusted too much in the means, and not in God.

Of natural Corruption.
1 HE observed this experience in himself, that when he would not do a thing
that Neglects in any occasion of doing good.
was good, then his own reason and the devil would easily teach him an excuse:

Lord forgive us this corruption.

2 He thought by nature all men to be Papists, heretics, adulterers, etc.
until God renewed The spawne of all sins in every man.
them, so that if all heresies, Papistrie, impiety, were ceast among all men,
yet if a man be left of God, he has in himself sufficient matter and spawne
to breed, revive, and to renew all kinds of sin.

Despair. A particular faith.

1 HE observed this policy in Satan, that to make men despair, he would
make them argue thus: I have no faith in this and that particular. And
contrarily, to train men to presumption, he would make men argue thus: I have
a general hope and faith* and therefore I d^^^^^ not but my faith is ^ound in
every particular: both which are hurtful.

2 When we distrust Gods promises, let us set before us the example of his
mercy Examples.
done to others, that we may be the more assured to obtain faith: and when we
begin to presume, let us set before us the examples of Gods judgments, that we
may pray for humility.

3 Many despair of help, because of their own unworthiness, as though there
were ^o hope of Gods mercy unless we bring in our gift, and pawn in our
hands to him: but God is most free in his mercy* therefore let no thought of
unworthiness ke^pe thee from him* Simile.
this were to disered it the Lords mercies, and to bring in credit our merits,
and rather to bind the Lord unto us, than us unto him: but if our sins be
great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be beggarly, Gods mercy is
a rich mercy: if our case were not desperate, and we past hope of recovery,
our redemption should not be so plentiful: but when all seems to go one way,
when heaven and earth, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars go against us,
then to ransom us, and to make a perfect restitution, is to draw something out
of nothing; even as in sickness, to have either little danger, o^ in great
danger, deliverance by present means is nothing: but in extreme peril, when
physic can do nothing, and nothing makes for us but the grave, then to be
rescued from the grave, and to recover our life from the pit, is redemption.

Death.
1 AS we must think of life as being content to die, so we must think of
death as being content to live: And they are as well to be liked of, that
measurably fear A measurable fear of death commandable.
death, as they who joy so much at it; because they that moderately fear
death, have this in them more than the other (which is also allowable by grace
and nature) that they tremble at Gods judgments.

2. He said, be never durst desire to die, howsoever his continual crosses did
afford him small desire to live: therefore he feared and forewarned men of
these kinds of wishes, because Wishes of death evil.
often the Lord hears a man in judgment, though in some mercy, and when he
wishes this or that affliction* he lays it on him, so that after he cannot
do that good to others, which to his own comfort he might have done.

3 To one that said she feared death, he said: As I would have you to think of
life, as being content to die, so think of death as you would also be content
to live: and as for the fear of death, I like as well of them that measurably
fear it, as of them who so joy at it, for I hope and like well of them also.
Howbeit I see not this in those, which is in them, and which is a thing both
allowed by grace and nature, that is, that they tremble at Gods judgments. You
will say, that notwithstanding you see not why you should not fear death*
seeing you find no comfort in life: to which I answer, that your life has
not been without comforts, howsoever things gone are soon forgotten, though
your co^forts were not in the full measure hoped for, and it may be that
plentiful measure shall be given you in death. But what if you should die in
this discomfort? for my part (as I my self look for Master Greenhams death.
no great things in my death) I would not think more hardly of you, neither
would I wish any to judge otherwise of Gods child in that estate of death: for
we shall not be judged according to that particular instance of death, but
according to our general course of life, Not to judge of any man according to
his state in death.
not according to our deed in that present, but according to the desire of our
hearts ever before* and therefore we are not to mistrust Gods mercy in death,
be we never so uncomfortable, if so be it has been, before, sealed in our
vocation and sanctification.

Desire.
1 HE said, God looks to the desires, not to the deeds of his children: and
if we purpose to do good, howsoever we find ignorance, what, where, and when
to do good, God will direct us in occasion, place and time, and in mercy will
pardon our weakness, though we fail in the circumstances.

Dispraise.
1 WHen any told a thing that sounded to the dispraise of a man, he (as not
credulous in such matters) would make show to the carnal plainti^e, that he
was as one not hearing, and would fence off the matter a long time by causing
him to repeat often his matter.

Diet.
1 BEcause no particular rule can be set down how to amend excess and defect
in diet, this were the best rule generally to be observed, so to feed, as that
we may be made thereby more fit either to speak or hear the praises of God
with more cheerfulnes and reverence.

Dreams.
1 A Natural dream, which comes of natural causes, easily slippeth away:
but if our dreams dwell longer upon us, and leave some greater impression in
us, they may be thought to proceed either from God, or from the devil. And by
these it is good to profit, if they be favorable, by thinking such a thing we
might have, if we How to profit by dreams.
were not unprepared for it: if contrary, by thinking and forecasting, and
fearing such an evil, if the Lord be not merciful; because God does often
correct some sin past which we regarded not, or foreshewes some sin to come
which we were not afraid of: and an 1. A natural dream.
evil dream does show some evil in the heart, either in some sin already
committed, or in some sin which may be shortly committed. If the dream be
terrible, it is good to 2. A good dream.
avoid all the occasions of that evil, and to give our selves to prayer, and
not to give too great credit to dreams, least they weaken faith. The best is
to be neither too remiss, nor 3. An evil dream.
too wise in them, but to labor to profit by them, because the Lord by leaving
such long impressions in us, does as it were call upon our consciences not to
pass them over without 4. A terrible dream.
some use.

2 Being asked how one might avoid the sin of unclean dreams in the night,
he Unclean dreams.
said, first it were good to avoid all objects and wandering thoughts in the
day, and security of praying against it at night. If these means did not
prevail, we must then think that God calls us to some more earnest
repentance for this or some other sin before committed: See more in the title
of Humility sect. 2.
specially we are to beware of company, such as may stir us up unto evil;
either laboring not to come into their company, or having just occasion, to
do it with fear and with prayer* and doing this, not to tarry longer than
godly occasion is offered.

Distraction of mind.
1 BEing asked, why a man after sundry and laborious reading in his calling,
being desirous by meditation to apply the things read unto himsel^e, was so
much interrupted, and violently, suddenly, and unwillingly drawn into other
conceits: he said, it was either want of preparing and sanctifying our hearts
by prayer before we set upon so holy How we be hindered in godly meditations.
an exercise, and therefore the Lord corrects the pride of our ^^ts and
presumption of our hearts, in being bold to work upon holy matters in our own
strength or else for that we resting upon a general purpose of thinking some
good thing, or at least not to think any evil, did not fasten our mind
constantly or continually upon some particular object, but raunging up and
down, as having some part of our affections, studies, and meditations void
for some other matters, did not wholly and seriously set on the thing propounded
to our selves. The truth hereof may appear hereby, for that which the heart
is thoroughly set upon, it is so attentive to, that it can be present to no
other thing at that instant, especially if it be an hindrance to the thing
taken in hand.

Dulnes.
1 HE said, after his great joys conceived of some effectual working of God
in himself, Deadnes and dulnes.
he most commonly not long after fell into deadnes and dulnes, and thereby was
humbled: so that until that he was prepared with some new grace from God, and
had received some new mercy at his hands, he was very unfit to perform any
service unto God or men.

2 Deadnes of the spirit, is the grave of many heavenly graces.

Doctrine.
1 BEcause in reading of examples we restrain duties to certain persons, and
wring Rules concerning doctrine drawn from examples in Scripture.
our own neck out of the yoke, or else we chiefly tie the mercies of God to
them, and think they appertain not to us; it is good to learn certain rules
whereby we may know when the use of the doctrine is general, and when
particular, which is set down in singular examples. Three rules are to be
observed: first, if we read of any thing in particular, we are to search
whether in some other place in the Scripture, the samething is not set down
generally, that is, whether that which is commended, or discommended in some 1
proper person, be not commanded or forbidden to all: if it be, then the use of
that is general, not particular: but if it be a particular precept enjoined to
some one, and no warrant found in the word of that to be done of another; then
it is a thing personal, proper to some, not general appertaining to all. The
second rule is, that wheresoever there is a general 2
equity of a thing, there is a general practice to be had, howsoever we see it
set down but in particular. The third is, whersoeuer by the scope of the place
there appears a general 3
drift, either by something going before or coming after, though the present
place seems to be particular, yet there is a general use of the doctrine to
be gathered out of it.

Exercise of religion.
1THe wicked not daring openly to profess iniquity, redeem times secretly As
Nicodemus. John.3.
to commit it: so though we have not the strength to profess religion
publicly, yet let us redeem times secretly to frequent the exercises of
godliness.

2 As it is but a small pleasure, so long as we are in the garden, to be
delighted Simile.
with the smell of herbs, unless we gather of every kind some to carry with
us, that so we may have the benefit of the garden, though we be far from it.
And as it is but a small comfort to be ravished with sweet odors, so long as we
are in the Apothecaries shop, and afterward to want them: so it is but a
flattering joy, nay rather a Of starting joys and affections to the word which
some have, while they are in the Church.
starting joy, no longer to be affected with the word and religion than we are
in the Church: therefore we must gather here and there, that may work on our
affections when we be far from the place where they grew.

3 We must use all exercises of reading, hearing, conferring, praying, singing
and meditating: but we must not tie the working of Gods spirit to any one
particular.

Experience of our corruption.
1 WE shall never be brought hungerly to seek after Christ, until we come by
See before of corruption in C.
the last precept, to see and feel our natural corruption, where of we must
not only have knowledge, but experience also, as S. Paul had, Romans 7. Now
whereas the Papists say, that this corruption is a sin in the unregenerate,
but ^^t in the regenerate; we say it is a sin in both. I say a bare knowledge
hereof is not sufficient: for even the knowledge of our corruption is not
without the corruption of a privy pride.

Faith.
IT is harder to believe in the abundance of worldly things, than it is in the
want Hard for the rich to believe.
of them* for these things are, as it were, vailes set betwixt God and us, they
stay our sight in them that it cannot pearce to God.

2 As the arm being soundly knit to the body, receives pith and strength
Simile.
from the body to resist all evil, and to draw all good things unto it, and
being but out of joint, and the sinews which did knit it to the body being
loosed, it has no such force to perform duties: so our faith being the means
spiritually to join us unto the Lord, we Faith sound how needful. 1. Ioh 5. 4.
receive strength so long as it is sound, both to resist evil and accomplish
good: but if it decay, and fall as it were out of joint, then we cannot draw
that full strength from the Lord, for our defense and strength which we were
wont to have.

3 When one asked him, whether we first received the spirit or the word, to the
working The spirit comes by the word, Gal. 3. 2. yet is he the first cause of
our faith and love to the word.
of faith, he said, we first receive the spirit; howbeit to feel our faith we
must necessarily receive the word. And although the smoke, in respect of us,
do first show that there is fire hidden under the ashes, yet there was fire
before the smoke came: so though the word first make known unto us our faith,
yet sure it is that the spirit of God was given us before our feeling wrought
this mightily by the word.

As he that had but a dim sight to behold the Serpent in the wilderness was
healed, as well as he that saw perfectly: so he that has but a weak faith in
the son of God, shall never have his salvation denied him, Zach. 12. 10.
Smile.


Family.
1 SO often as we be asked of the welfare of our people, wife, or family, we
ought to Our care for our family.
take it as an occasion whereby God stirs us up to pray for them, to give
thanks for them, and to examine our own heart, what means both in presence,
and absence, we have used for their good.

2 Care in superiors, and fear in inferiors, cause a godly government both
private and public, in family, Church, and Commonwealth.

Feeling.
1 THough a man have knowledge, yet he may want faith: though he have faith,
yet because many evils come between, feeling immediately does not always
follow, nor after feeling joy, nor after joy practice. Feeling.


2 We can do but little good to any body, except we have a feeling pity and
compassion of them.

3 If any be afflicted in mind for want of feeling, he must distinguish
between Gods How to distinguish between Gods spirit and his graces in us.
Simile.
spirit and his graces in us: for his spirit may live in us when his graces are
dead in us, Psalm. 51. For as by some extreme sickness life may be within one,
yet it cannot be felt of the sick body: so in some great temptation, the holy
Ghost may be in us, and yet we not feel nor find his presence. Howbeit, as by
breathing never so short we discern life: so by the actions of the spirit, he
it never so little, we may judge of the life of God in us.

4 Such as for want of feeling be loath to pray, must learn, not to tarry to
pray till they find feeling, but offer themselves up into the hands of Jesus
Christ, and so humbling Prayer without feeling.
themselves before him, pray on, and continue in prayer of faith, though not of
feeling.

5 Though we feel not the spiritual joy which we should feel, yet let us not
be too much cast down; so that our conscience tell us, that we are ready to
withdraw somewhat In any case take heed ye draw not carnal joys into the
place of spiritual joys.
from our outward pleasures, for want of this inward pleasure; and that we have
not prevented or smothered out these spiritual joys, but are grieved that we
have them not, and wait for the time to feel them: for of all things we must
beware that we draw not into their steed carnal joys, and so drive as it were
into exile the working of Gods spirit in us by them.

6 A certai^e man complaining that he was comfortless for want of feeling,
receives this answer: Oh brother be of good comfort, we hold Christ by faith,
and not by feeling.

Fruits of faith.
1 ONe being courteously faluted, and worthily commended of a Gentlewoman, who
said, she heard a very good report of him: he answered her, the like have I
heard of you: but God make our after fruits of his spirit more effectual than
the former, or else we shall not answer the glory of God and good opinion of
his Saints conceived of us.

2 There are two workings of Gods spirit in us: the one inferior, which
brings but some fruit of the spirit, without any special fruits of grace:
the other superior and more Two works of Gods spirit.
certain, when the spirit works an infallible sanctification: the first may
totally be darkened and fully quenched: the other has but a particular
Eclipse, and in measure may be dimmed, as it was in David, Psalm. 51. but this
is not finally quenched. As God made man so that he might fall, though
afterward he had mercy upon him: so he regenerateth us so, that we may fall,
so as afterward he may raise us again, and will. And it is fearful enough,
that there may be such particular decays of grace in us, as after sin, to
feel less comfort in the word, less fear of sin, less care of well
doing, less zeal in praving, less fruits in the means: so that all our
actions are turned to be bitter, which were sweeter unto us then any worldly
increase unto the worldly man, or honey can be Evident tokens of true
sanctification
to them that love it. These are evident tokens of the sanctifying spirit, to
love good, because it is good; and to hate sin, because it is sin: the more
we grow in gifts, the more to hunger, the more to complain of our
unworthiness: the more being humbled 1
in our selves, the more meekly to judge of others: when we are most quiet with
all things, 2
then to think our selves least quiet, and then most to fear our selves: so
to feel the graces 3
of God in us, as that yet our sense and feeling is not lessened, and to fear
and quake 4
at the first degree and motions of sin; not least they fully quench, but
least they cool 5
the heat of the spirit in us. Here, I say, let us not forget to fear, for if
it be so, that thou 6
being the child of God, can not finally fall, yet consider how will this
grieve thee, if thy sin break out to the dishonor of so loving a Redeemer?
or though he keep thy sin from flaming out, yet that thou shall feel such a
burden in thy self, or such vile corruption or matter as shall cool the
heat of all Gods graces in thee.

Falling into sin.
1* IF any doubt concerning this question, (whether the child of God might
fall often into one and the same sin) these cautions and distinctions are to
be observed. 1


First, whether the party be generally called, or specially touched: if he
be but Cautio^s concerning a relapse.
generally called, as all common Christians professing the Gospel, it were an
easy matter to slip in that state. Secondly, if the party be effectually
called, it is to be enquired, whether he be but a babe in Christ or no, or
whether he be come to some good growth 2
in Christ: for that if he be but a nouice, he may twice fall so. Thirdly, we
must observe, 3
if he be now grown to some good age in Christ, whether the sin committed be
a thing known unto him, or if he know it not to be a sin, he may doubtless
slip into it.

2 When we consider how Noah, Moses, and others fell in their latter days,
and how the most excellent men have fallen, we must earnestly pray, rather
that the Lord would take us out of the world, than that our life should bring
any offense to the Church, or slander to the Gospel.

Fear.
1 Be never afraid of leaving good undone, least the Lord suffer you to fall
into the contrary evil.

2 He thought when he had no fear nor grief, he could not profit.

3 Beware of immoderate fear, which rather hinder the certainty of says,
then beat Immoderate fears.
down the security of the flesh, and which be the readiest means to pull
Gods wrath upon us, in that they be the fruits of unbelief, and such as would
tie the grace of God promised, to the present danger and deliverance out of the
same. The mean and middle path is, that we should fear and forethinke of
evils to come, not as thinking that of necessity they must fall upon us, as
though God could not, or would not deliver us from them, but as they, who
being guilty in this one, desire to submit themselves to the hand of God, and
acknowledge themselves heirs of Gods justice or wrath in this or that evil:
yet so as we meet with the Lords mercy, who is both able and willing even
then most of all to assist and deliver us, when we most fear, and through
this godly fear are reverently humbled under the hand of his Majesty. For
if natural parents know then to mitigate the stripes of their correction to
their children, when they see in them a mild and meek submission of
themselves, under the hand of their authority, and yet so fearing them as
Governors, To submit our selves to Gods hand, acknowledging that he may justly
confound us, yet desiring to meet with his mercies in Christ Jesus.
but upholding with mercy as fathers: if they have that wisdom, by so much
to make their hand in correction the heavier, by how much the Child to be
beaten is the stubborner; we must then think this merciful wisdom and
confideration to be much more in the Lord, from whose brightness the parents
have received these sparks.

4 He said, that to win any, or to continue any in the fear of God, he
would give no such things which he loved not, but such things as he loved most
dearly, that they might know it to be a gift of love, and not of fashion.

Feastings.
1 IN our meetings and feastings, we are to look to our selves; if good
speeches be used, To cherish the fear of God in men.
we must be thankful; if evil, sorrowful; if things not merely evil, not
greatly to torment our selves.

Friendship.
1 THis advise he gave, that it was good to discern of them whom we much
receive into our company, least we lose the credit of the Church conceived of
us. For although many seem and show themselves to be well disposed, yet
because there be so many corruptions in our nature, it is heavenly wisdom to
discern of men; wherefore Noscitur ex comite qui no^ cogno citur ex se. Psalm.
1.
it is good for us to consider with what soundness of judgment, and power of
true knowledge they do speak: first look what sight they have of inward
corruptions This humility teaches true wisdom, and the sight hereof would
cause us to seek after Christ and him Crucified. For many, who have a little
confused knowledge, will much be talking, 1
Rules to discern such as we recei^e. into our society.
but for want of this knowledge they are not so sound. Secondly, we must see
how ready they are by their soundness of knowledge, and feeling of inward
corruptions, to do good to others with cheerfulnes, and to speak of the
infirmities of others with compassion and grief; for many for want of this
sanctified knowledge, will rather bitterly and openly declaime against the
infirmities of others, then either wisely ^dmonish them, 2
or brotherly pity them.

2 He said, the best way to have comfort in any of our friends, was to pray
for them, A true token of love.
and that he never had more joy in any, then from them whom he most prayed
for, and in them most when he prayed the oftener and vehementer for them present
or absent. for this is a true token of true love to pray for them whom we love.

3 Though he was most severe to his friends and kindred, so long as they were
not reconciled to God: yet once being wearyed with one, he shut up the matter
with this sentence; It is wonderful, that diverse hearing the same word of God
spoken, one should believe, and another should not believe: but I am rather to
thank God that I believe, then to search o^t a reason, why another does not
believe; and as I am to be thankful for my self, so I am to be pitiful to
others.

4 Like as natural men do well by natural wisdom: so we ought much more
to be stirred up to do well by spiritual wisdom. It is commended ^or
s^^ciall wisdom Society.
in our Saui^ur Christ, John* 2. that he did not committee himself unto ^l^
^^^^, because he knew what was in their hearts: So it is a special token of
w^sedome in us, on the contrary not to commit our selves unto all men, because
we know not what is in their hearts.

5 He rejoiced to see his friends, but he was humbled, in tha he rested so
much in that joy, that he forgate to do them good to their salvation, or to
receive good from them to his salvation, which he thought he should do, and to
be his duty.

6 His love ever grew to a man, as he knew the man to grow in godliness: he
said, that if he had once seen any effectual work of Gods spirit in any
man, h^e could never but hope well of him: If graces decayed, first he was
grieved, and then his love decreased in him.

Grace of God.
1 HE feeling on a time the grace of God assisting him in a thing which of
himself he despaired of, said: Oh how easy are the ways of man, whilst the
Lord does govern him, and how is he beset as with a hedge of thorns, when the
Lord does not assist him.

2 As we are careful to use the means of our salvation, so must we wholly
refer the blessing of the means to the grace of God: neither, as some do,
think that we can obtain Perseuera^ce in the use of the means.
or continue the graces of God in us without using the means, (for that is but
a dream of fantastical spirits) neither, as the manner of some is, so to
trust to the means, as neglecting to pray for the grace of God in them: which
is but a preposterours zeal of such as are not rightly instructed in the way
of their salvation.

3 It is a profitable note to observe, when extraordinary gifts of God be for
our good, and when for our hurt. If our extraordinary blessings drive us more
carefully to seek to Extraordinary gifts.
the ordinary means, then it is of Gods mercy: but if they slaken our care
in the ordinary means, and puffing us up with a spiritual pride, cause us to
rest in them, then they are for our further condemnation: as if God bless us
maruellously without prayer in any thing, if we are driven more to prayer by
it, then this is of God: if it cause us to leave prayer, it is perilous.

4 There is nothing so precious as Gods grace, which changes the face of
heaven and The pollution and pow er of sin.
earth: and nothing so vile as sin, which opens hell, and staineth the
earth, and shuts up heaven.

5 As of all gifts, the gift of Gods spirit is the dearest, so the loss of it
is most dangerous: The decay of Gods graces how dangerous.
for besides that, we know how few taste of it, and with what pain they that
have gotten it keep it, and with what hard brunts they that lose the graces of
it recover them again, we may conjecture the greatness of the loss, by our
experience in other things: they that have been in reputation for their
riches, and are become bankerouts, are grieved Simile.
and ashamed; how much more then should their grief be, who by the riches of
Gods graces have been comfortable to themselves, and honorable among others;
and now by the decay of those gifts, have lost both the sweet joy and peace in
themselves, and their credit with God, and in the conscience of the godly.

6 Some rejoice so much in the hearing of good things preached, that they
forget to be humbled for their wants: again, others always looking on their
wants, walk not thankfully for Gods graces received: The mean way is the
best, so to rejoice in the grace of God, that we be humbled for our wants, and
so to mourn for our wants, that we praise God for his graces.

Good works.
1 AS it argues great height and willingness to sin, when men fearing to
sin in the day, redeem, and steal time to sin in the night: so it shows
a great height and willingness to godliness, when men being not sufficiently
contented to do good in the day, stretch their well-doing even to the night
also: wherein they show themselves to be free from vaineglory, that none seeing
them, yet they do good for the love of God, and not for outward things.

2 A man may truly judge himself to be truly willing to do any good, when
he strives all that he can, to do it, although he cannot do it as he should.

Grief for sin.
1 WE cannot heartily be grieved for that sin in another, whereof we have not
made great conscience in our selves.

2 The things that are evil, and grieve us, so far as we see them with
grief, hurt us not.

3 Seeing a woman lamenting for the sins of the people, he said unto her,
(not purposing to cause her to cease from so good an action, but admonishing
her to look to her Three rules to try our sorrow for the sins of other men.
affections) you shall well try your heart, said he, if this sorrow for sin
be first bred for your own sins, and from your self proceed to the sins
of others. Again, the measure of your mourning must be agreeable, and
proportionable to the sin. Lastly, your grief must so be for the person, as
you may be moved rather to pity and pray for him, than to hate and despise
him. 1


4 That is true sorrow and grief for sin, which neither can by outward
pleasures be 2
stolen away, nor by continuance of time be taken from us, but only in
Christ. 3


5 Because great, natural and worldly sorrow and joy, will cause a man to
break his sleep at midnight, he would try himself whether sorrow for sin,
or icy in salvation had caused him to do the like.

6 His greatest sorrow was, when he spoke of some good thing, that was not in
himself, Trial of our joys.
and the greatest joy he had was in the contrary.

7 As by nature we are long and hard to be brought to be grieved for sin: so
being Two extremities of joy and sorrow.
once down, we are hard to get up, and to rise out of grief again. For two
extremities attend upon us; the one to be grieved and feared too little; the
other, to ^e grieved and feared too much: the one makes us secure, and the
other dead and dull. To meet with these two, it is good in time of joy to
think what judgments ^aue befallen us heretofore, what may befall us
hereafter. In time of humbling we are to consider what mercies we have
received, and what mercies are stored up, and ^^rrie for us again: and surely*
no one thing makes grief more to waste us, than the forgetfulness of Gods
mercies past, and doubtfulnes of Gods mercies to come: and nothing does more
strengthen our new temptations, than the forgetfulness of Gods judgments past,
and the carelessness of them that are to come. Though mercies succeed mercies,
yet the sea of Gods mercies is never drawn dry, if we claim hold of them by
our faith and former experience.

Hardness of heart.
1 THe cause why men's hearts are hardened now adays, may be this in part,
because they see as great gifts of learning, tongues, and civil life in
Papists, and heretics, as in Gods true servants. Even as the cause of Pha^^^hs
obstinacy was this, that being willing to be dece^ied, he would not obey the
Lord, because other Sorcerers in Egypt could do (as he thought) as great
matters as Moses and A^ron.

2 To one that complained of hardness of heart, he said: You must wait for
comfort, and know, that you can now no more judge of your self, than a man
sleeping can judge of things which he did waking: or a man wandering in the
dark can discern of bright colors: for as the one may while he waketh do
excellent things, and yet now neither he himself knows of them, nor any
other can epsy them in him: and the other may be among Simile.
flowers, and for want of light, can have no use of his eyes, nor pleasure in
the objects: so you have done great good things whilst God gave you a waking
heart to put them in practice, and the light of his spirit to discern his
graces in you, though now you have neither the sight nor sense of them: and
this is the thing which deceives and disquieteth many: they look for that
discerning of themselves (when in them Gods graces were more oppressed) which
they had when Gods spirit wrought in the sweetest and fullest measure in them:
and because there is some intermission of the work of new birth, Note.
they think it is a flat omission in them of the spirit of God. But as it is a
token of a mind too presumptuous and infatuated, in time of dead security, to
persuade our selves still of that safety, for having those graces which
sometime we had: so it is a sign of a mind abject, and too much de^payring,
to think that because that we have not even present seeling of those joys,
glorious and unspeakable which we have had; therefore we never had ^^^m
heretofore, or that we shall never have them again hereafter.

3 Admonis^ing one to prevent hardness of heart in his child, by godly and
discreet correction: he said, that because children incline often to the
sins of their fathers, parents correcting, should in wisdom first consider,
if it were not a sin before in themselves, Confer this with the 6. Sermon,
concerning the education of Children.
(which they gave them as it were) which now they are about to correct, and
finding it so, that they should be humbled in themselves; and being humbled,
proceed to correction, in prayer, in the fear of God, in wisdom, in love,
and desire of their conversion, and in measure, as correcting their own
sins, after a sort in their own children. For men begetting Children without
regeneration, give a natural propagation of their sins, without some
special blessing of God: and none in regeneration begets any with such
gifts of nature, but unless they become new borne, they have no good thing in
them.

Heresy.
1 MEn be more grieved for murder and adultery, then for superstition and
heresy; Harlots are sooner reclaimed then heretics.
because these be peccata rationis, the other, affectionis and actionis; the
one goes with a privy pride under color of devotion, the other are ever
apparent, and are accompanied with outward shame and confusion.

2 As the Gospel first began by simple Fishermen to be preached, but
afterward being received in love, grew to the other more learneder sort: so,
for not receiving the word in love, but having our ears tickling to new
doctrine, heresies, and sects, (beginning now amongst We find this true
already in our time.
us but in the simpler sort, and ignorant men of the Country) are like to
invade the best learned. And God purposing to punish the coldness of our age,
can as well now send an heretical spirit, not only into the common people,
but into 400. learned Preachers, as he did in times past send a lying spirit
into the mouths of 400. Prophets.

3 Even as polygamie was not very hurtful to the Church, so long as it was
within Lamech his house, and when it preast into Abraham's family, got great
strength and prevailed much: So ill opinions are then less hurtful, whilst
they are amongst the wicked and ignorant: but when they get favor amongst the
learned and godly, they begin to be most dangerous.

Heart.
1 THe heart is Gods own part, and that which must go to the Lord. Now as
nothing might be employed to common uses, which was sacrificed by the priests
under the Law: So the heart which is the Lords, must not be applied to any
other use, than to his service.

Haste, how it argues unbelief: and of Watching and waiting.
1 NOthing more bewrayes unbelief, then not to stay the Lords leisure: as
contrariwise, Watching and waiting on the Lord shows Faith: for those hasty
and unquiet spirits, when they see not speedy redress according to their
expectation, they either murmr in impatiencie, or they will ease their grief
by seeking indirect means. And sure as nothing in prosperity is a greater
token of Gods favor then to fear our selves: so in adversity, this is a
pleasant pledge of our patience, when we can wait and attend on the Lord,
for the time, and the manner, and the measure of our deliverance.

There be some principal properties of true waiting: 1


The first is, to wait in our selves: for many will not outwardly murmr,
and yet inwardly Properties of constant waiting on God.
they boil and fret in themselves: and many will abstain from outward
impatiencie, which look to the inward estate of their hearts but a little. But
it is good for us to begin here: for if there be a quietness of the heart,
there cannot be any great disquietnes 2
in the tongue, or in the hand. The second property is, to wait on the Word.
Many will say, they wait on God, and yet they are marvelous impatient, if
ye charge them with impatiencie: but weigh their waiting by the Word, and it
will not abide the trial, it will not go for good. Look what Faith we have
to wait on God, unless it be taught out of the Word, (which is as true as God
himself) it is not found. Some will be content to wait on God, but it is not
to have their obedience and Faith in the Word, but to obtain some thing the
sooner, which they desire. This is no true waiting, but to wait rather for our
own profit, then for Gods glory. The third property is, to corti^ue in it. 3
Every man by nature can wait for a while, so he may know a certain and
definitive time of his waiting: but to offer our obedience in waiting, and not
know for how long or how little we shall wait, this is the ^ainting of the
soul: for if it were determined to us how many days, or months, or hours we
should wait, the hope of the profit drawing near, and of a term drawing out,
would sustain us: but to leave all moments, and conditions to the Lord, and to
be in a continual service and expectation, this is hard for flesh and blood.
We must learn to amend this fault, by considering how justly the Lord may
suspend his answer* and helping of us, for that our sins are not
sufficiently bewa^led, or our faith is not sufficiently purified, or his graces
not sufficiently wrought in us. The 4
fourth and last property is, to continue waiting with a kind of vehemency:
keeping us from faultring or fainting in our hope, though it be long ere our
suite be answered, or our danger be helped. To be vehement a while, or less
importunate long, is little worth: but to have our affections h^to; and for a
good thing, and not to slake the heat in long continuance of time, and not to
be made remiss or dead in the suit of our desires, though no appearance of our
deliverance appear, is hard indeed. And here to meet with an objection, we
say, vehemency argues faith, and vehemency bewrays want of faith. Faith,
when no deferring of our desire does break the power of our zeal: want of
faith, when without all hope, we are greedy and ravenous to have our request,
or else we cast all off.

Humility.
1 Many deceive themselves with a bare opinion of humility: therefore this may
be a true trial of humility, if we willingly suffer our selves to be taught
of our inferiors: Admonition.
and if we can patiently abide our selves to be admonished of our faults.

2 Heathen men were humbled by their dreams, we are not humbled by the Word:
they that will not profit by Gods judgments in others, shall feel them
themselves. We have no claim to Gods mercy offered in the Gospel, v^till we
be humbled by the threatenings of the law.

3 We must be like children in three things chiefly, first, like little
babes. Secondly, 1 how the faithful must ^ee li^^ little children. ^2 1. Pet.
2. 1.
like innocents. Thirdly, like them that are growing from childhood. First,
babes are never quiet, except the p^p be in their mouth, or else having late
been at it, they are well fed: so ought we still to desire to lie at the food
of our souls, and to find unquietness in our souls, if we be long from it.
Secondly, weaned children, though they are not without natural corruption; yet
this corruption does rather show it self by imitation, than by action: and if
they do any evil, it is rather violent than permanent. Thus should we be, not
making an occupation of sin, but preoccupated of sin; not forecasting
patterns of sin, but bending our minds how we may not sin; we are
violently drawn thereunto by another rather then voluntarily commit it our
selves. Thirdly, they that grow out of 3
childhood, do things beseeming manhood, rather then childishees: so though
babish things both in life and doctrine become us being babes, yet having past
our childhood, Heb: 5. 12.
the Lord looks for more manly ripeness, both in knowledge and in holiness of
life, though our perfect age be not consummated before the resurrection. As
little children, whether in teachablenes to good, or reformablenes from sin,
are either wo^^e by a fair word, Simile.
or ^llured by a trifling benefit, or awed by a check, or feared by a frowning
look or stiiled by seeing another beaten before them, or else quieted by the
rod: so if we be children, either the promises of God must affect us, or the
mercies of God must allure us, or his threatenings in his word must awe us, or
his angry countenance must fear us, or his correcting of others must humble
us; or else the corrections of God upon our selves, must pull us down. But as
those children are of most liberal and ingenuous nature, who are rather
allured with fair words, than driven to duty with the rod; so they are most
gracious, which are most broken with the conscience of their unkindness, more
provoked by the promises of God: then by all the curses, thunderings, and
threatenings of the law: but they that are affected with neither, degenerate as
yet from the affections of children.

Hypocrisy.
1 He observed some, who outwardly lived an honest and civil life, yet lying
hypocritically How the wicked often discover themselves in their death.
in some sin, were constrained in death, or before, to utter it to their
shame. Which kind of judgments are most necessary, that God might show
himself to be God, and his threatenings to be true, that the wicked might less
rejoice in their exceeding impiety, and that Gods children might be raised
from their security.

Judgment.
1 IN our most earnest matters we must be zealous over our own heart, and
then especially Affections.
examine and call to account our affections, because that in such a case there
is either some special work of God, or else it is some notable work of the
flesh, or of Satan. And whereas it is a pedagogie of the soul, that in all
things we had need to ask the government of God, by his word and spirit, for
that a man knows what he is, but not what he shall be in this or that
action. When we cannot gage the depth of our heart, we must impute it to want
of prayer, and the not travailing with our heart how to do the things in
wisdom.

2 Though all exercises of pure religion purely used, do both strengthen
judgment What exercises (...) me^ and what f^rre v^ affection.
and whet up affections, yet reading, hearing, and conferring, do most
strengthen judgment, and in part whet on affections. But praying, singing, and
meditation, do mos^ chiefly whet up affection, but in part strengthen
judgment and understanding.

3 Being desired to give his judgment of a weighty matter, he answered: Sir,
neither am I able to speak, nor you to hear, for that we have not prayed,
indeed I may talk, and you answer as natural men; but we are not now
prepared to confer as the Se^ Psalm. 119 verse. 116.
children of God.

4 He fatherly exhorted men to labor for increase of judgment: first by
reason, 1
then by example: by reason thus, without soundnes of judgment, it is a more
difficult Reasons to labor for increase of judgment.
travailing for the child of God with his own heart to any fruit. Again, not
being stayed in judgment, one shall be troubled to commit, and afraid to do
many things, which indeed he might lawfully and comfortably do if he had
knowledge. Thirdly, we shall not without good knowledge satisfy our godly
desire in persuading or dislwading an^e, 2
for that we cannot do so assuredly, substantially and effectually, as we
ought, and would 3
do. By example he exhorted men to consider of the Prophet David, in his
Ps^lme ^19. he prays for knowledge, having no one thing oftener then this,
Teach me O Lord thy statutes, etc.

Sound joy.
1 THe more one tastes of heavenly things, the less is his joy in earthly
things: the Trial of our joy.
more one feels earthly things pleasant, the less joy can he have in
heavenly. Coloss: 3. 1. Phil: 3. 20.

2 We must in reading the judgments of God observe this rule: If any man will
try conclusions against Gods conclusions, he shall prove nothing in the end
but himself to be a fool. And if he fail in his trial, by how much the
more he might be admonished, by so much the more he shall be without excuse.
There are many that fear ( Psalm. 14. 5.) where no fear is: but there are more
which rejoice, where no cause of joy is.

3 Some joy every man must have, either carnal or spiritual: and therefore
when Cain had lost his title and interest in heaven, he made himself a seat
on earth: and when he had lost the harmony of a good conscience, his nephew
Tubal was feign to invent Organs, that he might have some music and solace
in outward things. And 2. Kings. 11. when the people could not have their own
fond delights, Solomon causes Apes, Peacockes, and such like, to be brought
from Ophir for them. Men will have joy ^t they cannot have the more solemn
melody by Art, they will have the common instruments of the Country. But the
reason is, because the soul is mouldring, and the heart is p^rching dry. But
let these sandy mouldring earthly hearts consider, that there is no secure nor
true joy, which either time may loose, or death dismay, or the judgments of
God make afraid. It is no sound joy that either will leave us, or we shall be
glad to leave it as an unprofitable possession.

4 Many had rather part from all favor of God, then loose the grace of some
witty Jests.
speech, which they have devised: but cursed be that merriment which
respects not either duty to God, or love to our neighbor.

Knowledge.
THere are many who have a general knowledge of the Truth, but when it comes
to particular practice, they are hindered with profits, pleasures, A general
knowledge.
and selfeloue.

2 They whose knowledge is in swelling words, and painted eloquence of humane
wisdom, being but a doctrine of the letter, in their death they are as if
they knew nothing of Christ crucified: and whereof comes it, that there is so
much preaching, and so little learning? but because men preach and delight to
hear plausible novelties, to please the ear rather then the simple power of
the Simile.
Word to pierce the heart: they take the bone, and refuse the marrow: they are
content with the shell, but want the kernel: and not only the law kills,
but also the Gospel: How the Gospel may be said to kill.
that is, the letter of the Gospel being ministered without the spirit. Ask
the wounded conscience, what comfort it is to hear that Christ dyed for our
sins; Nay, ask if this gall not as much as the law it self, so long as it
is rather conceived by reason, than received by faith.

3 He said, how after he knew God, he desired by prayer two things
principally: the Love the Saints.
one, that he might love the Saints: the other, that he might willingly and
profitablie behold the judgments of God on others: which as God in mercy had
granted him, so he confessed this fruit thereof, that unless he had seen
such judgments, he should have fallen into many troubles, which now through
Gods grace he had escaped, by seeing and hearing the causes of these miseries
in others. For when he saw how God dealt with others, he searched his own
heart, whether he had been or was such a man: he persuaded himself he might
be such a one hereafter, and therefore he repented before Gods judgments came
on him, if ever he had done the like; And so by prayer and good means he was
made more careful for falling into it hereafter.

Love of the creatures.
1 THe love of the creatures hinders us in good things, but the use of them
furthereth us therein. Gods children look to the spiritual use of those
things, which the worldlings use carnally.

2 Then we have a sure testimony of our love to good things, and of our
hatred to evil, when no punishment nor reward can either drive us from good,
or draw us unto evil.

Madness.
1 A Great cause of madness is impatiencie of mind, or else the sudden wrath of
God upon a man, for doing some thing against his conscience.

Matrimony.
1 ONe may know whether his wife be brought unto him of the Lord by these
notes. First, if there be any agreeing or proportionable liking each of other,
and that in 1
the gifts of the mind, concerning their general calling, as zeal, faith,
godliness; and also Notes of an holy marriage
concerning their particular calling. Secondly, if they being thus consonant,
do use good 2
means, as the word, prayer, and consent of parents in their contracts, and
then the good order of the Church in their meetings, and if they use no
charms, nor dishonest or unlawful means. Thirdly, that their hearts be
sincerely affected to Gods holy ordinance, 3
so that first they respect this end, to have a helper to Gods kingdom, when
each of them has said in their souls, I will seek out one in whom I may see
mine own image of faith, love, holiness, etc. that will help me to Gods
kingdom. Again, when they do not marry for riches, beau^ie, or such like
outward things: but have a desire 4
mutually to do the duties which they owe one unto another. Besides, they must
5
have a desire to hasten the kingdom of Christ, by fulfilling, so much as in
them lies, the number of the elect: and using it as a remedy against
incontinencie. And so we see condemned 6
here all marrying of young men with old women, when there can be no hope of
procreation.

2 Unto a gentlewoman that was afraid that her good will was suspected to her
husband, If our own heart condemn us, no man can acquit us.
being fa^re from her, in that he received not the letters she sent him, he
said: If your conscience did excuse you, he could not condemn you, and God
will make known your heart unto him: if your own heart condemn you, then can
he not ex^use you, no not although he thought very well of you*

3 As a loving husband will not take away his love from his wife for some
particular Simile.
wants, so long as she keeps her love wholly and truly unto him: so the Lord
will not cast off his loving kindness to us for special wants, or frailty in
particular commandments, so long as we generally labor to please him.

4 When one asked him concerning marriage, whether it were good to marry;
seeing sometimes, when concupiscence pricked him, he was moved to it, and some
other time when he felt no such thing, he thought he might abstain from it: He
answered, many See before title of concupiscence.
come hastily into that calling, not v^ing the means of trying their estate
thoroughly before; as namely, whether they by prayer, fasting, and avoiding all
occasions of concupiscence, have the gi^t of chastity or no? Many use some of
the means, and not all: many use all the means, but a small time: therefore
it is good to use first the means, not part of them, but all of them: not for
a while, but long. If so be that all these things will not prevail, attend
upon the Lords ordinance, and wait when the Lord shall give just occasion of
using that estate, to his glory and our comfort.

5 He thought it to be a good ceremony for the father to give his daughter in
marriage The father to give his daughter in marriage.
before the congregation, if she either be a virgin or a young widow, to show
that she made not her own match, but that she made it by her fathers consent.
And being asked how it should be, ^^ t^^ father were dead, he said, then he
would not have the mother to do it in the congregation, but th^ught it good
for the father in his testament, wisely to appoint some viceg^rent to do^ his
duty. If any man do this rather at the appointment of the young parties, than
at the appointment of the parents, it is an abuse. Now that there must Consent
of parents.
be in all lawful contracts the consent of parents, he said: first, children
are a part of men's goods, as in Job. 1. it appears, in that Satan having
commission to set on the goods of Job, did seize on the children of Job.
Secondly, if in the law a damsel might not perform her vow unto the Lord, her
father misliking it: then much less, as it is probable, may a damsel perform
promise of marriage to a man, her father misliking it.

6 He said, he could not away with such as would marry too soon after they
had ^uried Second marriages not to be hastened. Est mul^er in^amis propter
nuptiarum festinationem, si ante annum nubit. In authenticis Iustiniani,
collatione quarta de nuptii^.
their wives, but that it were better for abstaining a time, to show themselves
humbled underneath the hand of God in that cross: and to testify that it was
no light love unto the parties whom they loved in the Lord. For besides that,
it is almost unnatural, to get another body in bed, before the former be
rotten in the grave: it is a thing of evil report impugning common honesty,
in that it may offer offense unto the friends of the parties departed, and give
occasion to think that their love was but light, being so soon forgotten; ^s
also for that it may give occasion of jealousy to the parties to be married,
and to their friends, in that they may fear that their love will be as light
and little to them, as it was to the other before. And although any set time
for diverse circumstances cannot be prescribed, yet usually a year were but
sufficient for this purpose of abstinence.

Meditation.
1 MEditation is the very life and strength of reading, hearing, prayer and
Sacraments, without which they are made weak and unprofitable unto us.

2 Meditation is that exercise of the mind, whereby we calling to our
remembrance What meditation is.
that which we know, do further debate of it, and apply it to our selves,
that we might have some use of it in our practice.

3 In meditation two parts of the soul are occupied:

1. The memory. Remembering some thing heard or read. 2. The understanding.
Gathering some other thing upon that which is remembered, as namely, in finding
out the Causes. Fruits. Properties.

4 The work wrought in the affections is this, that they are framed either to
love or hatred, hope or fear, joy or sorrow, according to the diversity of
the thing which the reasonable part has seriously considered of. For example,
a man then meditateth on the word, when he so remembers it and museth on it,
that he goes from point to point, applying generally somethings unto himself,
and wisely examining how the case stands betwixt the Lord and him in those
things, whereby he seeing what is like to follow upon it, has his heart
stirred up to put something in practice.

5 In hearing of the word with others, and reading of it by our selves, we
think we have to deal but with men, because those are but outward things, many
men will carry themselves cheerfully: but there is nothing more tedious unto
us, (without Gods special assistance) Godly meditation painful.
than by meditation to call our selves to account before Gods judgment seat
for that which we have heard, and to deal with our hearts in good earnest for
the doing or not doing of the things we have learned: and without hypocrisy to
lay our hearts naked before God, accusing our selves when we come short of any
thing, praying also for grace therein, confessing our sins that we have been
rebuked of, and craving forgiveness: acknowledging his mercy where we have
received any thing, and begging for the continuance of it: and so to depart
away either more humbled in our selves, to avoid sin more carefully; or
comforted in the Lord, to go on forward in weldoing more cheerfully.

6 A great company of men, ^^d even many prosessors, have an evil opinion of
meditation, because (having purposed to pass their time in mirth) they fear
if they should deal thus straightly with themselves* least it would make them
melancholic and heavy: upon which occasion, they will not so much as abide to
be alone, nay in the company of False fears of m^lancholie.
grave and sober men: and to keep them from thi^, some of great place are
content to maintain Iesters, etc. But if we will consider the profits which
come to those, who use meditation, and the hurts which fall on them who use it
not, we shall be easily persuaded to embrace it.

Commodities of meditation, and hurts of the want thereof.
1 IF we meditate of those general rules which we have heard out of the word,
we shall Psalm. 119. I am wiser than my teachers.
many times see more clearly into the truth of it, than he that preaches, or
at least more than he expressed unto us. For by the spirit of God we shall be
taught to apply it more particularly to our selves, than he did or could do,
because we are most privy to our own estate.

2 Those that much meditate, become there by the godliest men, and most
profitable to themselves and others: because meditation so increases knowledge
in us, as that it especially breeds good affections, and quickens them
most, being begun in us, and by ou^ affections we are carried to practice
goodness in our selves. Contrariwise, they which use not meditation, cannot
attain to that knowledge, which otherwise they might have. For we see that a
scholar of a most excellent wit, cannot attain to great learning, if he
meditate not on the things read unto him; how much less can we which are dull
and blind, concerning spiritual things?

3 Furthermore, the knowledge which one gets, whilst it swimmes in the brain,
and is not settled in the affections by meditation, is but a vanishing
knowledge. For if persecution befall us, or if heretics try us with subtle
arguments, or if Satan tempt us, we shall be shaken from our former knowledge.
But contrariwise a settled persuasion of the heart, is hardly or not at all
overcome.

4 Those who omit meditation, have their knowledge for the most part grounded
upon Horat. lib. 1. E^ist. 2,
other men's sayings and writings, and they bring themselves into this bondage,
to believe all to be true that their writer says, because they have not
examined it. In v^^ba jura^^ mag i^^.


5 Want of Meditation destroys the memory, and causes men to trust
altogether to their books: so as if they have time sufficient and store of
books, they are able to speak with great admiration of the hearers, and yet of
the same matters can scarce speak to Meditation helps memory.
a private man tolerablie to his edification and comfort, because he has but
spoken it out of the book, and not labored to make it his own by Meditation,
that thereby he might find out how to apply it to his own use, and the
benefit of others. Want of Meditation takes away the use of knowledge.

Rules for Meditation.
1 FIrst, let the word be the object, and beware of mingling it with men's
devices, Psalm. 1. 2. 26. 119. 99. Secondly, hear, read, and confer much
with reverence and diligence, else our Meditations may be erroneous, Psalm: 119.
99. The Prophet was wiser then his teachers: therefore he had instructions and
conference before his meditation. Ioshuah Josh: ^. 8. 1 Timothy: 4. 13. 15.
and Timothy were commanded to read before, and then to meditate.

2 Meditate but of one thing at once, and at one time, according to the old
proverb: Hoc age.

3 Though he who is come to strength of Meditation, can make his use of all
places and companies: yet even these, and much more other, not grown to such
ripeness, must be careful to choose time and place, and to sequester
themselves from all lets, that ^ight carry them away, when they will give
themselves to earnest meditation, as Job did, who whilst his sons were
banqueting, kept himself apart. And they are to use fasting, that they may
bring themselves into the presence of God, and see into the depth of t^eir own
corruptions.

4 In meditating of a point, we must first travail with our judgment and
affections, before we come to make use of it in our hearts.

5 We must know that there will never be sound nor abiding fruit of
meditation, until our heart be sound and sincere, and dehorting others from
sin, look that we our selves hate it.

6 Before and in all we must pray that the spirit may be given us, that we
neither add nor detract, that we go not too far, nor come not too short.

7 We must ever be mindful to be thankful unto God, when he blesses us in
our meditation; else we shall be buffeted in our next meditation.

8 Being often troubled suddenly in his deepest meditations with distractions
of mind, he tried whether they were of God or not, in this manner: If they did
either bring some evil things past into his mind to humble him, or some good
thing to comfort him, and make him thankful; or if they did instruct him in
any thing to come, leaving an admonition in him to be circumspect, then he
took them to be of God: but if they drew his mind from the things present,
to roue and wander after other matters, he presently suspected it, and fell to
prayer, to be established in his present calling, from whence his own How to
help our sudden failing of our memory in preaching the word.
corruptions and Satan went about to lead him.

9 He had often in his public ministry and private conference, a sudden
failing in memory, so as by no means he could recover himself in those
things he purposed to speak: in which case he used this remedy, presently to
groan in his heart, and to humble his soul underneath the holy hand of God,
not busily to stand troubling and tossing his memory, because he knew, and
had often proved, that this was the best way to turn away this evil.

10 To read and not to meditate, is unfruitful: to meditate and not to read,
is dangerous for errors: to read and meditate without prayer is hurtful.

11 The cause why our meditations and prayers are no stronger in the night, is
because we join not with meditation the examination of our hearts upon our
beds: which if we did in some truth, it would keep us from drowsinesse, and
want of reverence in our prayers; as well as worldly men are kept waking, by
thinking on worldly matters. Here we are taught by David's example, when we want
the more solemn and best means, to make a supply by often and sincere using
of such private means as we can.

Ministry, Ministers.
1 WE must never be so moved at the reproaches of enemies, as at the not
profiting of friends: that is, such as be, or ought to be the joy, crown, and
glory of our ministry, for whom we have prayed, and with whom we have
travailed for their salvation. For as these men alone give all the credit to
our ministry in well-doing, so they do far more discredit it by evil
doing, then all others, at whose hands we look for no such things. And for
this cause we may not be so moved to see the common sort of people offend,
because what marvel is it if they fail in duties, when others which are
continually taught, do so often slip and fall?

2 Ministers should most frequent those places where God has made their
Ministry most fruitful: they should herein be like the covetous man, that
where they have once found the sweetness of gaining of souls, thither they
should be most desirous to resort.

3 He feared much the preposterous zeal and hasty running of young men into
the Ministry; because as judgment, so also stayednesse, and moderation, use,
experience, gravity in ordering affections, and the having some masterie over
corruption, was needful The haste of young men to the ministry
in him, that should teach others. And he observed the extreme in our age, to
be contrary to that in the first age, wherein men being but slenderly brought
up, it was very long ere they were used in the Church: but now education being
bettered, they are too soon employed. Too hasty a trial must not be made of
men's gifts to their hurt that use them, and that have the use of them.

4 If we ask, whether a man may not lawfully desire to be in the Ministry or
no? I answer, that in the Ministry are two things; a work and a worship; a
duty and a dignity. The work and duty to the glory of God, and the good of
his Church, a man may desire: The worship or dignity, to serve our covetous
mind, is not to be desired. It is good before we come to the complete function
of the Ministry, there should be some training up by degrees in the schools
of the Prophets, Acts, 20. We read of the training up of certain Disciples
at Corinth, and at Antioch: Paul was first a Disciple, then an Apostle: Joshua
under Moses; Samuel under Ely; Elisha under Elias; Solomon under Nathan; Baruch
under Jeremy; Timothy under Paul; were trained up. And surely it is a divine
policy, first, to be of the children of the Prophets, then a Prophet, the^ a
Pastor. First, Christ calls some to be domestical Disciples, Luk: 6. After,
he sends them forth, Luk: 10. And then they preach most fully, when after his
Ascension they had received the holy Ghost. Now if this order were in the
Prophets times, why should it not be much more in ours? In the commonweal,
there is a training up of the Gentry, before they be installed into
Magistracy. In the Court, no man at the first is admitted to the highest
titles and functions, but according to their gifts and practice. In natural
things, we will not commit our bodies to every Physician, and professor, but
make enquiry after him who has had the longest experience. Then it is good,
first with Joshua, Samuel, Elisha, Solomon, Baruch, and Timothy to be humbled;
then with Moses, Ely, Elias, Nathan, and Paul to be honored. For what age
requires this more then our headie old age of the world? Wherein young men
are some what forward, and young men have younger judgments, younger
affections, unseasoned speeches, and unseasoned speeches bring retractions, and
retractions bring their discredit.

Mirth.
1 WHen a Gentlewoman asked him if he were not sometime merry. Yes, says
Mirth.
he, we are often merry, and sometimes we are afraid of our mirth.

Mercies.
1 THe way to see the length, depth, breadth and height of Gods mercies, is
first with shame and sorrow to see the length, etc. of our own sins.

Memory.
1 THe best art of Memory, is, to be humbled at Gods threatenings, and
comforted at his promises: for sure it is, that exceeding griefs or exceeding
joys, leave great impressions in us.

2 The best art of Logic is to reason E conuerso, out of that saying of
Paul; There is Temptation.
no temptation has overtaken you, but it has overtaken others. And to say
thus, There has no temptation overtaken others, but the same may overtake us.
This will teach us to speak charitably and profitably of other men's
infirmities.

Marks of the children of God.
1 THere be some notable marks to know whether our journey be to heaven, or to
hell: first, if a man be so close, that he will not open his way whither he
purposes 1 How to discern and discover the 2 ways of men.
to go, yet you shall sp^e out his intent, by observing which way his carriage
is sent: if our carriage go after the flesh, to the flesh we shall come: if
after the spirit, to the spirit we shall come. Secondly, if a man conceal his
voyage, yet you shall discern him by his inquiry this way or that way: if he
ask which is the way to Canaan, and where the way lies in the wilderness, it
is an argument he is going to the promised land. Thirdly, 3
albeit he would keep his journey never so privy; yet he is bewrayed, if when
in hearing a man speak against his country, and dispraise his Prince and
people, his blood begins to rise, he finds himself grieved, and stands
in defense of his country: So, if when men disgrace Gods word, speak evil of
his Ministers, or reproach his Saints, we find our selves moved, and not able
to contain our selves from reprehension: that is a token we are travailing
toward heaven.

Occasions of evil.
1 GOdly men are not in danger of gross wicked women: wherefore we must have a
greater carefulnes of our selves, when we are in company of such as profess
godliness. And so in all evils beware of secret and colorable occasions of
evil, wherein some make a show of good, being guilty of great offenses.

Patience.
1 PAtience then possesses the soul, whenever all our outward wants are
supplied Trial of our patience.
by patience.

2 There are many who have set a press on their hearts, and purposed to exempt
themselves from all grief: others eat up their hearts with grief, as the
flesh of the body is eaten up with a corrosiue, and so make themselves dull
stones, rather than feeling members: Some eat up their hearts with grief.
the mean is not to be too quiet, as without all grief; nor to be unquiet too
much, as being without a God.

Pity.
1 THey are not to be pitied in their grief, which sorrow not with some grief
for their sins.

Poverty.
1 WE often want outward things, because we esteem no more of inward graces.
Cause of outward wants. Murmuring.


2 It is the policy of Satan, to lay before us the great benefits which we
want, to cause us to murmur for them, and to disgrace the present benefits
which we have, least we should be thankful. We must not desire to come out of
the fire of affliction, until the Lord thereby have purified ^s, as fine gold,
for his own use: but still think that the continuing of the cross, is the
continuing of scouring away of some corruption.

3 The Lord oftentimes gives his children no other riches, but his promise
made unto them, which they must wholly depend upon, until the Lord seeing them
ready for the Co^tentation.
thing in the testament hequeathed unto them, shall in wisdom give them their
legacies.

3 The Lord will have us to begin with good things though our beginning be
small: the devil contrary. In evil things God would have us fear the very
first beginnings: the devil contrary.

Preaching.
1 IT is to be feared, that by reason of our long peace and ease, men's teaching
will become glassie, bright and brittle: for that preaching is already grown
so cold and so humane, that the simple preaching of Christ does greatly decay:
and that the great peace and The simple preaching of Christ. 1. Cor. 2. 2. 3.
2. Cor. 4. 5. 6. 7.
quietness which men have in themselves, shall destroy the power of godliness out
of them.

2 If we preach things whereof we are not fully persuaded, or if we be
persuaded of them, yet if they be not sound according to truth, they will
trouble our consciences afterward.

3 He observed that many would receive the word of God publicly preached with
reverence, and being privately spoken, they made no such account of it: wherein
men showed themselves not to respect the preacher of God and his word, but some
other thing. And that some men (which was a foul sin, and worthy public
reprehension) would Hypocrisy.
hear a man willingly in the Church, and gainsay his doctrine at home. Wherein
they bewraied, rather that they heard for solemnity of place, more then for
any devotion.

4 In denouncing the judgments of God, either privately to one, or publicly to
more, the Ministers of Christ still ought earnestly and inwardly to be moved to
pray, that that evil which the Lord foreshewed them by the word to fall on
such sinners, might be turned Preachers must be far from wrath. 1. Tim. 2. 22.
away: so far must they be from speaking in wrath.

5 Some Preachers do much inueigh against the body, crying out, that it is the
enemy of the soul: when notwithstanding we are rather to nourish the body as
the friend of the soul, for the exercise of repentance, and mortification, and
sanctification: and on the contrary, The corrupt actions of the body proceed
from the corrupt affections of the soul.
the soul is the enemy to the body in using it to sin, for that there is
never any corrupt action in the body, but there has been first a corrupt
motion and sinful affection in the soul.

6 He was always desirous to be in the place of public reading, praying and
preaching, even of conscience to Gods ordinance, were the Preachers never so
mean. For if he spoke of judgment, he either increased (as he said) or
confirmed his knowledge. If the speaker had great wants, even these wants did
humble him, and made him to meditate inwardly To attend the holy ministry and
Preaching of the word.
of that truth, whereof the Preacher failed: in so much that sometimes hearing
the wants, and then meditating of the truth, he could as well be enabled to
preach again of that text, as if he had read some Commentary.

Prayer.
1 WE cannot be dry in the graces of God, so long as we resort to Christ by
fervent prayer.

2 If you will ask any blessing at Gods hands, begin with craving his favor:
Psalm. 4. If you would avoid any cross, begin first with repenting and craving
pardon for thy sin. Psalm. 32.

3 He in all things would ask counsel of God by his word and prayer, thinking
he could never well do good to others, unless he had also first done well to
his own soul. And he observed, that taking in hand things more suddenly, he
either was crossed in the doing of them, or if he had any present fruit, yet
he saw it was not an abiding and remaining fruit.

4 It is good to use every night as soon as we awake, some exercise of
prayer, or meditation, Prayer in the night.
and to prevent the morning and evening watch in thinking on the Word.

5 He compounded with himself three times a day, to pray for those things
which he Prayer in the day.
preached, using also daily three portions of Psalm: 119.

6 They pray not altogether of fashion, who see their infirmity in praying,
and are To see our infirmities and wa^ts in prayer, and to be grieved for them.
grieved for it: And they that indeed do pray only of fashion, do not see
it: and this imperfection does not so much displease the Lord, as the grief
in us for our imperfection does please him. And though it come to pass that
God do cross a vehement prayer, and does grant our prayer when we pray
coldlie, it is not either to make us to surcease from zeal, or to slip to
coldness in prayer, (for that is the way either to heresy or profaneness) but
to teach us that we must not on the one side, trust too much to the James, 5.
means, as though we would tie God to our praying; and to encourage us on the
other side to use prayer, when seeing the Lord has heard us praying faintly,
he will surely hear us when we pray fervently.

7 Sometimes in a good action, using good means with an upright heart, to a
lawful end, if our prayers be unfruitful, and our labors want success:
then let us remember, Secret corruptions may hinder success in good actions.
that in all these there were secret imperfections, and that the Lords
deferring is, that we being better prepared by humility to be thankful, he
may grant our requests in richer manner and measure.

8 When one said to him after long conference and prayer: Sir, I have troubled
you; Oh my brother, not so (said he) I never felt ill by well-doing, and if I
may pleasure you, it is as joyful to me as any thing can be: for, for this
cause I live.

Praise.
1 Unto one that with many words disabled himself, he said meekly: O why do
you so much seek your own praise? for it bewrays a privy corruption of
nature, that by too open dispraise, desires to stir up his own praise and
co^mendations.

Parents.
1 SEeing a godly man having his son in his arms, whom he loved
tenderly, he Immoderate love of parents.
said to him: Sir, there is the matter of your rejoicing, God make it the
matter of your thanksgiving.

2 The Lord has corrected the immoderate love of parents toward their
Children, specially when it was grounded on nature, more then on the gifts of
God: as we may see in Abraham, who so loved Ishmael; in Isaac, who so loved
Esau; and in David, who so loved Absolon.

Prosperity and Peace.
1 MEn ought to use all good means in the time of peace, and before troubles
come: and yet, though (because outward things are as a veil to hide Gods face
from us) we cannot understand good things so easily in prosperity; or if we
understand, we hardly have the feeling of them: we must therefore still use
the means, in hope of that fruit and comfort that comes in time of trouble,
unto which time God often reserues our Feelings most under the cross. 2. Cor.
12. 9.
greatest feeling, because it is the most needful time of help.

2 And if it be so that in our prosperity we have not used so the means, yet
are we not therefore in adversity utterly to despair of comfort, because the
Word was given for man's help, who needs means, not to help GOD, who can
comfort without means: neither are we to be out of heart, though our
Conscience tell us that we have used the Means.
means in some weakness: for the Lord pardons our infirmities, and crowns
our sincerity in them.

3 Brown bread and the peace of the Gospel is good cheer.

4 He said surely, that long prosperity will breed either heresy or
security, or some The long prosperity of the Church.
great adversity: and that howsoever men did little fear these plentiful
days, yet when prosperity is full and come to repletion, there must needs
follow some rupture, and the abundance of wealth must needs have an ulcer, to
break out in one place or other.

Rebuking or reproving of sin.
1 BEing asked how a man might reprehend, he answered: First, look that you
have Rules for admonition.
a ground out of the Word for reproving: then look if it stand with your
calling to reprove: Afterward, consider if some other man might do it more
profitably 1
than you: then look before whom you reprove, least you hinder the credit of
2
the party with his friends, and increase his discredit with his foes. And
again, if by all 3
occasions of calling, person, time, and place, the Lord has put you in this
place to rebuke 4
sin; Consider, you must put on you the person of the offender, that as you
spare not his 5
sin, because of the zeal of Gods glory, so you press it not too far,
because of compassion 6
to a brother; then look that with these your heart be right in zeal and
love, and 7
so call for Gods assistance, before you speak, his grace in speaking, and for
his blessing after your speaking: If any thing be left out that might have
been profitable, please not 8
your self in it, but be humbled for it; though some infirmities be in you,
yet shall they not do so much hurt, as Gods ordinance shall do good. 9


2 We must rather win men with a loving admonition, then gore them with a
sharp reprehension, that we may more easily work upon them afterward. A
loving admonition.


3 If we think we may speak, we will speak too soon: if we think we may
keep silence, we will hold our peace too long: when we much love the persons
to whom we speak, we slack our zeal in rebuking of sin: if we be zealous
against sin, we slack our love to the person.

4 We may rebuke publicly, a public offense of a private man on this manner:
My brethren, such a sin has passed from this place, the guiltless need not
to be offended, the person guilty is to repent of it.

5 His manner was both in espying and reproving of sin, he would not always
more sharply reprove the greater sin, nor more earnestly reprehend the lesser
sin: but measuring the accidents and the circumstances of the sin, with the
quality and degree of the sin it self, he did see that some appurtenances
with the sin, did aggrauate or extenuate it: So as a greater sin with some
circumstances, he thought less to be reproueable, What to consider in
reproving both little and great sins.
and some lesser sin with some accidents, to be more condemnable: even as we
see that the Lord did strike with death the man that with a high hand, did but
gather sticks on the Sabbath, and yet not punished others so grieuouslie, who
of infirmity did more deeply profane the Sabbath.

6 By admonition we may win and save souls, and for want of due admonition,
we loose and destroy souls. When we are admonished, we either deny the thing,
or else we quarrel with the affection of the speaker, and find many faults.
We had much rather have our consciences privily touched, then our names openly
dishonored: yet when we have chafed with our own shadow, and disputed with
our own reason, it will come to How unwilling we be to accept an admonition.
pass, that we shall speak reverently of him behind his back, whom we much
gainsaide in words before his face. Neither for all this impatient bearing of
an admonition, must we leave off, or marvel too much at the little success of
this duty: for either we sinned in the manner of doing, or in the want of
wisdom: or we would too much have gloried in our selves, if we had done
good, or too much grieved with our selves, if we had not done Motives to
practice admonition.
good; or we did convince judgment generally, or not observe the applying of
things to their circumstances particularly; or we do all without love, or
without prayer, and so though we plant and sow, God denies the first and the
latter rain to bless our labors. Again, we are to comfort our selves under
hope of time to come: for experience proves, that some at the first receiving
of an admonition most hardly, have after most profited by it: and others
receiving an admonition very gently, have lost the fruits of it afterward very
negligently. For many courteous natures are as soft as wax, sooner able to
receive the Simile.
impression of an admonition, but less able to retain it. Again, a more
heroical nature, is as the harder wax not so soon admitting the print, as
surely keeping the print being made. Many notwithstanding had rather sleep in
the whole skin of their senslesnes of sin, and therefore give entertainment
unto flatterers, whom for a while they love, but afterward most grievously
hate: for when a flatterer coming to have some booty is denied, he will
reason on this manner: Sir, I did you this good, and therefore I deserve this
pleasure. Nay rather he should say; I have not done good but evil: and
therefore it is the mercy of God, that I lose the wages of my sin. For let
us learn this as a rule of our liefe, never to trust him Never trust him that
will conceal a sin in us.
that will promise to conceal a sin in us; nor again to mistrust him too
much that will not willingly be admonished at the first. For as a furious or a
phreneticall brain, can by no means away with him that shall lay any hands
upon him, though it were for his profit: so, so long as we be in impatiencie,
we shall suffer no man to speak unto us, though it be for Simile.
our good: but the l^thargie of our mind being cured, we marvel at our
former impatiencie, and are ready to show our selves thankful unto him that
would have a care to draw us out of such a sin.

Regeneration.
1 AS good natures do not help of necessity to regeneration: so evil
natures cannot Good and evil natures.
hinder Gods purpose in calling, if the means with his mercy and blessing be
purely and painfully used.

Repentance.
1 Satan under the color of repentance, brings many into an extreme
sadness, and Extreme sadness.
strictness in using the creatures of God. Again under pretense of Christian
liberty, and delivering of men from extreme griefs, he allureth them to an
immoderate and an unsanctified mirth, and intemperate use of the creatures of
God: so blinding judgment, he afterward corrupts affection.

2 One complaining unto him for the not feeling of his corruption, which did
sometime enbolden him to sin, and to add one sin to another, as to shuffle
a little sin To defer sorrowing for some one sin unto the more general
accounting time, who dangerous.
under the pretense of a great sin, and to defer the sorrowing of one
sin, until the more general accounting time, when we should sorrow for more
and many sins, his temptation touching him on this manner: Why fear thou
to commit this one sin and this little sin, which is as pardonable by
repentance as the former sins, which are more in number and greater than
this, seeing thou may repent for this sin when thou repent^st for them all?
He made this answer: In such a temptation, because Satan is very near, we
are to tremble under the hand of God, to fear our selves, to strive in prayer,
and to mourn for the temptation, whereby Satan would cause us after not to
dispute with it: and we be to suspect our selves to be rather ready to add
sin to sin, than to repent of any sin, howsoever Satan would blind us
with a kind of repenting: and we must stay upon the power and help of God in
Jesus Christ.

Reproaches.
1 HE said, although he was subject to many and grievous reproaches, yet two
things Trial of our hearts in reproaches.
did ever comfort him: the one, that his heart was well, and not evil affected
to any man: secondly, that going alone, he could humble himself and pray to
God, that the authors of such reproaches might be pardoned.

Riches.
1 SOmetimes good outward gifts hurt the beholders, when they hurt not the
possessors, A mediocritie.
as we may see in the beauty of Sara and Joseph: which thing ought to humble
us in the desire of outward things, and to make us thankful for a mediocritie.

2 It is a just judgment that earthly riches do deceive our hearts, when
heavenly riches A trial of the rich man's faith.
do not delight us; that the outward things should carry us away, when
heavenly things cannot so much prevail with us. Well, howsoever gold or silver
go here on earth for the greatest riches before men: godliness is the greatest
riches before God and Angels in heaven.

Sacraments.
1 AS Isaaks intent being to bless Esau, hindered not the will of God in
blessing of Jacob: so the corrupt intent of the Minister does not hinder the
blessing of God in the Sacraments, it being Gods own ordinance.

2 After one had asked his advice for sitting, or kneeling at the Lords table,
he said: As for such things, let us labor what we may, to do as much as we
can for the peaceof the Church.

Security.
1 Security is a forerunner of some gross sin, or of some great cross.

2 We must overcome our unwillingness and sluggishnes betimes in good things:
Delays. Trial of our dulnes.
and prevent delays at the first; because it is certain, the longer we delay,
the worse.

3 There is a great corruption in our natures, which makes us most dull when we
have most means. This arises either because when we have the public means
more plentifully, 1
we use the private more sparingly: or because we do not so much esteem of
the 2
means, ordinarily administered, as we do when they are less familiar unto
us: or if the 3
Lord seeing us too immoderatly desire the place where we are, denies us the
benefits and 4
fruits of the place to correct our desire: or for that we promised to our
selves too large a hope of freedom from many evils, by the means of the word;
therefore it pleases the Lord to prove unto us, that they are nothing unto us
without the blessing of his holy spirit. 5
Or this may arise from the temptation of Satan, who because he would make us
discontent Change of place and calling.
with our present estate and calling, and to hunt after new; therefore he
shows us all the inconveniences of the place present, and hides all the
profits; and shows us all the profits of the place where we have been, or
shall be, and hides all the inconveniences. Or because when we were the best in
a whole town, and saw nothing in others but corruption, 6
we pleased our selves, and provoked our selves more to good things; and being
among many good men, we make not so much of our goodness, and grow something
secure, 7
and trust too much in the goodness of the place and persons. Or in that we
like of our selves well, when we are teaching and instructing others, and are
more impatient of silence 8
in our selves, and to be instructed of others. Or because we would still be
getting praise by bringing out, but we are loath to store up treasures both new
and old for time to 9
come, when as yet there is a time of both. Or we more see this, because the
last complaint seems the greatest, though indeed we have suffered as evil;
even as a man thinks his sickness present to be sorer than any sickness past.
The only remedy against this dulnes is, continually by prayer, and by using
the means to strive against it.

Singing.
1 HE wished all men that would sing, that in singing they ever sing with
affection and Affection and feeling in singing Psalms.
feeling, or else have a mourning in their heart that they cannot do so.
Coloss. 3. 17. Ephesians* 5.

Sin.
1 I^ we go on still in sin, God will go on still in judgment: but if our
hearts relent from sin, God will release his sentence of punishment. Cause of
sin within us, occasions without us.


2 To a Courtier complaining of the occasions of evil, he said: Though you
have occasions of sin offered, yet the cause of sin is still in your self.

3 Because God works the sense of sin by degrees in his children, he
suspected them, who at every sin named, would show themselves forthwith
troubled. Sins be linked and chained one in another.


4 Sin is such a canker that it spreads secretly, and there is such a
chain of sins, that he that yields to one, draws on another; grant a
little one, and a great one will follow: wherefore as it is good wisdom not
only to avoid the plague, but to eschew every little ragge that may seem to
carry the plague: so it is heavenly wisdom not only Heb. 3. 12. 13. Simile.
to avoid gross sins, but all such shows of sins, as may draw on the
other. And as we count it policy, not to go as near the rivers bank as we
can, least suddenly (or at unawares we should slip in: so it is a spiritual
policy, not to go too near sin, least we be overtaken of it before we be
aware of it.

5 It is our corruption to be scrupulous in sin, in the beginning: but when
we are entered in a little, we run over head and ears. The trial of our
state against any one special sin often assailing us.


6 This is a sure experience, whether the sin which has often assailed us
shall get dominion over us or not: if the oftener we are tempted, the more we
are grieved, the more we strive against it, the more we labor for the contrary
virtue, we shall shortly be conquerors over it. But if the first coming of
sin wrought some grief in us, and the often coming of it, makes our grief
the less, and causes us to cease to use the means of with standing it, and
to be careless in the contrary virtue, then it were to be feared that that
sin in time should prevail against us, and that we should get no victory
over it.

7 Though it is hard to find out our special sins, yet by often and diligent
examining To know our special sin.
of our selves by earnest prayer, that God would reveal unto us our sins, by
often hearing and reading the word, by marking the most checks of our
consciences, and reproaches of our enemies, we might be led to the nearest sight
thereof.

8 If Gods children are ready to slip in a moment; how much more dangerous is
the How the godly fear sin more the^ external crosses
estate of the wicked, who are willing to fall continually? It is wonderful
to see a poor sinner ready to swound and fall dead almost at every sin,
which a man would think to be nothing to fear him, or drive him to this
fear; and yet when adversities, strange judgments, persecutions, and death
do come, to be exceeding patient, comfortable, courageous, and valiant. And
again, it is strange to see others, who marvel that men will suffer
themselves to be feared with sins, and ask what mean men to stand trembling
at the word of God: yet let sickness come, or if the hand of God be upon them,
or let death How the godly and godless differ in their joys and fears.
come toward them, they quake at the name of sickness, death, or hell; and
either they prove very senseless and blockish, or else they be in a most
desperate estate: yea, if God begin to reckon with them, every countenance of a
godly man, every chirping of a bird, and drawing near of the least and weakest
creature toward them, every shaking of a leaf, moving of a shadow, every
noise of the air appaleth their courage, and makes them most fearful
cowards. They fear most when Gods judgments are executed, which fear least
when they are threatened: And they fear least when Gods judgments are
accomplished, which tremble most when wrath is denounced. Wherefore if we long
for courage, and loathe cowardice, against the evil day, let us labor for a
good conscience, which breeds Note.
true boldness, and fly from sin, which brings a spirit of fear upon us,
as daily experience may teach us. It is better to fear the evil to come, when
only fear, and not evil is upon us, than to fear then, when besides the
fear, the affliction it self is come, which so sorely besetteth us, that we
have no liberty or leave to breathe for any comfort, or to hope for any
deliverance.

9 They that will have a true faith in Christ must believe in him, that he is
our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Are then thy
cogitations confounded? See thou no knowledge, not so much as a literal
knowledge of Christ, but all is doubtfulnes, all is dulnes, all is deadnes in
thee, as though thou never knew, heardest, read, True remedies against
deadnes and au^es.
or learned any thing? Now know and believe, that whatsoever knowledge,
experienced power of understanding, was in Jesus Christ, the same is made
thine; he is thine annoynting, that will teach thee all. Have thou knowledge,
and yet thy life not brought agreeable or proportionable to thy knowledge? Thou
art troubled with thy sins, thou feel no goodness, thou think thy self
as an evil tree void of all good fruit: Now remember Christ is our wisdom.
that as Christ being no sinner, was made of God a sinner, and punished of God
as a sinner for thee: thou having no righteousness, art made through Christ
righteous, and shall be rewarded of God as righteous through him. It may be God
has enlightened thee with heavenly understanding, he has hitherto
strengthened thy desire in giving thee to walk uprightly; but now thou art
afraid thou shall not persevere, because of thy corruptions: thou tremblest to
remember how many excelling thee in gifts and graces have fallen away, and that
all is but hypocrisy, thine own heart thou think will one day begu^le
thee: now call to mind that Christ is made unto thee holiness, not as a new
Moses to follow, Christ is our holiness.
but as a Messiah to believe in, as the author and finisher, of thy holiness;
so that to persevere seems impossible to thee, yet with him it is possible:
yea and more easy to continue thee in holiness being begun, than to convert
Zacheus, Matthew, and Mary Magdalen, or to reconcile the Lamb and the Lion, and
others which he has surely done. There Esa. 11. 3. 4. 5.
is one thing yet troubles thee; thou have many things promised thee, and thou
think they are not performed; thou look for peace of thy mind, and
behold a wound of the spirit; thou art the heir of the whole earth, and yet
pinched with poverty; thou art Lord of liberty, and yet lie in prison: it
is so, and yet in all this see Christ is thy redemption, Christ is our
redemption.
not suffering thee to be overcome with any of these in this life, and freeing
thee wholly from them in the life to come. Admit thou werst cruelly persecuted,
cannot he that made the fire not to burn at all the three children in the
furnace, make the fire so easily consume thee, as thou shall comfortablie bear
it? Will not he that made the Lions being hungry, not once to open their
mouths on Daniel, crush thee so greedily that thou shall willingly sustain
it? Now the means are the word, prayer, and Sacraments: the word carries the
spirit Note.
of faith into thy heart; prayer gives thee a feeling of thy faith; the
Sacraments confirm both thy faith and feeling.

10 We must not be proud in our gifts, for God has in judgment given
judgment to Spiritual pride.
many simple ones to spy us out. If we confess to God, we must frankly and
freely bring our selves into the presence of God, and lay our hearts naked and
b^re before him: we must not as harlots wipe our mouths and say we have
offended, and yet fall into sin again: but with remorse of conscience
acknowledge them, and with fear and reverence leave them.

11 Many think it to be easier to confess their sins to God, than to
acknowledge How hard it is to confess our sins to God.
them unto men: but it seems to be contrary: for he that refuses to confess
his sin before man, in whom is but a drop of the indignation against sin,
which is fearful in the Lord, will not willingly open them and strip them
naked before the majesty of God. And he that can frankly stand as a penitent
before God and his Angels, he will not stick to confess his sin before the
face of men. Behold our father Adam whilst there was no man to fear him, the
Lord comes at the first to him by prick of conscience, he hides himself
with figtree leaves: to this prick of conscience the Lord sends a voice or a
noise that is heard: Now not content with a few leaves, he goes into the
thicket of wood: at the length the Lord to draw him out of his hypocrisy,
brings him into the plain, and urges him with substantial questions: he not
able to hide himself any longer, hides ^^ sin, and shifteth it off to Eua.
Why does the holy Ghost thus orderly and particularly set down this matter,
but to show that though we have a prick of sin by nature in part to confess
sins, yet nakedly to uncase thy sins before God, is a hard thing to flesh
and blood, the Devil lying by, prompting us, that in so doing we shall bring
our selves to despair, we shall run out of our wits, we shall kill our
selves, and never live merry day again? In that notable Psalm of
instruction, 32. we are taught, that then there is hope our sins are
forgiven, when God emptying our hearts of all guile, we can be content freely to
give God the glory, and to shame our selves before men. We see when his great
affliction could not bring him to confess his sin, yet no comfort came to
him, until by Gods grace he grew to this issue, that he reckoned up the whole
catalogue of his great sins: so Sundry euasions of sinners.
hard a thing it is to confess our sins before God.

12 It is our great corruption, being admonished or charged of sin, we either
deny it to be a sin, or we deny our selves to have sinned in that sin, or
we quarrel and wrangle 1
about the nature of sin, or else we countenance our selves by Scriptures, as
the Familists do 2
cover many iniquities, by making plain places allegories; or if we confess,
it is in great 3
hypocrisy; or if we confess in some truth, yet we go not out of the sin.
Howsoever Admonition.
4
Popish confession has made a cloak for sin, so as now a thief on the
gallows 5
6
ready to fall into the grave, and into hell both at once, will say, it is
sufficient to confess my sins unto God, though I do not so unto men: yet I
say, there is no greater toke^ of grace, than when for the glory of God or
good of the brethren, we can be content to discover and lay open our selves.
If none of these excuses serve, then we can say, why, this is a common 7
thing, I am not alone, better then I have done so; or else, such a one
provoked me to 8
do thus, or else I had not done it; or else we are very frail, and may not
you sin? or was 9. 10.
there ever any that sinned not? Thus we are even as dainty as Gentlewomen,
who having a sore, which they are loath to have esp^ed, will cover it till it be
incurable* so we, having some sins, are loath to open them, until they grow
almost unrecoverable.

13 Every man is afraid of this, least his sin should break out, yet every
one uses Discover and confess the mother sin.
the way of breaking out. Nothing more stays sin, then to make it known in
time. Nothing draws it sooner forth, than too long to conceal it. It may be
some will confess some sins; yea many sins, and yet hide the mother sin,
whose life if we continue, howsoever we may murder some of her brood, yet she
will hatch new sins again.

14 When thou art afraid thou shall go out of thy wit, because thou fear
sin; when thou can dispute and preach more fearfully against thy self,
then all the preachers in the 1
world: remember how Christ Jesus having no holiness by the flesh, by being of
his own Consolations against diverse kinds of griefe^.
mother (to the testification whereof it pleased him to be borne of such a one,
whose progenitors were notable sinners, to keep company with such as were the
most miserable wretches, to call to the greatest dignity in the Church, the
prophanest tole* gatherers, persecutors and worldlings) has given thee an
holiness imperfect, and would not have thee to look for any great things in thy
self, seeing he having put on thy flesh, got no gain thereby at all. It may
be the multitude of thy sins trouble thee, and therefore thou think, now 2
it is hard to make thee an holy one. Consider how Mary Magdalene had seven
spirits, and yet of all women was made most devout; and after Christ his
resurrection received greatest 3
dignity to see him first. It may be the great continuance of thy sin troubles
thee: remember how Christ called Matthew, who long time had weltered in
worldlines. It may be the greatness of thy sins fear thee: consider how the
greatest persecutor of the Church was 4
made of all other, the most glorious preacher of the Gospel. It may be thy
sins drawn 5
from thy country grieve thee: the Cretians were good Christians, and the
filthy Corinthians, 6
became most faithful professors. It may be thine hereditarie sins by nature
move thee to despair of help: consider, he that can so far ouerrule nature,
that the wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard lie with the kidde,
Esai: 11. 5. 6. he can also change that course of nature in thee, by a
supernatural grace. And yet as I would have thee to beware, so to trust in
Christ his righteousness, as thou forget not, he is also thine holiness: and so
to labor for thine holiness in him, that thou forget not he is thy
righteousness: but so to labor for both, as if thou be righteous, thou must
also be holy: and being never so holy, yet to seek for thy whole
righteousness before God in Christ only.

15 Many feebled and exercised minds are often cast down without hope of
help, because of their own unworthiness, as though there were no comfort to be
obtained of God, unless we bring of our own fruits to present him withal:
but this were to discredit the Lords mercies, and to bring in credit our
merits, and rather to bind the Lord to us, than Consolation against the fear
of our own unworthiness.
us to him. But what means this? There is with the Lord plentiful
redemption: and therefore Israel need not to fear to find mercy; if our
sins be great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be beggarly, Gods
mercy is a rich mercy. If our peril be not come even to a desperate case, and
that we be as it were utterly lost, and past hope of recovery, there is no
praise of redemption. Here then is the power and profit of our redemption,
that when all sins go over our heads, and heaven and earth, the Sun and
Moon, and the Stars come as it were in judgment against us, yet a clear
and full ransom shall be given into our hands, wherewith to purchase our
redemption, and so to procure our perfect deliverance beyond all expectation:
and so as it were to fetch something out of nothing. We see for example, in
sickness to have either little danger, or in great danger to have deliverance
by present means, is nothing: but in extremity and peril, when Physic can
do no good, and make nothing for us, to keep us from the grave, then above
and beyond all this to be rescued therefro, and to recover our life from the
pits brinke, is a work highly deserving: So though God driuevs to ordinary
means, this is not to withdraw our redemption in using the means, but to
train up our faith, that after he may make known that he has an help
beyond all helps, and much redemption. And this is needful for us to learn:
for if the means be many, we rest in them: but if they be few, and faint,
the meditation of this redemption will be most comfortable.

15 It is an experiment of Gods Children, that by prayer sins receive their
deadly wound, and a temptation by resistance: yea, we shall find it both
sooner to depart, and to Sin is wounded by prayer, and temptation by
resistance.
recompense the present and little pain, with an after and longer pleasure:
and contrariwise the not resisting thereof, causes it the further to feed in
us, and the small present pleasing of our selves, is paid with a long bitter
grief of conscience afterward.

16 If we will truly learn how to avoid sins, let us remember often what
punishment we have felt for sin. If we will be kept from unthankfulness, we
must often call to mind the things that the Lord has done for his glory, and
our souls health in us.

Sick, and sickness.
1 THis I take to be a fit prescription to all parties afflicted: First, to
labor to have Rules for the sick.
peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost, through the assurance of their
sins pardoned in Jesus Christ: then to be careful to use the means which
may nourish 1
their inward peace and joy: thirdly, they must rejoice and recreate themselves
in wisdom 2
and well-doing with the Saints of God, and holy company: and lastly, they
must 3
refresh themselves with kitchen physic, and a thankful using of the
creatures of God. 4


2 It is not good to use that for diet, which is prescribed for physic: for
that will not work in the extraordinary need of the body, which is used as
ordinary in the state and time of health.

3 He marked two things commonly neglected: he saw that men being in danger of
death, would be prayed for in the Church, but they would not have the Church
give Public prayers for the sick.
thanks for their recovery. Again, he saw that women would give thanks
after their deliverance, which is a Christian duty well beseeming them, but
they would not before ask the prayers of the Church. And seeing it is so rare
a blessing to have the fruit of the womb, seeing sometime the mother, sometime
the children, sometimes both died: and that the gift of both is a work passing
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars: it were nothing superfluous or
burdensome in such cases to pray and to be thankful.

4 It is the wisdom of God joined with mercy, for the preserving of his
Children, in humility and thankfulness (if they forget to spy out, and to be
humbled for their inward corruptions) either to let them fall into some sin,
to punish their pride, and sway of their own wit, or else (which is his more
merciful chastisement) to break them with some cross, until their hearts be
bruised. Hereof it comes that the Lord is constrained to correct our
haughtines, and cool our courage by some kind of affliction, because we are
ready to break out in time of prosperity. Wherefore to cut off the occasions
of sin, which Satan would find out in our proud flesh, after long time of
health, the Lord sends How the Lord corrects the pride of our prosperity.
some sickness, or some weakness upon us, to cut short our horns, wherewith by
reason of long wealth, we would (like Bulls of Ba^an) push at the godly; the
Lord sends fire, thieves, and oppressions to let us blood in our riches,
least we should ^e too rank, and grow into a surfeit. The best way in the
midst of our prosperity is, to labor to think wisely and lowly of our
selves: and to walk fearfully, as being now most jealous over this our corrupt
nature, which least fears, when Gods graces are greatest: and namely, as of
all blessings this is one of the greatest, ^uen in abundance, health, credit,
and authority, to carry as humble and meek an heart, and faithful a spirit,
as we would or ought to have, even when we come out of some affliction: So
this of all the plagues is the greatest, to be pricked, and not to feel; to be
stricken, and not to be humbled for it. And yet it is no great commendation to
be made better by affliction: But this is the praise of godliness, to grow on
more in prosperity, then, not to forsake our first love; then, to enter into a
lowly conceit of our selves: for as it is a sign of a more liberal and
ingenuous nature, to learn more by lenity, than by severity; or if he slip,
to recover himself as carefully at the sight of another corrected before him,
as if he were beaten himself: So it is a token of a mind more reformed to
have a bruifed mind rather with the ^aste of Gods mercies, than with the
terror of his justice; or if he see but an inckling of Gods displeasure
breeding, as much to strike his heart, as if the heavy hands of a fearful
scourge were upon him. And here we must beware that we lose not the fruit of
the least cross: for if we break not our hearts with a little affliction, we
shall afterward become blockish in greater. Wherefore seeing it is a token of
a melting heart to bleed at the least blow; and it is a sign of a senseless
mind, not to be touched until the sword has tasted deeply of our blood: let
us pray 1
for the first grace of Gods children, not to need to be corrected; or for the
second, to be 2
the better by the least correction; or at the least, that the Lord let us not
go so far, as neither prosperity nor adversity can do us good.

Satan's practices.
1 Satan is ready ever to make us most unwilling to that, wherein the Lord
will most Note.
use us to the greatest good of his Church.

2 We must pray that the Lord give not that measure of leave to the devil that
we give out to sin: but that he would rather make Satan a surgeon to show us
our sins, than a sergeant to arrest us to perpetual imprisonment for our
sins.

3 Satan has two ways to buffet us: first, he moves to despair, showing us
how such Satan buffeteth us two ways.
men did abide trouble, but they were rare men, of rare faith, of rare feeling,
of rare patience; God has not called us to that measure of grace; we are
unworthy by reason of our sins, to hope for the like faith or fruits of
faith. His other temptation savors of pride, 1
when he will make us equal in dignity with the highest of Gods Saints, but
unequal in 2
duty with them: then he will persuade that God is as good, and as strong to
us, as he has been to others: but he keeps us from using those ways and
means, whereby others have, and we ought to have this goodness and power of
God conveyed into us. Wherefore as we must not distr^st God that we shall
obtain the like mercy with others, if we use the like means: so we must not
be so bold, as to dream that ever we shall have the like favor with them,
unless we labor for the like faith with them, the like faith I say, though
not in quantity, ^^^^. quality, and that by use of the means.

4 Unto one that said he was possessed of a Devil: he answered, as hoping that
he was the Possession. 1. Cor. 6. Ye are not your own.
child of God, and rather deluded than so afflicted. True it is, that as much
as lies in you, you have given over your self unto the Devil: but it is not
in your power to give over your self unto him, neither is it in his
jurisdiction to possess you.

Superstition.
1 MAny having escaped out of the gulf of superstition, are too deep plunged
in Prophanenes.
prophanenes.

Strange corrections.
1 Unto a very godly man, whose only son was drowned, and therefore came unto
him in great anguish of mind, and asked whether such strange corrections were
not always tokens of strange sins. He answered, That albeit God did severely
correct Causes of great afflictions.
sin in it, yet it was not necessary that God should chiefly respect the
punishment of sin in this thing; as might appear in the like dealing with
Job and other of his children: Eccl. 9. Such things happen oftener to the good,
etc. Howbeit (said he) God might correct your 1
security herein (which either brings some sin or cross) or God might
correct your immoderate 2
love of him; or your unthankfulness for what measure he was reformed, or your 3
not praying for him: or the Lord might take away this consolation, and
withdraw wholly 4
your mind from the world, and more thoroughly sanctify you to himself. Or he
might 5
prevent some worldliness which you might have fallen into, or some sin
which your 6
son might have fallen into, which would have been a sorer trouble than his
death: and 7
therefore you must stay your self on the love of God in all. 8


Salvation.
1 THat man is blessed whom God has from all beginnings chosen to eternal life.
To The golden chain of our free election.
whom God has given his Christ as a perfect redeemer. In who^ he has sealed
the assurance of ^l those things by his holy spirit; to whom he has given his
word; in whom the word and spirit have begot faith; by whose power faith has
begotten joys in 1
heavenly things; in whom joy has wrought a sincere heart to please God; in
whom sincerity 2
is accompanied with love unfeigned to the Lord and his Saints; love joined with
a 3
care to obey the commandments; this care breeding a reverent fear to please
God; in 4
whom this godly fear rebukes sin; the rebuking of sin works a mourning
spirit; in 5
whom a mourning spirit begets true meekenes, this meekenes of mind causing
us to 6
hunger after Christ. So as feeling his own misery, he is taught to show
mercy unto others, 7
and so shows mercy as it is with the bowels of compassion; whose heart God
so governing, 8
that all outward benefits turn to his blessing, as seals of the favor of
God; unto 9
whom all crosses being sanctified in Christ, turn to his good: who finally in
this faith 10
and fruits of faith, meekely and patiently possessing his soul, waits and
looks assuredly 11
for the glorious kingdom of God after this life. This is the golden chain of
undoubted 12
blessedness, whose linckes are so fastened the one in the other, that
wheresoever 13
any of them be wanting, there is a breach and weakness made in the whole. 14


To make speed to good things. 15
16

1 AS it is a fearful thing to hasten to do evil, and to linger to an evil
thing is an 17
holy lingering: so it is a blessed thing to hasten to godliness, and to make
speed to a good thing, is a hastines very godly, Psalm. 42. Psalm. 95. Elisha
must not salute any body in the way: the Apostles must not commune with any in
their journey, and why? They must make haste to do the will of God. It is
profitable to make haste to heaven; but it is no wisdom to make haste to
hell: and yet to do well, we find a Lion in the streets; but to do evil,
nothing can stay us He that evil come to heaven must make haste: for the
kingdom of God Or as another copy, is taken of them, that use violence to
come to it.
must be taken violently: he must be like those wise virgins not linge^ing to
get oil, nor delaying ^o furnish themselves with the graces of God against the
coming of Christ.

Sleep.
1 BEcause great natural and worldly sorrow and joy will cause a man to break
his sleep at midnight, he ^ould try himself whether sorrow for sin, and
joy in salvation had caused him to do the like.

Sermons.
1 MAny men may be said to be Sermon-sick, as there are some said to be
Sea-sick: for Sermonsicke.
as they that are Sea-sicke, for the time of their seafaring, so long as they
be on the water are feeble stomacked, faint hear^ed, ever ready to die: and
yet arriving on the land, being gotten out of the ship, and having paused some
little time, do begin to forget their late troubles, and to recover their
former strength again: So many, so long as they are in the Church hearing, and
are tossed by the power of the word, their hearts are sick, their consciences
melt, they are much troubled: but when once the voice cease, and they are out
of the Church doors, and have acquainted themselves with the air of the
world, they forget what they heard, and wherewith they were moved, and so
retire to their former life again.

Schism.
1 ALthough it is sure that a good man shall not finally fall in the maine
points of his salvation, yet he may be seduced in some less matters, but for
all that in the end he shall escape: but the seducer shall surely be punished.
For a well meaning man found in faith, and yet a nouice in Christ, may be
carried to like some solemn superstitions, and po^pous ceremonies in the
worship of God. Again, a man careful and right in the substance of salvation,
for the remnants of corruptions and defects of good things, may easily be
drawn of a malicious man to cut off himself from the Church, not being able
to discern between essential and accidental, between the principal and
inferior points, which make or destroy a Church, that is, which cannot judge
how, the substantial ground works remaining, there is a Church, though there
be otherwise some accidental things wanting. If any man not so much intending
this man's good, as to feed his own ambition, Schisms.
pride, stomach or vain glory, shall carry such a one to such superstitions
or schisms, he by his evil heart intending to hinder the truth, and to
destroy the temple of God, the Lord shall destroy him, and he shall either grow
profane or worldly, or he shall be cut off by death, or bear some other token
of Gods wrath. And because of a singularity of Singularity of spirit.
spirit, such men with an evil conscience disturb the Church, they may grow
from error to heresies, from preciseness to prophannesse, from strictnes to
madness, not being content to be corrupted, but seeking to corrupt. Howbeit, the
man of infirmities and for want of judgment going in an high path, shall in
the end inherit good things and be saved, but as by fire.

The true suruay and examination of our selves.
1 When we examine ourselves, we are to sit in judgment over our selves, and
to keep a solemn court in our own consciences, to suruay our manners: our
wits, our senses, our members, and to see how we have used them: but yet least
we should be too favorable to our selves, either in not espying out our
sins, or in not co^demning our sins, still we remember to make the law our
judge, but Christ the answerer of the judge.

The motions of the spirit of God in us.
1 IT is a good thing to make much of a tender conscience, and to nourish the
motions of Gods spirit, and not to offer any violence to that spirit of grace,
which rebukes sin i^ us: for he that has once cracked his credit, will
happily care for nothing: she that has once bruised her virginity, will by
all likelihoods prove an old harlot. It is dangerous to bury the checkes of
our conscience, to fight against Gods spirit, or to ^mother the Check of
conscience.
light of grace in us: for so we may grow to such a sottishnes in sin, that
no admonition can forewarne us, nor punishment can affray us: the smallest
means will provoke us to sin, the greatest means cannot revoke us from
sin. For suffering our selves to be hardened by degrees, the spirit is so
quickly quenched, the conscience so tender is so soon bruised, that it is no
marvel though we use so great preciseness and wariness in so tender a
matter, by suspecting the retire of old sins, and by foreseeing the assaults
of new sins.

Evil spirits.
1 HE observed the difference of superstition and true religion in many things,
and namely, how the devil whilst he was made known to men only by horns,
by claws, or by an hollow voice, was wonderfully feared; but now being
revealed to Satan feared in superstition too much, and now in the light too
little.
be a more secret adversary, a spiritual tempter, a privy ouerthrower of the
soul, no man almost regards him: and therefore as some have feared him too
superstitiously; so now it is come to a more dangerous extremity, that he is
not feared at all: and which is more, we cannot truly believe the gracious
help of Gods holy Angels, but seek after Satan's practices He marked, that
good men and learned, did much omit this in their prayers, that God would send
his Angels to them to deliver them from evil spirits.

Temptations.
1 EVery man is that indeed that he is in temptation.

2 The faithful shall not be tempted above their strength, but with the
increase of temptation the Lord will increase our faith: or with the decrease
of our faith he will decrease our temptation.

3 Gods children have their faith so tried by the cross, as always some
dross of sin The crosses of the faithful ever take away some dross from
them.
is purged away thereby. As Jacob ceased not to wrestle though his thigh were
^^^^^d, till he got the blessing: so we must not faint in temptation though we
be humbled, til we get the victory. We must not despair of victory, because
in our striving we had some infirmities; but rather we must rejoice in this,
that God has given us a will and a desire to cleave unto him.

4 It is a great fault in time of temptation not to resist those corruptions,
which after our To resist our corruption in temptation.
temptation is over, we are ashamed of, and time it self resists them.

5 Outward temptations do not hurt till our inward corruption does yield: but
rather they are as Surgeons to draw out our festered corruptions. Outward
temptations.


6 Long and strange temptations may betoken long and strange sins.

7 Gods servants being tempted, are not so much to look at their state
present, as on Strange temptations.
their estate to come: because they that presently sow in tears, in time to
come shall reap in joy.

8 He said, that when a great temptation hangs long upon us, it were good to
seek Against great temptations.
for some special sins in us, because that we shall find that for some
privy pride, or unthankfulness, or such like, a temptation remains long with
us. There is a a train of corruption in us, and God often punishes one sin
with another; which if we epsy not, but look only to the grosser sins, we
shall hardly be brought to humble our souls underneath the hand of God, or to
profit by the admonition of others. Again, we must avoid all occasions of
drawing on sin, and use ruery principal means at the least that helps
against sin For although we shun all occasions, and use many means, and
omit but one of the chiefest, God may correct that one omission in us.

9 He thought it to be a Christian d^scretion never to utter a temptation, but
when a When to manifest our temptations to our brethren.
man had no comfort in himself, or when he stood in very great need of
comfort, and then always to discern to whom he opened it.

10 Subtlety and violence are usually attendant upon the temptations of the
devil and the flesh: the devil especially using these two.

11 Unto one that was much tempted with unbelief, he gave this counsel: When
the Sathanicall temptations.
temptation comes, either fall down in prayer, and say, Lord thou make me
to possess the sins of my youth, and this temptation is of very equity:
howbeit, oh Lord, To be tempted with unbelief and the remedies.
grant I may by wisdom herein, make this temptation an holy instruction, and
suffer me to possess my soul in patience: oh turn this ^o thy glory and my
salvation. I see and confess what has been in me a long time, by that which
now shows it self in me, and that thy grace ^ath altogether hitherto kept
under this corruption: yet Lord I believe, and yet Lord I will believe, help
Lord my unbelief, thy name be praised for this seal 1
of thy love, and pledge of thy spirit; that in this unbelief I am grieved, as
in my belief Prayer.
I am wont to be comforted. And though my former old and secret sins, descrue
that I should not only be given over to infidelity, but also that it should be
in me without grief and remorse, ^et Lord forgive me my sins new and old,
forgive me my unthankfulness, increase my faith. And gr^^t good father, when
thou shall restore to me this gift of faith 2
again, that I may use it in fear, and show it in fruits. Or if this do not
prevail, give Reading of the word.
your self with all humblenes to read the word of God, especially his
promises, and be still attending upon the means, waiting when the Lord shall
in large your heart. Or if this 3
do not help, go to some faithful brother, confess your self to him,
acknowledge your Confession.
weakness to him, and be not ashamed to give God the glory, by shaming your
self, and opening your corruption to him, that so he may pray for you, whose
prayer according 4
to the promise of God, made to his holy ordinance herein, James. 5 undoubtedly
shall be Attend on your calling with patience.
heard in the appointed time. Thus having prayed by yourselfe, and with
another, and used the means of reading for your recovery, though you have not
present relief: yet in meekenes of mind, and patience of your spirit, go to
your calling, knowing that your 5
prayers and the word of God, being as seed, must have some time between the
sowing Not to reason with our temptations or the devil.
of them, and the reaping of the increase and fruit of them. Above all, reason
not with your temptations, dispute not with the devil, as though you could
prevail of your self. And as I would not you should dispute with your
temptation, so I would not you should despise it, and make no account of it:
for in both are extremities. If you take it too much to heart, or marvel how
you should overcome such a temptation, it will make you dull or desperate. If
you account of it too little, and marvel how such things should come into your
head, which was not wont to be so, it will make you not to strive, and you
shall be swallowed up before you be aware. If you account of it too fearfully,
Satan will oppress you before you begin to fight. If you account of it too
lightly, the devil needs not to wrestle with you, you will overcome your
self: therefore fear in respect of your self, 6
fight boldly in Christ, tremble at your own corruptions, but rest and trust
in Christ your To wait the temptation, and so to offer it up to God in prayer.
salvation. If still you are tempted and no body by you, write your temptation,
and offer it to God by prayer, and promise to him that you will ask counsel
at his word, at the mouth of his minister, when he shall give you just
occasion. If all this help not, comfort your self with this pledge of
Election, that you are ioyed when you feel your belief, and you are grieved
least you displease God by your unbelief: and know, that as there is 7
a vicissitude of the means of salvation, which you must use; so there is also
a vicissitude Remedy.
of temptations, whereof this is one, against which you must strive.

12 Unto one that was tempted with worldly shame, and thought the
distemperature To be tempted with worldly shame, and the remedies.
of his mind proceeded thereof, he said on this sort: First know, that Satan
has no absolute power, but a power by permission to try us: against which we
must arm our selves ly faith; which will assure us, that either the Lord will
mittigate our temptation, if our power and patience be not great: or else, if
he ^^large the trial, he will increase our strength according to the
proportion of our temptation. We must also pray, that the 1
Lord give not out that measure of leave to the devil, which we give out to
sin, to work 2
rebellion in us against his majesty: but that he would rather make Satan a
Surgeon to show us our sins, than a Sergeant to confound us for them. It
is the policy of the adversary, to persuade many that the weakness of their
body, and feeblenes of their brain When and how temptations breed.
proceeds of their temptations; when indeed it comes of their unstained
minds, wandering too much after the motions of the devil, in that they not
resting on the word, nor depending on Christ, nor contenting themselves to be
tried, nor comforting themselves by meditation, attend too much, and confer too
often with the devils illusions and temptations, and so they complain of the
effects, and not of the causes of the temptations, being more grieved for their
present sufferings, than for their sins past. The root of this worldly
shame, is pride, and haughtines of mind, which is a privy evil, and hardly
will be beaten into the head of them that are infected with it. But sure it is
that we would never be so grieved for the loss of a thing, if we did not too
much desire it, and too immoderatly use it, whilst we had it, Ioh. 12. 42.
Which sin of haughtines, the Lord seeing in his children, that they are more
humbled with the loss of worldly credit, than with the sense of their sins,
and loss of his glory; he strikes them with the want of that thing which is
most precious unto them, because they made no conscience of that honor which
is most pr^cious unto him. Wherefore this is the best remedy, rather to be
grieved that we feel not our sins to be pardoned with God, than that we are
known to be sinners against men: and that we be ready to shame ourselves,
that God may have the glory, acknowledging shame and confusion, and the whole
pit of hellish temptations to be due unto us; and glory, praise and
compassion, to be the Lords only. For this is a special work of the child of
God, by temptations rightly humbled, when he is ready to shame himself for
his sin, to glorify God in his mercy.

13 Unto one that thought himself to have sinned against the holy Ghost, he
said: Satan's temptations follow our affections: for if we lightly account of
sin, he bleares our eyes still with Gods mercies. If we begin to make a
conscience of sin, he loadeth us with How Satan's temptations follow our
affections.
the judgments of God, being as ready now to aggrauate this sin, more than
it is in it self, as before he would extenuate it to make it seem less than
it was. Howbeit (said he to the man thus afflicted) I will say unto you, as
Samuel said to the people, after they had One fearing he had sinned against the
holy Ghost.
confessed themselves to have sinned against God with a great sin: True it
is, said Samuel, (not flattering them in their iniquities) ye have sinned
greatly: notwithstanding, if ye will fear the Lord and serve him, and hear
his voice, and not disobey the word of the Lord, ye shall follow the Lord your
God: but if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but disobey the Lords
mouth, then shall the hand of the Lord be upon you, 1. Sam. 12. 14. So I will
not les^en your sin, but I say you have sinned a great sin before the Lord,
in that you made a mock of the word which you knew: yet if you turn to the
Lord in fear and serve him, your sin is remissible, howsoever Satan
charge your conscience, in that you have done evil against your own
knowledge, and in that you are afraid, least that sin be in you, and would
rejoice in God if it were not in you: if you purpose to leave your former
sins, and in truth to turn unto the Lord, I dare assure you, that as yet you
are free from that sin.

14 When a maid was so sore troubled, that two or three held her in her fit:
he charged Toresist temptation.
her in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that when the agony came, she
should not willingly yield to it, but in the Lord resist it. For both
experience teaches, that the over much fearing of temptation before it
comes, and little purpose to resist it when it comes, mightily incourageth
Satan: and also the holy Ghost bids us to resist the devil, and he will
fly from us; to draw near to God, and he will draw near to us. And the maid
was never after afflicted.

Thanksgiving.
1 OF all sacrifices, most acceptable is that of thanksgiving: and therefore,
in many words the Saints of God have vowed, and entered into bands with the Lord
to pay this oblation, both to prevent the untowardness of nature, which is so
unwilling to this, as also to shame themselves more if happily they grow herein
negligent: in which repetition of their vows and promises (which argues the
great desire of their hearts: for look what one delights in, he often
speaks of it, and in many words) they declare, that as even in things
agreeable to nature, we will help our delight by often speaking and repeating
of them: so much more this help is requisite in things above nature, and among
all the parts of godliness which are above nature, and chiefly in thanksgiving,
which is most contrary to nature: for we will pray often for a thing, but
hardly give thanks once. And yet experience proves in civil things, that of
all arguments to persuade one to give us a gift, none is more eloquent or
forcible, than to promise our selves to be thankful and mindful for that we
shall receive.

2 It is our common corruption, that the immoderate grief of evils present,
steals Note.
from us all the remembrance of former benefits, and all thankfulness for them.

Unbelief.
1 HE gave this advice to one, that when he felt mistrust of Gods promises, he
should set before him the examples of Gods mercies done to others, that we may
be the more assured to obtain faith: and when he began to presume, Against
presumption and despair.
he should set before him the examples of Gods judgments, that he might pray
for humility.

2 He said to a godly Christian, much inueighing against her unbelief; I do
not now suspect your estate, when you seem to me rather to have faith, than
when you seem to your self to have it. For faith being the gift of God, is
then most obtained and increased Faith and feeling.
of God, when you thirsting after the increase of present feeling, think the
smallest measure obtained to be no faith: and therefore be yet humbled under
the mighty and merciful hand of God for it. Rather I suspect you when you say
you have faith, because then you can less fear and suspect your self, and by
that means lie open to unbelief again. And surely experience proves, that
when we show we have belief, when we mourn for our unbelief, and then our
faith may be least, when we think it to be most. Besides, herein you are to
comfort your self with hope of increase of faith, because faith grows The
growth of faith by two means.
by these two means, either by some great feelings, by the word and the
spirit, and humble thanksgiving joined thereunto: or else by humbling our
selves before the mercy seat of God for want of our faith.

Ungodliness.
1 WE may not go to see ungodliness, to breed a great detestation of it in us.
For 1
first, in respect of our selves in so doing, and presuming on a thing not
warranted, Not to be present at the Mass, or any such superstitious service.
it is the just judgment of God, that we should learn to fall into that sin,
whereof before we were ignorant, because naturally we are inclined to such an
action* Secondly, in respect of our brethren it is unlawful: for if they be
strong, we offend them; if they be weak, we misleade them. Thirdly, in regard
of Gods glory it is unlawful: for such should be our zeal thereunto, (if not
having heroical spirits, by the motions of Gods spirit to speak against it)
that we should not ouersee such a thing. Dan. 3. 15. 2
3


Use of the creatures.
1 AS natural men use Gods creatures to stir up a natural comfort: so
spiritual men should use them to procure some spiritual comfort, and to
stir up godly joys and fruitful meditations in themselves: for as Satan
seeing men of a sanguine complexion and sanctified, labors to mix with
their spiritual joy a carnal i^y: so seeing some of a melancholy complexion
sanctified, to have spiritual sorrows, he bestirreth himself to bring upon
them carnal sorrows.

Unthankfulness.
1 HE would say, I fear not the time of the visitation of them, that thereby
do grow in the gifts and graces of God: but rather I fear the time of their
deliverance, least it should be overtaken with unthankfulness; and so woefully
they should lose the fruit of that good, which so dearly they had purchased
of the Lord.

Visions.
1 BEing asked if there might now be visions agreeable to the word, he said:
They might be extraordinary, but not to be credited but for the words sake:
and who so is moved with them, and not with the word, wherewith a man is
charged to be moved, and is not drawn the more by the vision to the true
means, that man's faith is suspicious. Visions and preaching.
And as visions have been ordinary, and preaching extraordinary: so now
preaching is ordinary, and visions extraordinary. But if you object that the
visions be true: he said, Satan will speak truth, and keep touch twice or
thrice in less matters, to get us in the lu^ch in greater matters, and at
length in some contrary to the word of God.

Of Usury.
1 Usury is the devils Alchymistrie to turn silver into gold; it is lucre by
lending, Lucrum ex ^^^^o. L^^o^^s puluinarii.
and they that use it be a gracious kind of thieves; it is a sin that has
many advocates and patrons. But to whom may this be used? Men are either poor,
mean, or rich: to the poor give freely, to the mean lend freely, of the rich
take usury. The Lord was never the author of this division. Aristotle by the
very light of reason, saw that it was a monstrous thing, for money to beget
money, but Gods law goes further, Leuit. 25 36. Deu. 5. 19. Again, the Jew
of a Jew might not take interest, but the link of a Christian is nearer than
of a Country: their brotherhood was but by Country only, ours by
redemption. Indeed recompense is to be made, where the thing is the worse for
the using that is lent, Exodus 21. 14. but money for the lending is not worse,
Ergo nothing to be taken for the lending of it. No member is permitted but that
which directs others in their callings, as the eye, or labors, being
directed, as the hand: so is it, or ought to be in our vocations: then the
Usurer doing neither, is not to be permitted.

2 A certain man that was an Usurer, asking him how with a good conscience he
might use his money, he said: Occupy it in some trade of life, and when you
can lend to the poor, do it freely and willingly, and that you may henceforth
labor as well against covetousness in occupying that trade, as before you
desired to strive against usury: especially use prayer, the word of God, and
the company and conference of his children: and whatsoever you get by lawful
gain, give evermore the tenth to the poor.

Word of God and the hearing of it.
1 EVermore be musing, reading, hearing, and talking of Gods word, and praying,
that we may keep the purity of doctrine and a good conscience, to wade out of
the iniquity of the time, and to do good as long as we may.

2 If you desire to hear the word with profit, observe these things. Before
you go to Church humble your self in prayer to God, that he may prepare your
understanding Preparation to the hearing of the word.
1
and affection to learn, and memory to retain, and that the preacher may
speak to your consciences. After in hearing with some short prayer, apply the
several threatenings, promises and instructions, to your own estate: when you
are come home from hearing, change all that you remember into a prayer, and
desire God that 2
you may remember it most, when you should practice it, and use to teach
others, and to 3
confer of all things remembered. And this is a good way to remember a thing,
and the 4
reason of it.

3 As the Lord does feed poor prisoners, even with a little food, who though
they Simile.
desire more foo^e, can have no more, and do not refuse more ordinary means;
and the same God suffers many to be pined, who having abundance, think
themselves rather Means of salvation.
cloyed with the means, than nourished by Gods providence: so the Lord
extraordinarily does nourish the souls of them, who having few means, do
look for the ordinary means more plentifully: and suffers some to rot in
ignorance, who being at the full measure of the means, have no reverent regard
of the necessity of them. And hereof it comes to pass, that some hungry
souls have been filled with more grace at one sermon, than the proud, who
having heard many sermons, are sent empty away.

Witchcraft.
1 SEnding his friend to one that thought her self bewitched, he gave these
aduertisements: First and chiefly to beware of sending to Wizards. Secondly, to
use prayer Aduertisements against witchcraft.
1
that Satan might be confounded. Thirdly, to labor to bring the person to
repent for 2
sin, because God permits such things to be done, either to correct some
evil, or to 3
try our faith. Lastly, to persuade the party to wait for the time of
deliverance, though 4
it were long before it came: because having repented for sin, yet the Lord
will defe^e health to make a further trial of us: whether we will still trust
in his help, or fly to unlawful means.

2 One asking what he thought of Fayries: he answered, he thought they were
spirits: but he distinguished between them and other spirits, as commonly men
distinguish between Not for that they are good or lawful, but of blind people
so called and reputed.
good witches and bad witches.

Worship of God.
1 IT is good to take up the opportunity of the morning for the worship of God.
For first, who so will see the image of his heart, he shall by observing his
first thoughts in the The morning how fit for Gods worship.
1
morning come to some light of it. Again, of all times it is most fit to do
any thing in, 2
and we, by reason of the alacrity which comes upon us after our rest, are
most fit to do any thing in it. Besides, if we be seriously minded on good
things in the morning, other vile thoughts shall the more feeb^y fasten on us
all the day after. And again, delay the 3
morning, with suffering worldly thoughts to seize on us, and our mind will be
so forestalled 4
with them, that we cannot easily and roundly gather up our affections
afterward to Gods worship. For this is a sure note, that he which consecrateth
in truth the first fruits Note.
of the day to the Lord, and shu^teth up the day with sacrificing to him; if he
have any sin falling on him in the day time, he is checked, either with his
first morning sacrifice, because he has not done as he prayed, and promised
unto the Lord: or he is controuled by the evening and latter sacrifice, in that
a fear and shame of his sin, makes him appalled to come into the presence of
God.

World.
1 When two gentlemen ride a hunting, it is hard to discern each others
hounds, Simile.
because they be mingled together, which afterward is more easily done when the
hunters are severed: Even so, so long as Gods children and worldlings walk as
it were together, it is hard to distinguish between the heirs of the one and
of the other: but when they are severed by persecution, it will surely be seen
who be the children of God, and who be the heirs ^f the world.

Word preached.
1 MAny come to prayer, and of custom resort to the Sacraments, who either do
not 1
at all hear the word preached; or else they hear at their leisure; or else
they do 2
it bu^ in ceremony without understanding; or if they do understand it, they
do not 3
practice it; or if they practice it, it is done coldly, and not in power, and
yet their own 4
practice in some things is somewhat strange. They will grant that to come to
the Sacrament 5
requires a more solemn preparation: and yet they dare boldly adventure on
Preperation to the word and Sacraments.
prayer and on hearing of the word, without any preparation at all. But
certainly as the abuse of the Sacrament brings judgment; so the abuse of
prayer and the word will procure it: for as the prayer of faith is a sweet
oblation to the Lord; so the prayer of the unbeliever is an abomination to the
Lord. We must not only bring the ear of understanding, but we must also bring
the ear of remembrance, and of practice, and beware that the word by little
and little wax not less precious unto us, as honey to the mouth that is
satisfied. Of profiting in holy exercises.
And this is sure, when and how much the word preached does prevail, so much
our prayers and sacrifices do prevail: look how much the word preached does
profit, so much do we profit in prayer, and in the Sacraments. And whenever
our delights in the word wax faint, our prayers and all good exercises are
like shortly to decay. Prayer brings a All our power in prayer comes from
the word.
feeling, and the Sacraments a more confirming of that which we have in the
word. We must beware therefore that we be not too quiet in sin, that we
please not our selves in a general good, and in a persuasion we have heard
enough, but still let us labor for the word: for I dare say that all our power
in prayer comes from the word, even as the life that is in a tree is
invisible, and yet by the fruits coming out in due season is discerned Simile.
of all: and as the life of a child is a thing not seen, but by moving, going
and feeling is Simile.
easily perceived; so the life of faith is a thing very secret, and yet by the
effects of it at one time or other is discerned of good men. There may seem to
be works, and yet not faith; and there may be faith, and yet not works by and
by following. Many men think the word now preached not to be the right word,
because few men are brought to the obedience of God by so long preaching of it.
But we must rather reason the contrary: this is a sure note it is the true
word, because it is so much refused, and men are made the worse by abusing the
word: which as it would make them better, and does make better all that obey;
so it makes worse all that do not receive it in love, that they may be saved*
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

AN OTHER ADDITION OF AN HUNDRED GRAVE COVNSELS OR DIVINE APHORISMS.
IF you desire to hear the word with profit, observe these things: before you
go to the Church, humble your self Hearing the word profitablie.
in prayer to God, that he may prepare your understanding, affection, and
memory to receive: and that the Preacher may speak to your conscience: after
in hearing with 1
some short prayer, apply the several threatenings, promises, 2
and instructions to your own estate: when you are 3
come home from hearing, change all that you remember 4
into prayer, and desire God that you may remember it 5
most, when you should practice it: and use to teach others, 6
and to confer of the things remembered: it is a good way 7
8
to remember a thing, diligently, to remember the reason of it.

2 The cause why our meditations and prayers are no stronger in the night, is
because Meditation and Prayer.
we join not with meditation the examination of our hearts upon our beds:
which if we did in some truth, it would keep us from drowsinesse, and want of
reverence in our prayers, as well as worldly men are kept waking by thinking of
worldly matters. Here we are taught by David's example, when we want the more
solemn and glorious means in dignity, to make a supply by often and sincere
using of such private means as we can.

3 It is better to offer a voluntary and free sacrifice in respect of Gods
mercy, as do Our obedience must be free, not constrained.
the Angels, than a violent and constrained obedience, as do the Devils And
this dare^ say, that though the fearful pronouncing of the curse, the wrath,
the judgment of God be fearful in the law, yet the denouncing of our
separation from Gods kingdom, of the gnawing worm, of the second death, is
far more fearful in the Gospel, which by how much it is the more proper
seat and treasury of Gods mercies, so when thundrings and lightnings do
proceed from thence, they are the more piercing.

4 Two notes to discern good Christians from hypocrites. First, whether they
complain Trial of Hypocrites.
of their own wants and corruptions. Secondly, whether they speak with grief
and compassion of the infirmities of others.

5 To one that seemed scrupulous in wearing the Surplice and Cap, and
notwithstanding Ceremonies.
stood in need of greater things; he said: As I will not for all the world
advise you ^o wear them; so I would counsel you to be well grounded ere you
leave them, least you shaking them off, ^ather of light affection than of sound
judgment, afterward take them again to your great shame and the offense of
others.

6 The greater gifts we have, the flesh is the prouder, and Satan the readier
to assault Pride.
us.

7 The Church is to fear and expect some notable affliction, when long ease
and prosperity Church.
have bred either superstition or profaneness.

8 Think not with thy self, if I were in such a place, if I were in such a
calling, or if it Against de^^^^s of repentance.
were such a time, if I had obtained such a thing, or if such a trouble were
past, then I would serve God, then I would take another course: though the time
were changed, and these things changed, yet if thy mind were not changed,
thou would be of the same opinion still; and though these lets were r^moued,
yet the devil would put more great impediments into thy mind to hinder thee
still, but redeem the time present, do good while thou may: serve God to
day, for who knows whether thou shall live till to morrow. God has left to
man the time past to repent of it, and the time present to Repentance.
consider of it, but the time to come he has wholly taken to himself, to
dispose of it. Thou may imagine the time to come; but if thou have been
deceived in the time past, art deceived of the time present, much more thou
shall be deceived of the time to come. Say not then I will do such a thing,
and such a thing hereafter; do something now; for art thou a Papist? Have thou
free will? If thou find thy self unfit now, thou shall find thy self more
unfit hereafter: if there be many occasions to hinder thee now, there will be
more occasions to hinder thee hereafter.

9 The persons afflicted are either the reprobate, or Gods elect, the children
of wrath, Afflictions of the reprobate
or the children of God. The afflictions of the reprobate are the punishments
of their sins: here they suffer some, in hell they shall suffer all torments;
here for a time, there for ever; here a little, there unmeasurable. Gods
children are either his children only by election, and not by effectual
vocation: or else such as are called in Christ. The affliction of Gods children
not effectually called, are the punishments of sin: God will have Afflictions
of the elect, before grace, and in grace.
them under the rigor of his justice, to make them meet to receive the grace of
his mercy. Gods children not only by election, but also by effectual
vocation, are of two sorts: they are either such as are not sufficiently
called, which are more out of Christ then in Christ, or else they are
sufficiently called, in whom Christ lives.

Again, those that are not sufficiently in Christ, which are more carnal than
spiritual, Note.
are of two sorts, they are either babes in Christ, in whom there has been no
more working of the spirit; or such as have had a greater work of God in them,
in whom the spirit is quenched: those that are but babes in Christ, and
continuing babes still, in whom there is but a little work of God, and great
abundance of flesh, their afflictions are the punishments of sin: because
they will not be governed by the rule of Gods spirit, God will Heb. 3. 13.
have them ruled by the rod of affliction; and they in whom the spirit of God
is decayed through the deceitfulnes of sin, their afflictions also are the
punishments of their sins, for because they refused the gracious government
of Gods mercy in the Gospel, therefore he brings them back to the rigorous
government of his justice in the law, till Christ be formed anew in them
again. Those only which are sufficiently called, in whom Christ is A sweet
consolation.
thus formed, their afflictions are no punishments of sin: but Christ suffers
with them when they are medicines against sin, much more when they are
trialls of Faith, and most of all when they are for well doing: but all the
former suffered themselves, Christ suffered not with them, because they
suffered for sin.

10 Rebecca wished to have children, but when they strove in her womb, then
she Regeneration and repentance, painful, but very gainful.
brast forth into words of impatiencie: so God gives to some a desire to be
borne again, who when their conception is so painful, and when the spirit and
the flesh strive together, they would sometime be content to be in the old
estate again.

11 When Moses came down from the Mount, the skin of his face did shine, but
only Against spiritual pride.
the people did see it, he did not perceive it: So should our righteousness
shine in the eyes of others, not in our own. Simile.


12 As a Fountain and all the water that springs from it have the same
quality: so the The fountain of the heart.
heart, and the thoughts, words, and deeds are all of the same nature: if one
be filthy all be filthy, and purge one, and purge all. Simile.


13 God calls his children out of this world in the fittest time, when though
they Death.
lived longer, yet they would be no better.

14 If we love not Christ more then his benefits, even than our own
salvation, we To love Christ more then his benefits.
are not worthy of him. Phillip says, John 14. 8. If we may see the Father
it is sufficient: And Jacob said, it is sufficient for me that Joseph is
alive, he cared not for his benefits: And David says (as if he should say
no more) one thing have I desired, to dwell in the house of the Lord.

15 We must at all times ^eare the Word, and use ^^^ the means o^ our (...),
Hearing of the word.
though we feel our selves most unwilling thereunto. For we know not when God
will bless it, or any of them to us. Yea it may be, that when we do but once
a^^^^t our selves from the hearing thereof, such things may be then spoken of,
as may most serve for our souls health.

16 Albeit Marthaes part be the worst, because it continues not, yet the world
hates The love of the world.
Ma^ies part, which is the best, and desires ^uer to choose with Martha.

17 Look how much we would come to Christ; so much we must come to the Word
Word and Sacraments.
and Sacraments.

18 If we rest too much in the outward action of the Word, and not in the
inward affection Hearing the Word.
of the heart; we shall be puffed up, and become profane.

19 Many Protestants can say, it is God that works the will and the deed,
but in a Carnal Protestants.
conceived imagination, not from a persuaded mind, and experienced con^c^e^ce:
for if they were persuaded hereof, it would greatly humble them, and make them
to finish their course with reverence and fear.

20 Look what a man loves, he wishes the good thereof. Love.


21 Every one is eaten up with the zeal of one thing or other. Zeal.


22 No man can purchase to himsel^e the glorious ^^^^^, that he loves God,
except he Trial of our love to God.
has a through hatred and detestation of that which ^^d hates.

23 Then shall we unfeignedly praise GOD for our ^^^^ creation, and his
Fatherly providence Regeneration
watching over us; when we are created a new by the Spirit of God, and feel
our Redemption in Christ.

24 As far as the Spirit is above the flesh, God above men, Heaven above the
earth, Regeneration
Eternity above frailty; so far is the new creation above the old: for the
one is but of mortal and corrupt seed that shall per^^h: but the other is of
immortal seed, and from Heaven, a great work of God which shall abide for
ever.

25 In temporal things our joy is greater then the cause: in spiritual
things, the cause Joy.
is greater than the joy.

26 If this be our chiefest felicity to be Gods people, it has also the
chiefest challenge Joy.
to our joy.

27 They that be in the hell of things fleshly, cannot see the heavens of
things spiritual. Love of the world.


28 Spiritual things are tedious, because sense, reason, and nature, cannot
taste of such joys. Joy.


29 Gods children being in the world, though not of the world, but sauouring of
the True joys.
things of the world, must be provoked to this sound joy; and be led from the
crackling joys which flame up for a little, and make a sudden noise, but never
truly heat or comfort the heart, but in death and affliction do much shame
and fear us.

30 To be persuaded of Gods presence in our thoughts, words, and labors, is a
pure Gods presence.
rule of Christianity. In every place we are before God, but more specially in
private prayer, and most of all in public prayer.

31 As there is no sin so great, but with repentance is pardonable; so there
is no sin Repentance.
so little, but without repentance is damnable.

32 The offense of sin is not so great as the de^ence of sin. Sin.


33 One tear of repentance is better then a thousand sack-clothes: first, our
sorrow Repentance.
must be spiritual, then continual; because our sin breeds at the heart,
and buddeth forth daily. There is no greater misery, than to be without
misery; nor greater sorrow, then to be without sorrow.

34 As the child breaking one rod, and burning it, provoke his father to
prepare Affliction.
a sharper: so a man impatiently wrestling with one affliction sent from God,
and escaping it, provoke the Lord in greater displeasure to send a sharper
scourge.

35 The more godly a man is, and the more the graces and blessings of God are
upon Prayer.
him, the more need he has to pray, because Satan is busiest against him, and
because he is readyest to be puffed up with a conceited holiness.

36 Where the Scripture has not a mouth, we ought not to have ears. Word.


37 O^ that one would do that thing, the remembrance whereof ^o long after
should To respect future joys and griefs.
bring comfort: oh that one should do that thing, the re^e^ora^ce whereof so
long after sh(...)g grief: and yet we so little esteem^ ^ho^e ^^^^gs, which
might after comfort us, and so little fear those things which might aft^r
grieve us.

38 The ^^^^s is often taken for the moral law of God: his precepts for the
Ceremonial See Psalm. 119.
Law: his Judgments or Righteousness, for the ^a^cti^us of the Law, whereby
the Lord ^^^ accomplisheth his promises for his Children, or execut^th his
wrath upon his ^^^m^es.

39 A though the Lord has promised a special blessing to the public
ministry of his Ministry.
word, yet we must not the his wisdom to any ordinary mea^es, but if any at
any time, shall have more ^ffectuall feelings by private conference, let him
not neglect the public reading, but with all holy and humble thankfulness,
yield this sovereignty to the Lord, that he is to dispose his gifts, to whom,
by whom, where, and when it pleaset^ him.

40 We are never the further from temptation for misliking it, but the nearer,
unless Temptation
as in judgment we mislike it, so in affection we humble our selves in fear
and prayer, as knowing that in time it may invade us.

41 Though often we speak of things lawful, yet we want wisdom in examining
the Conference.
ti^^^ pl^^e, ^^^ persons, when, where, and with whom we talk; and so Satan
labors to m^ke us sil^nt, when we might speak to Gods glory. For the
avoiding of this temp^ation we must speak when GOD gives us occasion, being
thankful for the good mo^io^s of Gods spirit; and humbled for our weakness,
whereby both our speeches are most s^ained, and we fail in many circumstances.
Then doing it in singlenes of hear^, only for the love of Gods word, and of
his glory, let us wholly commit the succ^ss^ (wh^^h depends not on us, though
we observe all circumstances,) to the blessing of God in Jesus Christ.

42 In the regeneration and dying of sin, we come as it were to the best
head, and trial Regeneration
of our hearts, when we come to those sins, wherein either nature or custom
does breed delight.

43 The meditation of death does so far move us from suffering our delights to
dwell Meditation of Death.
on earthly things, as reason disswadeth us from making any cost about a
tabernacle, where we know we shall dwell but a while.

44 Our corruption is like to the wantonness of children, who will do either
as they Obedience.
list or ^l^^ leave all undone.

45 When we think that our chiefest care is to glorify God, we indeed do
seek our Vainglory.
own glory.

46 It is a gracious thing to use all our members to Gods worship; for that
will comfort Gods worship
our conscience, when we cannot use them.

47 If we ^^ notorious in sin, we shall be notorious in an evil name: Many
would be A good name
lo^h to be ^^^^ed wicked, who can be contented to be wicked: but Gods children
had rather be good then accounted good; as the covetous man, etc.

48 Ma^ie often times desire that, which when they have gotten their conscience
is afraid Desires.
to use.

49 Lord give me thy grace to remember the bead-row of my sins to humble me
in Prayer.
prayer: Lord teach me the catalogue of thy mercies, truly to make me
thankful.

50 As God does rather oftentimes by heaping his benefits, then pouring his
plagues Offenses.
upon us show us our sins: so we must rather by courteous dealing then severe
handling, show others how they have offended us.

51 Ordinarily when God most comfort, he most humbles before. Humiliation.


52 If God watch over us when we sleep in unbelief, much more he will do it
when Providence.
we wake in faith.

53 The sin of the master of a family, brings sin over the whole
family, as we Family.
see in Ab^melech.

54 We can mark what men are spared, and so flatter our selves: but we mark
not Repentance.
how they repent, least we should disquiet our selves.

55 We must not deny mercy to others, least God deny mercy to us.

56 Many meddle and stir much about a new Church government, which are
sensles Mercy.
and barren in the doctrine of new birth: but ala^, what though a man know many
things, Regeneration
and yet know not himself to be a new creature in Jesus Christ? It is often
the policy of Satan to make us travel in some good thing to come, when more
fitly we might be occupied in good things present.

57 As the creatures were made for man, so were they punished for man.
Creatures.


58 If mercy must plead for mercy: Ma^th: 5 then mercy cannot plead for
merit, Merit.


59 It is a mercy to let us see that by Temptation, which we might feel by
woeful Temptation.
action.

60 If we be tempted, let us first examine it by prayer, whether it be
contrary to the Temptation.
word: if it be a sin, then it brings the curse; if it bring a curse, then
must we tremble: if we tremble not, let us suspect that our nature likes the
temptation, and let us apply prayer; if we tremble in truth, we will never
do the thing whereunto we are tempted.

61 The D^uell when he cannot at the first corrupt the action, he will begin to
corrupt Sathanicall suggestions.
the judgment and the affection.

62 When we must of necessity use inferior things, we must use them as
ready to M^anes.
want them.

63 As the hiding of our sin with Adam, hinders mercy: so to confess our
sin Consession.
greater then it is with C^ine, displeases God highly.

64 Many will seek the kingdom of heaven, but not the righteousness thereof.
Hypocrisy.


65 A good thing, if it be let alone, it will decay: but if an evil thing be
let alone, it Good things.
will increase.

66 The Prophets having regard, not what ought to be first in knowledge, but
first in Prophets.
practice, respected not the perfection of order, but the corruption of our
nature.

67 Familiarity with sinners brings the punishment of ^^ne. If the wicked,
that are Familiarity.
without the tuition of God, and stand only upon his ^^^^ (...), and every
minute of an hour lie open to Gods curse and vengeance, if they be our
companions, then when they are punished, doubtless we shall not escape.

68 Sin may easily be conquered of us when it is young; we may easily be
conquered Sin.
of it when it is old.

69 We must not so much rejoice for that we have done, as we must be careful
what Perseverance.
to do hereafter: For man^e are called but few are chosen; many begin
gloriously, which end ignomi^iously.

70 When we defer to have that in affection which we have in judgment, it
is the Affection.
just judgment of God to deprive ^^ ^^ that which we had in judgment.

71 When we have oftentimes q^^ked at a sin; and afterward, although we
like it Repentance.
not, yet if we mislike it not with as great indignation as we were wont to
do, but by little and little we can well away with it; it is to be feared that
by degrees we will fall to that sin ourselves.

72 We must be proud against Satan in Christ, and humble to all men in Christ.

73 The nearer Heresy comes to the likeness of the Truth, the more
dangerous Humility.
it is. Heresy.


74 He that will dissemble with God in his life, will dissemble with him in
his death.

75 Many will take up the sword to defend Christ's cause with Peter, who with
Peter will Repentance.
shrink when persecution comes. Persecution.


76 We shall sometime feel by experience a terror suddenly come upon us when
we are alone, or vehemently to strike us in the night, which is sent to humble
us, the Physician Sudden terrors of mind.
will say it is a melancholy passion: but it is the power of Gods presence,
preparing us to prayer, or some such service of God: which when we feel, if
we fall down before God in prayer, we shall find an unspeakable joy
following it: but if we cherish it with evil surmises, it will lead us to
further inconveniences.

77 When we have greatest cause of joy for doing some good; then it is a good
thing Unthankfulness.
most to fear our unthankfulness, and our self-love, and our secure unkindness.

78 When Satan cannot get us to gross sins, he will ^ssaile us with
spiritual temptations. Temptations.


79 Nothing in the world will so much fear and shame us, as God in his mercies
powered Humility.
upon us: which meditation in receiving graces from God, will humble us from
pride in them, and keep us in fear; which be the ways to obtain new mercies.

80 We must beware of smoothering the watch word of our conscience, when we are
Conscience.
bent to sin. Every man in his own conscience is forewarned of sin, though
the Lord speak not to him from heaven, as he did to Cain.

81 As a man being outlawed, may take his pleasure for a while: but whenever,
or Security.
wheresoever he may be taken, he must yield to that punishment, which by
verdict is appointed: so the wicked, on whom sentence of damnation is already
passed, may for a while shake off their pains with vain pleasures, but
afterward they shall be arrested, and carried violently to the place of woeful
execution. But for the godly, (which have the assurance of their inheritance
sealed up in their consciences) though they shall be warned in the day of the
resurrection, to make their open appearance; yet as honest men of the country
shall stand before the Judge, not as fellonious offenders.

82 We must first make men by a feeling of sin to seek Christ, by an holy
faith to Feeling.
find Christ, and then by newnes of life to dwell with Christ.

83 Bal^am prayed that he might die the death of the righteous: but let us pray
that Death.
we may live the life of the righteous, for he lived not the life of the
righteous, and therefore he could not die the death of the righteous: and if we
live the life of the righteous, we shall be sure to die the death of the
righteous.

84 It is a great token of regeneration, if we do not only sorrow for great
sins, and Regeneration.
sigh for small offenses, but mourn for particular wants of good actions, or
in good actions for w^nt of good affections.

85 There is small hope of him which cannot discern in himself the life of
the spirit, Regeneration.
and the life of the flesh, and it is to be doubted that he is yet unregenerate.

86 When men being young are too much given to carnal pleasures, they being
old Youth.
are too much given to worldly profit.

87 As we have taken a vain delight in the vain course of this life: so we
must sigh Youth.
and pray to be delighted spiritually in spiritual things.

88 Adam should have been no worse for his temptation, no more than Christ was;
but Temptation.
that the one yielded, the other did not.

89 If the blood of Christ has washed us from the guiltines of sin; then the
holy Sanctification.
Ghost has purged us from the filthiness of sin.

90 When our sin has less liking in us, then there is hope that it will
decay in us: Repentance.
especially if we sorrow for it when we cannot fully forsake it, and labor to
forsake it because it is sin.

91 In true mortification we must have the first motions of sin, and condemn
them Mortification.
as accessaries to sin in conspiring the death of our souls.

92 Hypocrisy is seen, when sin lies most dead under a cloak, and most
lives Hypocrisy.
under a closet; wherewith God is so displeased, that when we make no
conscience of sin in close places, our privy sins shall break forth into
open places.

93 Particular infirmities do not hinder the preparation of our hearts for the
Lord, if Infirmities.
we have a true love of his word, as had Iehosaphat.

94 Two things are necessary to espouse us to Christ: the one to use the pure
means, Our spiritual vinion with Christ.
the other to use those means with a pure heart.

95 If we play with our own affections, sin in the end, from sport, will
spur us to confusion. For though we be twice or thrice spared, yet we must
know that the Lord will Affections.
recompense his long tarrying with wrath.

96 Through our corruption we profit more by the doctrine of a man, if we
think he Admonition.
be our enemy, than if we think him to be our friend: for if he be our
friend, we let it pass as not spoken to us, though the matter never so much
concern us: if our enemy, if it never so little touch us, we think it to be
spoken against us.

97 Walking spirits are undoubtedly not the souls departed, but the evil
spirits of the Spirits.
air.

98 It is a great mercy of God to have a large affection of weldoing, when we
have Goodworks.
good occasion thereof: for God never cease in offering occasions, but we
often cease in having affections.

99 Obedience is a chain to tie up all the creatures of God from our hurt, and
as a Obedience.
thing to muzzle their mouths that they cannot bite us. Again, disobedience
breaks and opens the mouths of all things to our destruction.

100 If we have not the favor of men, it is either for the trial of our
faith, or for want Favor.
of duty unto them that are displeased with us, or because we sought to please
them by displeasing of God, or because we have not prayed for them; or have
offended God, for which he causes men to be offended with us.

1 Because we do not to men the good we should do, God often suffers them
to report Report.
of us the evil they should not.

2 Those temptations are most dangerous which have most holy ends. Temptation.


3 When a man is most merry, he is nearest danger. Mirth.


4 It is the easiest thing in the world to deceive a good man. Deceit.


5 God has two hands; in the one he holds a hammer to break the proud in
pieces, Gods hand.
and to bray them to powder; in the other hand he has a horn, to power Gods
blessings upon the humble, 1. Pet. 5. 5.

6 If a man should be stinted to one meal a week, he would have a pined body
at the Word.
weeks end: even so, if our souls be but fed with the word once a week, they
would be as hunger-starued, if we could see it.

7 You are in earth to follow your calling, you are not yet in heaven. Adam
when he Vocation.
was most holy by creation, and free from every jot of sin and corruption,
did walk in his calling appointed of God: much more then are we comfortably to
follow the Lord his ordinance; seeing these outward things did not come in with
sin, but were ordained before sin.

8 Whatsoever is upon you, it is from the Lord: and whatsoever is from the
Lord, to Affliction.
you, it is in mercy: and whatsoever comes in mercy, ought not to be grievous
unto you. What loss is it, when the losing of earthly things, is the gaining
of spiritual things? What if your body be decayed, your soul being renewed?
Have you had comfort in your body; but as it is the temple of the holy Ghost,
the Lord preparing it for his Spirit, why are you grieved? Your body is the
Lords, and the Lords loving hand is upon your body; all shall be for your good,
if you make your use of all.

9 In our greatest earnestnes we should be most jealous over our own hearts,
and then Zeal.
especially examine our affections. When we cannot gage the depth of our
hearts, we should impute it to want of prayer, and the not traveling with our
hearts how to do it in wisdom.

10 God by his graces and benefits marketh us, and prepares us for some
temptation Temptation.
to come: for he puts not on the armor, but he will also provide for us the
battle.

11 Not the finding of a want only, but the seeking of a remedy to supply
the want, is Godliness.
a token of a godly mind.

12 That God that drew light out of darkness, does often draw goodness out of our
corruption. Grace.


13 The Lord will rather look upon his old graces which we have received, than
on Mercy.
the new sins which we have committed.

A THIRD ADDITION OF GRAVE COVNSELS, AND DIVINE DIRECTIONS, FOR THE ATTAINING
AND RETAINING OF FAITH, AND a good Conscience.
EVen as a man swimming in deep water^ is not in danger of drowning, so long
as his head still keeps above the water: So though Simile.
we swim in deep and dangerous waters of our accusing consciences, The
security of the faithful wandering through all the tribulations of this life.
yet we are sure and secure, that we shall not finally be overthrown,
because our Head still remains above all in heaven; which Head is CHRIST, who
undoubtedly can no more condemn, forsake, deny, and separate himself from
us, then he that was condemned for us, can condemn us; then the advocate can
forsake his Client; then the Prince can deny the Subject; then the head can
be separated from his members.

So that when we dare not present our prayers in our persons, we must present
them to Christ, and Christ will present them to his Father, whereby our prayers
that are unworthy Hebr. 12. 15.
to appear by reason of our corruption, are most worthy because of Christ his
intercession; for whose sake the Lord turns his wrath from poor sinners
^ccused by Satan. For Christ is now our governor, not as he is God alone,
for so has he always been, but as Mediator, that is, as God and man, which
he shall be, until he having delivered up the kingdom to God the Father,
shall cease from his Mediatorship, and shall be all in all.

2 There is a general faith, and a particular faith, a general faith assuring
us, that God is such a one as his word prescribes, a particular faith applying
things to our selves. This particular faith is either active or passive:
active, when we believe, that if we keep the law we are saved; and this faith
was in Adam, and is in the devils, and yet neither of them having the
justifying faith. For Adam had it, when the passive or justifying faith needed
not; the devils have it, who know, that if they could fulfill the law they
should be saved: but they do not believe it to be fulfilled of any other for
them. The passive faith, which is only of the Gospel, whereby we are stayed
in the obedience of Christ imputed unto us, is the true justifying faith, and
only proper to God his children. The active faith, is either of the precepts,
or of the judgments of God: of the judgments of God, I say, because one may
believe the precepts, and yet not believe the other. Eua at the first fall
believed the commandment of God to be good, for she could confirm it with a
strong reason, but she halted in believing the threatening of God, and
extenuated it with a peradventure. Custom. Eye.


3 A strong custom in evil things is as a second nature.

4 The eye is the best window for Satan. A comparison between the children of
light and darkness.


5 As it is true, that the children of darkness are wiser in their generation,
than the children of light, so it is as true, that the children of light in
their light, are better than the children of darkness.

6 If a man rightly observes the course of corruptions in others, he may have
an easy character of corruptions in himself, or if he take a godly view of
the graces of God in How to examine our selves.
himself, he shall have a more speedy sight of the graces of God in another:
again, if we make an Anatomy or our own ^^ir^^ties, we shall the better
discern the veins and cond^ites of sin mothers; or if we reverently observe
the graces of God in another, he Note well.
shall see the image of that which is in himself. Howbeit, because the holy
Ghost works by many means* and the devil has many shifts, and therewithal
our discerning of good things is dim, and our judgment of sin is corrupt,
we must not be too strict herein. Only we may with safety make this use, that
we make others to us, and our selves to others, as looking glasses ^ow good.

7 We must in reading the Judgments of God observe this rule, that ruinae
praecedentium Judgments.
must be pr^m^^^tio sequentium.

If any man will try conclusions against God his conclusion, he shall prove
nothing in the end, but himself to be a ^oole; and if he fail in his trial,
by how much he might the more be before admonished, by so much he is the more
without excuse.

8 There are many that f^are, Psalm: 14. when no cause of fear is: but there
are more rejoice, where no cause of joy is. Fear and joy.


If a man walk in the cool of the wood and be refreshed, it is nothing: but,
if a man walk, as did the three children, in the fiery furnace, and be
refreshed, that is a cooling indeed: Joy in afflictions.
So, to be refreshed with ordinary means of wine, oil, wheat, fruits, or
whatsoever, is a small thing: but in prison, persecution, and trouble, to find
comfortable refreshing, is a thing both worthy to be made of and marue^led ^t.

9 The mind being perpetually in some action, may well be compared to a Mill,
continually grinding out either good or evil. The mind.


10 It is the mercy of God, and wisdom of the holy Ghost, even in things of
their own nature most lawful and good, to take order with us for the pure
using of them, and The pure use of all blessings.
of every motion in them, that so, unless we will obstinately, we should not
be guilty of the abuse of them.

11 Many had rather part from all favor both of God and man, than that they
would lose the grace of some wi^tie speech, which they have devised; so great a
delight they Foolish jesting.
conceive in it. But as we would not have God to murder all joy, so God would
not have us to murder all griefs; but that the remembrance of our bodies
turned to moules, and of souls, called to the book, should correct our unruly
hearts, remembering in our deepest joys the lamentable cries of Syon, and
accompting our delight to be but as the ruins of Babell.

12 Oh, that men would fear and follow the Lord! Well, follow they must one
way or other: If we will not follow the shepherd to the fold, we must follow
the butcher to the shambles: if we choose rather to go to the shambles then to
the fold, we are sheep indeed, and worse then sheep too. But men have gotten
an old distinction, when they are Late repentance.
not able to turn their sick bones on their beds, they then will bring a dish
of sins and dried skins to the Lord: but how unacceptable a sacrifice such
refuses are, Malachit does tell them, and they shall one day try it.

13 If ye ask, whether a man may not lawfully desire to be in the Ministry
or no: I answer, that in the Ministry are two things, a work and a worship;
a duty and a dignity: Ministry.
the work or duty to the glory of God and good of his Church a man may
desire: but the worship and dignity to serve our own loose minds is not to
be desired.

14 It is the wisdom of God in his holy word, not only to instruct us in
things concerning our salvation, but also to teach us in things of this life.
For although all things be The right use of the creatures.
good in the ordinance of God, yet they are not good to us, unless by
knowledge and faith we be able to use them according to the ordinance of God,
with prayer and thanksgiving. And as it is not sufficient to be a good man
only, but a good man must use good things: So it is not enough to use good
things alone, but he that must use them must see himself Tit. 1. 15. Romans 4.
to be a good man; that is, to have his heart cleansed by faith and by prayer,
whereby he is assured that he has fetched the interest from Christ, who has
and gives title to all, being himself the heir of the world.

15 When we examine our selves, we are to sit in judgment on our selves, and
to keep Examination.
a solemn court in our own consciences, to su^uay our memory, our wit, our
senses, our members, and to see how we have used them: but yet so, as, least we
should be too fa^ourable to our selves, either in not espying out our sins,
or in not condemning our sins, still we remember to make the law the Judge,
but Christ the answerer of the Judge.

16 If God his children are ready to slip in a moment, how much more dangerous
is Sinners.
the estate of the wicked, who are willing to fall continually?

17 It is wonderful to see a poor sinner ready to swound and fall dead
almost at every little sin, when nothing in the world does fear him or drive
him to this fear; and yet when adversity, strange judgments of God,
persecution and death come, to be exceeding The ^^^re of the godly and godless
how they differ.
patient and comfortable, courageous and valiant: and again, it is strange to
see others, who marvel that men will suffer themselves to be feared with
sin, and ask, what men mean to stand trembling at the word; yet let sickness
come, or if the hand of God be upon them, or let death come toward the^, they
quail at the name of sickness, hell, or death, and either they prove very
senseless blocks, or else they be in a most desperate estate Yea, if God begin
to reckon with them, every stirring of a mouse, shaking of a leaf, moving of a
shadow, every noise of the ear, every countenance of a godly man, every
chirping of a bird, or drawing near of the least and weakest creature toward
them, appalles their courage, and makes them most fearful cowards. They most
fear when God his judgments are executed, which fear least when they are
threatened, and they fear least when God his judgments are accomplished, which
tremble most when his wrath is denounced. Wherefore as we most long for courage
and most loathe cowardlines, when the evil day approaches; so let us labor for
a good conscience, which breeds true boldness, and fly far from sin, which
brings a spirit of fear on us. And surely experimental wisdom may teach
us, that it is better to fear the evil to come, when only fear and no evil
is upon us, than to fear then, when besides the fear the affliction itself
so sorely presses us, that we have no liberty or leave to breathe for any
comforts, or to hope for any deliverance.

18 We are wont to ascribe the afflictions of the Church or Commonwealth, the
defect The sins of the people move God to punish them with evil governors,
etc.
of right discipline and government to the sins of the Magistrates, when
rather, if we consider things with a single eye, our own sins have begot
such fruits. For that God, who rather loves many than one, that God, who for
ten good men would have spared whole Sodom, who rather takes away Saul a
sinful governor, than punishes his loving Israel being humbled subjects,
knows rather to take away the King, if the subjects be good, than he desires
to alter the whole estate for the sin of one, unless it be when both Prince
and people agree together in sin. That God, which even in the time of the
Church remaining but in a few families would rebuke Kings, as Phara^h, and
Abimelech, that they should do his Prophets, Abraham, and Isaac no harm:
^oubtlesse the sins of the people do breed defects of well doing in
Princes. When Israel began to sin, the Lord withdrawing his grace from David,
left him to the numbering of his people. The Altars were not taken away, and
why, in the time of Josiah? The holy Ghost says, the people had not prepared
their hearts to walk with the Lord their God.

19 It is far otherwise in our Christian profession, than in the profession
of other Arts. Physicians love to have some secret experiments, wherein they
have a singularity, and How Christians should communicate good things.
which in their life they will communicate to none. Lawyers have some points,
which they will not make common, but keep for present and private gain. But
this is rather a note of pride and of a conceited mind in heavenly things,
than of godliness. For as true godliness forewarneth others of that sin,
the sting, torment, and filthiness whereof we have found; so it traineth up
others to that fruit of holiness, whose beauty, glory and excellency we
have both tasted and proved.

20 It ever has been and is, that prayer, or coming to the divine Service,
as they call it, and resorting to the Sacraments have been more accounted of,
than the word, and hearing of it preached. Many of superstition may thus come
to prayer, and of custom resort to the Sacrament, who either do not at all
hear the word, or else they hear it at their leisure, or else they do it but
in ceremony without understanding; or if they understand it, Preparation to
the hearing of the word.
they do not practice it; or if they practice it, it is done coldly and not in
power. And yet their own practice in some things, is somewhat strange: they
will grant, that to come to the Sacrament requires a mo^e solemn
preparation, and yet they dare bol^ly venture on prayer and on the hearing of
the word oftentimes without any preparation at all. But certainly as the abuse
of the Sacrament brings judgment, so the abuse of prayer and of the word
will procure it. For as the prayer of faith is a sweet oblation to the Lord, so
the prayer of the unbeliever is an abomination to the Lord. We must not only
bring the ear of understanding, but we must also bring the ear of
remembrance, and of practice, and beware that by little and little the word
wax not less precious unto us, as honey to the mouth, that is satisfied. And
this is sure, when and how much the word preached does preu^ile, so much our
prayers and our sacrifices do prevail; look how much the word does profit,
so much do we profit in prayer and in the Sacraments; and whenever our
delight in the word waxes faint, our prayers and all good exercises are like
shortly to decay. Prayer brings a feeling, and the Sacraments a more
continuing of that, which we hear in the word. We must beware therefore, that
we be not too qu^^^ ^^ sin, that we please All our power in prayer comes
from the word.
not our selves in a general good course, in a persuasion we have heard
enough, but still let us labor for the word: for I dare say, that all our
power in prayer comes from the word.

21 Even as the life that is in a tree is a thing invisible, and yet by the
fruits coming out in due season, is discerned of all (howsoever it may be
green, yet wanting fruit) The life of faith very secret, and often hardly
discerned.
or as the life in a child is a thing not seen but by moving, going, and
feeling easily perceived; so the life of faith is a thing very secret, and yet
by the effects of it at one time or at another is discerned of good men.
Howsoever, there may be works and yet no faith, howsoever there may be faith,
and yet not by and by works following.

Many men think the word now preached not to be the right word, because no more
are brought to the obedience of God by so long preaching of it: but we must
rather reason to the contrary, this is a sure note it is the true word,
because it is so much refused, and men are made the worse by abusing the word,
which as it would make them better, and does make better all that do obey it;
so it makes worse all that do not obey it.

22 Of all the Commandments we shall never be brought hungerly to seek
Christ, until we can in the last precept, see and feel our natural
corruption, whereof we must not only have a knowledge, but experience also, as
Paul had, Rom 7. Now where the Papists How we must have not only a knowledge
by the last commandment of our natural corruption, but also an experience.
say, that this corruption is a sin in the unregenerate, but not in the
regenerate, we say it is a sin in both, and that which is sin in one is
sin in another, without respect of persons: but yet we affirm that there is
a diverse quality in this sin in those diverse subjects, because that sin is
imputed to the one, and not to the other. The not diligent observing and
understanding of this corruption does hurt even some of the godly, bending to
that other opinion, whiles they think too little of the first motions of
sin: for which if they were humbled truly, it is sure that they should not
only not break forth into any corrupt life, but also they should have less
corrupted lips. I say a bare knowledge hereof also is not sufficient (for even
the knowledge of our corruption is not without the corruption of privy pride)
but we must join therewith faith in the judgments of God, which the Ninevites
having escaped the wrath of God, which the old world not having fell into the
wrath of God.

23 Seeing prophanenes is not so much in grosser sins, as in the vnreuerent
and irreligious handling of most holy exercises, we must more warily watch over
our selves, but especially that we bear sanctified minds in our using of
outward things, which in themselves Profaning of holy exercises.
have no great holiness, because we may easily be corrupted even in prayer, in
hearing of the word, in keeping of our Sabbath, which in themselves do carry a
kind of holiness, which being not rightly used are said to be profaned. This
sin is so perilous and infatuateth us so far, that it brings us to make
away not only our maintenance on earth, but also our inheritance in heaven for
most vile and contemptible things, as Es^^ did, who though he did to supply
his need use unlawful means, yet if he be set head by head with a great many
not having any such need, he for his need in respect of the^ might be less
condemnable, but they in respect of him most justly reproueable. Now if there
be Note well.
any Esau, who will not stick to sell heaven, his soul, and the kingdom of
God, under pretense of necessity, let us beware we follow not Jacob in taking
this advantage (for this was a particular thing permitted of God, and Jacob
will do so no more) but let us exhort him to wait upon God his providence, to
take a better course for the safety of his conscience, and contribute to his
necessity, that Esau may not have by our uncharitable dealing a cloak for his
prophanenes, but that, if he will needs be profane, he may be profane and
guilty in and of himself alone.

24 We must not be proud in our own gifts, for God has in judgment given
judgment to many simple ones to spy us out.

25 If we confess our sins to God, we must frankly and freely bring our
selves into the presence of God, and lay our hearts naked and bare before him.
We must not as harlots wipe our mouths, and say we offended, and yet fall into
sin again, but with remorse of conscience acknowledge them, and in fear and
reverence leave them.

26 Satan is not discouraged at the first, though he lose his possession, yet
he will keep Satan's diligence.
his title, and will lay claim to us as to his mansion place; and yet though
Satan thinks us to be sties for himself. Christ makes us of the sties of
Satan, palaces of his spirit.

27 Though when Satan finds us waste and void, he may enter into us, yet if
we have any store of good, yea if we have a spark of goodness, it shall fire
out the devil, the least groune pronounces a judgment against him, every
tear is as a pearcing sword to him: We must be as diligent to serve the Prince
of glory, as the (...) are the Prince of darkness.
but wholly to quench the spirit, to be waste, to be swept of all the graces of
God, yea and not only to offer violence to God his spirit, but to build and
labor for the devil is a very fearful thing, for that makes the devil to
look better to his possession the second time. And as we must not flatter our
selves in every motion, as though we were sealed most surely; so one spark of
pure zeal does fire out the devil and his whole train. Surely we must do as
much for our God, as the wicked for the devil, that is, we must be swept of
all corruptions, and garnished with all graces of God his spirit, that the Lord
may delight in his hold in us, even as the wicked gratify their Prince of
darkness with sweeping clean away the graces of God, and furnishing every room
with some loathsome sin or other.

28 The nearer Christ his coming was, the cleerer was the Law. Moses saw it
cleerer The (...) the light law Law ^^ Gospel in ^^^ ages till Christ came.
than the Patriarchs, the Prophets saw it more clearly than Moses, John
Baptist more evidently than the Prophets, and Christ Jesus more spiritually
than they all did see into it and taught it, not as a teacher of any new
doctrine, which the gross Pharisees dwelling on the literal sense did think,
but as a confirmer and more divine reader of the Law, than ever had been in
any age before, which thing we must needs believe. For if Christ be the
Fathers Counselor, then is he wonderful, and why is he so wonderful, but
because his doctrine is a mystery, if his doctrine be a mystery, no marvel
though so many see not into it. In this spritual interpreter, the Fathers
Counselor, whose name is Wonderful, must we believe.

29 There is no striving in sin, but in God his judgment and wrath, and
therefore No thriuing in sin.
it is usual with the Lord to check sin sooner in his own children than in
the wicked, and to rebuke it sorer in his children regenerate, than in them
that are not renewed, and to withstand more severely sin in his children
renewed and having more plentiful means, than in the regenerate not having so
great a measure of the means.

30 We must labor to have the fear of God before our eyes always. Believe we
cannot The fear of God the strong bridle of the faithful.
always, rejoice in God we cannot always, faith is often faint, love is
little, joy is dead, feeling is fallen asleep; yet if we continue in the fear
of God, fearing our selves for the absence of these things, it will be a mean
to recover them all again. For this jealousy of our selves, least we should
displease God, will drive us to such an examination of our own hearts, as we
seeing these wants, we are constrained to mourn, until the graces of God
shine to us again: but if this fear be once gone, yea though we had those
other gifts, yet will they decay, and we shall fall into so deep a peace with
our sins, that though we slip very grossly, we will never suspect our selves
for any thing.

31 That man is truly blessed, whom God has from all beginnings chosen, to
whom God has given his Christ as a perfect Redeemer, in whom he has sealed up
the assurance of these things by his holy spirit, to whom he has given his
word, in whom the word and spirit have begot faith, by whose power Faith has
begotten joys in heavenly things, in whom joy has wrought a sincere heart to
please God, in whom sincerit^e is accompanied with love unfeigned to the Lord,
and his Saints, love joined with a care to obey his commaundemens; this care
breeding a reverend fear to displease God, in whom this godly fear rebukes
sin, the rebuking of sin works a mourning spirit, in whom a mourning
spirit begets true meekenes, this meekness of mind causing us to hunger
after Christ, so as feeling his own misery he is taught to show mercy unto
others, and so shows mercy as it is with the bowels of compassion, whose
heart God so governing, all outward benefits turn to his blessing, as seals
of the favor of God, unto whom all crosses being sanctified in Christ, turn
to his good, who finally in this faith and fruits of faith, meekely and
patiently possessing his soul, waits, and looks assuredly for the glorious
kingdom of God after this life. This is the golden chain of the undoubted
blessedness, whose linkes do so coherently join together, that wheresoever
a^^^ of the least is wanting, there is a breach and weakness made in the whole.

32 Great is the power, and mighty is the force of the fear of God, that is,
when we have a sure persuasion, we are still in the presence of the God of all
glorious Majesty, not sparing the least sin unrepented, and yet in the sight
of a most gracious Father, not punishing The great power of Gods fear.
the greatest sin repented of. First we consider this Majesty and glory, and
are driven to seek comfort in Christ: Secondly, when we remember through
Christ the seat of Majesty to be turned into a seat of mercy, and the
throne of glory to be made a throne of grace, our fear is corrected,
tempered, and mittigated, least it should be excessive, that is rather
hindering the certainty of faith, than repressing the security of the flesh
For so exquisite is God his justice, so great is his glory, so bright is his
Majesty, that without the view of his favor we could not abide it. Neither
does this faith in God his mercy abolish, but correct the fear of his
Majesty. Again, sure it is so long as we have this fear before our eyes,
howsoever we may of ignorance or infirmity sin, yet we shall never sin
presumptuously, or if forgetting our selves we slip suddenly, we shall not lie
long in our sin, but this fear of God will soon draw us out and recover us.

33 The cause why often our hearts want liberty and comfort in prayer, is,
because our consciences tell us, that we have been unthankful for the former
benefits. And therefore we must be thankful, as we are ready to crave. For
therefore is the Church often afflicted, that it may often pray, that often
praying it may pull down many benefits from the Lord, Thanksgiving.
that pulling down many benefits from God, it may return many praises unto
him. In this duty the godly differ from others: for though others have the
outward benefits, yet having no feeling of the favor of God in them, they
cannot heartily praise him for them. Another cause why our prayers are feeble,
is, because our faith is faint: but God can as well deny himself, and cast
down his throne from heaven, as deny to hear us crying in How fervent prayer
preuailes with God.
faith, which if we were persuaded of, we should have more heart in prayer, yea
every little want would set us a work in it. It is not a particular practice
of God at one special time to receive our prayers, as it was of certain
Princes once in the year sitting in the gate to accept freely the bills of
request preferred unto them, but it is an unchangeable nature in God: so as no
sooner than he can cease to be a God can he cease to hear our requests.
Wherefore if our faith be weak in the assurance of our sins pardoned, we
must know, that the Lord having chosen us, though our iniquities be as black as
the devils, yet God is unchangeable, and makes them white as snow; and as he
loves us not simply for any well doing, so he does not cast off his love
simply for any evil doing. We must often listen to that sweet Echo, which is
between the Lord and our consciences. Sinner, says the Lord, I am thy
salvation: Father, says the sinner, thou shall be my salvation. That we may A
sweet consolation.
be assured hereof, it pleases the Lord even to admit us into his Tabernacle
of conference, and will not only let us tread in the courts, but also gives us
a stool^ to sit in his own presence before the Arc; yea and not only gives
us a room in his Church, but also divides us our portion of heavenly
consolation by his Spirit and truth, whereby not only our souls and bodies be
holden together, but also we grow from glory to glory, from pleasure to
pleasure, until we be made perfect in his Syon.

34 The heart is God his own part, and that which must go to the Lord* Now as
nothing The heart whose it is by right.
should run to common uses, which was sacrificed to the Priests under the
Law; so the heart which is the Lords title, must not be freely given to any
possession, but only in, for, and from him.

35 As of all mercies of God this is not the least that the Lord will not let
us thrive in A great mercy not to thrive in sin.
sin, but vouch safeth to cross us, and meet us in our way, as he did with
Ba^^^m going into an evil way; So this of all judgments is the sorest, when
the Lord taking away his careful hand from us, shall suffer us to prosper and
grow cunning in sin, so as we can rode through and cut down whole woods,
dry up whole fountains, and drink up many rivers, and overthrow every
mountain that stands in our way. And therefore God his children are quickly
espied to be bungerlike workers of sin, that the Lord may shame them in this
life, but the wicked knit so close a web, that they go away with art and
peace, until the Lord shame them in the day of shame.

36 As many being much diseased in body, are the more thereby distempered in
their Patience.
minds; So many troubled in mind bring a disorder of nature, even upon their
bodies. And none more then conte^tious persons, who not looking to the hand of
God, but to the weakness of man, do fret too much, which is only to be
remedied, with considering of the vileness of our sin, and of the wisdom of
our God. Job did not fume against the Chaldeans, but humbled himself before
God. David fretted not against Shim^i, but cast himself into a searching of
his conscience. And we shall find by proof, that they that are much humbled
for their own sins, are most meek to others, as also that they who are most
contentious with others, are not much humbled with their own sins.

37 It is one thing to have our hearts hardening, and another to have them
hardened. Hardness of heart.
Our hearts are hardened, when there is little hope of repentance, or at least
hard coming to repentance: our hearts are hardening, when we are but in the
way to the other, and this comes either by wholly refusing of good things, or
by some careless using of them; or else by doing of evil, and suffering our
selves to be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. This deceiueablenesse
of sin is either an inarching upon us after some good fruit or Christian
profession, when having been any long time well occupied, we have not through
want of fear and privy pride, the former iealouzie over our thoughts, but we
are ready to give some larger liberty to our first motions, motions breeding
consent, consent producing the action, the action iterated, bringing a custom,
and custom casting us into hardness of heart, or else it sl^ lie steals upon
us, by leaving our exercises of religion, by little and little, when we can
leave off for once, without any necessity one thing, and ^not^^r time another,
until at the length our desire die, and our good purposes lie buried ^re we ^e
aware.

38 We may learn to suspect our wisdom in matters concerning a better life,
even Simile.
by the wise men of the world in things concerning this life. The Physician,
whose Art has been fruitful to many, will not content himself being fallen
into some sickness with To suspect our own wisdom in matters of salvation.
his own knowledge, but will join in conference with the more learned in that
faculty for his recovery. The skillful Lawyer having co^mendablie handled the
causes and controversies of many Clients, will not in his purchase, or proper
case, trust to his own practice, but provides better for the matter, by
taking the advice of many men of experience in that profession; and yet in the
matter of salvation, in the great sickness of the soul, and purchase of
eternal life, we think our selves wise enough, and that sin can soon be
plaistered, and Heaven gotten with ease, as though salvation were not worth the
laboring for.

39 Many are ready to do duties, and they will also require duties, and
though they Diverse infirmities of men
have not duties answered to them, yet they must go forward in duties. Many
will do no injury, and they will suffer no injury, yet they must learn to
bear injuries, and be readier to receive the second then to revenge the
first. It is also true, that many see their own infirmities, and will not see
other men's, and yet they epsy not so many things, as they may epsy. Many
think they do many good things, and they do so, yet they do not many
things, which they may do. And one may do many things good in their own
natures, and yet corrupt them in the manner of doing, and by some blemish in
the affection corrupt the beauty of the whole action* Many leave many sins,
and do many good things, thinking that all others should le^ue many sins
too, and that every one should go foot by foot by them, and yet God gives
not the like measure to every one. Many rebuke a thing rebukable, and when the
offenders see it not they grow impatient, and yet in wisdom we should wait
for the turning of the sinner. Many will forgive, when they see a man
relenting, neither is it any great matter; yet this is a Christian duty in
deed by faith in God to hope and wait for the conversion of a sinner, in the
mean time supporting all infirmities. The natural affection of parents with
their children, does by hope use great longanimitie; and why should not we then
use the same and more in Christianity* For Gods children are to put upon them
the affection of fathers, of mothers, and of brethren and sisters, to hear out
and sustain the infirmity of our brethren. Many do duties, forbear want of
duties, look to the least infirmity in themselves, not pry into the
Admonition. How can rebuke kindly. A good counsel.
defects of others, and yet cannot away to be adn onished: but if a man can
sustain the rebuke of his friend, and the reproach of his enemy, not looking
so much into the affection or manner of doing in the speaker, as to his
prefiting by the wisdom and providence of God, this is a mark of a sincere
and sanctified heart.

40 Judgment being corrupted, we can make reasons for our selves, but not for
others. Judgment.


41 As God gives worship unto us, so we must advance the worship of God:
otherwise all our goodly gifts will be but as the gourd of (...), is the locks
of Absalom. For as the gourd of Jonah did suddenly wither, not being able to
keep him from the parching Sun; so our gifts shall suddenly rotte, not being
able to keep us from the heat of the To use well the graces which God has
given us.
wrath of God; and the beautiful things, wherein we were more proud in our
selves, then profitable to others, shall rather be a way to bring us to our
destruction, than a means to help us to our salvation.

42 Whenever we come to a general promise of outward things, we must not
take The general promises of outward things. 1. Tim. 4. 8
it so universally as admitting no exception, but know, that outward promises
do so far extend, as they stand with God his glory and our good, as also
that either some sin, or some failing in obedience, or the want of says, or
trial of faith, may suspend the performance of them.

43 We must learn by o^r outward senses to epsy our inward corruptions. For
why To learn to observe inward corruption by the outward sense.
does my sense l^ade me to this sin, but because mine heart has led my
sense, and my corruption has stolen away mine heart? or why does my sense
help me in this good, but that my heart has governed my senses, and God his
Spirit has guided mine heart? our outward senses will bew^ay our inward
affections. For look what I love, I am ready to hear of it, I am willing to
see it; look what I love not, I care not to see it, I esteem not to hear of
it.

44 It is the s^upour of this age not to regard a good name, not to be touched
with reproaches, How some respect neither cursing nor blessing.
not to care for the prayers of men, not to fear the curses of men. In times
past they were superstitious, in having men pray for them (even being dead) now
they are profane, not esteeming the prayers of men whilst they be alive.

Sin brings always it own punishment with it, it never wants a tormentor:
it is a snare, an assise, a bench, a Judge, a Iailor, an hangman to it self.
Though all Quest-men Sin how terrible.
could be entreated, and the Judge himself be corrupted, yet judgment and
inquiry i^ at hand. It intangleth our consciences, it binds and pinnioneth
us with cords: but righteousness is it own reward, and carries an whole court
with it, it carries a sword to revenge, a crown before it self to reward it
self. For as many in the midst of merry cups have their grievous gripes,
so many in the gripes of desperation are refreshed with their cup of
consolation: And as the wicked, howsoever he hides himself for a while, is
gotten at the length of the Sergeant of his own conscience: so howsoever the
godly for a time content themselves to mourn in sorrow, yet in the end they
are found and refreshed with the Savior of their souls.

45 There is no faith but by the word, no experience of faith but in
temptation: and yet An experienced faith.
we must not tarry until our faith be proved by great trial, but be content
to be wrought upon by smaller things. For it is the goodness of God to give them
faith in greater matters, who would have faith in lesser things; and it is the
wisdom of God first to give little trials, and then to give greater.

46 The politic Atheists and disciples of Philosophers of our time think,
that rain must come by a conjunction of Planets of necessity. We grant the
Lord uses means, Gods providence.
but so as he intends and remitteth them by his own limitation and power.
Man in want sueth to the creatures, the creatures not able to supply it
complain to the earth, the earth seeks to the heavens, the heavens crave
help from God as the last refuge, whereunto we fly immediately; God as the
author, from whom our help comes, hears the heavens, the heavens answer
the earth, the earth relieueth the creatures, the creatures minister unto man.

47 The Arc had clean and unclean beasts, Abraham had Ishmael and Isaac, the
The Church has a mixture of good and bad.
Commonwealth true and false subjects, an house has thriftie and unthrifty
servants, the body members and excrements, the Church good and bad.

48 As he that has ten grains of Pepper bruised, has no more in quantity
than the man that has ten grains vnbruised (howsoever he has a more
odoriferous quality Simile.
than has the other) so in substance the Fathers had no other faith than we
have in Christ Our faith the same with the Fathers.
Jesus, howsoever it being more unfolded unto us, is more comfortable than to
our Fathers.

49 It is a worn controversy, whether the Gospel or the Law is to be
preached. We answer both: the Law is to prepare, the Gospel is to follow
after. So likewise whether How the law and the Gospel is to be preached.
it is better to govern by clemency or by severity. We answer by both. But
if in comparison ye ask, whether the Law or the Gospel is most to be
preached, the lenity or rigor of the judge most to be used, we say,
consideration must be had of the persons preaching and preached to. The person
preaching may be of this or that gift more inclinable to do good, this, or
that way. True it is, John did no doubt sometime pipe, and Christ sometime
mourn; but for the most part John did mourn and Christ did pipe, being
ordained of God thereunto. The persons preached to, if they be already
humbled, must have the promises; if they be in their sin and ignorance, or
are fallen by security, the Law rather than the Gospel is to be urged. This
holy mixture and wise order we may observe both in the Prophecies, and in the
Epistles of the Apostles.

50 Many say, they can profit by some, and not by others It is their
infirmity, and they Of profiting by hearing of sermons.
must be humbled. Yet thus much for our comfort, it is God his mercy if we
profit any way; howbeit stay not here, for either thou must at the least desire
to profit by both, or else in the end it will come, thou will profit by none. It
is unnatural for an old man in Christ to be fed again with the dugge of the
first doctrine, as it is unseemly to offer the strong mysteries of faith to a
child and nouice in Christ. We must learn not only to discern good from
evil, but better from good. Some can dance, when Christ does pipe; some can
sorrow, when John does mourn; some can tremble when Paul preaches of
judgment; some can rejoice to hear him preach the promises; some can
entertain him when he comes with a kiss; some can profit more when he
comes with a rod. Some will say, if doctrine be much used, we cannot
understand, he is too profound: some, if persuasion be urged, we can learn
little, he is always about one matter: some, when one is vehement, say, he is
an Heremite too precise for us to follow, he had need of a new world: some, if
the Preacher be comfortable, think, he is a clawbacke and seeks for living:
some say, if they hear one for the peace of the Church tolerating some
ceremonies, that he is a timeseruer and man-pleaser: if they hear one zealous
and unwilling to give any little credit to superstitions, then they say, he is
factious: if he be young and vehement, then they say, he will grow wiser and
colder in time: if he be old and still faithful, then he wants wisdom and is
but a doting fool. But wisdom is justified of all her children; if doctrine
be used, we learn; if persuasion, we are moved; if threatenings, we are
humbled; if promises, we are comforted; if lenity, we think God calls us in
mercy; if severity, God calls us out of security, and so we profit by all
in something, though by some in more things and oftener.

51 We are said to be always in God his presence, and yet we are said to be in
God his Of Gods presence, and how to present our selves before him in his
worship. Heb. 11. 26. 27
presence in the time of God his worship. The fathers are said to walk with
God, they were as children always looking on their father, to see what he
would have them do, God being present with them, though invisible to nature,
yet visible to faith. Yet we are said to be in God his presence in his worship,
because more nearly we bring our selves before him. And sure it is, that the
more we are in his presence, whiles we are in any holy exercise, the more shall
we be in his worship even in our ordinary callings. Again, the more careless
we are in his worship to bring our selves into his sight, the more careless of
his presence shall we be in our ordinary callings.

52 This is not the privilege of God his children, not to be tempted, neither
is it a difference Differences of sinning in the godly and godless.
between the godly or ungodly to be tempted or not tempted; but God his
children pursue it not in the greedines of their affections, but they either
sin not, or he drawn by delay unto sin. God his children before fear to
sin, the wicked before lay platformes of sin: the godly in sinning find
some pain, the wicked a pleasure, the godly think of their sin with shame
and grief, the world put their sins in a new die by speaking and doing of
them with glory and gladness: the wicked blaspheme God in sinning, the godly
rebuke themselves for sins: the godly are fiercely and violently pursued of
temptation, the wicked are so^^ishly and voluntarily infatuated by temptation,
the godly power out their spirits to be cured in temptation, the ungodly power
out their spirits to be strengthened in sins. Abraham laughed, Sarah laughed,
Abraham rejoiced by faith in their promise, Sarah derided by unbelief the
thing that was promised: Zachary questioneth with the Angel, Mary questioneth
with the Angel: Zachary does it in unbelief, Mary does it to be confirmed in
the means for her faith.

53 It is wonderful, how some delighting and lying in a sin, will correct
the self How some can correct the same sin in others which they like in
themselves.
same sin in others, and cannot abide it in their own children: and yet it
has been observed, that politic dames, civil housekeepers, cunning whores
secretly bathing their bodies in filthiness, could not abide a wa^ton look, or
unchaste behavior in their children. Howbeit these secret sins, as all others
in time have blurted out. And let such sinners know, that God will still give
them some to be as a glass to see their own sins in them, as it were face
to face. Thou complainest against thy son, thy servant, or against thy
inferior: but do thou govern him, have thou taught, corrected, and
reformed him, have thou gone in and out in godly life before him, have thou
taught him publicly as well as privately, and at home as well as abroad? If
thou have, though thy son be a reprobate, or thy servant a castaway, thou
have at the least though not converted his heart, yet stricken him with confusion
of conscience.

54 It is both the fault and the folly of many, that being rebuked of a sin
like beasts How many cover sin by example.
following the drouer, or puppits following the play master say, they do but
as others do, wherein they rather accuse themselves of a new folly, than
excuse themselves of their old fault. For thinking they do well, because they
do as others do; they strengthen rather than weaken the sin, by joining to
sinners, and increasing the multitude of sinners in that kind; whereas on the
contrary, if they for themselves would leave the sin, the number of
offenders would grow the less, and then the number of well doers being greater
than the number of evil doers, would make them ashamed of themselves, and
though not for conscience sake, yet for shame, the sin would be the sooner
left. In regard whereof a godly father hearing of an heresy like to spread in
the Church, got as many to subscribe to the true part, as could be gotten,
which he did for this cause, that the adversaries seeing a few holding with
them, and many standing against them, might suspect their cause, and be the
more ashamed of their defense. And experience proves, that sin is like to
die shortly, which is nourished of none, but starued of all, and that sin is
like to prevail, which is entertained of the most, and withstood of the
fewest: we must beware of following a multitude to sin.

55 Look wheresoever in Realm, City, town, or household there is any
remnant of the Lords seed, although it sustaineth for a while some injury, as
Noah in the old world, What respect God has to his children, in the execution
of his judgments.
Lot in Sodom, Jeremiah among his people, and Abraham with his, yet as they
are preferued from many judgments by these men, so their eyes shall see them
fall in the end. The world is not covered with water, until Noah be provided
for in the Arc, Sodom is spared until Lot be delivered, and the Lord even
rebuked Kings for his servant Abraham's sake. If this were so in the infancy of
the Church, whilst it was in one or few families, how much more will the Lord
govern and preserve it now under the kingdom of Jesus Christ, if peaceably
we wait, until the arm of the Lord be revealed unto us?

56 It is an evil sign, when gentleness makes us worse and wanton, more bold
in disobedience, A good sign of Gods grace when Gods sweet blessings make us
more free in his service.
more remiss in obedience: and it prognosticateth good, to be made by
gentleness more free in obedience, more afraid to disobey. This being as true
in the spiritual estate has caused the Lord to cause some to bear the yoke
from their youth; and who are more pliable to the word? Others again, not
tasting of any crosses, which have been more intractable to all good duties.
Among many pawnes of God his love, this is one chief, when God his blessings
breed in us humility and carefulnes: among many tokens of evil, this is
one, when God his benefits breed pride and fluggishnes. And this is a trial
of our good, if the more we have, the more we fear to sin, the more we care
to do well.

57 If in respect of sin, the will only be enough to convince and condemn a
man, How God accepts the will in some, for the deed.
though the work follow not, and he is counted an adulterer before the
judgment seat of God, who has only looked on his neighbors wife to lust
after her: so in respect of good things we must not doubt, but our good will
and desire, which but for ability and occasion is ready to good, is also
approved and accepted of God, although the effects follow not so soon, and so
excellent, as we do desire. If there be a willing mind it is accepted,
according to that which it has, 2. Cor. 8. 12. and such is our imputation with
God, as is our affection: howsoever in effects we lagge somewhat behind, and
come short of that end, and perfection, which is set down in the Law. Abraham
was accepted for his will, and Paul rejoices in nothing but in his will, Romans
7.

58 Merchants of one company, and partners are partakers alike of all their
profits Of our happy communion with Christ, and how thereby we have an
assurance of all his insearchable riches.
and damages, which grow of their merchandise: The man and wife joined both in
marriage, are both one flesh, and participate in well and woe one with another;
Christ Jesus by reason of that society, which we have together with him,
gives us a part, and we likewise him, of all that we have and possess. And as
a Prince marrying a meaner woman, indoweth her with all his treasure, and is
content with her rags, purposing now to inuest her with his robes; So the
Lord Jesus, espousing us most unworthy to him, is content to take the rags
of our unrighteousness, to endow us with the treasures of his holiness, and to
inuest us with the robes of his righteousness. Indeed some difference is
between the Merchants and us; for both the gain and the use of traffic is
equal among them: but between Christ and us, the gain of his glory is ours,
deserved and purchased by his obedience: and the loss of our deserved death is
his, and charged wholly upon him, though our disobedience has purchased it.

59 Whosoever is joined in Christ for justification, he must be joined to him
in sanctification. Justification, and sanctification go together.
Shall we then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlot? Shall we make the Temple of God the mansion of devils? Shall we do
such injury to the member of Christ? Shall we offer such violence to the
Temple of God? Shall we being rotten imps, and yet ingraffed on the stock
Christ Jesus, willingly cut off our selves, that we might rather be fit (for
our rottenes to be laid on the fire) than for bringing of fruit, remain in so
sound a root? God forbid.

50 If Christ his Cross be as a chariot of Triumph, and as a pillar to fasten
on the evidence If we respect Christ and his Cross, we may not continue in
the filthiness of our sins.
which accused us, if the entrance of his Passion was so grievous, the
continuance so fearful, the end so lamentable, and all to free us from the
guiltiness of sin; it were great unthankfulness, to let all his pains be
lost, by continuing still in the filthiness of our sin, whereby though we have
no care of our own salvation, we show an open contempt of Christ his precious
Passion. And we are then worthy to die, in that, whereas we might live, we
rather did choose to die with sin; then to live with Christ. If we will not
overcome when we may, we shall loose the promised rewards that are given to
them, who will not only press out the breath of sin, and at the death of it
close up the eyes of it, but also follow it to the grave, and cover it with
moules, that it never rise up again. R^uel. 3. 5. 12. 22.

61 Though we cannot wholly leave off sin, yet the body, life, and kingdom
of sin How sin dw^lles in the godly.
is weakened in us Sin in the godly is as a rebel, not as a Prince, it is
ready to spue out treason against the Spirit, but it has no power to rule
over the spirit. And as a serpent cut into many pieces has but certain
relikes of poison, in the maimed and mangled members thereof, and is not able
to exercise the like violence to a man, as when it was whole, and right
membred, so howsoever some remnants of sin stick in our old, but martyred
Adam, yet it has no such force to exercise it self against us, as when it was
a perfect monarchy, and had the sole regiment and primacie in us.

62 Satan is very wise in all his attempts, he takes the best instruments,
as politic How the devil chooses the best wits for his service.
men use to do in matters of importance. In Paradise he makes choice of the
most subtle beasts, and opposes his strength to the weakest vessel. After
being moved to choler for the Churches deliverance in Egypt, he stirs up no
mean parties, but sorteth out Magicians, inchanters, mathematical heads, and
men of deeper wit and experience. Under the Prophets he chooses Kings and
Queens, and they carry the train of the common people as the drouer does his
heard. Against Christ he sets the profound Scribes and learned Pharisees;
yea, he chooses out Judas, so cunning an hypocrite, that the disciples being
forewarned of that treason, every one suspected rather himself than Judas.

63 The Scriptures lap up in one sin, all that are accessarie to that sin,
whether it be How many sins may lie covered under one.
by ministering instruments of sinning, or by commanding, or by counselling, or
by consenting, or by concealing, or by communicating in the booty gotten, or
by commending the sin, or by not hindering it, as we may, or not by
dissoluing it before a magistrate; or by not admonishing, or by not mourning
for the offender; or lastly, by not praying, when we hear of evil, both that
the malefactor may repent and we may be preserved from the same sin. When
we are free in every of these, we are not truly accessarie to the sin.

64 We must beware of drawing a thick skin on our conscience, and of
searing How to preserve a tender conscience, and to keep our hearts from
hardening.
it up, but rather labor to keep it in a feeling of sin, and in a bleeding
plight, so as the least strain may press out somewhat. Otherwise we shall
soon fall to hardness of heart; and consequently lie open to the judgments of
God. And as the wound, which at every small crush shrinketh, and yields
forth pure blood, is less dangerous, and more curable: and as the sore, which
hardly being pressed feels nothing there not at all bleeding, or if it yield,
affording but a little black and corrupted blood, is more dangerous, and less
curable: Even so the conscience, which at every check is melting, and resolved
into godly grief, as feeling the least smart of the least impression of God
his correction, is furthest from hardening, and nearest to the hearing: and
that mind whatsoever, which at a griping pinch remains insensible, and at a
dead blow continues as one vnremouable as a block, is not only furthest from
recovering, but also in danger of a final obduration.

65 Where God his mercies are most wonderful, there, if they be contemned,
the How dangerous to reject grace and light offered.
judgments of God ensue most fearful. The serpent of all beasts the wisest,
abusing that wisdom, became of all the cursedst. Sodom the beautiful
valley, being puffed up with pride, became the filthiest pit. The church of the
Jews, the valley of vision, not using it dignity, was as a scattered
wilderness, Jerusalem is an heap of stones, Sion as a thicket, the Temple as a
vast vessel. The Church of Rome refusing Christ, is become the seat of
Antichrist. The churches of Asia lost their candlestick, because light coming
to them, they loved darkness more than light.

66 Until a man by feeling the sorrows of sins determines to arise and go
to his father, How contrary the judgments of the word and worldare.
the word does say, he is not come to himself, as Luk: 15. in the lost child:
contrariwise, when a man by feeling the sorrows of sin, says, he will arise
and go to the father, the world cries with Festus, he is besides himself,
too much learning has made him mad. So far differ the judgments of the word
and of the world.

67 As the Serpent was the first instrument of sin, ^o sin retayneth still
a quality of How sin (...) the quality of the Serpent.
the Serpent. For first it windeth round about us, as though it would embrace
us, but in the end it plays the Serpent, and with the tail it does sting us.
For the sorrows which belong unto sin, do not commonly accompany the fact
to be committed, but the fault already committed, and doggeth the conscience to
sting it to death at the time of most advantage, for sin takes occasion by
the law, and deceives, and therefore s^ayeth us. And let not him think that
finds not a present controlement of conscience for every sin committed,
that therefore he has not offended God, for we are o^t suffered to have the
spirit of slumber for a while, that the spirit of Christ Jesus might more
perfitly awake us.

68 God his children are to rejoice, for the day of their Resurrection is their
day of Redemption. The judgment day of Gods (...) day of (...) redemption.
Their judgment day was, when Christ was judged, at what time all, that are in
Christ were judged. And as the wicked are now damned, but then shall have the
sentence of damnation, so now the godly are saved, but then they shall have the
full testimony of their salvation by Christ, yea with Christ they shall be
assistants in iudg^^^^^ to condemn others, so far they shall be from coming
into judgment to be condemned.

69 Bersillai having done a great benefit to David, the King could no^ (...)
estimation how sufficiently to recompense it, but referred him and his children
to ^eat Salomons table, To sit (...).
Bersillai thought in himself this to be so great a recompense, that he re^use
(...). If it were both in David's estimation, and in Bersillaie^ opinion so
great a (...) to (...) Salomons table, how much more glorious a benefit is it
to sit at Christ his table, (...) Solomon but a greater than Solomon is present?

70 It is our corruption, that we are more grieved, when we suffer as
^el-doers, than ^
when we suffer for euil-doing. For this is the logic of the world, I am
grieved that I am thus dealt with, because I never deserved it, had I done any
thing worthy of punishment, it would not have grieved me, though I had been
punished. Thou speak like a foolish man, thou know not when to be
grieved, and when ^ot to be grieved. For whether is it better to suffer, when
thy conscience is free and suffers not, or when with thy outward affliction
thou art afflicted also of thine own heart? And is it not a glorious thing to
suffer Note.
for well doing, wherein thy cause of grief is the less, and an ignominious
thing to suffer for evil doing, wherein the cause of grief is the more? For
if rather the cause of affliction than affliction itself should grieue^ he,
then affliction without cause of affliction being for God his cause should
rather comfort thee.

71 Company is the best thing and worst thing in the world* how much and how
(...) ^^.
are men beholding to it? it makes and marreth whatsoever comes near it
(...) as worms do easily breed in the softest wood, so does it commonly
spoil the best ^^^^sition.

72 When we have any cross it is hard luck say we. Well, that luck, as you
call it, and How profitable ^he cross it.
providence as I judge it, is often more worth unto us than all our substance.
And why so? the reason seems simple, and yet is most forcible, for then we
begin to be in necessity. That is, as you think, a cold comfort, and I should
hardly persuade you, that this argument is good. For, if I shall say that if ye
did believe, ye should see this, as sure as your life, I know, that you would
smile at it. Notwithstanding it is sure that the sense of our necessity
causes us to look for a remedy, the asking of it by prayer does assure us to
obtain because of the promise.

73 Herein is a difference between children and bastards, that original sin
in the Children and bastards how they differ.
refused, has the root as rottennes, the branch as dust, the bud as
blasphemy, the fruit as despair: in the elect being ouerturned with the
power of affliction, then arises in stead of it both the blossoms of rising
from sin, and the sweet smelling fruit of conversion unto God.

74 There is nothing so good, but privy pride will corrupt it, nothing so
evil, but a lie will cover it. For privy pride cast the Angels from heaven,
exiled Adam out of Paradise, Privy pride.
overthrew the dearest of God his children, when they were most full of the
spirit, and was the last but most fiery temptation, wherewith our Savior
Christ was assaulted. It is seen Matthew 4.
of others, before it is espied of our selves, it comes with greatest graces
of God, whereas other sins come with sin, it was the first sin in God his
child, and it will be last. For even when all sins seem to bleed, and all
graces seem to stand, herein we can be proud, that sin is so dead, and
godliness so abundant in us.

75 It is good still to attend upon hearing the word, although we feel not
that inward joy and working of God his Spirit, which either we have felt, or
desire to feel. The preaching The hearing of the word preached.
of the word is God his ordinance: if it has no^ wrought heretofore, though it
work not presently, it may work hereafter. And because we know not who is the
man, what is the time, where is the place, which is the sermon that God has
appointed to work on us, let us in all obedience attend on the ministry of
every man, watch at all times, be diligent in every place, and run to every
sermon which we can conveniently, because though the Lord touch us not by this
man, in this place, at this time, through such a sermon, yet he may touch us by
another. Let every one therefore thus meditate with himself: Though I hearing
am as dead as a stone, and feel as little as a block, yet I must hear still,
because it is God his ordinance, I will hear, that I may obey his ordinance,
and though I go an hundred times without any profit, yet I shall never go
without some peace, because though I have not that which I desired, yet I have
done that which God has commanded. This I am sure of, so long as I am under
the dressing hand of the Lord, I shall not perish, but in his good time I shall
bring forth fruit. But thou will reply, I may happily sometime feel, but it
is so short and so little, and so many have fallen away before me, that I fear
I shall fall, and of a natural vine I shall prove wild and an unnatural
branch. Well, the Lord by his word will purge thee and prune thee, he will
dress thee, if ever thou had any working, thou shall have more: thou shall
not only bring forth Christ being graffed into Christ, but much fruit also
being trimmed by the word. Only seek thou God in his word, he will not fail
to be found of thee, use thou the word which is his pruning knife, and he will
work on thee at one time or at another.

76 Great is our corruption, which turns the grace of God into wantonness, and
makes How corruption ^urneth grace into wantonness.
his bounteous liberality in outward things an occasion to serve our sin,
whilst abundance in the unsanctified brings an inglutting of the mind, the
inglutting of the mind breeds unthankfulness, unthankfulness causes coldness,
coldness begins carelesnes, carelesnes is the way to hardness of heart and
utter prophanenes, and prophanenes ripeneth us for the judgments of God to
fall on us.

77 Our own kindred, that should draw us most to God, often hinders us most
from How our own kindred may hinder us with God.
God, and it is Satan's policy when he cannot prevail against us with the
world, to undermine us with nature. So he suborned Lots daughters against their
father, Jobs wife against Job, and our Saviors own kinsfolk against him,
Kain against Abel, Ishmael against Isaac, Esau against Jacob, the eleven
brethren against Joseph, Ioab against Abner, Saul against ^onathan.

78 If we count it a great benefit to receive a Nobleman, or any appertaining
to the Nobility into our house, because they may after gratify us; or if we
think it a great injury to How to entertain and love the Saints.
hurt one of the blood royal, and to withstand one of princely lineage, then
what a dignity is it to entertain the Saints allianced to Jesus Christ? what
a traitorous villainy were it traitorously to offer violence to one fearing
God, who is of the blood royal and of the Lord lineage, whom he accompteth as
mother, brother, or sister?

79 Until we are fully stayed in mind with a contentation of outward things,
we can How to labor for contentation if we will profit in godliness.
never be very godly. For, if either our mind be about living, when we have
too little for our estate; or if our hearts wander as being stolen away to the
things of this world, when we abound, we can never aspire to the spiritual
power of true godliness. And then are we most fit to be wrought upon by the
word, and most free to strive in travail against ou^ own corruptions, when we
are at peace and at a point for outward things, when being content with that we
have we can say, O Lord, thou art my portion, thy word have I chosen as mine
inheritance for ever, thy kingdom is my principal labor, thy face is the
chiefest thing I seek for, thy favor is the joy of mine heart.

80 To have that measure which God has appointed us, we must use such means
as How to attain the measure of blessings which God has appointed for us.
are warrantable, and with good means we must use a right heart; neither
trusting too much in them, least we be worldly minded, neither mistrusting too
much, least we be murmurers. In this vprightnes of heart, we must not only
be just, that is, by every just title claiming our own interest, but
merciful, that is, remitting of our own for pities sake, even as God
remitteth us.

81 As we truly show our selves to hate sin; we love the contrary grace,
and as we truly love virtue when we abhor the contrary sin: so we indeed
hate sin, when we A good note of our love to virtue.
hate every little occasion to the sin; and we truly love virtue, when we
seek and receive every little mean helping to that virtue, as namely evil
company, which we must carefully avoid, unless we have either some special
calling, or some particular gift of God his grace, which do only privilege
us in this behalf.

82 It is dangerous to proceed in judgment against a man upon a bare
suspicion, Not to proceed rashly in judgment against any man.
when no proof can be had, both because we would be loath that the Lord should
so enter judgment with us, as also, because it were the way as well to judge
good men undeservedly, as a wicked man deservedly, for that the one may be
suspected as well as the other. The Lord has therefore appointed, that rather
an offender not convicted of offense should go unpunished, then that a man
upon surmise should suffer, least so a good man should often come into undeserved
danger.

The wicked shall be sunk in destruction, and though they be not moved with
God his The end of the wicked.
judgments, yet whatsoever they do, they shall spinne a thread of their own
destruction, and hatch an egg of poison to themselves.

83 Men must not be in wrath when they pray, for then it is not pleasing unto
the Lord. Prayer.
For as when an Instrument is played on, and it being out of tune, it does
jarre, and the noise is not so pleasing unto them that should hear it: No more
are our prayers pleasing unto the Lord, when we are in contention one with
another, the Lord cannot abide it.

84 When one has broken an arm or leg, and the same is healed again; will
that man by and by lift withal, as he does with that other arm which is
strong and perfect in How to cure contention.
health? No, he will spare it still a great while, for fear he bring it out
of joint again, and so it should be worse to heal than it was before: So,
when enemies are made friends, they must bear one with another, and not give
themselves leave to speak any nipping words one to the other, for then they
will fall out again, and so their contention will be worse then it first was.

85 We desire for the most part to do duty, when we may receive like
proportion Prayer.
again; which thing in praying one for another ought much to move us. For as
we pray for others by virtue of Gods commandment; So by the force of the same
Law are we to be prayed for of others, all being bound upon pain of Gods
highness displeasure to pray for us.

86 There is a self-will that breeds self-love, and a self-love that brings
a self-will, Self-love and self-will.
and self-will bewrayes pride, which is a monster of diverse heads. Some are
proud in arrogating that to themselves which they have not: some have the
things they boast of, but they think they proceed of themselves: some think
their gifts proceed from God, but by their own deserts: some acknowledge Gods
gifts to be free and undeserved, but Pride.
they are proud of them.

87 It is strange that we should not abide to be threatened, and yet can be
content to be Admonition.
afflicted, when as naturally we rather desire the less evil; or we would
lever be admonished of an evil, then punished with an evil. Now a threatening
forewarnes, but plagueth not, an affliction punishes rather than forewarneth.
Howbeit this bewrayes the great pride of man's heart, in that he had rather be
pressed under the hand of God, than reproved of a man.

88 In the estate of marriage choice may well be made of four things. First,
we are to Matrimony
look the woman be religious. Secondly, that she be chaste. Thirdly, that she
be loving to her husband. Fourthly, that she be an huswife. For other things,
if God cast them on us, they are not to be refused; if we want them we must
remember godliness is the best dowry.

89 As God his children have the greatest ^l^ssing^, so have they often the
greatest crosses: Affliction.
which would seem strange, but that God his wisdom must stay our ranging
wits. It is good therefore to promise this assurance, that we belong to God,
which will most comfort us, though affliction so belongs to us.

90 Because a truth may be taught, and not an whole truth, it comes to pass
that many Doctrine.
learned men, though not of purpose, open the door to many heresies.

91 As in receiving of a purgation, a man shall think himself sicker then in
receiving How troubled minds fear threatenings.
a cordial, and yet in the end he is not so; so it is incident to troubled
minds to think themselves worse in hearing threatenings, than in receiving of
the promises, and yet it is not so: For by hearing of the Law both their title
is better to the promises, and the promises more appertain to them.

92 As no gift or bribe does so much whet up the mind of a good Physician, or
skillful How greatly God is pleased with faith on his providence.
Lawyer, as to r^lie and rest in their Art and faithfulness, for which they
will do far more then for any other thing: so there is nothing does more
draw out more assurance from GOD, as when he sees that thoroughly and
confidently, yet with all humility we depend upon his promise, providence, and
power.

93 It is a danger to make a private offense public, because private offenses
would be privately admonished. Howbeit, if we see that notwithstanding our
private dealing the Admonition.
sin does still grow, then we are rather to make some hole into the same,
than to loose the soul of such an offender, and in such a case (not we, but
they) have published their own names.

94 Although we are not to accept persons, yet we may make difference of
persons, because How to put difference between persons.
some are more capable of good things than others. In which respect our Savior
Christ took some of his Disciples with him to pray, and yet but two, ^^d those
of choice: showing and teaching us thereby, that as we must avoid
popularitie, to seek our own* glory, so we must not hinder God his glory,
nor cease to do pure things before others, who for their faithfulness have
upright hearts, and for their wisdom can discern of things to be well
iustructed thereby.

95 It is one thing to have as it were the prick of a point of a needle, and
another to have a wound with the dint of a sword; It is one thing to be stung
with the tongue of: The passions of Christ in his death.
Serpent, and another thing to be hissed a^ of a Serpent having lost his
tongue; it is one thing to drink the cup of gall and poison to the dregs,
and another to drink of a cup, the bitte^nes whereof is drawn out, and Balm
placed in the steed of ^t; it is one thing to drop a few tears, and another
to sweat drops of blood; it is one thing to be grieved in measure, and another
thing to be heavy unto death; it is one thing to feel the wrath of God for
sin in our selves, but discharged in another; another thing to have the sin
committed of another, and sustained in our selves.

96 It is a good thing to look to ones heart in all things, especially for
uncleanness even Observe well the heart in all things.
creeping upon us in holy things, and with most holy persons; as when one shall
desire in comforting afflicted minds, to do it rather with women then with
men, and with beautiful women, rather then with others, and with rich women,
rather then with poor women, wherein the heart is very corrupt, and full of
matter to humble us.

97 The devil is a skillful pyrate, as for empty Barks he never makes after
them, but How the devil malignes the best.
for those that are po^sed and furnished with best wares, those he pursues with
maine sails: so those that have nothing in them the devil esteems them no
preye, but if once we be fraught with Gods graces, then he malignes us, and
hoysteth every sail, to take us as his spoil.

98 No man has so good a memory, but he shall forget a benefit; no man has
so ill Memory.
a memory, but he shall remember an injury.

99 It is worthy to be marked that Paul says, fly Fornication: and Iame^
says, resist the Wherefore the Lord bids us flee Fornication, but re sist the
devil.
devil: for Fornication must not be stood long withal, but to put our safety
out of question, let us flee all occasions of it: and contrariwise Satan must
not be fled from, (for that will embolden him) but he must be resisted by the
word, and by prayer, and the power of Christ.

100 It is a marvelous thing, that a young man should be so zealous in youth,
and about The zeal of youth and of age.
40 or 50 years should be honest and hold his own, but have no such vigor as
before: But we must know that even his heat is mixed much with heat of youth,
which shoots and thrusts out a little with a great heat and outward show
in the beginning, and that afterward the strength of godliness being sounder, a
man shall be less vehement but far more solid, at what time his pure zeal
being naked in it self, for that his young heat forsakes him, seems happily
to be less, but sure it is more sound and substantial than it was before.

101 It may seem strange, that we are so much moved with the sermons of godly
The difference between our feelings in our first conversion and afterward.
men at our first calling, and after we have long believed, that we should find
ourselves so coldly and seldom mou^d. Here we must know, that at our first
entry to Christianity, there is a more combustible matter in us, and that
every little spark of fire would inflame us, that is, that we had such great
ignorance, that every principle of knowledge did affresh us, and such
prophanenes, that every precept took hold on us: but afterward being much
purged and cleansed both in life and judgment, we are not so lightly moved, we
are not so soon carried away, every course di^t will not satisfy us as at the
first. Again, the graces of God are sweetest at the first, and sprout out much
in the beginning; for then we Simile.
are as young plant^, which in their first rising spring out more sensibly,
though less substantially, whereas old plants spring not so fast, nor so much
in sight and sense, and yet grow into a more firm and solid substance. So we
sprout with a more sensible joy at the first as unacquainted with that thing,
but after we bring forth greater fruits, things not so sensible unto our
feeling.

102 God does always hear the prayers of his children, though not according
to Prayer.
their desires it may be, yet certainly for their good and salvation.

103 We are not so much to have an eye to the beginning as to the ending in
godliness. The end tries all.
For Paul begun euilly, but he ended well: Judas began well, but he ended ill.

104 Many men will praise themselves, but who shall find a faithful man, that
is, such To be faithful in our own business.
a one as does more negotiari in suo, than otiari in alieno opere? It is not
good, if the Lord bids us to work in one field, that we should go gleane in
another.

105 If they be faulty that let the Sun go down on their wrath, what shall
become Anger.
of them that let the Moon change on their wrath: if the good man for speaking
good things but out of time be faulty, what shall become of them who speak
wicked things with a wicked heart?

106 As it is better with a silly Sheep to feed in a low pasture with peace
and quietness, The godly man's peace.
than with the sturdie Bull to be in a fat pasture with a continual baiting,
so it is better with God his children to have a little with joy of conscience,
than with the wicked to have much with terror of spirit.

107 John Baptist was a good pattern for Chaplains, who spared not his Lord
and Chaplains.
Master in due time.

108 We must not grow to be parched heathes, or flintie rocks, that let all the
drops of Hardness.
grace fall, for such cannot be softened.

109 The Lord does often let the wicked live in judgment for themselves, and
for a Judgments.
terror of God his judgments to others.

110 Many seek the world before the kingdom of God, and so by preposterous
order To seek first the kingdom of God.
they lose both the world and the kingdom of God. Some indeed seek first the
kingdom of God, but not for the righteousness of it, but for the ^ase of it.

111 Many play the devils registers in espying the weaknesses of the godly,
whose The Devils registers.
worm of conscience shall eat up themselves.

112 We seek as Demas, being more loath to forgo the world than the Lord, or
as Sound profession.
Lots wife, who carried away her body from Sodom, but left her soul and
affections behind. It is good therefore to profess no more than we will
perform.

113 We must so hide our treasure, that though the world strip us, yet we must
keep it How to hide our treasure.
from them, as the Martyrs did, whom when the world did search from top to toe,
and every vein in them, yet could they not find this treasure.

114 God deals with us as a loving father with his prodigal son, that is,
when he How God rewards us.
cannot get us to do duties, he will hire us to do well. Seeing then God
bargaineth so with us, that he will give us more for our service than all the
world, or the devils are ready or able to give us, let us receive him: for
Christ will give us for every penny an hundred fold.

115 We must not leave, or lend time, but make a through*fare of it. A man
having sold Not to dwell in sin.
an house may come into it, but it is as a stranger, not as the owner and
dweller in the house: So we may do sin again, but not as they that will
continue in sin.

116 We must leave all sin, one door is as good as twenty for Satan, one
poison is enough To empty our selves of every one.
to destroy, one plague sore will destroy us: we must be wholly emptied of
sin, least we be like to him that emptieth his mouth of filthiness, and so
may taste a little of sweet medicines, but because the stomach is not
emptied, filthiness comes again.

117 Oh Lord judge me not, I judge my self, oh that I may do it in truth.

1 I have not so loved the means, nor set by the Sabbaths as I should do.
Private examination and confession.
2 I have felt exceeding pettishnes where I did owe duty, and hardness of
heart, where I should have pitied. 3 Besides exceeding filthy thoughts, most
dangerously did I offend in, Lord. 4 My prayers are more monkish then
powerful. 5 Great hypocrisy of heart, and vaineglory in speech has overtaken
me.
Good Lord strengthen me to avoid these things:
1 Customable praying. 2 Vainglorious speaking. 3 Desire of being from the
means.
Good Lord strengthen me to do these things.
1 To be given to a contemplative life. 2 To keep my self in fasting, mine
eyes in heaven. 3 To meditate of Or spiritual
special things without superstition. 4 To remember my former covenants.
118 We must endeavor to discern between one sin and another, by the
qualities Differences in sin.
and circumstances following the same; for circumstances make every sin
greater or smaller.

119 Being asked, whether this may be said, that a child is, or children be
regenerated? Children regenerate.
he said, we might in hope so say, because the Apostle says, that the root
being holy, the branches are holy, and one of the parents being holy, the
seed is holy, 1. Cor: 7. yet here we must know, that he speaks of that
holiness which is according to the covenant.

120 It is a great mercy of God to have a good affection when we have a good
occasion; Affections.
for God never cease in offering good occasions, but we often cease in
having good affections.

121 When a poor man contemptuously in his charge had denied him his tithe,
he Tithe.
said, if he can charge me with want of duty, I will supply it, but that I
may not hinder my successors, he must pay it; And if he think I respect gain
more then mercy, I will give it to the poor man's box.

122 Concerning our study, it may be that a special working of God is in us,
that Philosophy Studies.
is made unto us so unsavory, and Divinity so sweet. In our studies general
precepts, which may make for the truth, are to be gathered, avoiding foolish
quiddities, whereby many study Philosophy, as heretics the scriptures, who
choose that which confirms their heresies, and leave the body and substance of
the truth.

123 We then do truly apprehend by faith Christ dying for our sins when we
feel A lively faith.
sin dye in us.

124 A good man being vehement with him in speeches, he said, you are fire, and
I will Vehement speeches.
be water.

125 Even as having a wheale in our hands, be it never so little, we will not
let another Admonition.
let it out, but we will do it our selves; so when we deal with the smallest
infirmities in another, let us do it with great tenderness, least they desire
rather to admonish themselves of it, then to be admonished by us.

126 Even as a man having corn ripe, when it is ready, for ^eare it should
fall away again Death.
into the earth, reape^h it: so the Lord when a man is ready for his kingdom,
least he should become earthly again, he cuts him off by death, and carries
him into the barn.

127 As when the Ark of God was with great gladness received of the
Bethsa^ites, 1. Sam. 6. 19 when it came from the Philistims, but with little
reverence used, it caused a The contempt of the Gospel a sign of wrath.
death and destruction to many: so it is to be feared, and almost looked for,
that unless better order be taken, the Gospel which should be our life, will
be our destruction and death.

128 Because we are dim of sight, and the Lords works have, like the
curtains of How to respect advisedly the works of God.
Solomon* beauty within, it is requisite that we hold our eyes nearer unto
them, and put our heads as it were within them and consider them, C^nt. 1.

129 He said to one troubled: You see now by experience, that which the world
sees by bare knowledge, that is, how God corrects in mercy, and with mercy
corrects. You are humbled for using evil means; Job said, he desired to be
strangled, and the ^aylor went about A consolation to one afflicted.
to kill himself. You sometime speak idly, but when you are well you must
presently be thankful. You think you cannot pray, the Saints pray, and when
they pray not, Christ prays for you. You fear much; fear to sin. You are
glad when good men are with you; Job. 7. 15. Act. 16. 27.
but take heed you tie not Gods help to bodily presence. You must labor for
two things: first, to come to the word: secondly, to the works of your The
afflicted must fly idleness.
calling.

130 It is a great mercy of God to be foolish and to be bunglers in sinning:
and as great a judgment for men to be wise in their sins.

131 When a man is most merry, he is most near to danger. We must fear God
in Sin.
prosperity, love him and believe in him in adversity. Mirth.


132 He desired never to lay any worldly grief near his heart. Grief.


133 When he spak to one vehemently, against want of reformation, he said, I
would our speech were less violent, and our spirits with God more vehement.
Again (he said) it Vehement speeches.
is hard to spend our heat against our own sins first, next against the
want of household reformation, and against our enemies, if they be present;
otherwise it is no divine courage. And (says he) we must in this case ever
try our selves, if we speak with mourning and pity: and we must be thankful
for the measure we have, which if it were more would cover many hypocrites, etc.

134 To a Noble woman asking him for good counsel, he said: Madame, first God
has given you a birth, blood passing many, credit and countenance, wealth and
abundance: A grave counsel to Ladies.
in all which as you excel others, so these things require in you the greatest
care of well doing. Wherefore my advice and counsel is unto you, to try your
heart, whether you have in any measure been answerable to these things in your
obedience to the Gospel.

135 To one very civil and unspotted in life, in outward appearance to the
world, yet To a man of civil life much troubled in mind
much tempted and troubled in mind, he spoke, not as some would do, charging
such with covering gross sins under the cloak of hypocrisy, but far
otherwise: Because you are so blameless and unspotted before men, it is Gods
great mercy (least you should be an Heretic, Papist, or proud person) to
humble you even in the sight of your natural corruption, seeing that thus you
may see your self to want Christ, as well as others.

136 They that will teach others effectually must be affected with the things
they teach, Teachers. 2. Cor. 1. 3. Joy and grief
as he that will humble, must be humbled, he that will comfort must be
comforted.

137 There is a grief that ends in laughter, and there is a joy that ends in
weeping: there is a mourning of the law for not doing good, or doing evil, and
there is a weeping in the Gospel when we are glad if the things we have done
please God, and this ends in consolation.

138 Is not the sanctifying of the Sabbath commanded? If they say it is a
figure, then I Sabbath.
ask what truth is therein foreshewed? If they affirm it to be a shadow, then
where is the body resembled? If it be neither figure nor shadow, but a
rudiment, whereunto does it instruct us? And I would desire you to show me,
where they find it rather enjoined to the Jews, than to us: or if it was not
commanded to Adam in Paradise? But if they can neither show it to be shadowing
nor rudimentall, but will grant the permission of six days travel, ^ (...)?
Now ^^ ^^ the working ^n (...) be a permission, who (...)? ^^ the (...) of the
(...) be a commandment, who ^^^^ forbid it? As (...)* (...) leave to ^^te of
all the fruits of the garden, who could re(...), the Lord restraining from one
for his probation, who could have given l^^^e to ^^^^ of it? Or the Lord having
permitted (...) of all (...), who for conference ^^^^ ^^^ forbid them? The Lord
having forbidden the use of them in fasting, who can permit them?

139 He said thus to ^ne in an agony, uttering desperate things: When you are
well, (...) these speeches, because God is much dishonored by them. And then
^^ said, that How to ^^rrie our selves in the temptation.
to give place in temptation is to make ^^ grow on us: we must therefore (...)
^he devil, and he will flee from us. And if we feel pain, the best is in
meekenes to (...) to the Lord, and to stay in Christ. For though many in pride
of nature do conte^^^^ the devil, yet that is his advantage, as much as in a
fearful nature. In any wife, in the temptation be afraid of yielding: for if
once our minds be out of peace, if ^^^ forsake the word, we shall go into
great extremities, unless it be for the prayers of the Saints* For as giving
place to lust, anger, or sorrow is dangerous, ^^ also to give place to fear is
evil.

140 We must in all things every day labor for increase of faith and
repentance; which Few means used in truth better than many in ceremony.
because it cannot be done without means, therefore we must use them, but ^^^
in ceremony. For we shall see that after f^^^r means, used in truth, follows
greater (...), than using many means in ceremony.

141 To persuade a difference between (...) and feeling, he said, that as we
cannot feel the love of a friend, when he (...), and yet are persuaded of his
love: so we Faith and feeling.
may be without a feeling of Gods love, and (...) persuasion of it.

142 It is wonderful to see how God directs the hearts of men simply minded,
in the How God blesses and directs the single and simple heart.
feeblenes of their senses: for as ^^^^^ being ^^^^^lly minded, though he
gr^ped was deceived, so Jacob being spiritually minded, was by Gods providence
directed, when he blessed Joseph's children, Genesis 48. 10. 14.

143 David had many troubles and yet overcame all, but the falling into sin
brake David's heart. Isaac was blind, and so was Jacob.


144 We must humble our selves to see Heretics do more for vain glory, and
for their sect, than we will do for Gods glory and for his truth.

145 If once we give consent to one sin, we are made ready to fall into many
sins: Sin.
and making no conscience of one sin, we shall not make conference of many
and great Heretics.
sins: and so being once inwrapped in sin, it is a hard thing to get out of
the claws of To lie in any one sin how dangerous.
the devil.

149 If any man make no conscience to walk uprightly, I will not free him from
poverty, from sickness, from heresy: for as well can and will the Lord punish
the mind as To walk uprightly.
the body.

147 It is the greatest judgment of God that can be to thrive in sin. To
thrive in sin.


148 When men begin to suffer themselves to be deceived, it is to be feared
they will be hardened* Heb 3. 12. 13. Deceitfulnes of sin.


149 If you slip back from the Gospel the stranger sort will be offended,
either by noting in you singularity, or by suspecting you for inhumanitie: But
O cursed corruptions of our sinful nature! if we give liberty, they will
grant licentiousnes; if we afford consolation, they will set on presumption;
if we call for humiliation, they cry to desperation.

150 Look often upon Christ when you are alone, be careful to please him; for
carefulnes and cheerefulnes may meet together in a sanctified mind.

151 He would give to others, not such things as he loved not, but such things
as he loved dearly, that they might know it to be a gift of love.

It is the temptation of the godly to fear whatsoever they do, that they do
it in hypocrisy.

A SHORT FORM OF CATECHIZING: WHEREIN ARE BRIEFLY SET DOWN THE PRINCIPLES OF
CHRISTIAN RELIGION, BY MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM, SOMETIMES PREACHER OF THE WORD
OF GOD, IN LONDON.

HEBR. 5. 12. When is concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have
ye need again that we teach you the first principles of the word of God, and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. JOB. 33. 16.
23. 24. Verse. 16. He opens the ears of men even by their corrections, which
he seals. Verse. 23. If there be a messenger with him or an interpreter, one
of a thousand to declare unto man his righteousness. Verse. 24. Then will he
have mercy on him. VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Creed, for William Welbie, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swanne. 1611.

TO THE RIHT VIRTUOUS AND GODLY GENTLEWOMEN, MISTRESS ANNE BOVVLES, AND MISTRESS
A. STEVENS, H. H. WISHES AL COMforts and mercies in Jesus Christ to be
multiplied.
THe holy Apostle S. John says, he had no greater joy John. 3. 4,
than this, to hear that his sons did walk in the truth. The same affection
all the true Ministers of Christ have in some measure toward all the sons
and daughters of God: specially such as they have gained, or God by them has
brought to the faith of Christ. I am well assured you remember Master GREENHAMS
great care and love toward you, which was unfeigned, because of the good
experience he had of your unfeigned faith in Christ, and love toward him. If
he had longer lived he would have rejoiced yet much more to see your love so
increase in knowledge, and the testimonies of your love in the fruit of
righteousness, and in your godly perseverance in the truth. Now receive his
works, and what you long expected and desired to see. This Catechism I have
sent you, that you may teach it your children, as Eunice and Lois did their
children. These letters serve well for your own use, that you may hear them
always speak in his absence from you, whom you so rejoiced to hear, being
present with you: and that you may have his own very words written and set
before your eyes, which you have heard often to your great joy sounding in your
ears, that so in the end, you may be able by your good experience to comfort
others, with the same comforts, wherewith ye are and have been by him
comforted of God. For the faithful are exercised of God diversely: some by
outward, some by inward afflictions of mind: and some have both troubles
without, and terrors within. Such as be not acquainted with the troubles of
mind, whatsoever gift they have, can bring but cold comfort in time of need, to
poor souls afflicted, as it is very manifest, both by Scripture and our
common experience. Now the God of peace sanctify you, both in spirit, soul,
and body, and keep you with all yours blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Yours ever in Jesus Christ, HENRY HOLLAND.

A SHORT FORM OF CATECHIZING.
WHereas all men desire to be blessed, and the most men are deceived in
seeking blessedness, tell me which is the true way thereunto?
To know God to be my Father in Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the spirit
according to his word, and therefore to serve him according to his will, and to
set forth his glory; believing that I shall want nothing that is good for me
in this life, and that I shall enjoy everlasting blessedness in the world to
come.

How know you this?
By the working of the holy Ghost, and by the means of Gods word.

What call you Gods word?
It is the revealed will of GOD, set forth unto us in the holy Scriptures.

Which call you the holy Scriptures?
The Books of the old and new Testament, commonly called Canonical.

Are all things that are necessary for us to know contained in them?
Yea: for God being full of all wisdom and goodness, would leave out nothing
that was requisite for us to know.

Is it lawful for to add or to take any thing from Gods word?
No: for God has flatly forbidden it, and has pronounced grievous curses upon
those that do it.

Why is it so grievous a sin?
Because it is a very great sin to alter the last will of a mortal man:
therefore much more grievous a sin it is to change the last Testament of the
eternal God.

Why is it requisite that the will of God should be set forth unto us?
That we might have pure rules of his worship, and sure grounds of our
salvation.

Is it not lawful to repose any part of Gods Worship, or of Salvation in the
doctrine and doings of men?
No: for all men by nature are liars, and defiled with sin.

What follows hereof?
That all men's doctrines and doings are mingled with lies and corruptions.

How far are we bound to their doctrine and doings?
So far forth as they be agreeable to Gods word.

May all read the Scriptures?
Yea, all that be of age able to discern between good and evil, ought to
increase in knowledge, for their furtherance in salvation, as they increase in
years. All must read the Scriptures.


Why must all such read the Scriptures?
1. First, because every one must be able to prove and try himself, whether
he be in the Faith, or no, 2. Cor: 13. 5.

Why else?
2. Secondly, because every one must be able to prove and examine men's
doctrines and Act. 17.
doings by the Scriptures, that they be not in their salvation by them deceived.

3. Thirdly, because every one must be able, as his calling requires, to
teach, admonish, Heb. 3. 12.
exhort, and comfort one another.

4. Fourthly, because every one must be able to make an account of the faith
and hope 1. Pet. 3.
that is in him.

What if men cannot read?
Then they must use the help of others that can read.

Is it enough to read the Scriptures privately, or with others? Reading the
Scriptures in the Church.

No: for God has also commanded to hear them read publicly in the Church.

And is it enough to hear them read publicly in the Church?
No: for he also has ordained preaching to be used.

Why must preaching be joined with ^eading?
Because it is the most principal and proper means to beget Faith in us. Heb.
4. 2.


Why must Faith be mixed with the Word, read, and preached?
Because otherwise the word profits us nothing. Preaching.


How many things are requisite to be in every one that will come to hear the
Word read and preached?
Amongst others, four are necessary.

What is the first?
1. First, a reverend fear of the Majesty of God. Hearing the Word.
2. Secondly, an assured faith in Christ. 3. Thirdly, an earnest endeavor to
frame our lives thereafter. 4. Fourthly, they must pray for the holy Ghost to
be given them, to enlighten their minds, and to write all these things in
their hearts.
Which be the principal parts of Gods word?
The Law and the Gospel.

What call you the Law?
It is that part of the Word that commands all good, and forbids all
evil. Law.


What if we could keep the Law?
Then we should be blessed.

What if we break the Law?
Then we are subject to the curse of God, and so to death and damnation.

What call you the Gospel?
It is that part of the word which contains the free promises of God, made
unto us in Gospel.
Jesus Christ, without any respect of our deseruings.

What does that work in us?
It works in us a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ, whereby we lay
hold of the free remission of our sins in him, and the true repentance of
them.

What must we learn by the whole word of God?
Two things: --

1. First, to make a right and sound entrance to our salvation. 2. Secondly,
how to increase, and continue in the same unto the end.
What is required for our right and sound entrance to our salvation?
Three things are required.

1. First, to know and to be persuaded of the greatness of our sins, and the
misery due to the same. 2. Secondly, to know and be persuaded, how we may be
delivered from them. 3. Thirdly, to know and be persuaded what thanks we owe
to -- God for our deliverance.
How shall we come to the right sight of our sins, and a sound persuasion of
the greatness of them?
By the spirit of God leading us into the true understanding of the Law, and a
due examination of our selves thereby.

Where is the Law set down?
It is written in many places of the Scriptures, but the sum thereof is
contained in the ten Commandments.

Rehearse them.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other gods but me.

How are they divided?
Into two principal heads or tables, as they be called.

What does the first table teach us?
It teaches us our duty toward God, and is contained in the four first
Commandments.

What does the second teach us?
Our duty toward our neighbor, and is contained in the six last
Commandments.

Why are the duties toward God set down before the duties toward our
neighbor?
1 Because the love of God is the ground of the love of our neighbor. Amo^ Dei
amorem proximi ge^e^at. General observations concerning the D^calogue.


What follows hereof?
2 That none can rightly love his neighbor except he first love God.

Why are the duties toward our neighbor joined to our duties toward God?
3 Because the love of our neighbor is the proof of our love toward God.

What ensues hereof?
4 That none can love God aright, except he also love his neighbor.

Why are the Commandments set down in ten parts, and not in general?
5 Because God is not pleased with doing our duties in general or in some
part, but he will be wholly served in all and every one of his Commandments.

Why are they set down singularly or to every one?
6 Because every one must do his own duty, though none go before him.

What follows of this?
That every one must bear his own burden, and none shall have excuse by the
example of others.

Are there not some rules which serve for the better understanding of every one
of the Commandments?
Yea, there be four which have special uses:

1 First, in every commandment where evil is forbidden, there the contrary
good is Rules.
commanded. 2 Secondly, many more evils are forbidden, and many more good things
are commanded in every commandment, than in words are expressed 3 Thirdly,
because God is a spirit, therefore his commandments are spiritual, and
require spiritual obedience. 4 Fourthly, in every commandment where evil is
forbidden, there the occasions of the evil are forbidden: and where good is
commanded, there also the occasions of good are commanded.
Rehearse the first Commandment. 1. Pre^^pt.

Thou shall have none other gods but me.

What evil is here generally forbidden?
Even that which the words do import.

What good is commanded?
To have God to be my only God, and to be always in his presence.

What is it to have God to be our only God?
To give him all things which be proper and peculiar to his Majesty.

Which be those that properly concern God, and therefore be the special
things commanded?
They be very many.

Rehearse the sum of them where b^ the rest may be understood.
I am bound to believe in God, to love God, to fear and obey him, to pray unto
him and praise him.

After what sort m^st you perform these duties of faith, love, fear,
obedience, prayer, and thanksgiving?
With my whole mind and understanding* with my whole heart and my whole
strength.

Which be the peculiar sins herein forbidden?
To fail in giving to God any of these or the like forenamed good things, in
any part Evil forbidden.
or in any respect.

What else is particularly forbidden?
To give any of the forenamed good things to any creature, or any other thing
whatsoever, whereby my heart may be withdrawn from God in any part, or in any
respect.

Which be the occasions of the breach of this Commandment?
1. First, the vain desire of the pleasures, riches, and glory of this world.
2. Secondly, a negligent and careless use of the means to serve God his
providence.
Are not the contrary good things to these commanded?
Yea. Good commanded.


Which are they?
1. First, a heart contented with any estate, and using things of this world,
as though we used them not. 2. Secondly, a reverend and diligent use of the
means to serve Gods providence.
Rehearse the second Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness, etc. The
second commandment.


What evil is expressly forbidden in this Commandment?
I am forbidden to make any Image either to represent God, or to worship him by.

What evil is generally forbidden?
I must avoid all inventions and devices of men in the outward worship of God,
which General evils
be contrary or besides the written word of God.

Which be the special evils forbidden?
Chiefly all corruption in the substance of doctrine, prayer, Sacraments, and
discipline Special evils
of the Church.

What occasions of evil be forbidden?
There be some which we must necessarily avoid, unless we will fall into
superstition Occasions of the breach of the second law
and idolatry; and they be these:

1. First, to join the false parts of worship with the true worship of God. 2.
Secondly, to be present in body at idolatrous and superstitious service. 3.
Thirdly, the reservation of some special monument of superstition and
idolatry.
Which be the lesser occasions forbidden, and yet (so we have the special
grounds of Gods worship) we must, and may tolerate them, when we cannot help
them?
1. First, all vain, idle, and superstitious Ceremonies. What we must
tolerate in a Church, which lies not in our power to reform.
2. Secondly, all keeping company with false worshippers.
Is not the evil in heart also forbidden?
Yea, so far forth as I lust in my heart to have any of them prevail or be
established.

What good is generally commanded?
All the outward means of Gods worship, which be agreeable to his written word.

What is specially commanded?
General good Special good thing
I must use such doctrine, prayers, Sacraments, and discipline of the Church,
as be agreeable to Gods word in the substance.

What occasions of good be here commanded?
1. First, to have and use good books of the doctrine and history of the
Church, written Occasions of good.
according to Gods word. 2. Secondly, erecting and maintaining schools of
learning, as nurseries of the ministry. 3. Thirdly, sufficient provision to
be made for the Ministers of Gods word. Sufficient provision for God^ s^ruie?.
4. Fourthly, building and maintaining Churches, and all things belonging
thereunto. 5. Fi^ly, I must v^^ ^ll good ceremonies and orders agreeable to the
word of God. 6. Sixthly, (...) fami^^^ company with the true worshippers of God.
What good in heart is commanded?
I am commanded to use the means of Gods worship, not only outwardly, but
also in spirit and truth.

What is me^^^ by these words: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc?
That God will punish false worship in the false worshippers, and in their
posterity unto the ^^^rth generation.

What is meant by these word^: And will show mercy unto thousands, etc?
The God will bless his true worship in the true worshippers and their
posterity, unto the thousand des^ent

W^^t is ^^^ ^^^ ^f these?
The use is to make false worship more vile, and his true worship more
precious in our eyes.

(...) third Commandment.
Thou ^^^^ not taketh^ Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. 3. Precept.


What (...) forbidden?
1. First, (...), ^^^ning or ^ursing, enchanting, or coniuring. 2. Secondly,
all (...) by false Gods, or naming them with reverence. 3. Thirdly, (...)
swearing, or speaking of GOD without reverence. 4. Fourthly, to c^use Gods Name
to be dishonored by false Doctrine or ungodly life, (...) in my ^^^^ ^r in
others.
What good is herein commanded?
1. First, in matters concerning Gods glory, I must swear by GOD only in
Justice. Judgment. Truth.
2. Secondly, I must endeavor from my heart to grow up in true knowledge, and
a godly life, that so Gods Name may be praised in my self, and by mine
example in others.
What is meant by these words: For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc?
That God will certainly punish the dishonoring of his Name in any sort.

What is the use of this?
The use of this is, to make us more fearful to dishonor him, and more
careful to glorify his Name.

Rek^^^^^ the fourth Commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, etc.

What is here generally commanded?
I am commanded to make it my whole delight, to sanctify the holy Sabbath of
the 4. Precept.
Lord from morning to night.

What is (...) commanded?
1, First, to use ^ll the public means of Gods worship in the congregation of
Gods Public exercises.
people. 2. Secondly, to rejoice to use all such private exercises, as may
make the public means ^^^^^table to my self and to others.
W(...) be those private exercises?
1. First, the examining of my sins and wants, private prayer, reading of the
Scriptures, singing of Psalms, conference with others, and applying all things
to my self, Private exercises.
with a care to profit others. 2. Secondly, relieuing the needle, visiting the
sick, and them that be in prison, comforting them that be in any misery,
reconciling them that be at variance, admonishing the unruly, and such like.
What is especially commanded?
The spiritual beholding of the Creatures of God, thereby to provoke my self
and others to praise him.

What else is?
A diligent searching of my heart, with a like care to find it out, and to
reap some profit of the forenamed means, so that I may be the better for and
through them.

What is then particularly forbidden?
2. All such labors and pleasures, in thought, word, and deed are forbidden,
as may hinder me and others, for using of, or profiting by the same means.

2. Secondly, the leaving (...) of those public means or private exercises

What is here generally forbidden*
The using either of those public or private means in ceremony without some
good fruit in my self, or care of fruit in others.

Rehearse the fifth Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land, etc.

Whom do you understand by father and mother?
5. Precept.
By father and mother I do not understand only my natural parents, but also
those whom God has set over me for my good, as Magistrates, Ministers,
Masters, and such like.

What duties do children owe unto their natural parents?
Children ought reverently and obediently to receive the instructions,
commandments, and corrections of their parents, to succor them, and to pray
for them.

What are they forbidden to do?
To refuse, or murmr at the instructions, commandments, and corrections of
their parents, or to neglect any duty belonging to them.

How may they try their love by these duties?
They may try whether their love be right three ways.

1. First, if they be as desirous to do all these duties to their parents, as
they would Trial of the love of children to Parents.
have their parents to do all duties unto them.

What is the second?
2. Secondly, if they be as desirous to do all duties to their parents, as
they would have their children hereafter to honor them.

What is the third?
3. Thirdly, if they be as willing to do all these duties to their parents,
as they would receive long life, or any other blessing at the hands of God.

What duties do parents owe to their children?
Parents ought to teach, correct, pray, and provide for their children.

How may they try their love by these duties?
They may try their love two ways.

What is the first?
Trial of the love of Parents to children?
1. First, if they be as careful to do all duties to their children, as they
would have had their parents in times past to have performed all good duties
unto them.

What is the second?
2. Secondly, if they be as careful to do duties to their children, as they
would have their children hereafter to be dutiful unto them.

What be the duties of Servants to their Masters?
Servants ought in fear and trembling to submit themselves to the
instructions, commandments, and corrections of their Masters, and to do no
eye-seruice to them.

What if Parents and Masters do not their duties to their Children and
Servants?
Yet they must obey them for conscience to Gods ordinance.

What if they command unjust things?
Then they must obey God rather then men, and submit themselves to their
correction.

Why are these words added, That thy days, etc?
They are added to allure us more carefully to keep, and willingly to obey
this Commandment.

And shall not disobedience be punished?
Yea; it shall be rewarded with a short and miserable life.

How may they try their love by these duties?
They may try it three manner of ways.

What is the first?
1. First, if they be as desirous to do all these duties to their Masters,
as they would Trial of the love of Servants to their Masters.
have their Masters to do the duty of Masters unto them.

What is the second?
Secondly, if they be as careful to do all these duties to their masters,
as they would have their servants to be dutiful unto them when they shall be
masters.

What is the third?
Thirdly, if they be as willing to do all duties to their masters, as they
would be glad to receive long life, or any other blessing at the hand of God.

What duties do Masters owe to their servants?
Masters ought to teach and correct their servants, and to pray for them.
Trial of the love of Masters to Servants.


How may they try their love by these duties?
They may try their loves two ways.

What is the first?
1. First, if they be as desirous to do all these duties to their servants, as
they would have their Masters deal with them, if they were servants.

What is the second thing?
2. Secondly, if they be as careful to do all these duties to their servants,
as they would be to have their servants to do all duties unto them.

Rehearse the sixth Commandment.
The sixth Precept.
Thou shall do no murder.

How many things are here forbidden?
Four especially:

1. First, is forbidden, by weapon or poison to kill our brother. 2. Secondly,
by wound or blow, or any other means to shorten the life, or empaire the
health of any man. 3. Thirdly, by word, countenance, or gesture, to mock,
grieve, or contemn any man. 4. Fourthly, we are forbidden all anger, hatred,
or envy, whereby we may be brought to revenge our selves upon our brother.
What good is here commanded?
1. First, we are commanded to have peace with all men, as much as is
possible and in us lies. 2. Secondly, we are commanded in thought, word, and
deed, to seek the preservation of the health of our brother.
Rehearse the seventh Commandment.
The seventh Precept.
Thou shall not commit adultery.

How many things are here forbidden?
Three things are forbidden.

Which is the first?
First, all outward actions are forbidden whereby the body is defiled, as
Adultery, Fornication, uncleanness.

How many ways is uncleanness committed?
Two ways:

First, either against Our own bodies, which is unnatural: or, The bodies of
beasts; which is monstrous.
Secondly, by marrying one 1. Of a false religion. or, 2. Of no religion at
all. 3. Within the degrees forbidden. 4. Without the consent of parents. A man
may commit adultery with his own wife.
5. It is committed by using the marriage bed intemperately.

What is the second thing forbidden?
Secondly, all instruments and occasions are forbidden, whereby this sin is
raised up or strengthened in us; and they be all contained in this word,
Wantonness.

How is this wantonness seen?
In two things:

First, when either 1. The whole body is abused in idleness, or vain sports:
or, 2. Any part of the body, as the eye, the ear, the -- tongue, the nose,
the hand, or foot are abused.
Secondly, when we do intemperately abuse meat, drink, sleep, or --
apparel, or use any inconvenient company, time, or place.
What is the third thing forbidden?
Thirdly, all inward settled lusts are forbidden, whereunto the heart does give
consent.

What good is cammaunded?
1. First, I am commanded to keep my self pure and chaste both in body and
soul. 2. Secondly, to use those means carefully, which may keep us chaste.
Which ^ee the means of Chastity?
Continual sobriety, in meat, drink, sleep, and apparel. Means of Chasti
ie.


Continual painfulnes in our calling.

Fasting and watching, so often as need requires.

What if by these means we cannot be kept chaste?
3. Then thirdly, we are commanded to marry, and in marriage to use those
means carefully, whereby the marriage bed may be kept pure and undefiled.

Rehearse the eight Commandment.
Thou shall not steal. 8. Precept.


How many evils are herein forbidden?
1. First, all those outward acts are forbidden, whereby stealth is committed.

How many ways is stealth committed outwardly in act?
Two ways, either

By our selves, and this is three ways. 1. First, all secret filching and open
robbery, ^e it never so small a thing, for never so great a need. 2.
Secondly, all extortion or violent wrong, all oppression and unmerciful
dealing. 3. Thirdly, all deceit in buying and selling, or exchanging, in
restoring things borrowed, found, given to keep, and such like.
By others, either By commanding or counselling others to steal. By keeping
counsel. By consenting any way to them when they steal.

Which are the second evils forbidden?
2. Secondly, all outward occasions of stealth forbidden.

Which be they?
All idleness, wastfull spending of goods, living in an unlawful calling, all
false weights, Idleness,
measures, coins, and such like.

What is thirdly forbidden?
3. Thirdly, all inward stealth of the heart is forbidden.

What is that?
The settled will or desire of our neighbors goods, although we cannot get
them, or for fear, ^hame, or some other respect we do not take them.

What is h^ recommaunded?
1. First, to restore goods evil gotten, or wrongfully kept. Restitution.
2. Secondly, to labor faithfully in a lawful calling, to be sparing of that
we get, and to help others, as their need requires.
Rehearse the ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. 9. Prccept.


What is forbidden herein?
We are forbidden not only to bear false witness our selves, but also to be
partakers with false-witnes bearers.

How many ways do m^n ^eare false witness?
Two ways:

1. outwardly and against others, and that is in judgment. or out of
judgment. or
2. inwardly themselves. When they deny that to be in them which is indeed:
or When they take upon them that False witness.
which belongs not unto them, whether it be good or evil.

In Judgment, when they give or receive false information, pronounce or write
any false sentence.

Out of Judgment.

1. When any raise up, spread abroad, or listen after false reports. Psalm. 15.
2. When any report the faults of others without care of their credit, -- or
when with flattering hearts they commend any man.
2. Inwardly, either

1. In suspicion without just cause. Susp^^ion against any man without any just
cause* a sin against the ninth commandment. 1. Cor. 13. Charity suspecteth
no evil.
2. In judgment falsely or hardly of any man.
Which be the occasions of false witness hearing?
They be fleshly hatred of our enemies, the carnal love of our selves or of
our friends; to get the things we love, and to avoid the things we fear or
hate.

How are we partakers with false witness bearers?
If we either command or counsel it to be done.

If we mislike it not, or not stay it if we can.

What is here commanded?
1. First, in judgment to further righteous causes, so far forth as my
calling requires. 2. Secondly, to speak the truth from my heart to every man,
so far forth as it is requisite for him to know it. 3. Thirdly, to be as
careful of the credit of my neighbor as of mine own, both in his presence
and absence, so far forth as the nature of his offense will permit. 4.
Fourthly, to hope and believe the best of every man.
Rehearse the tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not covet, etc,

Ar^ all motions and desires evil? 10. Precept.

No: for the desire of meat, drink, sleep, and such like are natural, and
in their own nature good, unless through our corruption they become sinful.
Motions.


What motions be evil?
These motions be evil, which are either against

God, or our Neighbor,
Are all those forbidden in this Commandment.
No: for all those which are against God are forbidden in the first
commandment: but these motions only are here forbidden, which are against our
Neighbor. What motions are forbidden in the tenth Commandment.


Seeing in the former Commandments we are forbidden to hurt our neighbor in
heart, how does this differ from the former?
In the former Commandments the settled desires of the heart are forbidden: but
the motions are only here forbidden, whereunto the heart does not consent.

Whereof do these motions arise?
They either arise from our own corruption, or are offered by Satan, or by
the world.

Are all these motions sin in us?
All that arise of our corruption, are sins in us: but they that be offered
by Satan or the world are not sins; unless we be infected with them.

How are we infected with them? How we be infected with the motions.

1. First, when weetake pleasure in them. 2. When we be entangled with them.
3. When we suffer them to tarry in o^^ ^in^es, though our hearts do not give
consent. which come from Satan and the world.

How is this Commandment brok^^?
Three ways.

1. First, when evil motions arise of our corruption, moving us to hurt our
Neighbors. 2. Secondly, when we be infected with those motions which Satan or
evil men do put unto our minds. 3. Thirdly, when we do not with like
affection desire the good of our Neighbor as we do our own.
What is then commanded?
I am commanded to love my Neighbor as my self.

Who is your Neighbor?
Who is our Neighbor.
Eu^ry one that is near me, and stands in need of my help, and it lies
in me to help him, though otherwise he be a stranger unto me, or my foe.

Why judge you so?
Because of the Image of God in him, and that he is mine own flesh in respect
of our first parents.

Does the Law of God prescribe the perfect rule of righteousness?
Yea, for there is no good thing in deed, word, or thought, but here it is
commanded, and likewise no evil, but here it is forbidden.

Can every one keep the Law of God perfitl^?
They that are not borne again of God cannot keep it, neither in all, nor in
any one point, as pleasing God thereby in respect of themselves.

Why so?
Except a man be borne again of God, he cannot see the kingdom of heaven,
not Ioh. 3.
enter therein, neither can he keep the commandments of God: moreover, all
men by nature being borne and conceived in sin, are not only insufficient to
any good thing, but also disposed to all vice and wickedness. Ephesians. 2. 3.


What punishment is due to the breakers of Gods Law?
In this life the curse of God, and death, with manifold miseries both of body
or soul, or both.

What else?
Where this curse is not taken away, everlasting death and damnation both of
body and soul in the world to come.

But God is merciful.
He is indeed full of mercy, but he is also full of righteousness, which must
fully be discharged, or else we cannot be partakers of his mercy.

And cannot we by our selves make satisfaction for our sins?
We cannot by any means, but rather from day to day increase our debt.

But does not God wrong to man, to require of him that he is not able to
perform?
No; for God made man so, that he might have performed it: but he by his
sin, spoiled himself and his posterity of those good gifts.

Can any creature in heaven or earth, which is only a creature, make
satisfaction to his righteousness?
No, none at all: for, First, God will not punish that in another creature,
which is due to be paid by man; and besides, none that is only a creature, can
abide the wrath of God against sin, and deliver others from the same.

What manner of man is to be sought out to be our Mediator and Deliverer?
He which is indeed a very man and perfectly righteous, and more mighty than
all The Mediator described
creatures, that is he which also is very true God.

Why must he be man and perfitly righteous?
Because that the righteousness of God requires, that the same nature that
sinned, should pay, and make amends for sin.

Why must he be God withal?
Because that by his godly power he may abide the burden of Gods wrath in his
flesh, and may get again and restore to us the righteousness and life which we
have lost.

Who is that Mediator, which is very God and very man, and perfi^ly righteous
withal?
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who was made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. 1. Cor. 1.


What is the use of all that hitherto has b^ene taught?
The use is, to bring us to a sound persuasion and f^eling of our sins,
because they have deserved so grievous punishment, as either the death of the
son of God, or hell fire.

Are they only delivered from the curse of the Law, and made partakers of the
merits of Christ that are truly humbled?
They only and none other: Es^i, 57. Matthew. 5. 3. 4. 5. and as for the Law,
heaven and earth shall pass away: but one jote or title of Gods Law shall not
fa^e till all be fulfilled.

How is the truth of Gods Law fulfilled?
It is fulfilled in-

1. Gods children; because it brings them to be truly humbled in themselves
for their sins, and then sends them to Christ, in whom it is fully
fulfilled. 2. The wicked; because it declares to them their just confusion, --
when to the end they either presume or despair.
Is sorrow for sin sufficient to bring us to Salvation?
No: for we must also have a true Faith.

What is that true Faith that saves us?
It is a true persuasion of the mercies of God merited by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Faith defined.


How shall we attain to this true Faith?
By the spirit of God, giving us this true persuasion by the Gospel.

Where is the Gospel declared unto us?
It is generally declared unto us in the holy Scriptures: but the Church of God
has gathered out of them a certain sum thereof.

Which is that?
The Articles of our Christian faith, commonly called the Creed.

Rehearse the Articles of our Christian faith?
I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, etc.

Into how many p^^^t^ are these Articles divided?
Into two:

The first is, of Faith in God. The second is, of Faith concerning the Church.
What are you taught to believe in the first part?
In the first part, I declare that I believe in God the

Father. Son. H. Ghost.
Why say you I believe in God and not in Gods?
Because there is but one only true God, upon whom my Faith is wholly stayed.

Seeing there is but one God, why name you three, the Father, Son, Holy Ghost?

Because that God has so manifested himself in his word, that these sundry
persons, are but one true and everlasting God.

Why say you I believe in God, and not rather, that there is a God?
By saying, I believe in GOD, I declare that I put my whole trust and affiance
in God; whereas the Devils and wicked men believing that there is a God, yet
cannot put their whole trust and confidence in God.

Why say you I believe, and not, We believe?
Because I must be saved by mine own faith, and not by the faith of another.

Why call you God FATHER?
Because he is the Creator of heaven and earth, and so is the Father of all
creatures.

Why call you God, Creator of heaven and earth, and not Maker of heaven and
earth?
Because he created all things of nothing; for to Create, is to make a thing
of nothing* What Creati^^ ^^.
but to make, is to make a thing of that which was something before.

Why call you him Almighti^?
Because as he created all things of nothing, so does he preserve and guide
them by his Almighty power, wisdom, Justice, and mercy.

What comfort does this article (...)*
It ministers unto me ^oure notable comforts Use of the first article of the
Cr^e^e.


1. First, that all the good Angels of God shall watch over me* and pitch their
tents about me. 2. Secondly, that neither the devil nor men shall have any
power to hurt me, but when, and as far forth as God does give them leave. 3.
Thirdly, that I shall have a profitable and convenient use of all Gods
creatures. 4. Fourthlie, though I suffer hu^t by Satan, or want of the
creatures; yet all this shall turn to my good in the end.
How can this be?
Because God can do it as an Almighty God, and will do it as a most merciful
and l^^^ing Father.

True it is, that by Creation we had this benefit but we have ^^st it* and
are bec^me the children of wrath: how then can God become our Father and show
his merci vn^ us?
He is become our Father by Faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God.

What believe you of God the Son^e?
1. First, I believe that he is able to work my salvation. 2. Secondly, I
believe that he has wrought it indeed, after that manner that is set down in
the Creed.
How can you believe that he is able to work your salvation?
I do believe it, because he is both God and man, and has an office from God
the Father to work my Salvation.

By what words in the Creed do you believe Christ to be God?
By these words, His only Son: I declare that I believe in Christ the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made.

Why call you him the only begotten Son of God?
Because he is the alone Son of God by nature.

How can this be, seeing Adam, the Angles, and we also, be the sons of God?
Ad^m was the Son of God by Creation, which we have lost, but yet we be the
sons of God by regeneration.

Why was it r^qui^^te that he should be God?
Because nothing but God was able to abide and overcome the wrath of God, and
the punishment due unto sin.

What comfort have you by this that Christ is God?
Hereby I am sure, that he is able to save me, by reconciling me to the
Father, that he Christ very GOD.
may make me the child of God.

By what words in the Creed do you show that you believe Christ to be man?
By these words, Borne of the Virgin Marie, I do show, that Christ is borne
of the Virgin Marie, as others be, and subject to all infirmities of man,
sin only excepted.

Why are these words added; Conceived by the holy Ghost?
To show, that Christ by the holy Ghost was conceived in the womb of Marie,
(she continuing still a pure Virgin) and that he was borne holy and without
sin, whereunto all other men by nature are subject.

Was it n^edfull that Christ should be without sin?
Yea, for otherwise the Godhead and Manhood could not be joined together: and
again, if he had been a sinner, he could not have satisfied for the sins of
other men.

Why was it requisite that Christ should be Man?
Because the righteousness of God requires, that the same Nature which had
sinned, Christ very Man.
should also pay and make amends for sins.

What comfort have you by this that Christ is man?
Hereby I am assured, that Christ is fit to suffer the punishment of my sin;
and being man himself, is also meet to be more pitiful and merciful unto
men.

What fruit have you by his holy Conception?
I am assured that this holy Conception has covered the corruption of my
nature, and Use of holy Conception.
that his pure Conception shall be imputed unto me.

What comfort have you by this that he is both God and man?
By this I am most certainly assured, that he is able most fully to finish my
salvation, seeing that as he is man he is meet to suffer for sin; as he is
God, he is able to bear the punishment for sin, and to overcome in
suffering: and therefore he is called JESUS.

What does JESUS signify?
It does signify a Savior.

W^y do you c^ll him JESUS?
I do call him JESUS, (that is, a Savior,) because he saves me from all my
sins, and because there is none other means whereby I may in part or in
whole be delivered from them.

What comfort have you by this?
My comfort is even the same which I have said, and the rather because GOD from
heaven gave him his name, and the Church on earth has subscribed thereunto.

What signifies CHRIST?
It signifies Anointed*

W^y is he so called?
Because he was anointed to be a

Prophet for all his people, and so for me. Priest for all his people, and so
for me. King for all his people, and so for me.
How gather you this?
By the anointing of Prophets, Priests, and Kings, which were figures of him.

Was Christ anointed with material oil as they were?
No: but he was anointed with all gifts of the holy Spirit without measure.

Why d^e you call him Prophet?
Because he was, he is, and ever shall be the only teacher of the Church.

What were then the Prophets and Apostles?
They were his Disciples and servants, and spoke by his spirit.

What comfort have you by this?
Hereby I am sure, that he will lead me into all truth, revealed in his word,
needful for Use of Christ's Prophecy.
Gods glory and my salvation.

Why call you him Priest?
Because offering up himself a sacrifice once for all, he has satisfied for
all my sins, and makes continual intercession to the Father for me.

What comfort have you by the Priesthood of Christ?
Hereby I am assured that he is my Mediator, and that I also am made a Priest.

How are you made a Priest?
Use of his Priesthood.
By him I have freedom and boldness to draw near, and offer my self, and all
that I have to God the Father.

Why call you him King?
Because ^e does guide and govern me unto everlasting life by his word and
spirit.

What comfort have you by this?
Hereby I am assured, that by his kingly power, I shall finally overcome the
flesh, the Use of Christ's kingdom.
world, the devil, death, and hell.

Why call you him Lord?
Because not with gold nor silver, but with his precious blood he has
purchased us to be a peculiar people to himself.

What comfort have you by this?
Seeing he has paid such a price for me, he will not suffer me to perish.

What is the second thing wherein the faith of Christ consists?
Secondly, I believe that he has wrought my salvation indeed after that manner
that is set down in the Creed.

After what manner has he wrought your salvation?
1 By his most painful sufferings for sin. 2 By his most glorious victory
and triumph over sin.
In what words are his most painful sufferings expressed?
In these words; Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell.

What is the general meaning of these words?
By them I show my self to believe, that Christ endured most grievous torments
both Christ's passion most grievous in body and soul.
of body and soul.

What comfort have you by this?
I am freed from all those punishments of body and soul which my sins have
deserved.

How then comes it to pass, that we are so often afflicted with grievous
torments both in body and soul?
Our sufferings are not by desert any satisfaction for our sins in any part,
but being sanctified in the most holy sufferings of Christ, they are medicines
against sin.

Why are these words added; Suffered under Pontius Pilate?
Not only for the truth of the story, but also to teach that he appeared
willingly and of his own accord before a mortal Judge, of whom he was
pronounced innocent, and yet by the same he was condemned.

What comfort have you hereof?
That my Savior thus suffering not any whit for his own sins, but wholly for
mine and for other men's sins before an earthly Judge, I shall be discharged
before the heavenly judgment seat.

What is meant by this; That he was crucified?
That he died not only a common death, but such a death as was accursed both
of God and man.

What comfort have you by this?
I am comforted in this, because I am delivered from the curse which I have
deserved by the breach of the law, and shall obtain the blessing due unto him
for keeping of the same.

What is meant by this; That he died?
That his soul was separated from his body, so that he died a corporali death.

Why was it requisite that he should die?
Because by sin came death into the world, so that the justice of God could
not have been satisfied for our sins, unless death had been joined with
his sufferings.

Why is it ^rther added, That he was buried?
To assure us more fully that he was truly dead.

What comfort have you by his death and burial?
1 I am comforted, because my sins are fully discharged in his death, and so
buried, Use of Christ's burial. Phil. 3. 9. 13. Romans 6. 12.
that they shall never come into remembrance. 2 Secondly, my comfort is the
more, because by the virtue of his death and burial sin shall be killed in
me, and buried, so that henceforth it shall have no power to reign over me. 3
Thirdly, I need not to fear death, seeing that sin which is the sting of
death is taken away by the death of Christ, and that now death is made unto me
an entrance into this life.
What is the meaning of this, He descended into hell?
This is the meaning; that my Savior Christ did not only suffer in body, but
also in soul did abide most unspeakable vexations, griefs, painful troubles,
and fear of mind, ^^to the which both before, and most of all when he hanged
upon the cross, he was cast.

What comfort have you by this?
I am comforted in this, because in all my grievous temptations and assaults I
may stay and make sure my self by this, that Christ has delivered me from
the sorrowful griefs and pains of hell.

What beleeuest thou in this article, He rose again from the dead?
I believe that Christ in his manhood has suffered for me, and that he did in
the third day, ^^^ again by his own power from the dead.

Wherein does this article minister comfort unto thee?
In three things:

1. His resurrection does assure me, that his righteousness shall be imputed to
me for my perfect justification. 2. it comfort me, because it does from day
to day raise me up to Use of the article of the Resurrection
righteousness and newnes of life in this present world. 3 It ministers unto me
a comfortable hope, that I shall rise again in the last day from bodily death.
What beleeuest thou in this Article, He ascended into heaven?
I believe that Christ in his humane Nature (the Apostles looking on,) ascended
into Heaven.

What comfort have you thereby?
1. I am comforted in this, that Christ has prepared a place for me in
heaven: which John. ^. 14.
now I see by Faith, and her^a^ter shall fully enjoy. 2. I am comforted by his
intercession to the Father for me.
What fruit have you by his intercession*
1. First, it does reconcile me to the Father, for those sins which I do
daily commit. Use of Chrstes intercession.
2. Secondly, being reconciled in him, I can pray to GOD with boldness, and
call him FATHER.
What is the meaning of this article, He si^tteth at the right hand of God the
Father?
I believe that CHRIST in man's nature, was advanced by the FATHER unto that
high authority, whereby he rules all things in heaven and earth.

What comfort have you thereby?
1. I am comforted, because I shall receive from him all things needful for
me under his gracious government. 2. By his power all mine enemies shall be
subdued, and trodden under my feet.
What believe you in this article, From thence he shall come, etc?
1 Thessalonians. 4. 26. 1. Cor. 15.
I believe that Christ shall come in his Majesty, to pronounce sentence upon
all those that were dead before, and upon them that then shall befound alive.

What comfort have you by this?
1. I am comforted in my greatest misery, knowing that CHRIST will come one
day and (...) of all. 2. I am sure that he will give sentence on my side, and
take me to glory with him.
Why say you I believe in God the holy Ghost?
Because he is God, equal with the Father and the Son.

Why call you him ^^^?
Because he is the Author of all holiness.

What fruit have you by this?
1. The holy Ghost does assure me that I am the child of God, by making me
to call him A^^^ Father. 2* He assures me, that by the virtue of the death and
resurrection of Christ, that sin dies in me, and I am raised up to
holiness of life. 3. The holy Ghost leads me into all truth needful to Gods
glory and my salvation. Phil. 3. 10. Romans 12. 13.
4. He comfort me in all my troubles, and in death assures me of a better
life in this same body and soul.
What is the meaning of this article, I believe that there is a Catholic
Church?
That God has a certain number of his chosen children, which he does call
and gather to himself.

Why say you, I believe that there is a Catholic Church. Church.

Because that the Church of God cannot be always seen with the eyes of man.

Why call you the Church Holy?
Because the Church on the earth though in it self it is sinful, yet in
Christ the head it is holy, and in the life to come shall be brought to
perfection of holiness.

Why do you call it Catholic?
Because God in all places, and of all sorts of men had from the beginning,
has now, and ever will have an holy Church.

What is the meaning of this article, The Communion of Saints?
The whole Church communicates with Christ, and every member one with another
in the benefits of Christ.

What comfort have you by this article?
1. I am comforted, because I am justified by that Faith whereby Adam and
Abraham were justified, which is tied to no time, or place, and excludes no
person. 2. I am comforted, because I am made partaker of Christ and all his
mercies by Faith, and of all the blessings of the Church by love.
What belieuest thou in this article, I believe the forgiveness of sins?
I believe that God for Christ's sake does freely forgive me, not only all my
sins, but also the punishment that I have deserved by them.

Why say you, I believe the forgiveness of sins? The holy Ghost alone
gives us the assurance of the pardon of sins.

Because no reason can persuade me, but the holy Ghost only must work the
assurance of it in my heart.

What comfort have you hereby?
1. First, I am comforted, because all the sins I have, and daily commit,
shall never be laid to my charge. 2. Secondly, I am comforted, because that
the weakness and wants of all my duties are covered and supplied in Christ. 3.
Thirdly, I am comforted, because God will hear me praying for others, that
they may have Faith to By Faith we come by degrees to feel and to have a
comfortable experience of the pardon of sins.
feel the forgiveness of sins.
What belieuest thou in this article, The resurrection of the body unto life
everlasting?
I believe that this body after it shall be dissolved into dust, shall be
raised up again at the last day, and my soul shall live in everlasting glory.

What comfort reap you thereby?
1. I am made comfortable and cheerful in well-doing, seeing my labor shall
not be in vain. 2. I am made to despise the pleasures and glory of this world,
and with patience to suffer all troubles that are laid upon me in this present
life. 3. It comfort me over the death of my dearest friends, and makes me
careful in death, knowing that I shall have a part in the resurrection of the
just.
What fruit have you when you believe all these Articles?
All do come to this end, that being justified by faith, I am righteous in
Christ before God.

What be the several fruits?
1. First, I am at peace with God, although in my self for my outward sins
which I daily commit, and my inward corruption which remains, I am daily
accused. The comfortable use of all the articles of the Creed.
2. I get strength to fight against my outward sins, to subdue my inward
corruption, to do outward good works, and to delight in the law of God in the
inward man. 3. I have a right to all Gods creatures, so that the use and want
of them shall turn to the furtherance of my salvation. 4. I am assured of the
glorification of my soul and body in the heavens, because I am made an heir
of everlasting life.
Why is this given wholly and only unto Faith? Faith only justifies. Romans 3.
28.

Not because Faith does deserve it: but because the merits of Christ can be
laid hold on and applied to my self, by none other means but by Faith alone.

Cannot our good works in some part justify us before God?
No: for the righteousness which is able to stand in the judgment of God, must
be perfect in all respects.

Are not our good works perfect?
No: for in many things we sin all; and again, the best works we do, are
defiled with sin, and therefore can deserve nothing at the hands of God.

Why then does God promise a reward unto them?
The reward that God does promise, it is not for the desert of works, but of
his own A reward to works is promised of Gods free mercy, and not for merit
Works.
grace and mercy.

Will not this doctrine make men careless of well doing.
No: for they that be ingraffted into Christ, must needs bring forth good
works.

Why is it needful that they should do good works?
1. First, that we may by them show our selves thankful unto God for all his
benefits. 2. That we may be assured of our Faith and election by good works.
3. That by our good works we may edify others.
How may thou edify others?
1. First, by encouraging and strengthening those that are good. 2. Secondly,
by winning those that are not come unto God. 3. And then by stopping the
mouths of the wicked. 4. The fourth arises of the former, and that is the
glory of GOD, which is advanced by them.
Are good works so needful, that without them we cannot be saved?
Yea: for although good works do not work our salvation in any part, yet
because they that are justified are also sanctified; they that do no good
works, declare that they neither are justified nor sanctified, and therefore
cannot be saved.

Then they must much more be condemned, which commit sin and lie in it? Law
and Gospel condemn sinners which lie in sin without repentance.

Yea: for such are not only pronounced to be accursed by the Law, but also
the Gospel has denounced, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Can every one do good works?
None can do good workrs, but they that are borne again.

How can they that are thus borne again do good works?
They that are thus borne again, and carry in them the Image of God, have
repentance wrought in them; from whence good works do proceed. Repentance
defined. Note.


What is Repentance?
Repentance is a turning of our selves to GOD, whereby we crucify and kill
the corruption of our nature, and reform our selves in the inward man,
according to Gods will.

What is it to crucify the corruption of our nature?
It is truly, and with all my heart to be sorry, that I have angered God with
it, and with my other sins, and every day more and more to hate it and them,
and to fly from them.

How is this sorrow wrought?
It is wrought in me partly by the threatenings of the Law, and the fear of
Gods judgments, but especially increased by feeling of the fruit of Christ
his death, whereby I have power to hate sin, and to leave it.

How is this reformation of our selves wrought in us?
Only by the promises of the Gospel, whereby we feel the fruit of the rising
again of Christ.

What does ensue hereof?
Hereby we are raised up into a new life, having a law written in our hearts,
and so reform our selves.

Hereby it appears that none can repent of themselves, or when they will?
Yea: for it was said before, that it is the gift of GOD, given unto them that
are borne again.

By this it is also evident that Gods Children stand in need of Repentance, so
long as they live?
Yea: for there is none of Gods Saints but always carrying this corruption
about The faithful have a cortinuall repentaence all their life.
them, they sometime fall, and are far from that perfection of goodness, which
the Lord requires.

Se^ing it was said before, that good works did proceed from Rep^ntance, what
properties are required of works?
1. First, that they be such as God has commanded in his Law. 2. Secondly,
that they that do them be such as be ingrafted into CHRIST, and continue in
him.
What say you then of the good works of them that be not in Christ?
They do no good works, because they neither are as yet members of Christ,
nor do offer them to GOD in the Name of Christ.

3. The third property of works is, that they may be to glorify God, and to
assure our salvation.
Is it not lawful to seek our own praise and merit by our own good works?
No: For all our good works are imperfect, and salvation is only merited by
the death of Christ, as was said before.

We have heard that the Law works the knowledge of our sins, and feeling of
our miseri^ What means has God ordained to work and increase Faith in us?
He has ordained

1. The Gospel to beget and breed it in us. 2. Prayer 3. Sacraments 4.
Discipline 5. Affliction. -- to confirm it in us.
What is the Gospel? Gospel defined.

It is that part of Gods word, whereby the holy Ghost works in us a lively
Faith, to apprehend the free remission of sins in Jesus Christ.

How many kinds of Faith be there?
Two, a

General Faith, whereby I believe God to be true in all his works. Special,
and this is either whereby I believe God to be just in his threatenings, and so
am made penitent; Or, whereby I believe him to be made merciful in his
promises, and so come to repentance. Penitence and repentance how they differ.

What difference is there between Penitence and Repentance?
Penitence is a sorrow for sin, wrought by the Law: Repentance is a
recovering our selves from sin, wrought by the Gospel.

Is there such difference between the Law and the Gospel?
Yea: for the Law differs from the Gospel in four things. Four differences
between the law and gospel.


1, First the Law reuealeth sin, rebukes us for it, and leaves us in it:
but the Gospel does reveal unto us Remission of sins, brings us to
CHRIST, and ^reeth v^ from the punishment belonging unto sin. 2. The Law
commands to do good, and gives no strength: but the Gospel inable^^ us to
do good, the holy Ghost writing the law in our hearts, and assuring us of the
promise. 3. The Law is the ministry of wrath, condemnation and death; but the
Gospel is the ministry of grace, justification, and life. 4. In many points
the Law may be conceived by reason; but the Gospel in all poin^^ is far
above the reach of man's reason.
Wherein do they agree?
They agree in this, that they be both of God, and declare one kind of
righteousness, Romans 3. 2.
though they differ in offering it unto us.

What is that one kind of righteousness?
It is the perfect love of God and of our neighbor.

What thing does follow upon this?
That the severe law pronounces all the faithful righteous.

How does the Law pronounce them righteous?
Because that they hau^ in Christ all that the Law does ask.

But yet they remain transgressors of the Law.
They are transgressors in themselves, and yet righteous in Christ, and in
their inward man they love righteousness and hate sin.

What then is the state of the faithful in this life?
They are pure in Christ, and yet fight against sin.

What battle have they?
They have battle both

within: the battle of the flesh against the Spirit. and without: the
temptation of Satan. The combat of the faithful.
the world.

How shall they overcome?
By a lively Faith in Jesus Christ. 1. Ioh. 5. 4.

What call you the flesh?
The corruption of our nature, wherein we were borne and conceived. Flesh
defined


Does that remain after regeneration?
Yea: it dwells in us, and cleaves fast unto us so long as we carry the
outward flesh about us.

How does the flesh fight against the spirit?
By continual lusting against the spirit.

What is that?
1. By hindering, or corrupting us in the good motions, words, and deeds of the
spirit. The motions and lusts of the flesh.
2. By continual moving us to euill-motions. words. deeds.
What call you the spirit?
The holy Spirit, which God in Christ has given us, whereby we are begotten
again.

D^^ we not receive the spirit in full measure, and in perfection at the first?
No: but first, we receive the first fruits, and afterward the daily increase
of the same unto the end, if the fault be not in our selves.

How does the Spirit fight in us?
By lusting against the flesh.

How does it lust against the flesh?
1. First, partly by rebuking, and partly by restraining in us the evil
motions and deeds The spirit rebukes and restraines evil motions in us.
of the flesh. 2. By continual inlightning and affecting us with-thoughts,
words, deeds. agreeable to Gods will.
What call you the world?
The corrupt state and condition of men, and the rest of the creatures.

How does the world fight against us?
By alluring and withdrawing us to the corruptions thereof.

What means does it use?
1. It allureth us by false 1. Pleasures 2. Profit 3. Glory. of this world,
from our obedience to God. The lives of the world.
2. It allureth us other-paines, losses, and reproaches, to distrust Gods
promises whiles by
How shall we overcome the pleasures, profit, and glory of this world?
1. By a true Faith in JESUS CHRIST, who despised all these things to work our
salvation, and to make us overcome them. 2. By Faith in Gods word, that fears
us from doing any thing against his will.
How shall we overcome the Pains, losses, and reproaches. of the World.
1, By aliuely Faith in Jesus Christ, who suffered all those things to work
our salvation, and to enable us to suffer them. 2. By a ^ledfast Faith in Gods
promises and providence, that we shall want no good thing, and that all things
seeming hurtful, shall be turned to the furtherance of our salvation.
What call you Satan?
The adversary of enemy of God and his people.

How does he fight against us?
1. By subtlety, alluring us to sin, and therefore ^e is called a Tempte^ or
Serpent. Satan how he fights.
2. By laying fearfully to our charge our sins committed, and therefore he
is called the Devil, an accuser. 3. By seeking by manifold inward terrors and
outward troubles to swallowe us up, and therefore is called a roaring Lion.
How shall we fight against Satan and his temptations?
1. By Faith in Jesus Christ, who overcame all his temptations in his own
person, that so we might overcome in him. 2. By resisting the inward motions
and outward occasions of sin. To resist the inward motions and outward
occasions of sin.

How shall we do^ that?
By believing that we are baptized into the death and resurrection of Christ.

How shall we overcome Satan, and his accusations?
1 By Faith in Jesus Christ, who has justified us from all the sins for the
which he can accuse us. 2, By all those comfortable promises of forgiveness of
sins, which in CHRIST'S Name are made unto us.
How shall we overcome him in our terrors and troubles?
1. By Faith in Jesus Christ, who was heard in all his troubles, to give us
assurance that we shall not be overcome in them. 2. By Faith in Gods
providence, whereby we know that he can do no more unto us than the Lord
does direct, (and as it were) give in commssion for our good.
We have heard that the Word is the first and chief means not only to
beget, but also to strengthen and increase Faith in us: What is the next
principal means?
Prayer is the next principal means, serving for the strengthening and
increasing of Faith.

What is Prayer? Prayer defined.

It is a lifting up of the mind, and a pouring out of the heart before God.

Is there any prescript rule of Prayer left us in the Scriptures?
Yea, even the Prayer which our Savior CHRIST JESUS taught his Disciples,
called the Lords prayer.

Is it lawful to use no other form of words?
We may use another form of words, but we must pray for the same things, and
with like affection, following the same rules which are prescribed in that
prayer.

How is that prayer divided?
It is divided into the

Preface, or entrance to the prayer. Prayer it self. Conclusion, or shutting
up of the prayer.
Which is the Preface?
Our Father which art in heaven.

What does the Preface put us in mind of?
1. First, of him to whom we pray. 2. Secondly, of our own estate in prayer.
To whom do we pray?
Only to GOD the

Father. Son. Holy Ghost.
Why do you here name the Father?
Because discerning the persons, we pray to the Father secretly understanding
it, that we do in the mediation of the Son, by the working of the holy
Ghost.

Why must we pray to the Father in the mediation of CHRIST his Son?
Because GOD being displeased for sin, we can have no dealing with him, but
only by the means of his Son, in whom he is well pleased.

Why is it required that we pray by the working of the HOLY GHOST?
Because the holy Ghost assures us that he is our Father; and whereas we
know not what to pray, nor how to pray, the holy Ghost does teach us both.

What must we be persuaded of, and how must we be affected in prayer?
Partly concerning.

ourselves: 1. We must be truly humbled; which is wrought in us two ways: 1.
By a persuasion of our sinful misery and unworthiness to be helped. 2. By a
persuasion of the loving mercy -- of God in heaven that must help us.
2. We must have a certain confidence we shall be heard: and this is wrought in
us, 1. By faith, being persuaded that God loves us as his own children, in our
L: Jesus Christ. 2. By faith, being persuaded that our Father being God
Almighty, he is able to do -- whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth.

others We must be per swaded* 1. That all Gods people pray for us. 2. That it
is our bounden duty to pray for others as well as for our selves.

How are the petitions divided?
Into two parts: for

1. We make request for those things that concern Gods Majesty. 2. For those
things which concern our own welfare.
Which be those that concern Gods Majesty?
The three first:

1. Hallowed be thy Name. 2. Thy Kingdom come. Part of Lords^
3. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
What is meant by the Names of GOD?
1. The Names and Titles of GOD, as Jehovah; the Lord of Hosts; and such like.
2. The 1. Wisdom -- of GOD. 2. Power of GOD. 3. Mercy of GOD. 4. Goodness. of
GOD. 5. Truth. of GOD. 6. Righteousness of GOD. 7. Eternity. -- of GOD.

Why be these Names called the Names of GOD?
Because as names serve to discern things by; so GOD is known to be GOD, by
these things.

What is meant by the word Hallowed?
We pray that as God is glorious in himself, so he may be declared and made
known unto men to be a most glorious God

How shall Gods Name be declared to be holy and glorious?
1. First, we pray that his wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, truth,
righteousness, and Eternity, may more and more be imparted and manifested unto
us and other of Gods people. 2. Secondly, we pray, that according as we know
these things, so the fruits of them may appear in our, and other Gods peoples
lives, that so Gods Name may be honored and praised.
What do we pray against in this petition?
1. First, we pray against all ignorance of holy things we should know, and
want of works, whereby God wants of his glory. 2. We pray against all false
religion, wickedness, and ungodliness, whereby Gods Name is dishonored.
I cannot as yet find any more of this Catechism; If any man have the rest in
his private use, he shall do well to communicate the same unto the Church for
the good of many.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

THE SECOND PART OF THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND AND FAITHFVLL SERVANT OF JESUS
CHRIST, MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM, MINITSER AND PREAcher of the Word of GOD,
containing several Treatises, the Titles whereof appear in the next Page
following.

Psalm 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach
in thy Law.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Creed, for William Welbie, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swanne. 1611.

SVCH TREATISES AND MATTERS AS ARE CONTAINED IN THIS PART, ARE THESE.
1. A comfortable Treatise for an afflicted conscience, on the 18. of the
PROVERBS. verse. 14. 2. Another short treatise of the same argument. 3. The
marks of a righteous man. 4. Notes of election. 5. A treatise of Contract. 6.
A large treatise of the Sabbath. 7. Short notes of our salvation, and of an
upright heart* 8. Necessary rules for the profitable reading of holy
Scriptures. 9. A treatise of the Resurrection. 10. A treatise of Examination,
both before and after the Lords Supper. 11. A treatise of Gods fear. 12. A
treatise of hypocrisy. 13. A treatise of Anger. 14. A treatise of blessedness.
15. A treatise of Fasting. 16. A treatise of sending the holy Ghost. 17. A
short treatise of Prayer upon the words of the Prophet Joel, chapt. 2. verse.
32. alleged by Saint Peter, Acts 2. verse. 21.
royal blazon or coat of arms
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR DRV DRVRIE KNIGHT, GENTLE-MAN-VSHER OF HER
MAJESTY'S PRIVY CHAMBER: AND MASTER THOMAS FANSHAW Esquire, the Queens
Remembrancer in her Highness Court of Exchequer: H. H. wishes the increase of
all mercies and comforts, in Jesus Christ for ever.
SOme of these Treatises (Right Worshipful,) serve well to teach us both the
danger and* the cure of the greatest The wound of the spirit.
wound a man can have on earth: the rest differ in argument, yet have one
general scope, as namely the building of Gods people in the faith and
obedience of Christ. Herein first I request your worships patience, to take
some view of a short representation of the whole book, by special branches,
couching the authors own very words and matter in this compendious form
following.

The first treatise is of a wounded spirit, wherein this faithful servant of
Christ teaches us: 1. How great an evil the wound of the spirit is: for that
the very Pagans and Papists can bear great afflictions till their spirits be
wounded, but if their minds be dejected, they will disp^tch themselves with any
violent death: and the faithful also cast down with Gods arrows* and sight
of their sins and the feeling of Gods hand upon their minds, Job, David,
Ezekiah, Jeremiah, mourned heavily for the wound of the spirit. 2. What comfort
the true peace of conscience carries with it, able to free us from all
discomforts of this life: and contrarily how the mind appalled, no blessing
can long cheer us in this present life. 3. How mad they be which by violent
death seek to end their afflictions of mind: for that this is the only way
to increase their torments: for if their burden be great here, it is
intolerable in hell. 4. How most men seem active, painful, and prudent to
prevent and foresee other troubles and evils: but few regard with any care a^
all to prevent the troubles of mind. How many travel with great skill for
riches, and honor, etc. but few take any pains for the precious treasure of
the peace of a good conscience. 5. Preservatives against afflictions of mind
are the searching of our sins past and present, great and small: and the
examination of our faith. 6. In examination for sin, we may not content our
selves to have left them. We must also heartily sorrow for them, even the
sins of our youth: for if we do not truly repent us of them, they may again
rebound upon us (says he) after many years to the great affliction and
tormenting of our minds. 7. Examination of sins, must be as well of sins
committed after our calling as before: for these sins of all other bite
sorest and pearce deepest. Cover them not, but confess them to God in time
least thou By the often checkes of conscience we may know what sins sway most
in us.
be constrained to blaze them abroad to thine exceeding grief and torment. 8.
After knowledge and light received from God, note ever what sins sway most in
thee, by the often checks of thy conscience, and so labor to avoid them,
being grieved for them: which if thou do not, thou can not escape either
hardness of heart* or afflictions of mind. 9. Sins of omission have much
distempered Gods good children, the negligent use of the means of salvation,
and for the not putting of their gifts in practice; many have been whipoed
afterward in their naked consciences, and the Lord has even pierced them in
their secret bowels. 10. Some are troubled for their private pride, and this is
a good preparatiue to receive Christ* Some for doing more in show than in
truth, abusing their knowledge, in that they make it but a mask to iuggle in,
and for that they make but the^r affections to fight with their own judgment.
Some righteous men are troubled when they offend not (for they are their own
greatest accusers) for some secret corruptions in other matters: so that there
is nothing more difficult, than to search our hearts to the bottom for sins
past and present, for privy pride, hidden wants, and secret corruptions. 11.
That we must carefully avoid too scrupulous a fear, as well as carnal
security. If the aiuell find us void of all fear, he thinks his assaults
must be stronger, because our resistance is the weaker: but if he find in us a
cowardly fear and fainting of heart, before we strike one stroke against him,
he will suddenly stab us to the heart, and make a spoil of us. 12. If we see
the godly afflicted in their consciences, either before or in the issues of
death, we may not conclude therefore they are hypocrites, or great sinners
before God: for that the Lord may as well make trial of their faith, as take
punishment of their sins, as we see in Job and others: for (says he) if such
affli^tion come principally for sin, then the greatest sinners should have
the greatest afflections. 13. When any shall come to the cure of souls
afflicted, they must not begin with words of compassion only; God is
merciful, etc. but first with a gentle searching of their sores, laboring to
draw out of them the confession of some special and secret sins. 14. All
griefs are either confused or distinct ^rising of known or unknown causes.
The spiritual Physician must wisely consider of the original of the evil,
whether it be in soul or body, or both: for this cause he warns that in
this distemper, the Physicians counsel be never severed, nor the godly
ministers labor neglected. 15. The persons ministering in this affliction must
be men learned, of sound judgment, wise, and of good experience, meek and of
most loving spirits. I counsel thee (says he) if thou can not come to the
particular sight of sin i^ and by thy self, use the help of such men, unto
whom thou must offer freely thine heart to be g^ged an^ searched, and the whole
course of thy life to be examined by the bright shining glass of the law of
God. 16 A certain cause or known sin is either already committed, and not
repented: or a sinn^ not committed, but whereunto we be tempted. If troubles
come for some special sin committed, say thus: Does this one sin so
displease thee? and deserve I thus to be punished and far more grievously for
this one? how great then should my punishment be, if thou should so deal
with me for all my other sins? If the heart be terrified with fear of the
commission of sin, for temptations and motions unto si^ne: we are not so much
to dispute with our motions, as to resist them strongly by instant and
extraordinary watchfulnes in prayer. 17. If thou labourest in this due
examination of thy self* thou shall in time be able to discover the veins,
body, age, and strength of many temptations in others, by an holy experience
which God has taught thee, thou shall see into men's secret corruptions and be
able to beget an inspeakeable joy in others, who may be tempted as thou ar^* or
have been, 18. Again, when men proceed in this cure, they must remember two
special grounds: first* to labor that the afflicted may be persuaded their
sins are pardonable, and their sores curable. Secondly, that their
visitations is not so much a sign of Gods wrath and anger, as a seal of his
mercy and favor: for that it is not blind and barren, but like to be
plentiful in good effects, and fruitful in godly issues. 19. Albeit some in
this cure, suppress the Law and apply the Gospel only: yet I see not* but
that there must be a sound sorrow for sin, before the pardon of sin be
sealed, and men must know and acknowledge themselves sick, before they seek
the Physician: yet here is wisdom required, neither to press the Conscience
too severely, nor to release it too unadvisedly 20. Lastly, in applying the Law
to some persons afflicted, he warns us wisely to observe: First* whet^er we
speak to man or woman, for that we may urge the Law more strictly to the man
as being the stronger. Secondly, whether they have knowledge or no: for the
ignorant in this case, thinks never any so tempted, and Satan persuades him
that has knowledge, that he has sinned against the holy Ghost. Thirdly,
whether strong or weak, more or less wounded for their sin. Fourthly,
whether by nature they are more fearful and melancholic. Fifthly, whether it
be a sign of infirmity, or of custom. Sixthly, consider well the persons
age* estate, and condition of life; for Temptations and Afflictions do vary
according to all these. And yet remember well how there be many (of what
condition, sex, and knowledge soever they are) which be more troubled for the
v^xation of t^eir minds distempered, then for the vileness and horriblenes of
their sins committed: as fearing some outward shame, rather then humbled for
their inward sin. Seventhly, the time is to be observed: to be more mild in
the burning ag^^ of their fit^es, but more sh^rpe in admo^ition in their
intermission and rest. Eighthly and lastly, to bear patiently the impatiencie
of the sick: remembering always the words of Gods blessed spirit: A wounded
spirit who can bear? And thus far concerning the principal contents and
rules of the first Treatise.

The second is of the very same argument: and here he commends these holy
observations following: First he wills us, in afflictions not so much to
fasten our eyes upon them, as upon the end which is most sweet and
comfortable. 2. That the Lord shackleth us the more wit^ the chain of his
chastisements, because we are more careful to ^ee vn^ urthened of our
afflictions, than to be freed from our sins. 3. How the godly should rejoice
in their godly sorrow for sin, for that it is an earnest of their
regeneration. And that they take heed to disqui^t themselves, because they are
pestered with wicked motions, suspicions, delusions, vain fantasies and
imaginations: for that the body of sin will ever send forth some filthy
froth, which is not only (says he) detestable to the mind rege^erate, but
also would make abashed the very natural man and unbeliever, if he could see
into that sea of sin and sinke-hole of iniquity. 4. Though we find in our
selves manifold infirmities: though we know not whether we strive for fear of
punishment, or for love of so good a father: yet if we feel this in our
selves that we would feign love the Lord, and be better, and being wearied and
tired with our sins, long gladly to enjoy the peace of righteousness, and
desire to please God in a simple obedience of faith: then let us be comforted,
there is no time too late to repent in. 5. If any say his faith is weak and
cold, and my conscience is as a burning furnace. I fear the Lord will pursue
me with his wrath. I answer, thou do w^ll to fear: but fear and sin
not. For that fear which sul dueth the security of the flesh is in all most
requisite: but fight ever against that fear which hinders the certain^y of
faith, for that will encourage our enemies more fiercely to set upon us, 6. He
says, that some are utterly ignorant of the afflictions of mind: and when
they hear any speech of any such matter, they suppose they hear a man speak
in a strange language. But he counsels us to run unto the Lord in this
life with a troubled mind, least we tarry with such men to be loc^t up with
the heavy fetters of desperation, when he shall summon us to the b^rre of his
judgment in the sight of his Angels, etc. 7. In prosperity many think Gods
blessings are their own^ right, and bind God (as it were) in this life to
entertain them at full charges; and sue him as it were by an obligation, if he
seem to withdraw his hand from them: So they prouokt him, to prove to their
faces by some special cross and affliction, that all they have is but lent
and borrowed. But Gods children acknowledge continually that God has rods in a
readiness (though they see no present evils) to beat them from their sins:
and bend all their care how they may rather suffer aduersi^ie to Gods glory,
than to sleep securely in prosperity to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. For they know Gods graces must not be idle in his children, but well
exercised by afflictions. Thus far for the second treatise.

The third treatise teaches us what be the special marks of a righteous man.
Here first he shows that true righteousness does not consist of any
inherent quality, be it never so excellent, but is only by imputation: for
the obtaining whereof a man must feel and find himself naked, and void of
all righteousness, and full of all unrighteousness, by reason of that sin
which dwells in us. 2. A man must desire to l^aue his sins, and to escape
the punishment due unto them. 3. To commit himself by faith unto Christ, and
trusting in him and in his all-sufficient merits for his full reconciliation
with God. 4. A man thus justified and reconciled, is also sanctified to walk
with an upright heart before the Lord. 5. This uprightness is tried by four
special notes. First, we must love all good things as well as one, and hate
all sins as well as one: having respect to all Gods commandments: Yet this
rule may have some exceptions (says he) for we do not at the first know all
good, nor all evil, much less love the one and hate the other as we ought:
yet let every man walk according to that measure of grace and light received.
For of this be assured, in that measure we like of sin* in that measure is
hypocrisy in us. Secondly, we must have a single care to approve our selves
unto God himself, and to set forth his glory in well-doing without hope of
reward, alb^it trouble come upon us for it. And here (says he) where as
Pharisaicall Papists which never knew the the true efficient, nor matter, nor
form, nor end of a good work, have in elder ages far past many of our cold
Gospel^ers, it is a sign there be but a few righteous men on earth. And if
here we shall find in our selves much rebellion and hypocrisy, yet mark
ever our chiefest drift in all our actions: for it is one thing to do a thing
for hypocrisy, and another thing mixed with hypocrisy. The third marks is even
to proceed on, in every good grace and in all obedience* not to stay in the
beginning, or to ^ide back, when we are gone somewhat forward. And here yet
Go^s children may both linger and f^ll: but they mislike and mourn for their
lingering; and if they fall, they take better hold of Christ in a new
repentance: and because by their fall they have lost much ground, they run
the faster and cheerefuller in the rest of their ra^e. The fourth note of a
righteous man is to love righteous manners, and righteous matters, as well in
others as in our selves: we must love our superiors before us, to follow them;
our equals to confirm them, and to be confirmed by them; our inferiors to
instruct them, and to help them forward in the ways of godliness. And thus
far this treatise.

The fourth portion of this book contains his short notes of election. The
fifth treatise is of a contract before marriage. And here first for the
commendation of this holy contract he uses these arguments: 1. That it seems
the light of nature commends it, for that the very Heathen did like it and
approve it. 2. Our b^essed presidents set before us in holy Scripture, they
likewise recommend it in their practice. 3. The holy law instituting the same
punishment for the pollution of parties contracted which it does upon
adulterers, argues a contract to be a special promise greatly respected of
God. In the next place he shows, that a contract is a preparation of the
parties contracted, by prayer and instruction, to present themselves for
marriage in a special time appointed publicly before God and his congregation.
Lastly, he gives the parties contracted many holy instructions and
exhortations, all grounded upon the articles of faith and the decalogue. Thus
^at the contract: an argument greatly desired (I am well assured) of many,
because so few in our age have written of it.

Now the sixth part follows, and that is a very large and learned treatise of
the Sabbath: the principal contents whereof (as briefly as I could contract
them) I have disposed in this order: First he shows the necessity of this
argument from the inconvenience of breaking and the commodities and blessings
of keeping the same. ^. Inconveniences are many set down, in respect of the
wicked and unbelievers, as also the true believers in the Church of God, which
move many scruples concerning it, for that they are not thoroughly taught nor
persuaded of it. The commodities and fruits also which follow the right
understanding and observation of the Sabbath, are many and great: for that this
day is the Lords market day, wherein he lays open the manifold graces of his
holy spirit.

2. The method of handling this argument may be thus:

1. This Commandment is 1. Affirmative: and 2. Negative. The rest not so. 2.
The reasons for confirmation: 1. From the end, in the word Remember. 2. From
the authority of the Law-giue^: The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord. 3.
From the equity of it: Six days thou shall work. 4. From proportion of the
Lords own example in the creation: For in six days, etc.

A fifth reason may be couched under all: from the time of the first
institution: if before the law it was so effectual to keep out sin, then
much more needful now, to recover us from sin, and to keep us being
recovered.

3. Generally he notes how this commandment is for words larger, and for
reasons fuller than any other commandment: because men will neither in reason
so soon admit it, nor in affection be so ready to embrace and practice it.
For thus has he done with all the rest of the Commandments, which find
entertainment and love among men.

4. This Commandment alone has a preface in the word Remember: where we be
taught in this first reason, that if we desire to know and to obey God
according to the first and second tables, remember this law set (as it were)
between both. Secondly, that this law was given before, and always practiced
in the Church of God* Exodus, 16. before the promulgation in Sina^. Wherefore it
is not ceremonial, as some phant^stically have conceived. He adds many
reasons, this special argument is one. The first end is the principal,
sanctify the Sabbath was the first end, and it is the principal.

5. The second reason is, from the equity of the law, that the Lord granting
us freely six days to travel and to mercha^^ize for our selves, we should
not presume to intermeddle ^or invade the Lords own day the seventh day
reserved for himself. And here again (against the ad^^^saries) he s^ith, if
these Commandments be ceremonial, then the permission of six days for
work als^ is but of the same nature.

6. The third reason is taken from the authority of the law giver, The Sabbath
of the Lord: because it must be wholly spent upon the Lord, or attending and
waiting ^n him. If the Iewe^ had need of this whole day for their instruction,
etc. then have we need as well as they, that being freed from the manifold
distraction of our callings, we might wholly give our selves to the worship of
God commanded in the Gospel.

7. The fou^th and last reason is drawn from the proportion of Gods own
example, In six days God made etc. where he shows that God has promised a
special blessing to this day in the true sanctification of it.

8. After all this he meets with very special objections* which are brought
by adversaries to prejudice the doctrine of the Sabbath, against the moral
obseru^ion of it. And here to know what is morally and ceremonially commanded
in the Old Testament, he gives us this special rule, when a Like reason like
law.
thing is urged to the Jews, and has a peculiar reason made properly to the
I^w, then as it begun with the Jews, it ceased with the Jews; but when the
reason of the thing v^ged is not peculiar to the Jews, but also belongs to
the Christians, then the thing commande^ is common to Jew and Gentile.

9. The Gentiles by the light of nature can no more see the true Sabbath of the
Lord, than the pure means and manner which the Lord has appointed for his
worship. The moral law and the natural law differ: for al^eit the moral law
be the explaining of the natural^ l^w, yet it does not follow, that that which
is in the moral law, is no more than that which is in the law of nature.

10. Having showed the moral use of the Sabbath to concern the Gentiles as
well as Jews, and answered all objections to the contrary. In the next place
he teaches the observation of i^: how it is to be kept and how it is broken:
what are the public exercises of the Sabbath: with what care and conscience we
should prepare our selves to meet the Lord on the Sabbath: how we must attend
upon him, for the time present in the congregation: and lastly, what our
private exercises must be after our departure from the public assembly.

11 In the second part or negative, ^e shows us in this law what works are
forbidden: and them all he refers to these two heads: First, all works of
our ordinary calling. Secondly, all lawful Strange works, as Iron mils and
such like, must rest on the Sabbath.
recreations. Concerning the first kind, be they more usual or less usual,
^^ question would be made, if men were as wise to serve God in di^i^ing the
times and seasons for the ^asements of their bodies, and refreshing their
souls on the Sabbath, as they b^ politic for the increase of their worldly
substance. And as concerning lawful recreation on the Sabbath day: If labor
be for^i^den in seed time and harvest, much more pleasu^^ all the year long:
i^ things more needful for the preservation of lif^* to the glory of God be
disallowed; then assuredly, these less needful cannot be allowed. Again,
(says he) the zeal of worldlings may shame us in our security: for so long
as any profit drops on them, they give no place to pleasure. Behold the policy
and painfulnes of the world may teach us what we ought to do for our seules.
And thus far of the compendious sum of the treatise of the Sabbath. Of this
argument I found three very good copies: after due examination and conference
had, I have here published the best in my judgment, both for matter and form,
in the best manner that I can. This work has been in many hands for many
years, and has given light to some, and I trust shall give further occasion
to others to travail yet more herein for the good of posterity. And whereas
so many in all Churches I wish that these two arguments, of the Sabbath, and of
Tithe, were more fully handled by some godly learned Divines.
in these days pass by this argument of the Sabbath, and that other of Tit^e,
is mere shadows and ceremonies: it were to be wished, that as this reverend
man of God, and Master D. B. have painfully travailed in the one: so the
learned and faithful servants of Christ, would communicate their knowledge and
judgment of the other, unto the Church and people of God.

The seventh portion is short, but contains very good notes of salvation, and
of an upright heart.

The eighth and last part o^ treatise, teaches us very profitable and
necessary rules for the reading and understanding of the holy Scripture, which
be these:

1. That Gods people which will profit by pr^^^^ing* must (...) the reading of
the holy Scriptures* for that none (says he) ^ar so w^ll profit by preaching,
as they that h^^e been i^^i^^d up in reading the Scriptures, or hearing them
r^^d.

2 Next to profit by reading of the Scripture, ^e requires ^^^^^ special
things to be observed: 1. Diligence. 2. Wisdom. 3. Preparation. 4.
Meditation. 5. Conference. 6. Faith. 7. Practice. 8. Prayer.

1. Diligence makes a rough way plain and easy: here keep an even course,
and persevere without wearines or starting from it. 2. With diligence desire to
join wisdom: for choice of matter what, of order how, of time when, to
read. For matter search things revealed, and hunt not after things not
revealed. In things revealed, seek after things most necessary, and then
G^^ealogies
things less necessary. For order, first desire to lay the foundation of
Christian religion, then build upon it, as God gives thee increase of faith and
knowledge. For time, we must not read always, but keep our appointed times.
The Sabbath day we may sp^^d a great part of it in reading* the n^^^^ days, in
the morning, at noone, and evening, when we may redeem* the day from the works
of our calling. 3. Again, a due preparation is required: whereunto appertain:
first the fear of Gods mai^s^^^ which serves well to correct the pride of
reason and to subdue our ^ff^ctions, and so to fit us for Luk ^4. 45.
the ch^le of Christ* Secondly* faith in Christ, for that he alone op^^^th ^ur
understanding, that we may understand the Scriptures. Thirdly* great desire in
the heart (...) upon the good word of God. 4. The fourth property is
meditation, which is the life of all good learning, and makes that we have
heard to be our own: and this is twofold: first of the mind or
understanding, discoursing of things read or heard. Secondly, of the affection,
when liking any thing in judgment, we labor that it may work also upon our
affections. Here this rule is to be noted, that meditation without reading ^^
c^r^neous, and reading without meditation, barren. 5. The fifth help here is
conference. For if in natural things, and in all things appertaining to this
life man stands in need of the help of other men, much more in spiritual
things. 6. The sixth property after reading, meditation* and conference is
faith which he requires as an increase of that aforegoing preparation. We must
believe in Jesus Christ by a general faith going before: but we must use
(says he) all the means before named, to increase our knowledge and faith in
all particulars after. 7. The seventh is practice: for this is a good way to
increase our store, to put to good use that mediocritie of knowledge, and gifts
we have received. And assuredly according to Christ's words, we see by daily
experience their gifts decay, which put them not in practice. 8. The eight rule
or property is prayer and thanksgiving. With this he will us to begin, to
continue, and to end this whole work. Like as we have no title to meat and
drink without our prayer: so (says he) they be impudent that do touch Gods
book without prayer. And here he requires also a spiritual thank sgiuing: for
(says he) if this be needful for corporal food, how much more for
spiritual, be thankful for any light and for every good motion which
proceeds from Gods spirit. And thus far the compendious sum of all these
treatises.
Now (Right Worshipful) this holy work I recommend to your protection: first,
because I knew not any in heart more affected toward that reverend man Master
R. Greenham, who was the author of them all. Again, this work in part
appertains to one of your Worships by a former dedication. And therefore I am
the more bold to recommend it thus amplified and enlarged unto you both. And
the rather, for that Gods good spirit having so knit your hearts together in
the holy faith of Christ, I may not doubt, but that this and the like blessings
proceeding from the same spirit, must delight your spirits, and find grace and
acceptance with you. I have much presumed on your Christian patience: I
commend you with all yours to the tuition of the Almighty.

Anno Dom. 1599. April 30. Yours to use in Jesus Christ: HENRY HOLLAND.

THE FIRST TREATISE FOR AN AFFLICTED CONSCIENCE UPON THIS SCRIPTVRE.
PROVERBS 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a
wounded spirit who can bear it?
THis Scripture is not only worthy to be graven in steel with the pen of an
Adama^t, and to be written in letters of gold: but also to be laid up and
registered by the finger of Gods spirit in the tables of our hearts. Which
sentence briefly speaks thus much unto us, that what trouble befaleth a man
(his mind being unappalled) he will indifferently bear it out: but if the
spirit of a man be once troubled and dismayed, he cannot tell how to be
delivered. And no marvel: for if the mind of man be the The mind cast
down, what shall comfort us?
fountain of consolation, which ministers comfort unto him in all other
troubles; if that become comfortless, what shall comfort it? If it be void of
help, how shall it be helped? If the eye which is the light of the body be
darkness, how great is that darkness? If the salt which sauoureth all
things be unsavory, for what is it good? If the mind which sustaineth all
troubles be troubled, how intolerable is that trouble? To show this the
better, I will first declare how great a punishment of God this wound of
conscience is. Secondly, I will teach how this trouble of mind may be
prevented and avoided. Lastly, I will set down how Gods children falling in
some measure into this affliction of spirit, may be recovered out of it.

For the first, the grieuousnes of this malady is seen, either by some due
consideration Parts to be considered.
of the persons that have felt it, or by some wise comparison made between
this grief of mind, and other outward griefs incident unto man.

The persons in whom we may consider this wound of spirit, are either merely
natural Persons afflicted in mind
men, or such as be renewed by the spirit of God. The men merely natural, are
either the Heathen, such as never knew God in Christ, or carnal professors,
such as have not professed Christianity aright. If we look among the Heathen,
how many of them have willingly gone under all poverty, and have been content
to unburden themselves of all worldly treasures? How some of them (whilst
their minds were not dejected) have suffered imprisonment, exile, and extreme
tortures of body, rather then they would betray their countries? How many of
them have devoured many injuries, and borne outward troubles, with some ease,
and with no resistance, whilst their minds were at liberty? And yet look
not into the meanest, but the best and most excellent men among them, even
their wise Philosophers, sweet Orators, and exquisite Poets, who in bearing
and forbearing, thought the The courage of heathens not disquieted in mind.
chiefest point of virtue to consist; and ye shall see when once some great
distress of mind did wound them, some would make an end of it by preparing a
cup of deadly poison: some would violently and voluntarily run on the enemies
pikes: some would throw down themselves from high Mountains: some would not
stick to stabbe most monstrously their own bodies with daggers, or such like
instruments of death: all which men would seem to have great courage in
sustaining man^e harms, so long as their minds were not ouer-mastered. But
when the divine and supreme Essence (which they acknowledged to be God) did by
his power cross and ouerturne their witty deu^ses and head-stron^ attempts,
so as without hope of remedy they were hampered in pensiveness and sorrow of
mind: Then not being ^ble to turn themselves under so hea^ie a burden
shrunk down, and by violent death would ^^d themselves of that disquietnesse
and impatience of their troubled minds.

But let us come nearer; and whether we behold the Papists, or the Family of
Love, or the common ^^rt of Christians, we shall see they will pass quietly
through many afflictions, whether for that they have a spirit of slum bring
and nu^^ess^ cast upon them, or whether because they have brawned themselves
through some senseless blockishnesse, as men hewn ou^ of hard O^kes, or
graven out of marble stones ^ know not: But yet Papists disquieted in mind^.
when the Lord shall let loose the co^rd of their consciences, and shall set
before their faces their sins committed; see what fearful e^des they have,
whilst some of them by hanging themselves, some by casting themselves into the
water* some by cutting their own throats, have rid themselves out of these
intolerable gr^s. Now wherein is the difference that some die so senslesly, and
some dispatch themselves so violen^lie? Surely the one feeling no sin, depart
like brutish Swine; the other surcharged with sin, die like harking dogs.

But let us come to the children of God, who have in some degree felt this
wound of mind; and it will appear both in the members and in the head, of all
burdens to be a thing most intolerable, to sustain a wounded conscience. And
to beg^^^e, let us set in the first rank I^b, that man of God commended unto
us by the hol^^ Ghost, for a mirror of patience: who although for h^s riches
he was the wealthiest man in the land of Job.
H^z; for his authority, might have made afraid a great multitude; and for
his substance, was the greatest of all the men in the East: yet when the
S^be^ns came violently and took away his Catt^ll; when the fire of God falling
from heaven, burnt up his sheep and his Servants: when the Chalde^ns had taken
away his Camels, when a great wind smo^e down his house upon his children,
although indeed he rent his garments, which was not so much for impatiencie, as
to show that he was not senseles in these evils: yet it is said that he
worshipping, blessed the Name of the Lord, saying: N^ked came I out of my
mothers womb and ^^^ed shall I return again: The Lord gives, and the Lord
takes away, blessed ^ee the Name of the Lord. But behold, when at the
strange conference of his comfortless friends, his mind began to be aghast,
which was not so in all his former trial; when his conscience began to be
troubled, when he saw the Lord fasten in him sharp arrows, and to set him up
as a B^^te to shoot at; when he thought God caused him to possess the sins
of his youth: this glorious pattern of patience could not bear his grief; he
was heavy, and now ^ani^ commend the image of a wounded spirit, to all that
come after. David, David. Hezekiah. Jeremiah.
a man chosen according to the Lords own heart: Eze^^^h, a pure worshipper of
God, and careful restoret of true religion: Jeremiah, the Prophet of the
Lord, sanctified and ordained to that office, before he was formed in his
mothers womb, were rate and singular in the graces and favor of God: yet when
they sel^ this wound, pearcing them with gri^fe of heart, they were as
Sparrowes mourning, as Cranes chattering, as Pellicans casting out fearful
cries, they thought themselves as in the g^aue, they wished to have dwelt
solitary, they were as bottles parched in the smoke, they were as Doves
mourning, not able without sighs and groans to utter their words, their hearts
claue to the dust, and their tongues to the roo^e of their mouths.

But above all, (if these were not sufficient to persuade us in this doctrine)
there remains Christ Ies^s, an example most comfortable for all afflicted
conciences.
one example, whom we affirm to be the perfect anatomy of an afflicted mind.
This is the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the image of the Father, the head
of the body, the mirrour-of all graces, the wisdom, righteousness, holiness,
and redemption of all the Saints, who sustained the cross even from his youth
upward: and besides poverty, baseness, hunger, did willingly go under the
great trouble of contempt and reproach, and that among them, where he should
have had a right deserved honor, in respect of the doctrine he taught them,
and in regard of the manifold miracles he wrought among them; as the healing of
the sick, the giving of sight to the blind, the restoring of life to the
dead: this unkindness nevertheless did not so much strike into him. But at
what time he was set as a sacrifice for all, when he was to bear our
infirmities, and carry our sorrows, at what time he was plagued and smitten of
God, humbled and wounded for our transgressions, when he should be broken for
our iniquities, and the chasticement of our peace was upon him; then he cried
out, My soul is heavy even unto the death: Then he prays, Lord if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. But how prays he? even with sweating:
how sweateth h^? even drops of blood: How long prays he? three times: When
ends his agony? not until he was dead: What said he being ready to
depart? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Was this for his humane
death, as some have imagined? No, no, wicked men have dyed without complaint,
whose patience then might seem to exceed his; it was his suffering in his
humane spirit, which incountred with the wrath of God, his Godhead suppressing
it self for a while: he suffered indeed many torments in body, but much more
heavily did the wrath of God lie upon his soul.

If this consideration of an afflicted spirit in these examples do not
sufficiently show, what a grievous thing it is to sustain a wounded
conscience: let us proceed to the comparing of this with other evils which fall
into the nature of man. There is no sickness, but Physic provides for it a
remedy; there is no sore, but Chirurgerie will afford it a salve; friendship
helps poverty; there is no imprisonment, but there is hope of liberty;
Suite and favor recover a man from banishment: authority and time wear away
reproach. But what Physic cures? what Chirurgerie salueth? what riches
ransometh what countenance bears out? what authority asswageth? what favor
relieueth a troubled conscience? all these banded together in league (though
they would conspire a confederacy) True p^ace of mind how comfortable
attained.
cannot help this one distress of a troubled mind: and yet this one comfort
of a quiet mind does wonderfully cure, and comfortably assuage all other
griefs whatsoever. For if our assistance were as an host of armed soldiers;
if our friends were the Princes and the Governors of the earth; ^f our
possessions were as large as between the East and the West; if our meat were
as Manna from heaven; if our apparel were as costly as the Ephod of Aaron; if
every day were as glorious as the day of Christ's resurrection: yet if our
minds be appalled with the judgments of God, these things would little
comfort us. Let experience speak: If a troubled mind impaireth not health,
dries not up the blood, wastes not the marrow, pineth not away the flesh,
consumes not the bones, if it makes not all pleasures painful, and
shortneth not this life: sure no wisdom can counsel it, no counsel can
advise it, no advice can assuage it, no asswagement can cure it, no eloquence
can persuade it, no power can overcome it, no scepter will affray it, no
inchanter can harm it. And yet on the contrary, if a man languish in
sickness, so his heart be whole, and is persuaded of the health of his soul,
his sickness does not grieve him: If a man be reproched, so he be precious in
the sight of God and his Angels, what loss has he? If a man be banished, and
yet doubts not that heaven is his country, and that Nothing can more
disquiet us if we be at peace with God through Jesus Christ: and contrarily,
etc.
he is a citizen among the Saints, it does not appall him: If a man be in
trouble, and finds peace of conscience, he will quietly digest his trouble.
But if the mind be troubled, who dare meet with the wrath of the Lord of
hosts? who can put to silence the voice of desperation? who will step out
and make agreement with the helles to spare us? who dare make a covenant with
the devil, that he would lay no claim unto us? if then a good conscience
helps all evils, and all other benefits in this life, in themselves cannot
help a troubled conscience; we see it true in proof, which here is in
proverb, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit
who can bear it?

Again, in all other afflictions we may have some comfort against sin; this
is ever accompanied with the accusation of sin. A man may be sick,
reproched, impouerished, imprisoned, and banished; and yet in all these have a
clear conscience; his own heart telling him that there is no special cause of
these cro^^es in him, but that he may ^uffer them for the trial of his faith,
or for righteousness sake and well doing. But when the spirit is wounded,
there is still a guiltiness of sin, and when a man's spirit is trou^led, he
suspecteth all his ways, he fears all his sins, he knows not what sin
to begin with; it breeds such hurlyburlies in him, that when it is day he
wishes for night; when it is night he would have it day: his meat does not
nourish him, his dreams are fearful to him, his sleep often times forsakes
him: if he speaks, he is little eased: if he keeps silence, he boyleth in
disquietnesse of heart; the light does not comfort him, the darkness does
terrify him.

To prosecute our comparisons: where all other evils are the more tolerable,
because they be temporal, and pursue us but to death: this not being cured,
ends not in death but becomes eternal. For even the heathen men thought
that death was the end of all misery: the perswas^ion whereof made them (being
in some misery) to make an end of themselves, and hasten their own death; as
Satan does make many now adays to do, who are ignorant of the hels, which is
a place of far greater pains than any they can suffer in this world
whatsoever: for a tormented conscience, if before it was begun, is now
continued; or i^ it was not before, now begins, and never ends world
without end. For though true it is, that sickness, poverty, imprisonment or
banishment have ended their term in death; yet a wounded heart which was
temporal in this life, is now eternal Unbelievers by violent deaths do not
end, but begin their torments.
after this life; that which before death was in hope recouerable, is after
death made incurable and unrecoverable. It is good therefore to consider, if
even in this life the torment of conscience be so fearful; how much more
grievous is it to sustain it in hell, where that is infinite, which here is
finite: where that is unmeasurable, which here is measurable; where is the sea
of sorrow, whereof this is but a drop; where is the flame of that fire, whereof
this is less than a spark?

But to shut up this argument: Some there have been who throughout all their
life time, have been free from all other troubles, so as either they felt them
not at all, or else in very small measure, and by that means never knew what
outward trouble meant. As for example, some men there have been, who for
sickness never knew the headache, for poverty, never knew what want meant;
who for discredit, were never evil spoken of; who ever put far from them the
evil day of the Lord; who made a league with death as it were, and a covenant
with hell; who though they could crucify every cross, rather than come under
any cross: yet they could never escape a wounded conscience, either in this
life, or in the life to come. True it is, that Gods children by faith and
repentance do often escape it, but the wicked, and such as are borne unto it,
as to their sure inheritance, the more they fly from it, the more it pursues
them. If we have transgressed the Civil Jaws, the Judge by bribes may be
corrupted; if a man have committed some capital A tormented conscience cannot
fly from God.
offense, by flying his Country he may escape the Magistrates hands: but our
consciences telling us that we have sinned against God, what bribe shall we
offer? or whither shall we fly? whither shall we go from his spirit? or
whither shall we go from his presence? If we ascend into heaven, is not he
there? If we lie down in hell, is he not there? If we fly to the utmost parts
of the sea, is he not there also? There needs no apparitor to summon us,
there needs no Bailey arrant to fetch us, there needs no accuser to give in
against us; sin will arrest us, and lies at the door, our own consciences
will impannall a Quest against us, our own hearts will give in sufficient
evidence, and our own iniquities will plead guilty to our own faces. Thus
we see both by the experience of them that have suffered the wound of the
spirit, and by the comparing of it with other evils, what a weight most
grievous, and burden intolerable it is to have a tormented conscience.

Now let us show how we may prevent, and by what means Gods children falling
into The second part of the first division.
some degrees of it (for if it rage in extremity, it is an evil most
dangerous) may safely and quietly be delivered from it. And here a just
complaint is to be taken up, and it is a wonder to be marked that we see many
so careful and watchful to avoid other troubles, and so few or none take any
pains to escape the trouble of mind which is so grievous. We see men loving
health and loathing sickness, in diet temperate, in sleep moderate, in Physic
expert, skillful to purge, and to avoid such corrupt humors, which in time may
breed (though presently they do not bring forth) some dangerous sickness: yet
to avoid the diseases of the soul, no man abateth his sleep, no man abridgeth
his diet, no man prepares Physic for it, no man knows when to be full, and
when to be empty, how to want and how to abound. Others carried away with the
love of riches, and very Or verieshie, that is, wary. How wise many be to
prevent many evils, and how few labor to prevent afflictions of mind.
sly to fall into poverty, will not stick to rise early, and take sleep
lately, to fare hardly, to tear and taw their flesh in labor by land and by
water, in fair and foul weather, by rocks and by sands, from far and from
near: and yet to fall into spiritual decaies, to avoid the poverty of
conscience, no man takes such pains; as though salvation and peace of mind,
were not a thing worthy the laboring for. Some ambitiously hunting after
honor, and not easily digesting reproaches, behave themselves neither
sluggishly nor sleepily; but are active in every attempt, by Or by law.
love and by counsel, by prudence and prowess, by wit and by practice, by
labor and learning, by cunning and diligence to become famous, and to shun a
civil reproach: yet to be glorious in the sight of God and his Angels, to fall
before the heavens, and in the presence of the Almighty to be covered with
shame and confusion of conscience, we make none account, as they, who neither
use any means to obtain the one, nor avoid those occasions which may bring
the other.

Others unwilling to come within the reach and danger of the law, that they may
escape imprisonment of body, or confiscation of goods, will be painful in
penal Satutes, skillful in every branch of the civil law, and especially will
labor to keep themselves from treasons, murders, felonies, and such like
offenses deserving the punishment of death: yet when the Lord God threatens
the seizure both of soul and body, the attaching of our spirits, the
confiscating of our consciences, the banishing of us from heaven, the hanging
of us in hell, the suspending of our salvation, the adiudging of us to
condemnation for the breach of his commandments, no man searches his eternal
law, no man cares for the Gospel, neither the sentence of everlasting
diuorcement from the Lord, neither the covenant of reconciliation is esteemed
of us.

And to reach our complaint one degree further. Behold, the more we seek
outward pleasures and to avoid the inward trouble of mind, the more we haste
and run into it, and suddenly plunge our selves in a wounded spirit ere we be
aware. Who posteth more In seeking so greedily for earth and so faintly for
heaven, we think we labor for our peace, but we hasten this way into many
griefs and sorrows. 1. Tim. 6. 7. 8. 9. Ambitious.
to become rich, who hops less to become poor, than the merchant man? who
aduentureth great treasures, who hazardeth his goods, who puts in ieopardie
his life; and yet suddenly he either rusheth upon the rock of hardness of
heart, or else is swallowed up of the gulf of a despairing mind: from which
afterward he cannot be delivered with a ship full of gold. Woeful proof has
confirmed, how some men (wholly set on pleasures, such as could not away to be
sad, and to be hedged up always of godly sorrow) have had their tables made
snares, and even their excess of pleasures has brought excess of sorrows,
and whilst they labored to put the evil day far from them, they have used
such follies, as have bred them most bitter and terrible torments of their
fearful and trembling consciences.

There be some of another sort, who never dreaming of a troubled mind, have
had their hearts set on nothing, but how they might get some great fame and
renown: and therefore have slipped into such vainglorious attempts, and foul
flatteries, as they have not only lost the peace of their consciences, but
also fallen most deeply into reprochful shame, which they sought to shun. Now
as the peace of conscience and joy of mind is such a treasure, as the eye has
not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the tongue expressed, but passes all
understanding: so the wounded spirit is such as the eye has not seen it, the
ear has not heard it, nor the tongue uttered; but passes all understanding.
And as they How we may be preserved from the wound of conscience.
only know what the peace of mind means, that feel it: so they alone can
in truth speak of a troubled mind, that have tasted of it by experience.

But let us show what way is to be used to keep us from this wound of the
spirit. It is the use of Physic, as to cure us of diseases when we are fallen
into them; so to preserve us from sickness before it has taken hold of us: it
is the power of the word, as to assuage the trouble of conscience, when it does
once press us; so to prevent it before it has overtaken us. It is a chief
point of worldly wisdom not to tarry for the use of Physic until we be
deadly sick; but to be acquainted with Gods merciful preseruations to defend
us from it: likewise it is a chief policy of a godly Christian, not only to
seek comfort when the agony is upon him, but also to use all good helps to
meet with it before it comes. Simile.
And we condemn them of folly, who will not as well labor to keep
themselves out of debt, as to pay the debt when they owe it: so it is a
madness not to be as circumspect to avoid all occasions, which may bring
trouble of mind upon us, as we would be provident to enter every good way
which may draw us out of this trouble, when we have once entered into it.

The remedies preservative, are first the searching of our sins, and then the
examining Preservatives against afflictions of mind.
of our faith.

The searching of our sins, is the way to the due acknowledging of our
sins, and to the true sense and feeling of our sins. The acknowledging of
our sins, is either of those that be past, whether we have unfeignedly
repented us of them: or of those which be present, whether we be truly grieved
for them.

Thirdly, of those secret corruptions, which in the course of our life are
likely to come, whether we are reverently afraid of them, and resolve to
suppress them with all our endeavor.

Concerning sins past, we must call to mind the sins done of old, in our
youth, in Psalm. 25. 1. Cor. 11. 29.
our middle age, in our old age; that we judging our selves, may not be judged
of the Lord: that accusing of our selves, Satan have no occasion to accuse us;
and throwing down our selves before the Lord, he may lift us up. For many
going quietly away, and sleeping in carnal security (notwithstanding the
sins of their youth) and neglecting to make conscience of their sins done
long ago; suddenly have fallen into such horror of mind, that (the violent
remembrance of all their sins surcharging them) they have been overwhelmed.

This examination does then rightly proceed, when it reaches to the errors of
this life, and to the sins of our youth; because many men (even from their
childhood, by a civil righteous life) having escaped gross sins, wherewith
the world could never charge them, have notwithstanding carried the burden of
their secret sins done in their youth, David (Psalm. 25. 7.) prays the Lord,
not to remember the sins of his youth: Job (23. 6. Sins of youth.
the man of God) confesses that the Lord writing bitter things against him,
made him to possess the iniquities of his youth. What, shall we think, that
David or Job were given to notorious wickedness in their youth? No, they knew
they were subject to youthful wantonness and vnstayednesse of their
affections; which though it did not burst out, yet it made them less careful
to glorifice God; which looseness, the way to lewdness; which weakness, the
way to strange vanities; which wantonness, the way to open wickedness, is even
in the best of Gods children in the days of their youth: which being
afterward in the time of their regeneration, brought (as it were) to
judgment, and laid before their consciences, does cause them to repent.

But here is a thing to be blushed at, which makes men's ears to tingle when
they hear it; that many men (far no doubt from this true repentance) can
largely indeed discourse of the things done in their youth: but with such a
bravery, with such boastings, and To glory in sins of youth.
pleasing of themselves in the remembrance of them, as besides that they
provoke others to sin in the like, and set themselves a flat back* byas against
repentance, and this christian examination; they seem to renew the decayed
colors of their old sins, with the fresh suite of their second pleasures
therein. But alas, what pleasure have they in those things, whereof they have
no profit? what profit have they of those things whereof they should be
ashamed? Neither in this streine can we forget the madness of them, who may
seem Romans 6. 22.
to step one degree farther toward this examination of sin than did the
former; by thinking that the leaving of sin, and repenting of sin is all
one. Against these both daily experience and the word of God does sufficiently
decline. Joseph* brethren ( Jacob his sons) who devised evil against their
brother, put him into the pit, and sold him unto strangers; did cease from this
cruelty: but yet they are not read to have remembered The leaving of sin, is
not the repenting of sin.
their sins with any remorse, until thirteen years after the sin was
committed; as we may see in the process of the history. David had left his
sins of murder and adultery (as thinking all quiet and well) the space of a
whole year; after which time (being admonished by the Prophet ^athan) he
repented of it. And experience has tried in many, that have had some working
of God in them, that though they left their sins many years ago, yet
because they repented not truly for them, they have rebounded upon them with
terrible sights and fearful visions, to humble them, and to bring them to a
serious examination of them, being done and left long since. Examples whereof
we need not fetch from far, seeing so many preachers as are acqauinted with
fearful spirits, will give witness hereof. The fruit of which amazed minds
for sins already left, is ours, to beware of sins which are to come. And
that other men's harms may teach us blessed wisdom, let us labor not only
to leave sin, which one may do for profit, for fear, for praise, For what
causes many leave sin.
or for weariso^nesse: but also to repent of it for conscience sake.

This examination of our sins past, must be partly of those that we committed
before our calling, and partly of those which were done after our calling.
Every man (especially having his reason reformed by the word of God) will
grant an examination of the life, before Examination of sins after our
calling.
our true knowledge of God in Christ, to be most needful. But it may be, some
will think that we need not to be so precise in the searching of those
sins, which were after our knowledge. But seeing of all other sins these
bite forest, and pierce deepest, for that they are aggrauated with all the
mercies of God going before, and sin is then most sinful, when after we know
the truth, after we have been delivered from sin, after we have been
enlightened with the grace of God, we have fallen into it: I think that an
examination most specially ought to be had of these sins. Wherefore to iterate
our former examples in a new matter, as we may see the former kind of
examining of our sins before our calling, in the sons of Jacob: so we have
a pattern of the latter in the practice of the Prophet David, who at the
hearing of his sins was so troubled in his spirit, that he could not rest in
the Prophets speech, telling him that his sin was forgiven him, but still was
disquieted, as one utterly forsaken of God, and could find no comfort of Gods
spirit in him. For as it fares often with sores, it comes to pass in
sins, we are loath Sins like sore^.
to have our wounds often grated upon, we cannot so well away to have our sores
rifled, feared, and lanced; but fed with healing salues: so we are hardly
brought to have our consciences ground, or our sins ransacked, sifted,
searched, and ripped up; but would still have them plaistered with sweet
promises, and bathed in the mercies of God: whereas it is far safer before
incarnatiue and healing medicines, to use corrosiue and mundifying Simile.
waters, without which though some sores may seem to close and skin up apace,
yet they prove worse, and being rotten still at the core; they have above a
thin skin, and underneath dead flesh. In like manner, we would cloak, we would
hide and cover our sins, as it were with a curtain: but it is more sound
Chirurgerie to prick and pearce our consciences with the burning iron of the
Law, and to cleanse the wound of the soul by sharp threatenings, least that a
skin pulled over the conscience for a while, we leave the rotten corruption
uncured underneath, and so we be constrained to cry out of our sins openly.
As it is a folly then to dissemble our sores whilst they be curable, and after
to Cover not thy sin.
make them known when they be grown incurable: so it is as great folly to
dissemble our sins whilst they may be remedied, and so after be constrained
with shame to blaze them abroad, when thou may think them remediles. But of
this by the way, because we shall more largely touch it in the last part to
come.

It is sufficient to commit sin before knowledge, but after some good light
of the spirit to sin breeds either hardness of heart, or a troubled
spirit; both which we shall avoid Sins after knowledge.
if in truth we be careful to watch over our affections, and beware that
after our delivery we fall not into sin again.

Several men, subject to several sins, have their several checkes in their
consciences: some are overcome with wrath, and yet after the moodie fit they
can tell that the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God:
some are subject to lust, and afterward they say, it profits them nothing:
some are given to a continual course of vanity, A blessed thing to be awaked
and grieved by checkes of conscience.
who notwithstanding can say, that man's life has another end: some slip
deeply into worldliness, and yet they be often weakened with most terrible
checks of conscience. Well, blessed are they, whose hearts be truly grieved;
and let them beware that make daliance with sin: for either hardness of
heart will overtake them, or a troubled conscience will confound them.
Wherefore it comes to pass, that many spending their bodies on lust, lament
that ever they so abused their strength: many given too much to the pleasure of
this life, had grief come upon them, to remember how they have spent Gods
graces, lauished his good gifts, and misspent their time; or else, if they have
not this grief, they fall into voluptuousness, and draw such a thick skin
upon their hearts, as will cause the strongest denouncings of Gods judgments
to rebound, be they driven on never so hard. And sure, it is the sin of this
world, that men being controlled in their consciences, whilst they are a
praying, and feel a secret charge laid against them, to beware of guile in
buying and selling; either have these checks less and less, and so they grow
to be profane; or else afterward they are wonderfully wounded, that they have
been ^o worldly, so greedily pursuing earthly things; so coldly procuring
heavenly things. Thus even our privy thoughts (not profited by) are breeders
of farther trouble.

Now the remedy against this trouble is, willingly and wi^tingly not to
cherish sin, Remedy.
to wish that the Minister should touch our most privy and secret sins, to
be glad privately to be admonished, to profit by our enemies when they do
reproach us: and rather to desire (in such a case) to be humbled, than to suffer
our selves to be flattered. This trying of Sins of omission.
ourselves must yet stretch it self further, not only to the committing of
evil, but also to the omitting of good. As when (after some good working and
feeling of the spirit) we begin to fight and conflict with our own
consciences, saying: though I must pray, I must have time also to provide for
my family: if I go to hear the word of God, surely I shall be in danger to
loose this profit: if I thus attend upon the exercises of religion, I shall be
cut short in the use of my pleasures. Wherefore it shall be good to search our
hearts, not only in the careless not using of the means; but also in the
negligent watching over the fruits of the means: saying to ourselves in this
manner: I have heard a Sermon, but (alas) without any feeling or working upon my
affections; I have been praying, but with no power of the spirit; I have
received the sacrament, but without those joys glorious and unspeakable, which
I was wont to taste of; I saw the discipline of the Church executed, but
without any fear of sin at all in my self, or compassion to the member
censured.

And here I dare for my own observation assuredly affirm, that outward sins
have not been at sometime so grievous to Gods children, as that they have some
times used Note.
the means with little reverence and with less fruit. And no marvel, we
shall see many men at some times, not so much grieved for their sickness it
self, as for that they have either willingly neglected the means which might
have preserved their health, or that they The negligent use of the means of
salvation.
have abused the Physic that might have restored their health to them again.
In like manner (I say) it fares with them, who either irreverently have
refused the means, which should keep their souls from surfeiting: or else
unthankfully have abused those helps, which might have recovered them again.
From hence it comes, that some men are as much grieved for not using their
good gifts to the benefit of Gods Church, as others are troubled for pestering
the Church with unprofitable corruptions: or as we shall see a rich man
sometimes as much humbled for not giving money to the poor, which he might
have done, as for heaping up riches falsely, which he ought not to have done.
And thus many (having received good gifts and graces from the Lord) are Or
wakened and quickened.
seasoned and sanctified by afflictions; whereby they are taught to put their
gifts in ure, and to offer their service to Christ, and others are forced to
hide their gifts, which cannot be without some decay of Gods glory, without
offense to the weak, without the loss of many souls, which otherwise might
be won to the Gospel, and without strengthening the hand of the adversary
to slander our dark and dumb profession. All which things will in the end
bring terror of mind; because if the Lord cannot work upon us by taking away
goods, friends, credit, wife, children, or such like, to bring us to
repentance; he will surely whip our naked consciences, he will enter even into
our very entrails, and pierce our secret bowels. As we must examine our selves
thus for sins of time past, and present, so must we use this practice in
sin to come* and this is very needful. For were it so, that our life and
conversation were such, as neither before nor after our calling, man could
justly accuse it: yet the hidden corruption of our nature, may threaten some
heinous downfall in Secret corruption.
time to come, which has made men of very good report and conversation to hang
down their heads, and fear their secret hypocrisy, as that which may break
forth to the shame of all their former life, in time to come.

But because we forget to speak of them, that in the examining of their lives
past, are much grieved for the want of sincerity, and for privy vainglory
in themselves; let us before we go to the searching of our hearts in sin to
come, speak somewhat of this. Men troubled for this privy pride are either
touched, or not touched. If the veil of sin was so great in them, that it
hid Christ from them; it is the good will of God, that by this sight of their
secret sins they should come to see the righteousness that is in Christ Jesus,
and so they shall the better be kept from being iusticiarie Pharisees. For when
being a long Iusticiarie Pharisees.
time well brought up, and leading a civil life, the devil would persuade us
of some inherent righteousness in us; it is the wisdom of our God to touch
us with the conscience of most hidden corruptions, as also to certify and make
known unto us, that even from our birth there was a secret seed of sin in
us, which (without the Lord watching over us) would surely have broken forth to
his dishonor. As for them which have had some working in them, and yet are
often plunged with sore distresses, this trouble comes to them for two
especial causes, either for some hypocrisy, that they did more in show than
in truth: wherefore the Lord brings them back again to see their corrupt
proceedings, Affections fighting against judgment.
and that they may know all their religion to be but hypocrisy, and all their
righteousness to be but unrighteousness: or for the abusing of their
knowledge, in that they made it but a mask to iuggle in, and that they made
their affections to fight with their own judgments. We must remedy this, by
not thinking of our selves above that which is meet, and by laboring to
embrace the truth in truth. And here let us note, that many of Gods children
accuse themselves of hypocrisy, when indeed they offend not in it, (for the
most righteous persons are their own greatest accusers) and yet the accusation
does justly arise from some fault on their parts: for though they have done
things in truth, yet because with truth they labored not to see their secret
corruptions, in some other matters, they sustain this trouble of mind. So
that there is nothing harder than to si^t and search Examination hard.
our hearts to the bottom, whether we respect our sins past, or our sins
present, whether we look to our privy pride, hidden wants, or secret
corruptions.

And to return from whence we digressed, to the examination of our hearts, in
sin Return to sins to come.
to come: let us observe that in Gods children there is such a jealousy, as
they tremble at the very first motions, and quake at the least occasion of
sin, although because vice will sit in Or in resemblance The godly jealousy
of Gods children.
reside^ce very near unto virtue, there may be in them sometime too much
scrupulousnes. This fear causes the dearest of the Saints of God to reason on
this sort: O Lord, I see how many excellent in gifts, and constant in
profession for a long time, whose end has not answered their beginnings,
whose deaths were not like to their lives. This is true, whether we look into
the word or into the world: and it is a thing that may much humble us. For
though we may remember what we have been, and know what we are; yet who can
tell what may come unto him hereafter.

Oh that the serious meditation hereof would dwell long upon our consciences:
that with an holy jealousy we might prevent the sin that is to come. But
alas, there be some venturous knights, which think it no masterie to offer
themselves to masking, minstrelsie and dancing, nor to run into quarrels,
braules and contentions, as though they had their ears, their eyes, their
hands, and their feet in their own power, and at commandment to use and
govern as themselves list. Howbeit, Gods children better fenced with his
grace, than those bold bayards, are afraid of these occasions: as knowing full
well, that their eyes may soon be provoked to lust, their ears may quickly
listen unto unchaste delights, their hands may suddenly strike a deadly blow,
and their feet may easily be s^ared in carnal pleasures. Beware O man, be
circumspect O woman, that thou prostitute not Take heed to our liberty.
thy self to too much liberty: for although in coming to such lascivious and
contentious places thou did purpose none evil: yet for thy ventring
without warrant, thou may be over thy shoes in sin, and plunged in some
wicked attempt over head and ears, ere thou be aware. And because vice is
so confine unto virtue, beware also of superstition: for still the enemy
labors either to make thee too hardy in sin, or else he will cause thee
to be too fearful and superstitious; either he will puff thee up with
presumption, or assault thee with desperation. To these tentations our nature
is very pliable: first to presumption, as may appear by our common speech;
^ush, the preacher is but a man as I am, I am sure he has infirmities as
others have; we are no Angels, our nature is corrupt, The devil tempting. The
devil accusing.
we are but flesh, I am sure you would not have us Gods. Thus the devil
comes to tempt; but he apparrelleth himself in another suit when he comes
to accuse, and then of a fly he makes an Elephant; of the very smallest prick
of a pin, a globe of the whole earth; of a molehill a mountain: and presses
silly souls with fears and terrors, that they know not how to wind out
themselves. If he cannot bring them to make no conscience, where they should
make conscience, he will labor to bring them to make conscience where they
need make no conscience. He cares not whether thou will be remiss or
superstitious, so thou be one of them. If he cannot get you to follow the
Epicurisme Note.
of the world, as Libertines in diet and apparel; he will make you so precise,
as to think it a heinous sin, to eat one bit of meat, or to wear one rag
of cloth more than for necessity. How needful therefore it is to sail with
an even course, we may conjecture by other things which will bewray the
corruption of our nature.

In the time of a plague we shall see some will be so bold, that without any
lawful calling Boldness in plague.
or godly warrant, they will rush into places infected; and then falling sick,
their conscience pricks them for their tempting of God by an unadvised
boldness, in the hour of their death.

Others plunged as deeply in a quite contrary extremity, are too fearful
when they do but hear of the sickness; and for very fear have been brought
to deaths door, only by imagining themselves to have been infected, when they
have been most free, who oftentimes have even died, and that without any
natural cause that ever could be known, but only through immoderate fear,
and the judgment of God coming upon them for their infidelity and unbelief.
Thus it is with us in Christianity, in that as well the oppressing our selves
with too much fear to be overcome, as the carnal security, in not fearing to
be overcome, may bring sin upon us: God his children must labor for a
measure, and that must be sought for in the word, which will teach them how
they shall neither decline on the right hand, nor on the left; but will guide
them in the narrow way, showing in every thing what is virtue, what is vice;
what is the mean, what is the extreme. Zeal.


Among many examples, let us consider of zeal, a most precious virtue in
Christianity, so long as it is free from the extremities. Otherwise if we be
cold in zeal, it is a sin on the left hand: if we be zealous without
knowledge, it is preposterous, and becomes a sin on the right hand. What
perfection we have in this life.


But can we not come to some perfection? No, if you understand it for an
absolute vnspottednes; albeit to that perfection which the Scripture takes for
soundnes, truth, and sincerity of heart, which is void of careless
remisnes, we may come. Neither does the Lord deal with us after our sins,
nor reward us after our iniquities: in whose eyes the most glorious actions of
men, are but as waters flowing purely from the Conduit, but defiled by passing
through a filthy channel. Wherefore having these imperfections, let us not seek
to be more righteous than we can be, saying for every error of this life; Oh, I
am none of God his sons, I am none of his daughters: for I cannot find that
perfection in me which is to be required. But let us comfort our selves in the
truth of our hearts, and singlenes of our desires to serve God, because he is
God; and so we shall be accepted of God.

I speak this to this end, that poor souls might have comfort, and know that
if they abhor sin as sin, if they examine themselves for it, if they
groan under it, if they mislike themselves for it, if they fear to fall into
it; the Lord will not pursue them with the rigor of his law, but will give them
the sweetness of his promises; they are no more under the curse, but under grace.

But further to enforce our exhortation, to avoid too scrupulous a fear,
which hinders A scrupulous fear.
the true examination of our hearts: let us think that it happens in the
spiritual conflict as in civil wars. We read that many cities lying in
great security, have suddenly both been assaulted and overthrown; as also
how some Countries (too much negligent in the means) through an excessive
fearefulnes, have encouraged their enemies with more greedy violence to pray
upon them. With which kind of stratagems our adversary me devil being well
acquainted, does often practice this policy. If he see us without all fear
too quietly to rest in our selves, he thinks his assault must needs be the
stronger, because our resistance is the weaker. Again, if he descrieth in us a
cowardly fear and fainting of heart, before we once begin to join battle
with him; he will set upon our immoderate fear, and as villainously as
suddenly stab us to the heart, and make a present spoil of us.

Common practice does further teach us, that when we can hear the word without
all trembling at God his judgments, when we can pray without all fear before
the Majesty of God, when we can come to the discipline of the Church without
all reverence of the ordinance of the Lord; all is in vain. Again, let us
hear with too much trembling, and we shall learn nothing; let us pray with
too servile a fear, and our worshipping of God will be without all comfort and
vncheerefull. Thus if we neither lessen sin, that is sin indeed, neither
make sin of that which is not sin in truth, it is good to proceed to this
threefold examination, and to lay the edge of this doctrine more near our
affections, because many will be sound in this ripenes of knowledge and
barrennes of conscience, to speak, dispute and declaime of all these things
very skilfully, which flickring in the circumference of the brain, and not
sitting at the ground of the heart, do seal up a more just sentence of
condemnation against them. To help this evil, we must meditate deeply of the
Law and of the Gospel, together with the appurtenances of them both, that
finding ourselves far from Gods blessings promised to the keepers of the law,
and seeing our selves near to the curses due to the breakers of the law, we
may raise up some sense of sin in our selves. Yet herein we must not stay our
foot, but give a further stride: for whereas many by a diligent view of the
law, have come to the sense of sin in themselves, and saw plainly their own
condemnation: yet because they labored not to see the guiltiness acquitted by
the remission of sin in Christ, they plunged themselves into a bottomless
Remission of sin and mortification of sin go together.
sea of sorrows. Others having passed these degrees, and hitherto made these
steps to avoid the wound of conscience, have come also too short, and missed
of the mark: when because besides the sense of sin pardoned by the death of
Christ, they felt not also the virtue of his passion crucifying sin in them,
but saw that with the remission of sin was not joined the mortification of
sin; they feared that there was no forgiveness for them, but still languishing
with sorrow, they thought themselves to stand charged with their former
guiltines. Yea, and which is more, for that such men have not truly been
instructed, nor surely have been grounded in the doctrine of Christ's death and
resurrection, that is, for that they saw not as well power flowing from his
death to slay sin in them, as virtue to pardon sin in them* for that they
felt not as well strength to sanctification, streaming from the rising again
of Christ, as they were persuaded of justification and righteousness therein:
they have lien still bleeding at the heart, in such sort, as the wound of
grief could Six points which must be knit together.
hardly or never be stayed and stanched. Wherefore let us strengthen our weak
souls with this sixe-fold cord of consolation, against these bitter assaults*
Let us first labor to know sin, then to sorrow for sin, after to feel our
sins in Christ forgiven, further to look for power to crucify the same,
then to lay hold on justification by his resurrection: 1
and lastly, hope for strength to proceed from thence, to further us in
sanctification and 2 3
holiness of life, even unto the end. And thus much briefly for the second thing
which we 4
matched in company with the examination of sin, even the trial of faith:
both which 5
rightly used, shall in some measure sauegard us from the trouble of an
afflicted mind. 6


Now let us hasten to the third part of our division, to show how Gods children
being The third part of the first division.
fallen into this wound of spirit, may be helped out of it: which (God willing)
we will also perform, after we have answered a necessary objection, which (in
the former part) might seem to encounter against us. There is no man but will
grant, that David, Job, and others of the Saints of God, had a sight of their
sins, a sorrow for their sins, and a taste of the remission of their
sins: how then comes it to pass, that these men were so troubled in mind?
To this I answer, that their trouble so befell them, either for failing in
some of these former things; or else they were rather afflicted for trial of
their faith, than for punishing of sin in them. And therefore be it always
provided, that we think not every conflict of conscience, continually and
chiefly to be for the pursuing of our sins: but sometimes and principally,
that it comes for the trial of our faith: and yet secondarily, or less
principally, for the scourging of sin, as we may see in Job. Whereupon let
all The godly afflicted.
men be admonished, when they see good men thus humbled and thrown down in
mind, to lay their hands on their mouths from saying; Surely these men are
but hypocrites, doubtless these men be great sinners, the Lord has found out
their hypocrisy. For good reason there is, that such silence should be used:
for that the Lord may as well make trial of their faith, as take punishment on
their sins. For if such affliction should always and chiefly be sent for
sin, then it should follow that all others as they exceeded them in sin,
should also exceed them in the punishment of sin.

But now coming to the saluing of this sore, I shall seem very strange in my
cure: and Salve of this sore..
so much the more be wondered at, by how much in manner of proceeding I differ
from the most sort of men herein, I am not ignorant, that many visiting
afflicted consciences, How to proceed in comforting the afflicted.
cry still; Oh comfort them, oh speak joyful things unto them. Yea, there be
some, and those of the most learned, who in such cases are full of these and
such like speeches. Why are you so heavy my brother? why are you so cast down
my sister? Be of good cheer: take it not so grievously. What is there that you
should fear? God is merciful, Christ is a Savior. These be speeches of love
indeed: but they often do the poor souls as much good herein, as if they
should power cold water into their bosoms; when as without further searching
of their sores, they may as well minister a malady as a medicine. For as
nutritive and cordial medicines are not good for every sick person,
especially when the body needs rather a strong purgation, than a matter
restoratiue; and as incarnatiue medicines may for the time allay the pain of
the patient, but after the grief becomes more grievous: so the comfortable
applying of Gods promises are not so profitable for every one that is humbled,
especially when their souls are rather further to be cast down, than as yet
to be raised up: so those s^gred consolations may for a while ouer-heale the
conscience, and abate some present grief; but so as afterward the smart may
be the sorer, and the grief may grow the greater: hereof insueth this effect,
that comfort seems to cure for a while, but for want of wisdom in the right
discerning of the cause, men minister one medicine for another; and so for want
of skill, the latter fit grindeth them sorer than the former. Some there be,
who without all precept and practice will be their own Physicians: and these,
so soon as the fit comes upon them, think it the best to chastise The vain
^^ifts of some in afflictions of mind.
and to chase away their sorrow, by drinking at tauernes, by minstrelsie, in
merry company, by purging melancholy in taking Physic: all which may seem
to wear away the pain for a while, but yet after it biteth more deeply, when
the burning fever of their spirits shakes them with a second recourse: and for
that before they were not truly searched, purged, ^eared and launced, it
comes to pass, that the second relapse is more dangerous than the first
impression.

To come to our purpose, we must know that all griefs are either confused or
distinct: and sure it is, that the mind is appalled either for some cause
known to us as certain* o^ for some thing unknown to us and uncertain. To
them which are troubled with such blind griefs, whereof they can see no
reason, as often it happens to Gods children in secret providence, who either
never knew God, or else had but a general knowledge of him: I answer, that as
I deny not Physic to be ministered, if it in part proceed from a natural
cause: so I require the word especially to show the principal and original
cause to begin in the soul* And this I do the rather, because I would have
wisdom both in considering the state of the body if need so require; and in
looking chiefly to the soul, which Note well.
so few think of. If a man troubled in conscience come to a Minister, it may
be he will look all to the soul and nothing to the body: if he come to a
Physician, he only considers of the body and neglects the soul. For my
part, I would never have the Physicians counsel severed, nor the Ministers
labor neglected; because the soul and body dwelling together, it is
convenient, that as the soul should be cured by the word, by prayer, by
fasting, by threatening, or by comforting; so the body also should be brought
into some temperature by Physic, by purging, by diet, by restoring, by
music, and by such like means; providing always that it be done so in the
sear of God, and wisdom of his spirit, as we think not by these ordinary
means to smoother or smoke out our troubles; but as purposing to use them as
preparatiues, whereby both our souls and bodies may be made more capable of
the spiritual means to follow after.

As we require these things to be the matter of our Ministry in such a
perplexity: so we would wish the persons ministering to be men learned and of
sound judgment, wise, and Meet comforters.
of godly experience, meek and of most iouing spirits. For when the troubled
patient shall be well persuaded of our knowledge and discretion, and there
withal shall perceive us to come in tender and loving affection, I think an
entrance is made, and all prejudice is taken away, so as we may the more freely
work upon the conscience; first bringing them to the sight of sin, as to
some cause of their trouble. Herein we must labor to put away all confusion
and blindness of sorrow, endeavoring by wisdom to bring the parties wounded
to some certain object and matter of their trouble; and so draw out of them
the confession of some several, especial, and secret sin; I say several
and secret sin, because I know, how many (through a palpable blindness or
disordered discerning of sin) talk of nothing so much as of sin; and yet
they either cannot des^ry (several sins, or they will not be brought to
acknowledge their secret sins: whereof the one proceeds of the ignorance of
the law of God, and the other of self-love, which makes us l^^t^^e even in
our travel of mind, to shame our selves.

Now that the confession of particular sins is requisite, it may appear by
the two and P^^^. ^^*
thirtieth Psalm, wherein (being a Psalm of instruction, concerning the
forgiveness of sins) the Prophet (by his own experience) teaches us, that
he could find no relief of his sickness, until he had remembered, and made
confession of his sins.

What? shall we think that the Prophet of God (taught so wonderfully by the
word and by the spirit) did not see his sins before? Be it far from us.
Rather let us know that Confession ^^ special sins.
he had not severally and particularly ripped up his sins before the Lord, in
a several confession of them. Which though the Lord knows far better than
we our selves: yet such kind of sacrifice is most acceptable unto him.

Now if in this trouble the persons humbled cannot come to the particular sight
of sin in themselves; it is good to use the help of others, unto whom they
may offer their hearts to be gaged and searched, and their lives to be examined
more deeply, by hearing the several Articles of the Law laid open before
them; whereby they may try the whole course of their actions. For (as we said
before) the grossest hypocrites will generally complain of sin; and yet
deal with them in particular points of the particular precepts, and prove
them in the applying of things to be done or not done to their own
consciences; and we shall see many of these poor souls tossed to and fro, now
floting in joys, now plunged in sorrows, not able to distinguish one sin
from another.

Now when we shall see the wound of the spirit to arise of any certain and
known sin, it is either for some sin already co^mit^ed, wherein we lie; or
else for some sin as yet not committed, but whereunto we are tempted. For the
former; it pleases God oftentimes to bring old sins to mind, when we had not
thoroughly repented of them before; that so (as it were) representing them to us
afresh, we might fall into a more misliking of them. And yet herein is not all,
to mislike our selves for some particulars, although it be good to be occupied
about some special sins: for as it is not sufficient for the avoiding of
hypocrisy, to see sin generally: so it is not enough to eschew the
deceiueablenes of the heart, ever to be poring busily in one particular, and to
be forgetful of our great and general sins. But Not to eye one sin only,
and to forget the rest.
let us learn by the particulars to pass to the generals. When any such one
sin then does pursue thee, rest not only therein, but say thus rather to thy
self; Oh Lord, is this one sin so grievous? and does my God punish this one
sin so sorely? How great then should be my punishment, if thou should (O
Lord) so deal with me for all my other sins. Let us labor to have a sense
both of general and of particular sins, least in time our grief pass away
without fruit, whilst that not being displeased as well with one sin, as
with another, we either look too superficially to generals, and not to
particulars; or else too superstitiously observe particulars, and not the
generals.

Concerning those sins whereunto we are tempted, as when a man is moved to
think blasphemously of God the father, or to doubt whether there be a Christ
or no, or to imagine grossly of the holy Ghost, or to deny God, or to doubt of
the Trinity, or to be moved to murder, adultery, or such like: in which
temptations he feels Gods spirit to check him for the^, so as he knows not
in this case what to do: for that on the one side he dares not listen
willingly to these fearful and monstrous temptations; and on the other side,
he fears least in time by long suite, he might fall into them; or at the
least for that he se^th not how to be delivered from them: I suppose these
motions are not so much to be disputed with, a^ we by them are to be provoked
to more instant and extraordinary zeal of prayer.

Surely these are dangerous temptations, and therefore are not to be kept
close, which our nature will easily incline unto: but particularly are to be
confessed of us. For the devil will come sometime to thee, to keep thee still
in a general acknowledging of sin, and urge thee on this manner: Surely thou
must needs do this sin, thou see thou can have no ^ase, until thou
have consented, thou art ordained to it: the reason why thou art thus
incessantly tempted, is because thou do not thus take thy pleasure. Go to
deny Secret motiones unto sins.
God, believe not his word: it is but a policy to keep men in aw^; Religion
is no such matter as men take it. Thus for fear of yielding on the one hand,
and for shame of disclosing the temptations on the other hand, many men have
pined away, and almost have been overcome by them. If we should disclose this
(say these men) what would people say of us? They would count us Atheists, they
would think us the wickedest men in the world. Well, for our instruction and
consolation herein, let us learn that these kinds of temptations, are either
corrections for some sins past, or punishments for some sin present, or
forewarners of some sin to come. We shall see many tempted to adultery, who
(no doubt) cannot be brought to commit it; and yet because in their youth they
have committed it, and not repented of it, it comes to them again. The like
may be observed in theft, in gluttony, and in other temptations, which are not
so much sent unto us, presently to overcome us, as to put us in mind, that
sometime heretofore we having bin overcome with them, should now repent for
them. Sometime a man shall lie in some sin, whereof when he will not be
admonished, neither by the public nor private means, then some other strange
temptation shall fall upon him, differing from that wherein he presently lies,
to admonish him of that other sin. As when a worldling shall be tempted to
adultery, a thing which he has no desire to do; yet it is to make him look
to his worldlines, whereof he has so strong and thorough a liking: wherewith
if then he will not be awaked, he may suddenly fall into that too, and so by
the punishment of God, in punishing one sin with another, both his sins
shall be to his great shame laid open, and one sin shall make known another.
Sometime also it comes to pass, that one shall be tempted with such a sin,
as neither heretofore, nor presently he has given any liking or entertainment
unto; and yet the Lord by it may forewarne him how he may fall into it
hereafter, as also to show that he has stood all his former life, rather by
the grace of God, than by the strength of flesh and blood. Wherefore when thou
art moved to doubt of God, of Christ, of the word, or of justification, do not
so much stand wondering at these Doubts.
strange temptations, as think with thy self that it is the mercy of God by
them, to cause thee better to discern of those temptations in others: when
thou shall have observed with fear and trembling how they make their first
entry into a man's heart, how they gather strength, how they agree with our
corrupt nature, in what degrees they come to some grows, how the spirit of
God does resist the^, what be the means best to prevail against them. And
thus if thou make thy profit by them, thou shall so wonderfully search and
descrie by several veins, the body, age and Or strength.
^leight of these temptations in others, by an holy experience which God has
taught thee in thy self, that besides that thou shall lay forth men's secret
corruptions, as if thou werst in their bosoms; thou shall be able also by the
seed of sorrow in thy self, to beget an unspeakable joy in others, who in
time may be tempted as thou now art.

Think moreover and besides, that such is the efficacy of sin, that they
who are now Note.
no Papists, Heretics, Adulterers, or Thieves, may for their secure contemning
and foolish passing over of these temptations sent unto them, suddenly, shortly
after fall into them; because they would not seek to make some use of them,
nor confess before the Lord both their pronenesse and worthiness to fall into
them. But if we will humble our selves in such temptations, and learn by them
meekely to discern the corruptions of our hearts, we shall not only presently
deliver our selves from peril, but be also further enabled to assist others
hereafter, in the like danger.

But some will oppose against these things which we have delivered: Do you
think it a remedy to cast down them that are already humbled? This is
rather to be a butcher than a builder of a man's conscience. To whom I answer,
that I desire preachers to be builders, and not butchers; and it is one thing
generally to apply, and another particularly to lay the medicine unto the
wound. It is good to begin with searching first, and to purge the sore by the
vinegar of the Law, and after to supple it with the oil of the Gospel. Both
which must be done in wisdom, using them to some in greater, to some in
lesser measure. For as some having nothing but a decay of nature, and no
mortal humor, need rather restoratiue, than purging medicines: so some
rather troubled for some spiritual wants, than for grosser sins, need not
so much the sharp threatenings of the Law, as the sweet promises of the
Gospel. As the body, through some extraordinary repletion, having gotten some
great surfeit, not so much to the weakening of nature, as to the threatening of
imminent death, and therefore requires rather some strong purgation, than
comfortable and cordial medicines: even so the soul brought almost to deaths
door with some extraordinary sin, is rather to be bored and pierced with the
denouncing of Gods judgments than otherwise. But because we would deal more
plainly and less confusedly, it is good in our access to afflicted
consciences, to lay these two grounds. First, we must persuade the persons
humbled, that their sins are pardonable, and their sores curable. And Two
grounds to be remembered in the cures of souls afflicted.
after, that this visitation is not so much a sign of Gods wrath and anger, as
a seal of his mercy and favor, in that it is not either blind or barren, but
plentiful in good effects, and fruitful in godly issues. The former how
needful it is, the experience of so many almost as have been thrown down, is
a sufficient witness: who have had this as a tagge tied to their temptations,
that never any were so plagued as they, none ever had the like temptations, the
Lord will surely make an end of them in some strange and unknown temptation.
Wherein they are not unlike unto men fallen into some dangerous disease, who
thinking them selves to be without the fadome of the Physicians skill, and not
to be within the compass of things recouerable, add a second and sorer grief
unto their former.

Wherefore as these men seem to be half healed, when any man of knowledge can
be brought, who by experience has cured the like malady in like degrees in
others: so these sorrowful souls are not a little by hope refreshed and
strengthened to look for some ease, when they see none other temptation to
have overtaken them, than such as having fallen into the nature of man, have
found mercy at the hands of God, that he might be feared. This ground work
framed, it is good (to build up and repair the decayed joy of the mind) partly
by the law, to make a preparatiue for these joys, if the mind not truly
humbled, be not fit to be truly comforted: and partly by the Gospel, if the
conscience kindly thrown down, is become a fit subject to apply the sweet
promises of God in Jesus Christ unto it. And here again to answer them that
deny the law wholly or at all to be used, when we would breed comfort in one: I
demand whether if it be necessary to maintain the righteousness of Christ, it
be not also as necessary to preserve the righteousness of the law? Seeing the
righteousness of the law, of us not fulfilled, will draw us unto the
righteousness of Christ to us imputed: and since the righteousness of Christ to us
imputed, is never thoroughly and truly esteemed, until we see the righteousness
of the law of us to be unperformed. Again, if our Savior Christ did foreshew
his Disciples, that the first work of the holy Ghost at his coming, should be
to convict the world of sin, to make men know, that without Jesus Christ
there is nothing but sin, and then, that he should rebuke the world of
righteousness, that they might see how Christ died not for his own sins, but for
the sins of others: I see not why it should not be very convenient, first to
lay open the righteousness of the law How to begin with the la^, incuring
consciences afflicted.
that men may see their sins; and then the righteousness of Christ, that men
may see their sins discharged in him. Besides, where the Lord says by his
Prophet: At what time soeu^r a sinner does repent of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance: it
may well be gathered, that there must be first a sound sorrow for sin; and
then a true joy of sins pardoned, may more freely by virtue of his promise be
both hoped for, and looked for afterward. Moreover, seeing all the promises of
God in the Gospel are commended unto us under the title and tenor of
restoring sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, strength to the lame,
health to the sick, and life to the dead; it is manifest, not only that there
is no disease of the soul which Christ cannot heal* but also that we must
first find our selves blind, deaf, dumb, lame, sick and dead, before he will
meddle with us; because they that are whole need not the Physician, and he
came to call sinners, not the righteous to repentance. Now, to do this in
wisdom, by neither pressing the conscience too severely, nor releasing the
conscience more unadvisedly, it shall be a safe way, to use the well tempered
speech of the Apostle to the sorcerer: Repent, that if it be possible, thy
sin may be forgiven thee. Where he does not wholly discourage him, because it
may be his sin may be pardoned; neither yet too boldly encourage him, in that
without repentance, he shows it to be altogether impossible to be pardoned.

And that we be not too preposterous in our consolation, let us be warned by
the blasphemous speech of that detestable Arria^, who of late years was put to
death at Norwich. This hellish heretic, a little before he should be executed,
affoorded a few whorish tears, An Arian executed at Norwich.
asking whether he might be saved in Christ or no? When one told him, that if
he truly repented, he should surely not perish: he brake out most monstrously
into this speech: Nay, is your Christ so easily to be entreated indeed, as you
say? then I defy him, and care not for him. Oh how good a thing had it bin not
to have cast this precious stone to this swine? Oh how safe had it been to have
dealt more bitterly, and to have dwelt more vehemently on the conscience of
this cai^ife?

Now to attain some discretion in curing this wounded spirit, we must learn
wisely to 1
judge, both of the person afflicted, and of the nature of his affliction.
First, we may note Good considerations in urging the law to some afflicted.
whether it be a man or a woman, because we may urge more fearfully the use of
the law to a man, as being the stronger vessel. And as Satan knew the woman
to be most easy and framable to be wrought upon, at his first temptation: so
is he not ignorant that she is the weaker party to sustain any temptation
now. Then let us consider, whether they that are thus humbled have knowledge or
no? Because, if they have no knowledge, they think 2
trouble of mind to be so strange a thing, as never any before had it: if they
have knowledge, then Satan is ready to accuse them of the sin against the
holy Ghost, as though every sin done against knowledge, were a sin of
presumption. Further, we are to enquire, how strong or weak they are, that if
they be sorely stricken, we cease to humble them any further: if they be not
sufficiently wounded, then to touch them with some deeper sense of sin. Also
we must be circumspect, to find out whether by nature they are fearful and
melancholic or no: as also, whether they be usual sinners, or have fallen
once of infirmity; that so upon their disposition and inclination, we may
build our speeches the better. To these it is good to add the consideration of
the persons age, estate and ability: as if the party be troubled for
worldlines, whether he be not a great house holder: if he complain of
uncleanness, whether he be not a young man and unmarried: if he be humbled with
covetousness, whether he be not old: because diverse countries, callings, ages,
conditions and estates of men, have their diverse and peculiar sins, which we
must rightly discern. Howbeit, of what sex soever they are men or women, of
what complexion soever they are, of what knowledge to discern sin, of what
degree of committing sin; of what age, authority, wealth, estate, or condition
soever they are, it is good to mark that there be many who are more troubled
for the vexation and disquietnes of their mind being distempered, than for the
vileness and horriblenes of their sin committed; who are wounded more with the
fear of shame, with the fear of being mad, or with the fear of running out
of their wits, than with the conscience of sin. Which thing if we find in
them, it is our part to travel with them, that they make a less matter of the
outward shame, and more conscience of the inward sin. Neither must we here
forget to make a distinction between our speeches used to the humbled, in the
very time of their extreme agony and burning ague of their troubles, and those
speeches which we use to them the fit being past; because the one and former
requires more consolation and less exhortation; the other and latter would
have us more abundant in admonishing, and more sparing in comforting, when we
may wisely admonish them to beware of sin, which so procured their own woe.
In this breathing time, it is also expedient to exhort them, that for some
season until they shall find greater power of regeneration, they would tie
themselves to some holy orders, and godly vows, whereby they may either be
furthered in mortifying some special sin; which for that they could find no
power against it, did most grieve them, or strengthened in some special grace,
the want where of did also wound them.

But before we launch deeper into this sea of particular temptations, and begin
to sound the dangerous passages of natural corruption, and original sin,
the troublesome froth whereof does almost ouerwhelme many poor pilgrims, it
shall be good to give this caution, that both in these and in the former
troubles, men would be still again admonished, patiently to bear with a
wounded spirit, albeit it fall out so, that they be somewhat pettish, seeing
the holy Ghost speaks so favorably of them, saying: A wounded spirit who can
bear? And surely our practice in other things, by the law of equity, may urge
this at our hands. For if men by the light of reason can see it to be a duty
convenient, not furiously to control, but meekly to suffer, and wisely to put
up the unadvised speeches of a man distempered in brain, by reason of some
burning ague, or such like violent and vehement sickness: we may easily gather
even by the same rule of reason, not so severely to ce^sure the impatie^t
speeches of him, who by reason of some parching fever of the spirit, is
disquieted in all parts of his mind, and has all the veins of his heart (as
it were in a spiritual agony) vexed. Wherefore both unsavory for want of
godly wisdom, and uncharitable for want of Christian love, are their
murmuring obtrectations which say, what? Is this the godly man? Is this he that
is so troubled for his sins? Why, see how pettish he is, nothing can please
him, no body can satisfy him. Consider, O man, if thou can bear with a
^raile body, that thou must much more bear with a frail mind. Consider, O
man, that this his pettishnes does more wound him to the heart, than any injury
thou could press him with. And therefore seeing he afflicts his own soul
for it, thou need not add any thing to his affliction, and to exasperate
his grievous smart. Consider that it is a blessed thing mercifully to bethink
us of the estate of the needy, and that to rub a fresh wound, and to strain a
bleeding sore, is nothing else, but with Jobs friends to bring a new torment,
where there is no need of it. As the wise father does rather pity tha^ rebuke
his child, whe^by reason of sickness the appetite is not easily pleased: so, if
we purpose to do any good with an afflicted mind, we must not be austere in
reprehe^ding every infirmity, but p^tiful in considering of the tender
frailty of it. Neither do I speak this to nourish pe^^^shnes in any, but
would have them to labor for patience, and to seek for peace: which though
they find not at the first, yet by prayer they must wait on the Lord, and
say: Lord because there is mercy that thou may be feared, I will wait upon
thee, as the eye of the servant wai^ ^^^ upon the hand of his master. I will
condemn my self of folly, and say, Oh my soul, why art tho^o so h^a^^e? Why
art thou so cast down within me? Still trust in the Lord, for he is thy health
and thy salvation.

FINIS.
THE SECOND TREATISE, BELONGING TO THE COMFORT OF AN AFFLICTED CONSCIENCE.
IN all afflictions Gods children must look unto the end: they are to desire
to profit by them, and in them to seek In afflictions ever look to the end.
^he way of sound comfort and consolation: which that they may find, they must
know that the afflictions of the godly last but a while, they serve them but
for salues and medicines, the end of them is always happy. In them they are
not only preserved, and purified from many sins: but also much beautified
with the image of Jesus Christ, who is the eldest son in the house of God.
Again, the cross of true Christians is the sweet and amiable call of God
unto repentance, in that he puts us in mind thereby to bethink us of our
debts: because we are given to think the day of payment is yet far off: yea,
we fall asleep until our turn be ended, and whilst God lengtheneth our
days waiting for our repentance, we never think of our sins, until the
hour come wherein we perish with shame. The best meeting then with the Lords
visitation, is without delay, and in sincerity to pray for our sins to be
pardoned. For therefore does the Lord oftentimes shackle us the more with the
chains of his chastisements, because we are more careful to be unburdened of
our sickness, than to be freed from our sin: which we the rather are loath to
confess, because we would not be espied to be in the wrath of God. Others
there be that hearing of their sins in the time of their afflictions, will
acknowledge indeed their infirmities to be the mother Some have but a confused
conceit of their sins in their afflictions.
of such a brood: yet they have no true remorse to restrain themselves from
sin, because they have but a confused conceit thereof: and though their ship
be never so much tossed and turmoyled, yet think they not that God holds the
stern* These men, if God bear with them, do as it were settle in their lees,
and are as it were soked in their sins. For prosperity is a drunkenness, to
cast our selves into a dead sleep, and when the Lord lets us alone, we
cease not to soothe up ourselves, bearing our selves in hand, that we are in
Gods favor, and that he loves us, because he scourges us not. And thus
retchles we are whilst we measure Gods love according to our sense and humor.
Wherein we bewray our ignorance of the exercise of the cross, in that
affliction is the mother of humility, humility breeds repentance, and
repentance obtains mercy. Some also there are, who usually whilst the
fearful judgment of God is before their eyes, either in themselves or in
others, have a few glancing motions, and starting cogitations of their sins,
and of Christ his passion: yet at all other times their minds are so clasped up
from thinking of temptations, and their hearts so locked up from foreseeing or
forethinking of Mockers and scorners of the afflicted.
judgments, that they feel no godly sorrow. They mock the mourning days of
the elect, as of them that be of melancholy nature; they make a sport of sin,
as little remembering the sting which will either prick them to the heart blood
most fearfully in the hour of death, or meet them with griping agonies in
the day of their visitation more speedily. But happily they think they have
given good testimony and Or warrant.
word of their repentance and remembrance of God, when they give one deep sigh
and away, and pass over Gods heavy indignation as over burning coals. So that
whilst the Lord in prosperity affoordeth large peniworths of his love unto
them, they dally with his Majesty, and make a sport of his mercy. Al which
imperfections may be better corrected, if in our deepest rest with a reverent
and humble fear of Gods judgments, we did wait for the day of our trial, and
prepare our selves to the Lords visitations: for the feeling of Gods mercy
must come from the sight of our misery by sin; which being pardoned, we
shall soon have our infirmities healed. Wherefore let us first learn to
cleanse our souls from sin* and then to sustain the sores of our body.
Sure it is, that if we have suffered our hearts to be harrowed with the rake of
Gods judgments (as occasion from the Lord has been given) that we are become
soft and well exercised in the fear of God: we shall come to the feeling of
our sins, the sense whereof, if it bring as it were a sickness to the body,
and a corsey to The feeling of our sins, an earnest of our regeneration.
the soul, it is an undoubted earnest of our regeneration, and happy are we if
we find our selves so diseased and troubled with our sins. True it is, that
we can hardly (being in the skirmish and agony) make any difference between
the motions to any evil, and the consent unto the same: for oftentimes evil
motions do so possess the souls of Gods children sincking down so deeply in
them, that though they weep, pray, and meditate (which be the last means and
remedies to ease and cure them) though they feel them with irkesomenesse and
loathsomenesse, as we feel sickness in our bodies: yet those motions will be
continually in them without diminishing, the delight only excepted. Wherefore
for our Note.
comfort herein, we are not to martyr our selves with disquietnes of mind,
because we are so pestered and thronged with wicked motions and assaults, but
rather let us quiet our selves, and not suffer our selves to be hindered with
sickness either of body or mind: by means whereof we should become more
unprofitable to our selves and the whole Church of God. For the godly shall not
be so freed from sin, but that they shall be assaulted with evil motions,
suspicions, delusions, vain fantasies and imaginations; the body of sin
shall never be from us so long as we live. For the scum thereof is almost
continually boiling The froth of sin in the regenerate.
and wallopping in us, foming out such filthly froth and stinking savor into
our minds, that it is not only detestable to the mind regenerate and renewed
by the spirit of God, but also it would make abashed the very natural man, to
look into so loathsome a stie of sin, and sinkehole of iniquity. Yea it
makes us often to quail, and if it were possible, it would corrupt the very
part regenerate. For mighty is the power, and raging is the strength of sin:
Neither for all this must we cease to sorrow for our sins, nor despair on
the other side, although our sorrow be but small. For if we be sorrowful for
the hardness of our hearts, if we can be grieved for that we are no more grieved
for our sins, if we can but sigh and groan because we feel our iniquities;
it is so much a greater comfort unto us, as it is a greater testimony that our
hearts are not altogether hardened: so that if we feel sorrow indeed, although
we weep not, yet we may gather comfort, considering that this sorrow is for
sin with a love and hunger after righteousness: yea if our assaults be
distrust, pride, arrogancy, ambition, envy, concupiscence, as hot as the
fire in the furnace all our days, and though Satan lays out oil in great
measure and out of measure, that it is the wonderful mercy of the Lord that we
stand; and though our prayers be dull and full of wear^somnesse, if the
striving and straining of our selves to goodness be so hard, that we know not
whether we strive for fear of punishment or for love of so good a Father: yet
To feel that we would feign love the Lord.
if we feel this in our selves, that we would feign love the Lord, and be
better, and being wearied and tired with our sins, long gladly to enjoy the
peace of righteousness, and desire to please God in a simple obedience of faith;
then let us comfort our selves; there is no time too late to repent in. For he
comes quickly to Christ (although in the hour of death) that comes
willingly, and in a desire of a better life: howsoever sin and Satan at that
time would especially persuade him. For as the hu^ming Be having lost her
st^^g Sin and Satan have lost the sting in Christ.
in another, does still notwithstanding make a fearful and grievous noise by
her often buzzing about us, but is nothing able to hurt us: so sin and death,
having lost their stings in Christ Jesus, do not cease at all, even in the
height of the parching heat of our consciences, to make a murmuring: and with
furious storms of temptations to terrify us and our consciences, albeit they
never sting us. Wherefore if Satan charge our consciences with sin (if we
can feel the things a little before mentioned in our consciences) let us bid
him not tell us what we have been, but what we would be. For such we are by
imputation, as we be in affection, and he is now no sinner, who for the love he
bears to righteousness, would be no sinner. Such as we be in desire and
purpose, such we be in reckoning and account with God, who Note.
gives that true desire and holy purpose to none but to his children whom he
justifies. Neither undoubtedly can the guiltines of sin break the peace of
our conscience, seeing it is the work of another who has commended us as
righteous before God, and saved us. It must indeed be confessed, that our own
works will do nothing in the matter of justification, which from Christ, and
in Christ is freely given unto us: it must be granted, that in our selves we
are weaker, than that we can resist the least sin, so far off is it, that
we can encounter with the law, sin, death, hell, and Satan: and yet in Christ
we are more than conquerors over them all. When the law accuses thee because
thou have not observed it, send it to Christ, and say; there is a man that has
fulfilled the law: to him I cleave, he has fulfilled it for me, and has given
the fulfilling of it unto me; I have nothing to do with thee, I have another
law which strikes thee down, even the law of liberty, which through Christ
has set me free. For my conscience which henceforth serves the law of grace,
is a glorious Prince to triumph over thee. If sin come and would have thee by
the throat, How to answer Satan and sin in temptations.
send it to Christ, and say; as much as thou may do against him, so much
right thou shall have against me. For I am in him, and he in me: wherefore (O
sin) I am righteous through my Christ, which is become sin, to free me which
have been a condemned sinner. If death creep upon thee and attempt to devour
thee, say unto it; Christ has overcome thee, and opened unto me the gates of
everlasting life: thou would have killed him with the sting of sin, but the
same being of no force, thy purpose (O death) has failed, and he being my
life, is become thy death. If Satan summon thee to answer for thy debts, send
him also to Christ, and say; that the wife is not suable, but the husband:
enter thine action against Christ mine husband, and he will make thee
sufficient answer: who then shall condemn us? or what judge shall daunt us?
since God is our Judge and acquiteth us? and Christ was condemned, and
justifies us? he is our judge, that wills not the death of a sinner; he is
our man of law, who to excuse us, suffered himself to be accused for us. O
gluttonous hell, where is thy defense? O cruel sin, where is thy tyrannous
power? O ravening death, where is thy bloody sting? O roaring lion, why do
thou fret and fume? Christ my Law fights against thee, O law, and is my
liberty; Christ fights against thee, O sin, and is my righteousness: Christ
fights against thee O devil, and is my Savior: Christ fights against thee
O death, and is my life. Thou did desire to paue my way to the burning lake
of the damned: but contrary to thy will, thou art constrained to lift up the
ladder whereby I must ascend into the new Jerusalem. Wherefore if we shall find
our selves forsaken of God, so as we perceive nothing but matter of despair,
let us still hold our own, and in the certainty of our faith stay our selves,
since Christ is given us of God, that he might extinguish sin, triumph over the
law, va^quish death, ouercom the devil, and destroy hell, for our only comfort
and consolation. But peradventure some will say, my faith is weak and cold,
and my Good fear.
conscience is as a flaming lamp and burning furnace: I fear the Lord will
still pursue me with his wrathful indignation: Thou do well to fear; but
fear and sin not.

For fear which subdueth the security of the flesh is in all most requisite,
in that the weaker we are in our selves, the stronger we are in God. But that
fear is dangerous, which hinders the certainty of faith, in that it
incourageth our enemy more fiercely to set upon us; when we (coming into the
camp) will cast away our armor especially which should defend us. Comfort thy
self, the Lord will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised
reed, he looks not on the quantity, but on the quality of our faith. For as
a good mother does not reject her child because through some infirmity it is
weak, feeble, and not able to go alone, but rather does pity and supporte
it, least peradventure it should fall, and recompenseth that with motherly
affection, which in her child is wanting God as a father pitieth us.
by occasion: in like manner the Lord God our most gracious father does not
cast us off, because through our imperfections we are unable or afraid to draw
nearer to the throne of grace; but rather pitieth us, and seeing us a far off
desirous to come unto him, meets us by the way, and by grace and strength of
his own hand, directs our steps unto his kingdom. And as he which freely
purposes to give a wedge of gold, will not withdraw Simile.
his gift because the hand of him that should receive it, is weak, troubled
with the gout, palsy, or leprosy, so that by any means, though in great
weakness, he be able to hold it; even so the Lord purposing in free mercy to
bestow on us an immortal weight of glory, will not deprive us of it, though
many filthy blemishes have polluted and weakened our faith, so that in any
small measure we be able to take hold of his promises: neither are we to look
for the perfection of faith, because we never believe as we ought; but rather
on that which the Gospel offers and gives, and on Gods mercy and peace in
Christ: in whose lap if we can lay our heads with Saint John, then we are in
felicity, security, and perfect quietness. Contrariwise there be some, who
(notwithstanding that a tormented conscience is a stinging Serpent, that it
were much better that all the creatures rose up against us, every one bringing
their bane; then once to come before the dreadful face of God) are so blockish
that they are wholly resolved into hardness. If they be pricked with sickness,
Some utterly ignorant of the afflictions of mind.
they cry alas; if they be pinched with poverty, they can complain: but as
for the torment of mind they cannot skill of it: And even to talk of a
bruised, contrite and broken heart, is a strange language. For proof whereof
our consciences are rocked asleep, so that not one amongst a thousand knows
what it is to be pressed and harrowed with the rake of Gods judgments. But
blessed are they that to their own salvation feel this in their bodies,
whilst sin may be both punished and purged. For though God spare us for a
time, yet we know what he keeps for our end. Wherefore it is the best for us
to run to the Lord in this life with a troubled mind, least we tarry till
the Lord have locked us up with the heavy fetters of desperation, when he
shall summon us to the bar of his judgment The state of the wicked which
sorrow not for sin.
in the sight of his Angels, and impanelling the great inquest of his Saints
against us, shall denounce our fearful and final sentence of eternal
condemnation; for we see many that have been careless and have made good
cheer all their life long, yea, and when men have labored to make them feel
the judgment of God, they have turned all to mockery, but their iolity the
Lord has so abated when they draw toward death, that in stead of resting and
sporting (whereunto they had been given) they have felt the terror of death,
hell, and damnation, and lapping up their joys in final desperation, have
forced out cursings against their filthy pleasures. Wherefore if we in the
tempest of our temptations will sail a right course, neither shrinking nor
slipping into the gulf of desperation, neither battering our bark against the
rock of presumption; let us in a contrite spirit cry unto the Lord: Have
mercy upon me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee, forgive all
mine iniquities, and heal all mine infirmities. Thou healest those that are
broken in heart, and bindest up their soars* why art thou cast down my soul,
and why art thou disquieted within me, wait on God, for I will yet give him
thanks, he is my present help, and my God. Yet my soul keep thou silence
before God, of him comes my salvation, he is my strength, therefore I shall
not much be moved. His mightines is enough to give me courage, yea and shall be
even when I am forlorn, I know that the diminishing of my body, goods,
friends, or any other thing is a calling of me to that which never shall
diminish nor decay, I believe that my Lord and my God allureth me daily
thither; that I might not doubt that when my body is laid in the grave, and
there consumed as it were to nothing, yet notwithstanding my soul resting in
the bosom of the Lord, shall return unto me and shall rise to glory: even as
it (resting in this life, in the mercies of Christ) did rise to grace: verily I
see, and that with joy, that my flesh must go to decay: for look what
freshnes soever was in it, it diminished How to speak to our own hearts in
afflictions.
day by day. And I need not go far to seek for death, for I feel not so
small an infirmity in my body, but the same is unto me a messenger of
dissolution. Yet for all this I shall see my God, and when I am covered in the
belly of the grave with mouldes, I am assured, that he will reach me his hand
to lift me up again to the beauty of his inheritance: so that this small
cottage and shed of leaves, being brought to the grave, shall be carried into an
incorruptible tabernacle. Thus communing with our own hearts, and being still
in the peace of a good conscience, concerning our outward sufferings, we shall
find that the Lord by his fatherly and loving chastisements, intends nothing
more than to prove our obedience, as good reason it is that he should, and to
confirm our faith, as also is most necessary. How be it still as I said, he
uses a fatherly correction, that is, in mercy, measure, and judgment. For as
he strikes us down in anger for our sins with the one hand, so he raises
us up again in love for our salvation with the other hand. For albeit his
corrections be wear^some wounds to flesh and blood, yet are they sovereign
medicines to the soul and conscience, especially when the Lord gives us that
privilege of his children, that by his holy spirit he does ouermaster us,
least that finally we should be his judge, and he not ours. And for this cause
the Lord is often times provoked to put on (as it were) a contrary face, and to
lock us up in a prison of adversity, to restrain us from the liberty of our
sins, which Satan feign would make us violently to rush into. And surely
though How greatly to account of our afflictions.
the wisdom of the flesh persuades us that nothing is better than to be
spared, and not to be espied when the Lord calls us to reckoning; yet the
spirit showing our desperate estate, without the sieue of affliction, and
boulter of adversity, teaches us that we cannot of all the blessings of God
sufficiently esteem this, being the mother of humility, and nurce of true
repentance. Again, the Lord often by inward temptations and outward crosses,
draws us from the stake of security and untowardness to good works; least in
time we should loose the experience of our knowledge and faith in Christ, and
seek some easier kind of life for flesh and blood. Neither can we truly
repent, until by some cross we know this world to be a place of sorrow, and
not of mirth and delight. For so long as we make our prosperity a bulwark to
beat down all harms, Prosperity how dangerous to some.
we are to look for adversity to beat down the high sail of our proud
hearts, whereby we gad after our own lusts, and leave the anchor of peace,
which is our trust in God. Let us learn then, when the world begins to
favor us, and we have as it were an hundredth thousand soldiers, to bear us
up, not to be secure; for there is nothing more easy for a man, than for to
make himself believe that he shall always continue in happy Security.
estate, and think he shall die in the nest. But we must be as birds on a
bough, to remove at Gods pleasure, and that without resistance when the Lord
shall visit us. And because we are given too much to think that we have the
things in our own right, which we hold of the free goodness of God: we are
taught in affliction how heinous unthankfulness it were to bind the Lord
continually to entertain us in this life at so full charge and cost, without
respect of his free and undeserved gifts: or to hold plea against, and sue him,
as it were, by an obligation, at whose hands we ought to beg daily; and at
whose gate we receive all our maintenance: or to make a rent charge of all that
which he gives of his free liberality. Thus in the end we challenge Gods
gifts as our own, and make account to have their company to the grave,
whereby we provoke the Lord often to prove to our faces, that all that we have
is but lent and borrowed. Let us then have such an eye to Patience under the
cross
every blow, that whenever the Lord shall lay any cross upon us, we be
ready to receive it, and to yield up our bonds unto him, the condition whereof
is, that we be ready to remove whenever he pleases, knowing that Gods
providence forces us always to the best, and as most may make for the
hastening of our souls to our everlasting in heritance. Let us learn not to
reckon without our host, and that we hold our prosperity of the Lord not in
fee simple, but as tenants at will, that is, from day to day, resigning to God
the sovereignty of reuoking us when it pleases him. Thus it becomes the
Lord to change our estate, that we become not snared in the gifts of
prosperity, and become so foolish as not to keep on our way to the heavenly
life. Our natural inclination is to forget that we are on earth as pilgrims;
to leap up into the clouds, and to promise unto our selves the whole course
of our lives to be in prosperity: and so long as God lets us alone at our
case, we take our selves (as it were) to be petty Gods. But when we see our
selves shut up, and know not what will be the end of our misery, finding our
selves to be entertained in this life but as journey men, waged for the present
day, but not knowing what will become of us the day following: we desire to
take our rest in the bosom of Gods providence, and so much we strike our
sails the lower, when the Lord proclaims war with our secure prosperity:
which persuades us that we shall live for ever, and drives us from bethinking
us of our miseries and frailties. Wherefore let us cut out our prosperity by
the pattern of humility, and in our best estate, put our selves In
prosperity to remember adversity.
in readiness to suffer adversity, and when we are well, to look for worse,
and keep a good watch when God handles us most gently, that in abounding we
may foresee our wants, in health our sickness, and in prosperity our calamity:
for concerning things of this life the faithful are to stand in a doubt, that
that which they hold with one hand, may be taken away with the other. We must
not think that we shall ever enjoy our liberty, and that we shall see no
cross: but we must lay open our selves to receive stripes from the Lord,
knowing that our least cries will stay his greatest scourges. Let us look to
be assaulted, but not vnmeasurably, because God will assist us. Let us look to
fall, but on our knees, because Gods hand does hold us up Let us look to be
humbled, but in mercy, because the Lord sustaineth us, and as we are assured,
where mercy hemmeth us about on every side, it is our part continually to
confess before the Lord, that we ever give new occasions, that he should
follow us with new punishments, and that our sins do often shake off the
wings of Gods mercy, under the which we have bin long comforted. For Gods
children acknowledge themselves without ceasing, that God has rods in a
readiness (though they see no present evil) to beat them from their sins:
and bend all their care, how they may rather suffer adversity to Gods glory,
than to sleep securely in prosperity unto their own pleasure. Now when the
Lord does, as it were hold us on the rack for these causes before named, we
must pray unto him, that howsoever he keeps us in the press) we may have a
breathing while to consider our days spent in pleasure, and to examine our
unthankfulness, which shuts up the door of Gods mercy from us. And because
our afflictions are the sorer when they come the nearer to the soul, we may
with our selves conclude to hold on the way of our thorough-faire: and though
we see nothing but thorns of temptations, and briers of evil affections, so
as we must be feign to leap over hedges, rocks and ditches; yet must we not
cease to continue in Gods service. For if that were not, what trial and
examination of our faith should there be, were we as in a fair meadow, that we
might run on along by the water side in a shade, and that there might be
nothing but pleasure and joy all our life time, who could vaunt that he had
served God with good affection? But when God I he cross sent to exercise our
faith.
does send us things clean contrary to our desires, that we must be feign one
while to enter into a quagmire, and another while to march upon ragged rocks
and stones; then we shall have the use of a well exercised mind in prayer, in
repentance, and in contempt of this life. And why does the Lord sometime suffer
us to pine away, and to languish in continuance of grief, seeing that he could
clean rid us at the first? doubtless to this end, that we might confess his
mercy more freely, and bite of his justice more sharply. Let us now learn to
hold all the passions of impatiencie in bondage, both by comparing our evils
with the wonderful mercies of God, and our small sufferings with the
intolerable conflicts of our forefathers. For there is no greater cause of our
disparing under the cross, tha^ when Satan persuades us, that never any were
handled so roughly: or else would bear us in hand, that although God afflicted
the faithful that have been before us, yet they were not so weak as we. But
let us remember that God has so pinched his servants, even them whom he loved,
and whose welfare was dear and precious in his sight, and has often brought
them to such extremities, as they were not able to look up any more, nor wist
how to speak, nor how to hold their peace. Wherefore least our infirmities
should ouermaster us, and when temptations are fierce upon us, we know not
where to become: let us call to mind the Saints of God, who were constrained
with sighs and groans to stoop under the hand of God; whose martyrs and
tormented children ought to be our looking glasses, to the end that by them we
may learn, that according as God deals forth the gifts of the spirit,
thereafter does he send greater afflictions, both to make them the more
esteemed, and also to cause a more plentiful fruit of their faith. How did
God deal with Abraham, not a common man, but rather an Angel, the tenth part
of whose sufferings Abraham* David.
would make a stout heart to quail? How was David the servant of God exercised
in Gods school, who felt all Gods darts, and had all his arrows shot at him?
Thus it is requisite, that Gods graces should not be idle in his children, but
set on work by afflictions, whereby they may be known in due time and place.
How did God play the Lion with Ezechias, who (as with paws and teeth) bruised
and crushed his bones; not that we may Ezechias.
accuse God of cruelty, but that we may see with what anguish the Lord does
sometimes exercise his holy servants, and with what patience he does arm them:
who notwithstanding his vehement trials, do stay themselves upon God, accusing
themselves, saying: I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him: and excusing the Lord with all humblenes with David, Psalm. 114. I
know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me
justly, etc* It is much auailable to mortification and Christian patience also,
to occupy our hearts in the house of mourning, even in our greatest
banqueting, and to betake our selves unto some serious meditation of
adversity, when present pleasures would most divorce us from the remembrance
thereof. So though we have much in possession, we shall have little in
affection: and when God does most advance us, we shall fear our wants of
humility: and then especially be ransacking our infirmities, when the Lord for
our trial enricheth us most with his benefits. For if the Lord God by
multiplying his mercies increases our account; we are often to suspect, to
call to judgment, and to arraigne our selves for the using of Gods creatures;
who often gives that in judgment, which he might deny us in mercy: and
often waineth us from some things in his love, which he might give unto us in
his anger.

FINIS.
THE MARKS OF A RIGHTEOUS MAN.
THe righteous man has three privileges. First, that he shall never 1
perish, though he be oftentimes afflicted: yea if there be a number of Romans 8.
them, the Lord will spare the habitation of their place for their sake.
Secondly, if the Lord be minded to bring destruction upon a land o^ 2
country: he will first deliver the righteous eitner by death, or by conueying
them to some other place: as here he does Let and is the children of Israel,
when Pharaoh was overthrown. Thirdly, the Lord will 3
not so much punish for the wicked, as favor for the go^ly sake; and if they
fall into the same temporal punishments, even thereby shall the righteous be
brought nearer to heaven, but the godless shall be thrown down to hell, even
as with the same flaile is beaten ch^ff^to be burnt, and pure corn to be
preserved.

Some think that there be none righteous: which comes to pass either
through ignorance, 1
or because they see the sins and loose righteousness of others: but then
the Who be righteous, and who be not.
Scriptures should be false which calls some righteous. Then Christ should
have died in vain, and there should be no salvation, because none are s^ued
but the righteous.

Some think that righteousness is an inherent quality, and that through works
we may be 2
perfectly righteous, as of old the Pelagians, and Puritanes, and now Papists,
and Family of love. But the testimonies of Scriptures which affirm that al our
righteousness is as a stained cloth, and that we are not able to answer one of
a thousand, etc. and also the sins of those who in the word are counted
righteous, do prove the contrary: for Abraham sinned ^. Pet. 2.
after he had been pronounced righteous, in distrusting Gods providence, in
going in unto his maid, in lying himself, and causing his wife to sin: so
Lot in departing from Abraham, to whom the covenant was made, and without a
just cause, in being loath to depart from Sodom; in lying with his daughters:
so David, Job, Zachary, Noe, Peter, and the Heb 11. Luke. 18. Romans 4.
Publican sinned, who were all justified by says as Abraham was, who believed
in God.

Some as a mean between these, do magnify the righteousness which is by
faith with out works, but in the mean while live vngedly: but these have
imagined a kind of righteousness 3
common to the dissolute Protestants, which shall better be discovered, when it
is set down what a righteous man is.

True righteousness is by imputation: for the obtaining whereof, we must first
feel and acknowledge our selves void of all righteousness, and full of all
unrighteousness, by reason of our sins. And this caused Paul to count all his
former righteousness as dung.

Secondly, that we feeling the weight of our sins, desire to leave them, and
be freed Psalm. 3^. Matthew. 11. 28. Phil. 3. Luke. 18. Romans 4. Phil. 3. 2. Heb.
4.
from the punishment due unto them.

Thirdly, that by faith we fly unto Christ, seeking to have his righteousness
imputed unto us, and our sins not imputed, but clean forgiven us. So was the
Publican, and Abraham: so is Christ sent a Mediator unto us, when we are
wounded, by the sword of the word. Now, although being thus justified in
Christ, there do yet sin remain in us: for all that it must not reign in
our mortal bodies: but we must do the work of our father Abraham, walking in
vprightnes of heart before the Lord, as it was required of Abraham: Genesis 17.
Psalm. 32. and 129. and 4.
in which sense David says, In whose spirit there is no guile: as if he should
say, his sins did still remain, if he walked not uprightly. This vprightnes
of heart may be tried by four special notes: first, that we love all good
things as well as one, and hate all sins as well as one, and that both in our
selves and others: so that although we cannot perform all, yet we will have
respect unto all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. Whereof Saint James gives a
reason when he says, that he that commanded the one, commanded the other:
whereby Iam. 2. To have religion in respect of persons.
he discovers the hypocrisy of those, which had religion in respect of
persons, and such is the religion of Papists, and of the Family of love.

Such was the religion of Herod, and of the young man that would follow Christ:
but when the one was reproved of his whoredom, and the other bidden sell all
that he had, they would be Disciples no longer, although before they would do
many things gladly, and be great professors.

Such is the state of many Protestants, who will condemn whoredom, and yet be
covetous, False hearted Protestants.
yea they will do great things, but will not be brought to glorify God in
their callings: which shows their religion to be vain, and their hearts full
of hypocrisy. And yet this rule may have exceptions: for we do neither know
all good nor all evil at the first, much less love the one and hate the
other, as we ought: yea, we see many sins which as yet we cannot come out of
as we should. Again, there may be sins of frailty, although not of
presumption: but yet if we be not grieved for these, and displeased with our
selves, when by any one we are overtaken, and hate sin, and love goodness,
when the Lord does reueile it unto us; we keep an evil conscience, and our
corruption shall be discovered: for in that measure we like of sin, in that
measure is hypocrisy in us: and if the oftener we sin the more we be grieved,
it is a sign of uprightness, and then there is hope to recover the fall, for
this works a care and strife to come our of sin, and at the last a
recovery: but in the hypocrite contrary.

The second note is, that we have a single care to please and glorify God in
all our doings, The second note of a righteous man.
and to approve our selves unto him without hope of reward, though trouble do
come upon us for it, and that only because we would please God and glorify
his Name, and for the same cause eschew evil.

The want of this caused Christ to reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, for
fasting and prayer, because they did it to be seen of men. The want hereof
condemns the Papists and Family of love in all their works, because they
do them, that thereby they may be righteous. When justification was given to
works, then men would build Churches, Abbeyes, etc. and these things were
greatly praised of men: but now, when good works are commanded, not to merit,
but for Gods glory, as to be signs and seals of righteousness, few are
brought to do them, which is a sign that there are but a few righteous men
upon earth.

This rule also has his exceptions, for we shall see much rebellion in our
flesh, and hypocrisy withal: but we must note what is our chiefest drift, and
what bears the chiefest sway within us, and of that shall we be named, as is
the use in other things, as to be of this or that complexion, because that or
this is the principal, and it is called leauened bread, though water be mixed
with it: so that if our consciences do witness with us that our chief care is
to please God, then is our heart upright with God, though hypocrisy be joined
with it. For it is one thing to do a thing for hypocrisy, and another thing
mixed with hypocrisy: Note.
one thing for vain glory, and another thing mixed with vain glory. If we
could see nothing by our selves, yet herein must we not justify our selves:
and when we see infirmities joined with our special care, we must have care to
leave them, and strive thereunto, so that we yield not our selves to them, but
rather they lead us away captives, and whenever Romans 7. 2. Cor. 12. 7.
we see them, to behold Satan in them, and therefore hate them, and though they
buffet us, yet still pray, and arm our selves against them, as Paul did.

The third note is, that we never content our selves in our selves, nor in the
things that we have done, but still go forward to leave sin, and draw near
to God. And this may be seen in Abraham* and is set down in the Proverbs. And
Paul says, As many as are perfect Prou* 4. 18. Phil. 3* 15. Heb. 6.
are thus minded. Here then are disclosed those that either stay in the
beginnings, or else slide back when they are gone somewhat forward. For if we
have tasted once of the good grace of God, and then turn back from it, it is
impossible to be renewed by repentance, whereof there are two causes: first,
because they are always learning and never the better, Esai. 28. where the
Prophet rebukes, saying: Line upon line, and precept upon precept. Secondly,
because that if they attain to knowledge: yet do they not build themselves
thereupon to keep a good conscience: and thus experience teaches in those
that become heretics. This is so fearful to the godly, that they had rather
fall into all the miseries of Job than into this Apostasy. We must then go on
still, giving God praise that we have Esaiah. 28.
done something, and yet not so much to be puffed up thereby, as sorrowful
that we have not done so much as we ought, so that we look upon our sins to
humble us, and upon that good which the Lord has wrought in us, to be
thankful* But yet sometimes the children of God see they go not forward, but
as it were linger, yea they sometimes fall into gross sins: for the first,
if we strive not against it, mislike not our selves for it* nor mourn because
it is so with us, we are in danger that the Lord will bar us out. And if he
punish Revel. 3. Esaiah. 28. Heb. 3. 14. Phil. 3*
those that go not forward thus, what shall be to those that fall back? But if
we mislike our selves for our sins, and mourn striving against them, we may
take sound comfort therein. And for the second, the Lord turns the falls of
his children to their faster going forward Gods children sometimes linger,
rather than go forward.
and growing up: for so they see their corruption more, wherewith being
humbled, (though it be a very fearful thing for Christians to fall into any
gross sin) they fly faster unto Christ. And again, their fall makes them
more wary, and also to run forward the faster, as they that run in a race,
or travel in a journey, being let either by fall or by company, do
afterward make more speed least that they should not obtain their purpose.
David after his fall brought to see his original corruption, craved more
Psalm. 51.
earnestly for the spirit to be renewed in him. The children of God then fall,
but the Lord reuealeth it and they rise again: but the hypocrites and wicked
continue still, and go Psalm. 119. 8. 6. 10.
from evil to worse, because salvation is given to none but to those that love
it. Psalm. 15. and 16. How to love superiors, equals, inferiors.


The fourth note is, that we love righteous men, and righteous things, as well
in others as in our selves. Righteous men, that is, either such as are before
us, our equals, or inferiors. We must love them that are before us, that we may
follow them, and be like unto them, and not to please our selves in our selves,
and therefore must we be desirous to keep their company, whether they be
preachers or professors: for those that love learning, will delight in the
company of those that are learned: and if we love good men because they are
so, it is a good sign we do much more love God who is goodness itself; as
if the father love the schoolmaster for the sons sake, it is a sign he loves
his son much more. And if this be so, it will restrain us that we neither
envy, nor yet despise the gifts we see in others: but rather give God the
glory for them, and seek to profit by them: contrary to ^ll this is the
unrighteous and vainglorious man.

That we might the rather do this, Christ has promised a reward, He that
receives a Matthew. 10.
Prophet, etc. Yea, we see that worldly men have been blessed for the godlies
sake, as Laban for Jacob: Putiphar for Joseph: and Nabuchadnezzar for Dani^ls
sake; much more are the godly blessed; as Abraham and Let received Angels in
shape of men, had the plague revealed to them and escaped. So Ebed-Melech and
Baruch, had their life for a prey, because of Jeremiah the Prophet; So did the
Shunamitish woman receive singular blessings for entertaining Eliah.
Contrariwise, the man that hears not instruction, nor loves righteous men,
but contemns his betters, is high in his own eyes, he has no righteousness
in him. This has also a punishment, as has been seen upon the Jews, who
killed the Prophets, but their children have builded their sepulchers: So we
can think well of many when they are gone, but when they are present with us,
and we might receive some profit by them, we cannot digest them. But we must
think better of others then of our ^. Cor: 5.
selves, yet approving our selves both to God and to others also, as Paul does.

We must love our equals, both to confirm them, and by them to be confirmed
our Romans 15. 14. Jude 20.
selves. The true sensible feeling of our own wants will move us to this
duty, that we may have the like of them.

We must love our inferiors, to instruct them, and draw them forward. And
because our callings will not suffer us to do this to all, we must first
begin with them that are nearest us, as Fathers, their wives and children:
Masters, their servants: Princes, their subjects. Thus Genesis 18.
did Abraham teach his Family, otherwise he could not have looked for the
performance of the covenant, whereof one end was this, that he should teach
his family. This belongs to us, and all Christians, who being righteous have
the covenant made to them and their seed: and therefore must they be taught
and instructed, that they may keep Gods ordinances and observe his laws. The
small practice of this shows, that few men have the warrant of salvation in
themselves. This love goes further abroad to others, Matthew. 23. Iam. 5. Dan.
12. Matthew. 25. Matthew. 5.
as to kinsfolks: for the wicked take great pains to make many like
themselves, which may be a shame to Christians, if they strive not daily to
win some. And that we may do this, there is a reward: He that conuerteth
sinner shall shine as the stars. But if he be condemned that spilleth the
body, and suffers the very A^le to fall, how much more shall he be that
loses a soul? We must love all righteous things in others, as in our Psalm.
126. 2. Pet. 2. Ezech. 9. 4.
selves. We must take heed of unrighteous men, and separate our selves from
them: but this must be in respect of their sins and corruption, whereby GOD
is dishonored; not in respect of their person which God has made, which after
this sort may be tried. If we do not brute abroad their faults, but even
mourn for them, and their salvation. So did Lot mourn, and those are marked
out which wept for the iniquity of the time, and Psalm. 119. 5. 3. Mark. 3.
Romans 15. Psalm. 69. Ierem. 12.
were preserved. In respect of Gods glory to be angry, but in respect of men
to lament: this is a true zeal. And so CHRIST was angry* and wept over
Jerusalem. Yet here must be considered, the manner of offending; for some sin
of malice, and some sin of infirmity. Thus must we hate all unrighteous
things, and mourn for them, and not only for them, but also for the abuse of
those things, which in their own nature are lawful.

FINIS.
SWEET AND SVRE SIGNS OF ELECTION, TO THEM THAT ARE BROVGHT LOW.
1A Clearing of judgment, conceiving of the truth, and true meaning of the
Scriptures, making for us, or against us. 2. A rebuking of sin inwardly, a
poverty of spirit from thence, and a mourning therefore, Matthew: 5. 3. 4. 3. A
meekness of spirit, to cast our selves down at Christ's feet, Matthew: 5. 4.
4 An hungring after the righteousness which is in CHRIST, and a pricing and
esteeming it above all earthly things. Philip: 3. 8. 9. 5. A musing upon, and a
desire to think and speak of heavenly things. 6. A conflict of the flesh and
spirit, and therein, by practice, the power of the spirit geting the upper
hand, Rom: 7. 23. 7. A sowing to the spirit, by the use of the means, as of
the word, prayer, etc. 8. A purpose unfeigned, upon strength received, of vowing
ones self wholly to the glory of God, and good of our brethren. 9. A
resignation of our selves into Gods hands. 10. An expecting of the daily
increase of our souls health, and our bodies resurrection. 11. The forgiving
of our enemies. 12. An acknowledging of our offenses, with a purpose truly to
leave them. 13. A delight in Gods Saints. 14. A desire that after our death the
Church of God may flourish and have all peace. 15 A spirit without guile: that
is, an unfeigned purpose always to do well, howsoever our infirmities put us
by it.
These are sure notes of our election: wherein if any be short, yet let him
but see into his heart, if he desire and long after these graces, and remember,
Nehem, 11. Psalm. 10^* 18. Psalm. 119 6. 40. 37.

A TREATISE OF A CONTRACT BEFORE MARRIAGE.
After prayer he spoke as follows.
THat none of us might doubt whether there be just occasion of this manner The
espousage or betrothing before full marriage known by the light of nature.
of our meeting or no; we are to call to mind even from the Heathen, that the
light of nature taught them, that there was a solemn promise to be made of the
parties that should be married, before they were to be joined in marriage, and
that was called the espousage: and therefore we were the more to be blamed, if
we should neglect so good a custom, especially being commended to the chosen
people of God, as we may gather of his words: for we read that the Lord God
made a law concerning the espoused persons, that if they were unfaithful of
their bodies, they should be condemned as adulterers, even as well as the
married parties. Mary also was affianced unto Joseph, before the solemnising of
their marriage. And the use of the Church stands with good reason: for that
the neglect of it is an occasion that many are disappointed of their purposed
marriages, because some of them through inconstancy go back. It is very meet
also, that they should have some instructions given them concerning the graces
and duties that are required in that estate, that they may pray unto the Lord,
and so be prepared and made fit to be publicly presented to the congregation
afterward.

Now further as concerning the nature of this contract and espousage, although
it be a degree under marriage, yet it is more than a determined purpose, yea
more than a simple promise. For even as he which delivers up the estate of
his lands in writing (all conditions A contract is more than a simple promise
of marriage.
agreed upon) is more bound to the performance of his bargain, than he that
has purposed, yea or made promise thereof by word of mouth, although the
writings be not yet sealed: even so there is a greater necessity of standing
to this contract of marriage, than there is of any other purpose or promise made
privately by the parties. These things observed, I purpose (as God shall give
me grace) to give some lessons, how you must prepare your selves to live in the
estate of marriage. I will for the help of your memory deal in this sort and
order: first briefly going through the Articles of your faith, and then through
the Commandments, noting some especial duties fit for this purpose.

As concerning your belief in God the Father, you know (brethren) you must
believe How the parties betrothed must be taught to know their duties.
in him, as being creator of all things, and also the governor and preserver
of the same: you must also understand that he created man according to his own
image, and gave him the pre-eminence and government of the woman, for the help
of the man, that he might be furthered in the service of his God. So you must
much more look that you be not hindered from the Lord by your wife: for there
are many whilst they desire marriage, so long as their hope is deferred they
are careful in the discharge of their duty: but afterward once enjoying those
things they looked for, they wax more negligent than they were before, greatly
dishonouring God by their unthankfulness. And it may be the only fault of man,
if he be not helped by his wife to grow in godliness: for I think that even
Euah in Note.
moning her husband Adam to eat of the forbidden fruit, had been an helper
unto him, to bring him acquainted with the malicious enmity of Satan against
them both, if according to the great measure of graces he had received from the
Lord, he had bin more faithful in obeying the will of God, and had wisely
rebuked his wife. And again, although the woman was the occasion of sin: yet
the force of sin to the corruption of mankind came into the world by the
sin of the man. For so the Apostle says, Rom, 5. As by one man (meaning
Adam) sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death went over
all men, for as much as all men have sinned. So much more the grace of God, and
the gift of grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.
And in the 3. of Genesis we read, that the eyes of the woman were not opened
until the man had eaten of the fruit: but so soon as he had eaten, the eyes
of them both were opened, and they knew that they had sinned. Therefore I
gather thus much, that rebuke should have prevailed more to convert her, than
her moving of him to transgress, should have been able to pervert him. I
speak not to excuse the woman, for I know the Lord was displeased with her,
and for that cause has laid a special punishment upon her, in the painful
bringing forth of children.

But that I might show the great charge that lies upon the man, to stay the
corruptions of the woman, by reason of the authority which the Lord has given
him over her* which I would have you (brother) diligently to consider of. And
you my sister must take profit, by calling to mind, that this was one end of
your creation, that you should glorify God in being an helper to your husband:
therefore take heed that you be not a hinderer unto him, to trouble him or to
vex his heart, whereby he should be less f^uitfull in his calling: but be you
cheerful toward him, so that although he should have little comfort in all
other things, yet he may find great cause to rejoice in you. And this you must
know, that as it is required of your husband to seek for wisdom to be able
to govern you: so the Lord requires of you to be subject unto him, remembering
also that as God has enjoined you silence in the congregation, so you must
seek for instruction at his mouth in your private chamber.

Another thing I would have you both to consider of in this point of your
belief, is faith in Gods providence. And mark that well I shall say unto you:
for it is a special thing, The contracted must remember that God by his good
providence brought them together.
and I know it shall do you good, if God bless it unto you: for if you be
assured in your hearts that it was the Lord who in his gracious providence
brought you thus together, you shall be comforted against all troubles and
hindrances that shall by any means be raised up against you. For this is the
nature of Satan to bring men and women to this doubt: and when they once yield
unto it, what trouble and what strife does he work betwixt them? For whereupon
arises that impatiencie of spirit that we see to be in many, in murmuring, in
chiding, in cursed speeches, and much like unquietness? does it not come of
this, because they have not a reverend persuasion that the Lord in his
providence as by his own hand joined them in that near bond and conjunction
together? Therefore my good brother and sister, as you would continue and
increase in much love and peace one toward another, mark (I say) this point
diligently: for it shall be a very comfortable stay unto you both, whatsoever
should fall out afterward, contrary to that you looked for: as if there
should be any disagreement in your seu^rall dispositions and natures: or if you
should fall into sicknesses, into any diseases, or such like trials, you
remembering that this was the Lords doing, you may be more assured that yet for
all this, it shall be well in the end, if you be constant in prayer, calling
upon God the Father through faith in Jesus Christ. Now that you may prove unto
your own hearts that the Lord has knit you thus together, you must consider
that it must needs be the Lord who has moved the hearts of your Christian
parents to give their lawful consents unto you in the same, and God in mercy
shall give you greater assurance of it, if you mark his dealings with you from
time to time.

Now as touching your faith in Jesus Christ, understand that marriage is holy
unto them Faith in Jesus Christ.
only, whose hearts are sanctified by faith in his name. And although God will
always approve his own ordinance, yet it must needs prove hurtful in the
end unto them, who call not for his blessing upon the same: and without
repentance will turn to their further condemnation. Therefore you are both to
examine your selves diligently herein: and you brother. A. must learn hereby
so to love your wife, as Christ Jesus loved his Spouse, his Church: that is to
say, even as our Savior Christ is very patient toward it, and by little The
wisdom and love of a good Christian in the government of his wife.
and little purges, washe^h, and cleanses away the corruption of it: so you
must in like manner in all wisdom use the means, and with a patient mind
wait for the amendment of any thing that you shall find to be amiss in your
wife, and that the graces of Gods spirit may daily increase in her. Therefore I
charge you in the sight of God and his Angels, and as you will answer unto me
and the parents of this my sister, before the judgment seat of Christ, that
as you receive her a virgin from her parents, so you neglect no duty, whereby
her salvation may be furthered, that you may present her pure and blameless,
as much as in you lies, unto Jesus Christ, when he shall call you to account.
And do not think that this is a harder charge, tha^ is meet: for seeing that
God has promised a blessing unto those husbands that are faithful to the
converting of their unbelieving wives, how much more then shall you prevail
with a Christian daughter, and one (I hope) that has received the faith as
well as your self? And you my sister, must likewise take heed, that you
refuse not to obey your husband, in all things agreeable to Gods most holy
word. For you must by his ordinance be subject unto him, even as the Church is
subject unto Jesus Christ. And as the Church should be but a strumpet, and be
unworthy of Christ, and those blessings which he brings with him for her, if
she should not receive and acknowledge him as her head: so could you not look
for any benefit from your husband, unless you should submit your self unto
him, according to the commandment of God. Neither do I thus charge you with
any obedience but in the Lord: for if he should require any such thing of you,
as should cause you to depart from Christ, I would have you in any case
remember that you are principally espoused unto Christ. And herein also you
must consider, that there will be special araces of obedience, and modesti^,
and goodness looked for of you: not only in respect of your good education,
but also because of that help which is now offered unto you. And when the holy
Ghost in the Scriptures tells you, that the believing wife may (through his
blessing) win the vnbeli^uing Husband, if so be she walk christianlie in
godly conversation with modesty and scare before him: let this encourage you
to hope for better success, by all means of dealing toward one that is
faithful, and I trust will be willing in all good things to comfort you.

Now thirdly, in that you are taught to believe in God the holy Ghost, it
admonishes you to pray for his teaching, that you may by him be led into all
truth, and be further instructed and drawn unto every Christian duty from
time to time. The duties are very many to be gathered out of every article, as
also out of the several Commandments: but I will only give you a taste, and
touch only some one duty, required of you in every one of them. In that you
believe that there is an universal Church and Communion of Saints, The
communion of Saints.
you must be diligent to approve your selves one to each other, that you are
parts and members thereof: and further the gra^es that God has bestowed upon
either of you, must be common in the use thereof to each other: so again, you
must sustain the infirmities one of another. Finally, you must provoke and
st^re up o^e another, that your Faith may be strengthened, and your selves
comforted against all other gri^fes, by the assurance you shall have wrought in
you concerning the forgiveness of sins, wherein your happiness does consist: as
also in the hope of the resurrection of your bodies, and the continual
meditation of eternal life.

We will come now to the Commandments: and first, for the first commandment,
The fifth commandment.
which requires all spiritual service of you that is due unto the Lord, that
you steadfastly belie^e in him, love him with all your hearts, and with fear
and reverence to call upon his Name, in all things giving thanks, as to him
which is the author and giver of every good and perfect gift unto you. You must
make the profit of this commandment, that if you will look in truth of
heart, to be faithful, loving, and dutiful one to the other, these graces
must spring from the other, as being the fountain and wellspring of all life
and truth unto them* For contrariwise, if you be unmindful of God, he will
not suffer you to find the benefits of these* one by the other.

The second Commandment, which requires of you to worship God after the true
The second commandment. That love which breeds by gedly means, will lo^gest
endure The third co^ mandement
manner, that he appoints in his word, teaches you thus much, that you must
nourish your l^e in this estate, by the practice of things whereby he is
worshipped and honored of us* n^mely, by hearing, and reading of his holy
word, and by the use of the Sacraments. For that same that is s^irred up and
nourished by this means, is most pure and will longest endure, when f^^^thly
love soon vanishes and fades away.

In the third Commandment, as you are trusted with the glory of God: so you
are charged (b^o^h^r) tha^ you abuse not his Name, if you be faithful unto the
Lord in seeking his glo^ie, and the advancement of his truth, and of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, preferring it in all things as is meet; then surely
will the Lord bless you, and prosper your ways: but if you fall away and
slide into any heresy, and so dishonor his Majesty; then will God certainly
plague you in his wrath, and he will make that which you desire to have
greatest comfort in, turn into a curse upon you. And I would have you remember
to this end, how God the Lord dealt with wicked Amaziah, who for the Amos. 7.
16. 17.
profaning of Gods glory and worship, had the heart of his wife drawn from
him, and so to his great reproach became a notorious whore. So likewise my
sister, that you dishonor not God, as being a means of withdrawing your
husbands heart from the duties of his calling, but nourishing Faith and a good
conscience in all things with him: so will the Lord for his own Names sake
bless you together. For you shall find it true which he has spoken: Them
that honor me I will honor* and them that despise me shall be despised; But
beware (I say) that you give 1. Sam. 3. 33.
no occasion of falling away, or back sliding unto your husband, least God also
bring shame upon you by him, by giving him over to some sin. I speak not
this, as though I doubted these things, in either of you both: for I hope of
better things of you: but in speaking to you, I admonish my self, wishing that
we all take heed, that we fall not as the wicked and sinners into the hand
of God: for he will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

I will spe^ke nothing of the fourth Commandment, only referring you to that
I The fourth Commandment.
taught publicly this day, concerning the conscience we ought to have, in the
true and spiritual keeping of the same.

The fifth Commandment teaches you to be obedient, and to relieve and obey
your The fifth commandment.
husband. And mark this (Sister) I shall now say unto you: if you had never so
many gifts, if you had the wisdom of Ab^gael, and all other graces which are
in any woman; yet if you wanted obedience to your Husband, I tell you true that
you are nothing worth, The obedie^^e of the wife to the husband.
and you could have no part in Jesus Christ: who denies himself to be the
governor of any, that will not acknowledge their Husband to be their head.
Therefore (Sister) let others do as they list, but be you in the number of
those that do fear GOD, and as the daughter of Sara by doing well, who
yielded reverence to Abraham, and is commended in the Scripture, for her
dutiful speech she always used unto him, calling him Lord, or Sir. Now
(Brother) remember that you must so govern, as you must give account of the
manner of your government, even unto GOD himself. Besides, where there is
greater dignity, there must you know that there are greater graces required:
and in ruling How the husband is to rule his wife.
well, there are many special duties to be performed. Therefore you must
behave your self wi^ely, least you dishonor your self, by abusing your
authority: for it is a daughter of Israel that is committed unto you, and one
that is fellow-hei^e of the same grace in JESUS CHRIST with you. Again, you
must consider that a woman is a very frail creature, and may soon be
discouraged; when as there ought to be more constancy, and stayednes on your
part.

Therefore in the sixth Commandment, God forbids all churlish behavior,
all The sixth commandment.
lumpishnes, and all unkindness and discurreous speeches; charging you also to
bear with many weaknesses, to the end they may be most quietly reformed.
And you (Sister) are forbidden all fullennesse, and that you also for your part
take heed of all bitter speeches, and of naughty names which we hear
thrown out, of some women of unquiet No bitterness between man and wife.
spirits: and if you will have your infirmity cured by gentleness, then deal
you in like manner toward your husbands. For it cannot be but occasions of
unquietness will sometimes be offered on either part: and therefore in many
things, you must willingly bear each others burden. Besides this (Sister)
there is a duty required in this Commandment, that you take care of the
health of your Husband, in dressing meats wholesome for him. And this shall be
a means that his heart shall be more bent in all loving affection toward you.

In the seventh Commandment there are many things to be noted, but I can but
touch The seventh commandment.
some one or two at this present for want of time: the special use and
substance of it is this much: that you live chastely in this estate, and that
you keep the marriage bed undefiled; and let me give you both this warning,
that you take heed in the beginning, mark what I say, least that which ought
to be a means to further chastity, should turn to the hinderance of you.
Therefore pray to God to give you grace that you may be soberly affected in all
things, and namely, in the use of marriage: and repent of that which is past, if
you have any way offended the Lord in this behalf. For many failing in
repentance for their former sins, fall afterward unto their uncleanness
again. As for you Brother, true love toward your wife, will be a notable
stay from all corruptions: this we read of Isaac, Gen: 24. 67. because he
loved Rebecca very dearly, he had no more wives but her; albeit in those days
(it was a grievous sin) even amongst many of the faithful, they had at once
more wives than one. Therefore when you are from her abroad, make a covenant
with your eyes, and let not your heart wander after any other, but think upon
your own wife, and delight your heart in her continually, and pray earnestly
unto God for her, and so will the Lord increase your love unto her, and move
her heart also to delight and long after you. So must you sister, that the same
blessings may overtake you: as surely if you embrace his fear, and walk in
his ways, he will bless you as well in bearing of children, as in other his
manifold graces which he has in store to bestow upon you.

Here also I must by the way admonish you of one other thing, which I had
forgotten before, and that is this; your love must spring from that reverence
and fear that you must yield unto your husband: for true love is mixed as it
were with these two: and this is a special True love.
duty, and often repeated in the Scripture, that the wife must fear the
Husband. So that you see (Sister) that you must not look to have your Husband
at your beck for your love: but you must render due benevolence unto each
other. For as the body of the Husband is not his own, but his wives: so is
not the woman's her own, but her husbands: for they are both one flesh, as the
Scripture does teach.

Now, if any do object, that this is the way to bring women into bondage, and
to be as drudges to their Husbands, if they should in this manner be subject
unto them. No, no, it is not so, but the most readiest way to procure unto
themselves grace, peace of conscience, and more sweet liberty; whilst they
live in obedience to God, and his holy ordinances. And therefore the spirit of
God admonishes all women, that they be not afraid of any such vain terror.

Now further my Brother and Sister, that you may keep your bodies pure and
chaste, one for the other, I would counsel you to beware of being alone with
any, when there is fear of temptation unto evil: but be careful, that you
may always have witness of your Christian behavior: and in keeping company
convenient, choose unto your self such as be most sober and faithful. Well,
although there be many more duties, yet I will content my self to go one
thing further, that is, that as you seek for continuance and increase of love,
so you take heed of jealousy: for although that true love is very Jealousy.
earnest, and mixed with godly jealousy; yet there is a wicked jealousy, and
that causes causeless suspicions, which works great woe unto such as give
credit unto them. Take heed therefore, my Brother and Sister of this, yea
though there should seem just cause, yet give not too speedy credit unto them.
Now, if you desire to know in your heart, which are ungodly suspicions, know
them by this token: for they will make you more negligent Note.
in praying one for another, and more slack in performing all other duties of
love, one to another,

In the eight Commandment you are charged (Brother) to use all lawful means
to The eight commandment.
provide for the maintenance of your wife in honest estate: else were you worse
then an Infidel. But I charge you to take heed, least through distrust in the
providence of God, you make shipshracke of a good conscience, using any unjust
or unlawful means. And you (Sister) are commanded to be a good houswife, and
to keep those things together which you have, and so increase them, as you may
from time to time be helpful unto others. For if you should consume and waste
things unprofitably, you should grieve and trouble the mind of your Husband,
who ought to be cased of that care by you. And further, if it should please God
to call either of you to suffer persecution in time of trial, the weaker must
(for the Lords cause) give place to the stronger, and desire the Lord to give
greater strength: for we must labor for grace, that we may be willing for the
Gospel, to forsake all things whatsoever we have.

Out of the ninth Commandment I will give you this rule, that neither of you
blaze The ninth commandment. Man and wife not to lay open the infirmities one
of another.
abroad the infirmities of each other: it is a great enemy to pure love. But
if there be need of counsel and help in any matter, then choose a faithful
friend with consent, that may be an indifferent judge betwixt you. And again,
in any case tell the truth one to an other: for it is a thing diligently to be
regarded in these our days, when as men and women are so full of policies and
subtle fetches, that there is almost no simplicity to be found in any.

In the last commandment, which concerns wicked motions and thoughts,
although there be no consent given unto them, you are to consider that your
nature will never be The tenth commandment.
freed from them in this life: therefore you must prepare to prayer, and other
heavenly exercises of Faith, to strive continually against them.

Thus I will end, beseeching God for Christ Jesus sake to give you of his
spirit, that may teach you in these things, and enable you to further duties
agreeable to his helic w^ll, to the glory of his name, and your everlasting
comfort.

O Lord God dear Father, for thy well-beloved Son our Saviors s^ke, make us
thankful Then he prayed.
for this thy gracious providence toward us. Oh Lord forgive all our sins, and
keep us pure both in soul and body: for thine own Names sake write these
instructions in our hearts, and give us grace to make practice of them in the
whole course of our liu^s: ^uide us in all things dear Father, by the grace of
thy good spirit, and let the merciful eye of thy fatherly providence watch
over us continually, that we may be comforted in thy ways, and quickened
always to give thee immortal praise, and that through thy dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

After the exhortation and prayer, he asked the parties to be contracted,
these two questions.

1, Of their consents of parents.

After their answer of their parents consent, to make a faithful promise of
marriage one to another, at such time as their parents could agree upon it, they
were charged to Judge. 14. 21. 2. Sam. 13. 13.
keep themselves chasle, until the marriage be sanctified by the public
prayers of the Church: for otherwise many marriages have been punished of the
Lord, for the uncleanness that has been committed betwixt the contract and the
marriage.

2. Whether they ever were precontracted?

Then he charged them, saying: I charge you, as by authority from Jesus
Christ, in whom you look to be saved, that having the consent of your parents,
and received these precepts, that (I say) ye labor to grow in knowledge, and
in the fear of God. And now as in the sig^t of God (with all such le^itie as
of others is used) you must make before the Lord a contract, which is far
more then a promise: and that on this manner their hands being joined. ^. R.
do promise to thee F. that I will be thine husband, which I will confirm by
public marriage, in pledge whereof I give thee mine hand. In like manner does
the woman to the man. Then after the prayer the parties are dismissed.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE SABBATH.
IT is written Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it ^olie, etc:
Dearly bel^ued in the Lord, there is no Commandment of Gods part more urged,
and of ou^ parts less observed, then this one of the Sabbath: wherefore with
zeal to Gods glory, and love unfeigned unto your selves, I have endeavored in
that measure and manner that God has enabled me to entreat of this argument.
The necessary use whereof we shall more plainly perceive, if we do wisely
consider either the lamentable inconveniences which accompany the want of the
pure understanding thereof: or the manifold commodities, which ensue the right
embracing of the same. The inconveniences and commodities of keeping or
breaking the Sabbath.


The inconveniences are partly to be observed in the wicked, and partly to be
noted in the children of God. In the wicked who either are seduced by false
doctrine, or else which are careless of true doctrine. They that are deceived
by false religion, be either Papists on the one side, the Families of love with
such like heretics on the other side: whereof the one, that is the Papists,
make the Sabbath day but an ordinance, and ceremony of the Church, and
therefore observe it, but as a thing taken up and retained by the Church of
Rome: as also they do many other holy days in the year. The other seeing no
further into Popish Sabbath.
it, than as it is an ordinance and ceremony, and thinking it to contain
nothing moral, cry out against it, as willing to have it wholly abrogated,
seeing all ceremonies have had their end in Christ: alleging, though nothing
to the purpose, that God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and in
truth: and therefore the observation of a day is nothing auailable to his
worship. Again, what credit it has in them that are careless of religion,
all men may see. Tush (say these men) the Sabbath is too ^ewish and full of
superstition: and therefore unto them it is all one with other common holy
days, saving that peradventure they had rather have it, than want it; not for
any love of religion, but for easing of their flesh, and the more in-glutting
themselves with carnal pleasure* by means whereof they make it a day of the
world, not a day of the Church; a time rather dedicated How men profane the
Sabbath.
to the pampering of the flesh, than sincerely consecrated to the building up
of the soul and spirit. In the children of God otherwise well instructed, have
also arisen many scruples concerning this matter, how it is ceremonious, and
how it is not: which kind of men keep the Sabbath not as gross heretics,
and yet not as careful obseruers, by reason that they are not thoroughly taught
in it, nor fully persuaded of it. Wherefore we may see how needful this
doctrine is, yea although we had no care of them, that are not in the Church;
yet in respect of them of whom we have most care, being in the Church of God
with us. And this necessity we shall also observe, if in truth we mark the
several commodities, which proceed from the right understanding hereof. For
seeing the Sabbath day is the school The Sabbath the Lords market day. He that
keeps the Sabbath, keeps the whole.
day, the fair day, the market day, the feeding day of the soul, when men
purely knowing the use of it, separate it wholly from other days, they shall
see how they may recover themselves from sins already past* arm themselves
against sin to come, grow in knowledge, increase in faith, and how much they
shall be strengthened in the inner man. Wherefore in the book of God, when the
Lord will urge the observation of the whole law, he often does it under this
one word of keeping the Sabbath. Again, when the Prophets sharply rebuke the
people for their sins, they particularly lay before them, how the Sabbaths of
the Lord are broken. And to speak the truth, how can a man lie long in the
liking of sin, who embraces this doctrine in conscience, who willingly would
have his sins discovered, his conscience unripped, the judgments of God
against his sins threatened, whereby he might come to a loathing, and grow to a
further misliking of his sins daily? Sure it is indeed, that as in other
things, so in this, the ceremonial use little avails. Howbeit, if for the
ceremonial use of the Sabbath, because many so use it, therefore we should
leave it, we might as well by the same reason put out of the doors of the
Church the administration of the Sacraments, the making of prayer, the
preaching of the word, because the most part of men use these things for a
fashion: neither is it the question which we have in hand, what men do, but
what they ought to do in the observation of the Sabbath. In the setting down
whereof, this order does offer it self to be observed: first to speak of the 1
commandment it self, and then of the reasons thereof. The commandment as we
see, is The order of setting down the doctrine of the Sabbath.
delivered both affirmatively and negatiuely, whereas all other the
commandments are but either affirmatively, or negatiuely expressed: so that
where it is said, the Sabbath day keep holy, the holy use of the Sabbath is
flatly and straightly urged: where it is added, in it thou shall not do any
work, the irreligious breach of the same is plainly restrained. The reasons
be in number four. The first is included in the word remember, and is drawn 2
from the end, which is thus much in effect: Will thou worship me purely, and
love thy 1
neighbor unfeignedly? then observe this one thing, which I have therefore
placed indifferently between those commandments which concern mine own
honor, and the comfort of thy brethren. The second reason is derived from the
authority of the lawgiuer, 2
whereby the Lord urges our obedience, and is expressed in these words, the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. The third is inferred of the
equity of this law: 3
wherein the Lord deals with men as it were by conference, and disputes by
plain reason, that justly we cannot deny him the seventh for his own glory,
who has not denied us six days to travel in our own affairs. And this is
gathered when he says, Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work: but
the seventh day, etc. The fourth and last reason is borrowed from proportion of
the Lords own example, that as in six days he made all things, and in the
seventh ceased from creating, though not from preserving them: so in six days
we may have a natural use of the creatures of God, but on the seventh day we
ought to have a spiritual use of them. Under these may be couched another
reason derived from the time, wherein the Lord first commanded the Sabbath,
which was in man's innocence: so that if before transgression it was an
effectual means to keep out sin, then after man's fall it must needs be of
force to withstand sin. It may seem the best way to some, first to entreat
of the commandment it self, and then of the reasons. Howbeit, because the
Lord his wisdom sometime prefixeth the reason, as in the first commandment,
and seeing it is a thing of small effect to urge the use to them who are not
grounded on the doctrine, and it is hard to ouermatch the affection until
judgment Doctrine to inform the judgment must go before exhortation to move
affections.
be convinced: we will first arm the matter with reasons, and then show both
how this law is kept, and how it is broken. This order is commended unto us by
the holy Ghost, 2. Timoth. 2. 16. and for want of this order, many excellent
Sermons have little effect: for where judgment, by the truth is not convinced,
there many exhortations fall to the ground: for which cause also the holy use
of the Sabbath so little prevails with many, in that they are not grounded
with judgment in the true knowledge of the same.

But before we come to the particular discourse of the reasons, generally let
us consider why this commandment is in words larger, in reasons fuller, than
any other commandment. What is generally to be observed in this commandment.
If we take a view of the whole law, we may observe how the Lord has set down
six precepts in many words, and four nakedly in bare words, as the 6. the 7.
the 8. and the 9. why then are the first five commandments so apparelled with
reasons, and the last so dilated by a special amplification; the other four
being so brief and so naked? Certainly the Lord and lawgiver foresaw, that
unto these four, men would easily be brought to yield: and we see how the very
Heathen have freely granted them, the Philosophers have fruitfully written of
them, all civil righteous men do earnestly maintain them: and to be brief,
common honesty counts him no man that will murder, he is thought beastlike
that defiles his body, outward civility condemns a these, and the common
sort of men mislike a backbiter and slanderer. Again, he knew in his eternal
wisdom, how the first five would neither in reason so soon be admitted, nor
in affection so easily embraced: and therefore to meet with the subtlety of
man's nature, and corruption of man's heart, they are set down more piercingly.
This we shall see in the first and last commandments of the second table. In
the first, when the Lord had commanded honor to 5. Lax.
be given to parents, he enforces his commandment with annexing a promise of
long life, and why? even judgment herein is much corrupted. For many there are
who granting the inconueniencie and vileness of murder, adultery, and false
witness bearing, yet deny the necessity and the excellency of Magistracy.
Yea, and albeit in judgment many men yield to the reason thereof: yet is not
the equity thereof so soon in affection embraced: for experience of all ages
proves, that the corrupt nature of man is most hardly brought to be subject,
and these last miserable days can witness the same more especially, wherein
men are grown to be without natural affection. Not without cause therefore is
this precept fenced with reason.

In the last (where God lays a more precise rule and straighter charge to the
conscience 10. Precept.
of man, than flesh and blood would willingly bear, because men think it some
rigorous dealing to have their least affections arraigned, and their secret
thoughts condemned, as willing to have their thoughts not to be called into any
court, to hold up their hand at the bar of judgment) he is constrained as it
were by particular branches and several articles to set down the law, that we
might not find some starting holes to creep out at, and to wring our selves
out of the precincts of the same. Yet more evidently does this appear in all
the commandments of the first table, because they are more contrary to the
judgment of man merely natural, although he be otherwise never so wise, and
the word of truth must only try them: for in the first commandment, the
reason is prefixed; in the second, third, and fourth commandments, the
reasons are annexed. But here may arise this question, ^o wit, why the second
and fourth Precepts, are so amplified in words, and strengthened with more
reasons than any of the other? Surely herein the Lord declares, how he
plainly foresaw, how amongst the rest these two commandments would Wherefore
some commandments have reasons and some none.
find lea^^ entertainment, and most be refused. But what shall we say of the
Papists, Familists, and Heretics among us in these days: and other men also
otherwise of sound judgment, which affirm, that as well the second as the
fourth Commandment, is ceremonial: whereof the one would bring into the
Church Images, the other prophanenes? Wherefore the Lord in his wisdom
foreseeing these cauilling wits, prevented their purposes: so that if either
they yield not, or make resistance to the truth so manifest, they oppose
themselves to the known and open truth, and so make themselves the more
inexcusable. We see to acknowledge that there is a God, to honor Father and
Mother, to abstain from blood, not to defile our flesh, not wrongfully to
oppress, not to be a notorious slanderer; every Papist and natural man
guided but by the light of reason, will easily grant. For the wonderful
order of the heavens, the continual course of the Sun, Moon, and stars,
the outgoings of the mornings and euenings declare there is a God. Reason
persuades, how the things in the world must needs be governed, and that we
owe love unto him by whom they be guided. Nature teaches that men's lives must
be maintained: common civility abhors adultery, oppression and
backbiting. But if ye ask how this God is to be worshipped, and what times
we must sanctify to that use: we shall see how many Countries, so many
religions; how many men, so many devises. Thus we see how necessary it was
that the Lord should provide for his own glory, and captiuate all man's
inventions, se^ing all these Commandments do most fight against the reason
of man, and by reason have most been oppugned. So in the pure observing of
these, consists the sincere keeping of the rest of them. For how shall we
know how to walk in pure worship with an upright heart before the Lord? how
shall we give him the honor due unto his glorious name? how shall we be
instructed rightly and reverently to deal with the dignity of our brethren,
faithfully with their lives, purely with their bodies, righteously with their
goods, or tenderly with their credit; but by those ways and rules which the
Lord has prescribed in his word? and when should we learn those rules, but
at such times as he himself has appointed and sanctified for that purpose?
Again where these two commandments are not rightly understood, there true
Religion goes to wrack. For admit that we should not carefully follow the
word of God, how many religions would then start up? Let this be granted,
that every man should have what day he would for the worship of God, and then
see how many days men would bestow on the Lord.

But let us come to the reasons, whereof the first is drawn from the end of
the law, and Of the reasons, and first of the first reason.
is partly signified by this word remember, and partly by this word sanctify;
Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it. For this word remember, which is
here prefixed, is set down this word observe, in Deuteronomie: wherein we
are forewarned to watch the more diligently, and attend more carefully upon
this Commandment. In which point we may observe, that whereas all other
commandments are simply set down and directly propounded, Deuteronomy. 5. 1*
this alone has a preface prefixed, which is thus much in effect* Will thou
learn sincerely to worship me according to that substance, manner, and end,
which I have prescribed? and will thou truly try thy love to me, by
exercising the duties of love to thy brethren? then forget not to keep holy
the Sabbath, wherein I shall teach thee both how thou shall walk uprightly in
the worship due unto me, and also live obediently in duties concerning man.
Again, the nature of the word remember, imports thus much, that this law was
not only graven in the hearts of our forefathers, as were all the other: but
also in express words enjoined unto Adam and Eve in Paradise, and manifestly
practiced of the Israelites in the wilderness. Exodus 16. and that therefore in
this common promulgating of the Law, they should especially remember this,
which is not newly given, as are the rest, but rather renewed as being given out
before. True it is, that before this solemn publishing of the Law in mount
Sinai, this, and all other Commandments were written in 1
the hearts of our Forefathers, as we may see in the book of Genes. For the
first, we read The Patriarks knew the moral law of God.
how the Lord said unto Abraham, Genesis 17. I am GOD all-sufficient, walk before
me, and be upright. Concerning the second, Genesis 31. 19. Rachel is said to
steal her Fathers Idols. Genes. 35. 2. Jacob reformed his household, and
cleanses it from Idolatry. For the third, we may see how religious they were
in swearing. Concerning the fifth, what authority exercised 2
Jacob toward his children? what duties they yield to him both in life and
death? 3
How they hated murder, it is manifest in that history. Both Joseph's
continency, and the 4
punishment threatened to Abimelech declare, how heinous a thing adultery was
unto them. 5
Concerning theft, Laban his quarrelling with Jacob: and Joseph his accusing of
the brethren, 6
do show that it was a thing unlawful. Lastly, Abimelech the king
reprehendeth both Abraham, 7
Genes. 20. and Isaak Genes. 26. for bearing false witness, in denying their
wives. 8


Thus we see what efficacy is couched in this preface, in that it shows both
by the precept, 9
and practice given and yielded of our first fathers, how this commandment
alone was given in express words: as also that this one precept is the school
of all the other Commandments. But to what end? to keep it as ceremonial?
No, to sanctify it as moral; for the end of the Sabbath consists in these
two things: first in the moral: secondly, in the figurative, ceremonial, or
shadowish observation of it: as we take the word shadow here for a figure,
because a ceremony is more then a shadow. That I call moral, which does
inform men's manners, either concerning their religion to God, or their duties
unto man: that I mean figurative, which is added for a time in some respect,
to some persons, A ceremony is more then a shadow.
for an help to that which is moral, as Deuteronomy: 5. 15. Remember that thou wast
a servant in the land of Aegipt. Howbeit, that this first moral end is here
understood, the first words declare, where it is said, Sanctify the Sabbath
day. For where mention is made of the ceremony, it is said keep, Note the
difference. Why the law is given to all Christians, as the posterity of Adam.
What it is to sanctify the Sabbath.
and not sanctify the Sabbath. Now what is it to sanctify the Sabbath day,
but to put it apart from all other days, for a peculiar use of Gods worship*
for otherwise we must know, that all other days are sanctified: so that to
sanctify it, is to do that thing on the Sabbath for which it was commanded:
but of this we shall speak more largely, by the grace of God in the last
reason. In the mean time let us briefly observe this, that as our first
parents did sanctify the Sabbath in viewing the creatures of God, for to
praise him: so we sanctify it in using the means which he has appointed for
his worship. So that first we using the exercises of religion, whereby we may
be sanctified, and then joining with them the spiritual use of the creatures,
whereby we may be furthered in our sanctification, should after use the
exercises of love, whereby we may show that we are sanctified. Our first
Fathers needed not ordinarily the ministry of the Word, but had the great
books of Gods works. We have need of the Word, both public and private, and
therefore must learn it, that having learned it, we might the better exercise
the duties of love: So then, that which was first to Adam, is now the last to
us, to wit, the beholding of God in his creatures, and the praising of him for
the same. In the Psalm 92. which was appointed to be sung of the Church on the
Sabbath, is set down as the chiefest use thereof, the singing of Gods mercy,
the showing of his righteous judgments, in rewarding the godly, though
afflicted, in punishing the ungodly, though here they be advanced, as also in
learning to know God in his worship and in his works.

Again, Psalm: 95. we shall not see any ceremonial use of the Sabbath: but
that it should be used in praying to God, in praising of God, and hearing of
his Word. This is confirmed, Exodus 31. 13. Speak unto the children of Israel
and say, Notwithstanding keep my Sabbaths; for it is a sign between me and
you in your generation, that ye may know, that I the Lord do sanctify you.
As also Deuteron. 5. 12. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy
God has commanded thee. And Ezechiel, 20. verse. 12. I gave them my Sabbaths
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord
that sanctify them. In which places, as the reason is adjoined of keeping the
Sabbath: So we must understand, that where it is called a How the Sabbath is
called a sign, that is, a document, and not a figure.
sign, it is meant a document, and not a figure (for every figure is a sign,
but every sign is not a figure) as we may see in the sacraments, which are not
figures or shadows of things to come: So that, in that the Lord says, My
Sabbath is a sign between me and you, it is as much in effect, as if he
should say: my Sabbath is a common instruction Adam also in Paradise had the
tree of life for a sign, not for a bare figure.
between you and me; of me as the Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; of you,
as created, redeemed, and sanctified: so that the Sabbath is a document and
pledge of Gods will, whereby we should know, what he is unto us, and wherein
we should learn what we should do to him. In which respect this commandment
is no more ceremonial then the first, where the Lord propounds what he is to
us, and secretly includes what we should be to him. No marvel then, though
this be the principal end, which was not begun to the Jews, but first
enjoined to Adam and Eve. Wherefore we may thus reason both safely and soundly:
Whatsoever is the first end, is the chiefest end: but to sanctify the
Sabbath is the first end, because it was ordained so to Adam, in time of his
innocence, at what No figures till sin came into the world. The Sabbath was
not given to the posterity of Abraham, but of Adam
time it could not be a figure, because, by the judgment of all sound
learned, (whereof I have read some) there were no figures until sin came
into the world, from which our Parents were yet free: but a mean to keep them
in innocence, in that notwithstanding their excellent creation, they were
subject to falling: therefore this end must be the chiefest. This was not
only given to the posterity of Abraham, but to the whole posterity of Adam:
and therefore it was not proper to the Jews, being first begun in Paradise,
and then afterward renewed in Mount Sinai. So that this moral end was the
first end, and common end: and although as the Jews had a more special
cause of worshipping God, in that they had received a more peculiar
deliverance, when they could have no rest in Egypt, they on this day did
remember their rest: yet nevertheless this was not the end, but rather a reason
why they did keep the Sabbath: as we may see also, Exodus 23. 12. where the
Lord commands the seventh day to rest, adding as a reason, not as an end,
that thine Ox and thine Ass may rest, and the son of thy Maid, and the
stranger may be refreshed. Where this sparing of the beasts is added, as a
reason drawn from that humanity, which is in the Law, not as a thing for this
special end in this precept commanded, which is proper rather to the sixth
Commandment, and but accessarie unto this. For which cause this ceremony
being but accessarie, cannot take away the principal, and being the latter, it
cannot take away the former. It is no good reason, that the accessarie being
taken away, the principal should also be abrogated: but rather on the
contrary, the accessarie removed, the principal may remain, the
appertinance being past, the more general substance may continue: and though
the latter be disanulled, the former may be vnabolished. Wherefore though the
ceremonial end, which was but an accessarie, and added afterward as a thing
peculiar to the Jews, is gone with them, to whom this law was made: yet the
moral end which was the principal, and first given out as a thing general
to all, appertains still unto us. Whatsoever seuereth ^ither God from man, as
the curse of the moral Law, or man from man, as the ceremonial does, the Jew
from the Gentile, that only is abrogated. The moral law being made our good
friend and guide in and by Jesus Christ, does not separate us from God, nor
from man, Jews or Gentiles which are in Christ. Ergo it is not abrogated
Lastly, whatsoever seuereth either God from man, or man from man, the same is
abrogated: the law Moral (which is free from all ceremonies, and through
Christ requires nothing but a sincere, though imperfect obedience, as being
void of all rigor, and exempted from the curse) does not sever God from man,
nor man from man: Therefore the Law moral is not abrogated. For nothing is
disanulled, but the rigor and curse of the Law, which made a diuorcement
between God and man, and the ceremony of the Law, which made a separation
between man and man, that is, between the Jew and the Gentile, as we may
gather, Coloss: 2. and Galat. 4. Wherefore we affirm, that as it was peculiar
to the Jews, as concerning their deliverance, that end of the Sabbath is
ceased: but as it is common to us with them, and all others, to be preserved
in the means of true worship, the Sabbath is to be observed: So that not the
doctrine and sincere obedience of the Sabbath, What is abrogated. Sacraments in
the time of the law had two ends. Romans 4.
but the curse of the Law, and rigorous keeping of the Sabbath is abrogated.
When one thing has diverse ends, if one end be removed, the other may
remain. For as the Sacraments in the time of the law had two ends: the one to
foreshew that Christ should come; the other to assure them, what they should
have in Christ when he came: and in that they did foreshew Christ to come, they
are gone; as they assured us what we have in Christ, they remain still with
us. And as for one example we may see in the Sacrament of Circumcision two
ends; the one a sign of the circumcision of the flesh, which is now ceased;
the other a seal of Repentance and Faith: and so it is unto us remaining a
token of imitation, though not in the same manner of administration that is in
circumcision, yet in the same matter to that effect, to wit, in Baptism: so
likewise the Sabbath having two ends, the one moral, the other ceremonial.
As it was ceremonial, and was given to the Jews, as they were Jews, it was
proper to the Jews; but as it was moral, not given to the Jews alone, but to
our first fathers before the Jews, and to the Gentiles after the Jews, it
remains no less to all men, after the Jews ceased to be a peculiar people,
then the coming together to one place does yet appertain unto us. For
although in that the Jews came together to one place, as it represented the
Church of God, it is taken away, because God is present with us in all places:
yet as they had it to establish them in their worship, and we The Sabbath not a
sign only of spiritual rest as some would have it.
need as necessary helps for religion as ever they needed, the same remains
with us.

Now, if the Sabbath were but a sign of spiritual rest (as some have
phantasticallie thought) and not rather an holy school, to teach us the
worship of God, we would grant it ceremonial: but sceing this is according to
the first institution, and that ceremony but in time, and for a time, was added
unto it, though we have not their day, yet we have a resting day, as though we
have not their seals, yet we have seals, and though the accessarie be gone
and ended with them, yet the principal continues to us, and remains after
them. Wherefore we conclude this first reason, that as the Sabbath is moral,
we must keep it in truth, though in weakness, knowing that the rigor of the
Law being gone with the curse and ceremony, we have a promise to have our
weakness and defects herein forgiven us in Christ, as we have in all other
things.

Now let us come to the second reason, drawn (as we have showed) from the
equity of the law, and contained in these words: Six days shall thou labor,
and do all thy work: but The second reason drawn from the equi tie of the law,
the seventh day, etc. This appears to be no hard law, nor burdensome, but
easy, and such a one as all may yield unto it. For seeing the Lord has given
us six days for our calling, then let us not think it strange or straight,
that he has reserved and taken up the seventh day to himself: who, if he had
commanded one day to work, and another to be bestowed in his worship, for the
glorious profession of his Name, might justly have challenged it. This reason
then is such, that for justice and equity cannot bu^ provoke our obedience,
and more forcibly charge us, if we be disobedient. This kind of argument is
usual in the If the Lord give us six days for our ordinary work, good
reason is there he may challenge the seventh day for his service. But he permits
us six days: Ergo, it is right we give him the seventh.
book of God, as Genes* 3. 2. 3. where our mother Euah frames this reason to
the Serpent very well, had she stood to it: We eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden: but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, etc. Wherein, as she commends
the mercy of God in giving them so largely the use of all the trees, excepted
only one: so from the law of equity she exaggerateth their sin, if having
so boun^^full an use of many trees lawful, they should eat of the one tree
that was forbidden. The same reason alleges Joseph, to restrain his
Mistress of her lewd and loath some purpose, Genes 39. 8 9. Behold (says he)
my Master knows not what he has in the house with m^ but has committed all
that he has to mine hand, there is no man greater in his house then I: ^^^ther
has he kept any thing in his house, but only thee, because thou art his
wise: how then can I d^ this great wickedness* etc? In which place, as he on the
one side commends his Masters liberalitie^: so on the other side he shows,
how his sin should even by the rule of justice be more ^ainous and horrible,
if not contenting himself with his Masters courtesy, he should intrude
himself into his own possession. Again, from hence Job reproves his wife,
and shows her blasphemy, Job. 5. 10. Thou speak (said Job) like a foolish
woman: what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil?
Thus by the square of righteousness the man of God proves her offense to be the
greater, in that having received so many blessings, she could not away once
to taste of the cross, Out of the mouths of these two or three witnesses we
may gather, how heinous an evil it is, that not contenting out selves with the
large measure of six days travail; we should be so bold, as to invade the
Lord his seventh day reserved for himself.

Thus we see how the Lord grants us six days for our bodies, and the
seventh day for our souls: not that we must think, that other days are to be
separated from this use, but that this day must be wholly severed from other
for that use. For, if it were possible, He means the Cathedral Churches.
or could be convenient, either in respect of our calling, or the places where
we dwell, twice to meet every week day, as it is yet used in some places,
though more of custom and fashion, then in faith and of conscience in most of
those places, it were nothing but equal. For look what proportion is from
six days to the seventh, the same may be gathered The tithe of our time to be
afforded for Gods worship.
from nine, or rather twelve hours to the tenth: whereby the tithe at the
least may be affoorded for the Lord* And herein is the only difference
between the six days and the seventh, that the worship of God must in the
six days be used at such seasons, as in wisdom are so separated and divided
to that end, without any hinderance of our lawful and necessary callings, as
it does not take up the principal, but shrede^ and overplus of our vocation:
but on the seventh day we must make such a separation from other days, that
what we did but in part, in the week, or working days, we may do in whole on
the seventh and Sabbath day. True it is, that this equity of twice meeting
every day, is more convenient for Cities and populous towns, where many dwell
together, than in other places and situations, which for distance of place have
not the congregation so dwelling together.

Here our common distinction of calling the week days working days, and the
Sabbath Not every day a Sabbath.
days holy days, takes away their frivolous assertion, who think that every
day should be our Sabbath day, as though we should confound and shuffle
together our working days and resting days.

Now if the permission of the six days appertain to us, is not the
sanctifying of the Sabbath day also commanded to us? And if those things be
permitted us, which concern our calling; are not much more those things
commanded, which respect our sanctification? Wherefore if any say, the
commandment is ceremonial, may not the same say the permission is
ceremonial? For who so affirms the one, may affirm the other: but both
falsely. If we should admit these days were to be restrained in some respects,
and for some special causes, we affirm this restraining must be for a time,
but not continual: and that when the reasons of the exceptions should cease,
then the exceptions themselves should cease also. But some will say: what will
you not allow some day of rest for humbling and fasting, or allowing some days
for humbling, will you not allow one also for thanksgiving and rejoicing? To
this I answer, that concerning fasting when there is a special need of a day
appointed, Fasting.
this is no commandment of man, or of the Church, but of God himself, who as
he has laid upon us the need of the remedy: so has he also commanded us to
use the remedy. And as for the day of rejoicing, I think it may be put on the
Sabbath, which we make our days of thanksgiving. For as the Jews used the
Sabbath as a day to remember with thanksgiving their creation: so we may use
that day for a thankful remembrance of our redemption, because in it we may
meditate of all those benefits, which our Savior Christ by his nativity,
circumcision, passion, resurrection and ascension, has purchased for us. But
if any man object, that this is too niggardly and sparingly, because as God is
extraordinary in mercy, so we should be extraordinary in thanksgiving: I
grant that Christian Magistrates may for necessary occasion, in wisdom of
the spirit, alter the times, and appoint some seasons for that purpose: so it
be done for a while, and continue not as perpetual: for in six days, as we
taught before, we must chiefly labor in our callings, and bestow some part of
time in God his worship: and on the Sabbath day we must chiefly wait on God
his worship, and bestow no time on other things, but upon necessity, because
we are no less charged on the Sabbath to worship God, than we are Or commanded.
permitted on the other days to follow our ordinary callings.

Now let us proceed to the third reason, taken from the Lawgiver, or author
of the commandments. For it thus follows, Exodus 20 verse. 6. But the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. This argument we know to be used
severely in the three precepts The 3* reason.
going before. In the first it goes before the commandment: in the second it
comes after: in the third it is more nearly adjoined. And here it is called
the Lords Sabbath: which proves that therefore it must be wholly spent upon
the Lord. Now were it ceremonial, then it should follow that there were but
nine commandments, seeing, (Deutr. 4. 13.) Moses affirms, that the covenant
which the Lord commanded his people to do, were ten commandments: where
we see, that not the Church, but the word of God sets down this
computation. And albeit the ceremonies be also the commandments of the Lord,
nevertheless we must wisely distinguish between If the Sabbath be
ceremonial, then the Lord gave but nine commandments. But he gave ten: Ergo
the Sabbath is not ceremonial. Note. The difference between the ceremonies
and the ten commandments. Ordinances what they signify.
the one and the other. The commandments were immediately given out by the
Lord himself, the ceremonies were given immediately to Moses from the Lord:
but mediately from God to his people by the ministry of Moses. For it is
said, Deutero. 5. 22. These words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude in the
mount out of the midst of the fire, the clouds, and the darkness with a
great voice, and added no more thereto In which place the man of God speaks
of the ten commandments, which a little before he had repeated, as they
were published, generally to all by the Lord himself, which therefore are
prepetuall to all people, nations and languages, not only to the Jews, but
also to the Gentiles. The ceremonies, as we know, were not universal, but
beginning with the Jews they ended with them: neither were they perpetual,
but in Christ his coming were abrogated. This difference is yet more plainly
set down, Deutero. 4. 13. 14. Then the Lord declared unto you his covenant,
which he commanded you to do, even the ten Commandments, and wrote them
upon two tables of stone. And the Lord commanded me the same time, that I
should teach you ordinances and laws, which ye should observe in the land,
whither ye go to possess it. Where Moses makes a flat difference of those
laws, which God gave in his own person, and them which were given by his
ministry. By this word ordinances, which is in this verse, are signified, as
some affirm, those laws, whereby the Jews did differ from other people. Thus
we see how Moses was the minister of the ceremonial law, which was given but
unto some, and lasted but for a season: but the moral law which appertains
to all men, and is in virtue for ever, the Lord himself did give it forth. Now
as we answer the Papists, in defending against them the second precept as
moral, and not ceremonial: so we likewise stand against them in this. For
look what straying and unstaid minds were in the Jews concerning the
worship of God, the same also is in us by nature: and what helps soever they
needed therein, either to be put in mind of their creation, or to the viewing
of God his works, or sacrificing to the Lord; the same are as needful for us
to help us in our sacrifices: for we need a perfect rule as well as the
Jews, to preserve us from idolatry and heresy. Again, seeing we have as
great need of a solemn time for The rest of the Sabbath as needful for us as
for the Jews.
these things, wherein we may give our selves wholly to hearing, praying, and
receiving of the Sacraments, as they had for their worship: we are subject to
as great distractions of mind in our callings, as they were, and being with
them of a finite nature, can no more than they do infinite things. It is as
requisite for us as for them to have a law, as well for the time, as for the
manner of worship: wherein laying aside our ordinary works, we should
chiefly and principally wholly give our selves to those exercises of Religion,
and duties of love, which only in part we did before, and so more freely epsy
our sins past, eschew our sins present, and strengthen our selves against
the sins to come. Wherefore to shut up this argument, we affirm against the
wicked heretics of our time, that so long as we stand in need of corporal
means, as meat, drink, apparel, and sleep, for the continuing of our
corporal estate: so long we shall also need the spiritual means, as the
word, the Sacraments and prayer for the continuing of our souls. And as it is
not ceremonial for these considerations to use these means: so it is moral
to have a time commanded and observed, wherein these things should be
practiced.

It remains to speak of the fourth and last reason, drawn from the
proportion of God The 4 reason, from Gods own example.
his own example, as may appear in these words, Exodus 20. 11. For in six
days the Lord made the heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and
rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed
it. Wherein we have thus much in effect, as the Lord made the creatures in six
days: so we in six should have a natural use of them. And as he sanctified,
that is, put a part the seventh day to his own worship, and blessed it with a
peculiar blessing given to his worship appointed: so we also setting this day
apart, from the ordinary works of our calling, should wholly and only
consecrate it to the worship of God. So that as God made all things in six
days: so we may use them six days, as Adam did in the garden: and as the
Lord rested from his works of creation, though not from his work of
providence and administration, so must we set a part this day, to look for a
special blessing and special benediction of God his worship, because of his
own promise and institution. Why did the Lord this to our first God gave a
special blessing to the Sabbath day.
father? he beheld the works of every day, and blessed every day? We must
note, that he gave a special blessing above the other days, unto this day.
Now therefore admit that a man should grant this much to an heretic, that we
should be as perfect as Adam in his innocence: (which is a manifest heresy)
yet they must grant, that we stood in need of the word and Sacraments, (the
use whereof they deny) seeing Adam had need of the use of all these things,
being yet without sin. We therefore oppose thus much unto them, that so long
as they will acknowledge a need of corporal helps, by calling for meat,
sleep, apparel: so long their souls stand in need of spiritual means, as
of the word, Sacraments and prayer, because their souls must as well be
preserved, as their bodies nourished. Our first father then had a Sabbath to be
put in mind of the Creator, and that without distraction he might the better
be put in mind of the glorious kingdom to come, that more freely he might
give himself to meditation, and that he might the better glorify God in six
days. As the heretics then deny the necessity of the word, prayer and
Sacraments: so we look for a new heaven, and a new earth, and then we hope and
acknowledge, that we shall keep a continual Sabbath But in the mean time,
seeing the Sabbath which we now have, was before sin, we, since sin came
into the world, have much more need of it, because that which was needful to
continue Adam in innocence, is also as needful to recover us, and to continue
us in our recovery. The Lord then having sanctified this day, it is not our
day, but the Lord his own day.

But some will say: How? is God better served on the Sabbath, than on any other
Objection. Answer.
day? I answer, not that we put religon in that day, as it is a day, more than
in any other: but that on that day we are freer from distractions, and set at
more liberty to the worshipping of God, than we are on the other six days,
wherein we are bound to our ordinary and lawful calling. Wherefore as we put
on holiness in the creatures of water, bread and wine in the Sacraments; but
acknowledge all inward grace to proceed from God his blessing and institution:
so we promise unto our selves on the Lord his day a greater blessing, not for
any thing in the day it self, but by reason of God his own ordinance, and
promise of a blessing to the same. And as we deny not a blessing from the Lord
on private prayer, reading and conference, but acknowledge a greater blessing
to be due Note.
even by the Lord his own promise, to these exercises public in comparison of
the other: so we deny not the grace of God to be upon those hours redeemed
from our outward callings, and consecrated to the Lord: but confess a more
special blessing from God to belong to that whole day, which the Lord has
taken up to himself alone, and that for his own promise sake unto all them,
which come with simple hearts to obey his holy commandment.

Now having gone through these reasons, which prove the Sabbath day to be
moral, Answer to the reasons that by some are brought against the Sabbath.
and that this commandment is no less to be observed, than the other nine:
before we enter into the exposition of the law it self, it shall be convenient
to meet with such reasons, as some men bring to preludice the truth of that,
which has been already spoken: which being done, by God his grace we will
come to the other. The reasons against the Sabbath may briefly be reduced into
such, as either seem to be drawn out of the express words of the Scriptures:
or else by some consequence to be gathered from the Scriptures. The arguments
borrowed from the written word, are either out of the old Testament, or out of
the new: they which are contained in the old, are taken either out of the
law, or out of the Prophets. Out of the law, they make much a do about that
1. Ob. out of the old Testa meant.
which is written, Exodus 31. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. where the Lord faith this unto
Moses: Speak thou unto the children of Israel, and say, Notwithstanding keep
ye my Sabbaths: for it is a sign between me and you in your generations, that
ye may know that I the Lord do sanctify you, Ye shall therefore keep the
Sabbath: for it is holy unto you: he that defiles it, shall die the death:
therefore whosoever works therein, the same person shall be even cut off from
among his people. Six days shall men work, but in the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the holy rest to the Lord: whosoever does any work on the Sabbath
day, shall die the death. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the
Sabbath, that they may observe the rest throughout their generations for an
everlasting covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for
ever: for in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, and in the
seventh day he ceased and rested. Out of these words they snatch these three
reasons. First they triumph before the conquest, and say, it is manifest that
it is a sign: and therefore as they please to conclude, it is a figure. True
it is, that it is here called a sign, verse. 13. as also Ezech. 20. 12* it is
plain: howbeit this is no good reason, that seeing the Sabbath is a sign,
therefore it is a figure or shadow. For although every figure and shadow be a
sign; yet every sign is not a figure or shadow. A figure foresheweth a truth
afterward to be revealed: a shadow betokens Every sign is not a figure or
shadow as before.
a body hereafter to be exhibited: but a sign as it does sometimes signify a
thing afterward to be looked for; so it does sometimes assure us of a thing
already performed. The figure cease when the truth comes: there is no use
of the shadow when the body is present: but the sign and the thing signified
may be joined together, and both of them serve for a present use. Again, they
gather out of the 16. verse of the chapter, which we have in hand, where it is
said, The children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, that they may observe the
rest through their generations for an everlasting covenant: that because the
Sabbath of God is his covenant for ever, that is, until Christ, it is
ceremonial. True it is, To know things moral and ceremonial.
that the law admits this phrase of speech sundry times, to say for ever,
that is, until Christ, in whom al things, are fulfilled. But we must observe
this general rule as our guide, when we will know what figures and ceremonies
end in Christ, and what moral precepts belong unto us. When a thing is urged
to the Jews: and has a peculiar reason made properly to the Jew, and
appertains nothing to the Christian; then as it begun with the Jews, as
they were Jews, it ceased with the Jews: but when the reason of the thing
urged is not peculiar to the Jews, but also belongs to the Christians; then
the thing commanded Note well.
is not proper to the Jew, but common to the Jew and Gentile. Wherefore let us
square out the reason by the line of this general rule. It is here added, v.
17. For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, and in the seventh
day he ceased and rested. Where, if it had been said, they shall observe the
rest for an everlasting covenant, because they were brought out of Egypt, I
would have granted it to have been peculiar to the Jews: but seeing this is
the reason, the Lord rested, which is* common, not to the posterity of Abraham
alone, but to the whole posterity of Adam, the commandment must be granted
general both to Jew and Gentile. For it is a common instruction to all men in
all ages to labor six days, wherein the Lord made the heaven and the earth,
and to cease from labor the seventh day, because in it the Lord rested. The
plain sense then of this place is briefly this, as if the Lord should say: I
made this law in the beginning of the world, and it shall last to the end of
the world: I made it to Adam the father of all generations, and it shall endure
to the last of all his posterity from generation to generation: I made this
law to ease my self after my great pains taken in the creating of the world
in six days, and you shall keep it to ease your minds, which are fraught
with many distractions, by reason of your ordinary callings in those days.
Neither would I have any to think, that the How God is said to rest after the
creation.
Lord had need of any refreshing, who being infinite, cannot be subject to
distractions or wearines: but we must know, that where the Lord is said, that
he refreshed himself, by taking view of his creatures, he commends his love
to us ward, in showing rather what ought to be in us, than what was in him. For
such alacrity and diligence should we use in our callings, as we should be
glad when the Lords day comes, that in it we shall recover our selves, and
ease our minds of those distractions, which burden us in our outward calling,
and so refresh our selves with spiritual pleasures in the pure worship of God,
and thankful beholding of his works. We see how these reasons make rather
flatly with us, than against us. And thus much for their proofs out of the
prescript words of the law: now let us consider what they allege out of the
Prophets.

Their reasons out of the Prophets be taken either out of Esaias, or out of
Ezechiel. Out of The second objection out of the Prophets.
Esaias they use these places, Esai. 56. 1. 2. and 58. 13. 14. and 66. 13. The
words of the Prophet, chap. 56. verse. 1. 2 are these: Thus says the Lord,
keep judgment and do justice: for my salvation is at hand to come, and my
righteousness is to be revealed. Blessed is the man that does this, and the
son of man which lays hold on it: he that keeps the Sabbath, and
polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any evil. See, say they,
here is the Sabbath commended 1. Out of Esaias a resting from sin.
as a resting from sin. I deny it not, but our controversy is about the
ground of the Sabbath. For why does the Lord so call on his people by the
Prophets for keeping the Sabbath, and cries so much against the breach of the
same, but because it was the especial means of God his worship and their
salvation: which being contemned, they contemned God his worship, and their
own welfare? And because in this horrible contempt of the holy school of the
Lord, where they should have learned both their religion toward God, and
duties to their brethren, they gave a manifest token of carelessness in them
both, they are worthily threatened by the Prophet. And concerning the pure
interpretation of this place, by keeping the Sabbath, is meant the observation
of the first table; The true interpretation of Esaias 56. 1. 2.
by keeping their hands from doing any evil, is understood the obedience of
the second table: so that the thing in this place chiefly urged, is this, that
they should keep the Sabbath, which might nourish them in the worship of God,
and in duties to their brethren. But, say they, the Sabbath is here joined with
ceremonies, as may appear in the verses following: Objection.
therefore it is a ceremony. This is no sound argument. For in the law is set
down the moral law, which teaches the common duties of all Gods people,
wherein be also Answer.
the ceremonies, which describe the duties peculiar to the Jews: whereupon we
must not 1
conclude, that therefore the moral law is ceremonial. Again, these
ceremonies contain 2
not only certain truths of spiritual things, which should be accomplished in
Christ, but also of other means which should succeed in their places. True it
is, that if they had only contained truths of spiritual things in Christ, it
had been somewhat, that they affirm: but seeing they have also in them such
means, which though not in the same manner, yet more effectually are afterward
to be used, the reason is not good. Wherefore we reason against them thus:
that, albeit we have not the manner of their sacrifices, yet we have our
sacrifices and means of Gods worship succeeding them. For though we have not,
as they had, Priests to offer for us, and such slain sacrifices as the Priests
did offer for them: yet we have the Ministers of the word of God, which cut up
men's consciences, by whom the secrets of men's hearts are made manifest: 1. Cor.
14. 25. By the preaching of the Gospel and word of God: which being mighty in
operation, and sharper than a two edged sword, enters thorough, even to the
dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the hearts. Heb. 4. verse. 12.
And whereby Christ is as it were freshly crucified unto us, and that by so much
the more profitably, than if we were present at the thing it self, as beside
the describing of the manner thereof, the fruit of it is more effectually
preached. And certainly we may affirm, that then the dumb sacrifices of the
blind Papists came in, when this glorious sacrifice of preaching ceased. And
where the word is administered in any power and sincerity, there doubtless
Preaching.
the preaching of the law strikes us, and the preaching of the Gospel
brings us to Christ.

Herein is the difference between the Jews and us, that they in all their
Sacraments and sacrifices represented Christ, that was to come, and showed that
their sins in him should be taken away, being yet to come: we manifestly in
our sacrifices witness, that he is already come, and that our sins in his
death are fully pardoned. Besides, to those forenamed sacrifices we have the
sacrifices of prayer, and thanksgiving: whereof the Prophet speaks, Psalm.
141. 2. Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense, and the lifting up
of mine hands as an evening sacrifice. As also Psalm 119. part. 14. verse. 108.
O Lord, I beseech, thee accept the free offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy
judgments. Of these sacrifices is mention, Malac. 1. Hose. 14. 2. Mat. 24.
Ioh. Heb. 13. 15. Now in that it follows, Esai. 56. 7. that the Lord will
bring them to his house of prayer: I grant, in that they had but one house of
prayer, which represented to them the Church to be one, it was ceremonial: yet
I also confess, that in the same was this common truth, that it should be a
mean to worship God. Wherefore in this place the Lord commands and
commends holy assemblies even to us, to whom they be as needful as to the
Jews. For though it be not now necessary, nor required, that we should go
up to Jerusalem to worship after the manner of the Jews: yet besides our
private houses, wherein we may worship the Lord, we have need of one public
and common place to meet in: whereunto the Lord in his Gospel has made this
promise, that where two or three shall be gathered in his name, he will be in
the midst of them. This also is commended unto us by the example of the holy
Apostles, who met together, and besides their several houses it is said,
Acts. 2. 46. They continued with one accord in the Temple: so that they had one
place, where the Word, the Sacraments, Prayer, etc were used. And though we now
have not the same offerings, places, and sacrifices which the Jews had; yet we
have these things more effectually than they: and though we have not their
Sabbath, yet we have a Sabbath. The words, Esaias. 58. 13. be these: If thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine The
interpretation of Esaias. 58. 1. 3
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate is, as glorious to the
Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own
will, nor speaking a vain word: 14. Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to mount upon the high places of the earth. etc. This is spoken
to the present estate of the Jews, as then they were, and not properly to the
Gentiles, but as they may see their estate in the Jews, in which respect it
may be profitablie applied to the Gentiles, but evident it is, that here
properly it was spoken to the Jews. For in this place the Prophet sharply
reprehendeth them, because they kept not their fastings and holy days aright.
Howbeit, they did not stick to complain among themselves, that they had
fasted, that they humbled themselves, and used all the means which their
fathers before them had done: but all in vain, in that they felt not the like
effects, which their fathers did. Wherefore the Lord by his Prophet answers
them in this sort: True it is, that ye fast indeed, but therewithal ye lie
and live still in your sins: ye fast, but without repentance: and so far
are ye from true forsaking of your sins, that on your fasting days,
howsoever like hypocrites ye use the outward action, ye exercise cruelty,
oppression, debate and strife: and do ye look, that this holy hypocrisy
should be acceptable unto me? No: If ye will please me with your fasting,
repent ye of your sins, show forth your sorrow by the fruits of love, in
exercising the works of mercy and compassion: which things when I shall behold
in you with an upright heart then I will accept your offering, and be pleased
with your fasting. Again, do not think, that I will look upon your
holidaies, so long as ye use them but upon custom and in hypocrisy, making
them unprofitable for my worship, and your salvation and repentance, until
such time as ye endeavor a better and more holy use of them, both concerning
the pure honoring of my name, and the furthering of your own salvation.
Behold here (say they) the Sabbath is abrogated, than which they can affirm
nothing more contrary out of this place. For here is no abrogating of the
Sabbath, but an establishing of the true celebrating of the Sabbath, with a
sharp reprehending of their corrupt and present estate. And as he speaks
against their corrupt Sabbath, so he taxes them for their hypocritical
fasting: so that if they will have the Sabbath to be abrogated, much more must
they drive fasting out of the doors of the Church, against which he is most
earnest, and telling them that their fasts are not in truth, the Lord shows
them, with what fasting he is pleased. Again, say they, see, here it is
manifest, that to cease from sin in our Sabbath, which we Fasting.
must keep. I answer, it is the fruit of the Sabbath, which we must keep:
and therefore, because where the means are used without any effect or fruit,
there the means are nothing, the Lord rather urges them to the effects and
keeping of the Sabbath with fruit, then disanulleth the Sabbath. And it is
usual in the word of God, to use the effect for the cause, and the fruit for
the means, as we may see Iam. 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled before God,
even the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. Which briefly is, as
if the Apostle should say, this is the effect of true religion, when faith does
purely show it self in the works of love. Again, Ioh 6. 47. 48. He that
believes in me, has everlasting life: I am the bread of life. Where our
Savior Christ shows, that the effect of faith is the eating of Christ his
flesh, and drinking of his blood. So that, to use the means without the effect
is hypocrisy: as (...).
also to look for the effect without using of the means, is foolish
presumption. Wherefore Presumption.
we affirm, and that from the mouth of the Lord by his holy Prophet, that to
rest in fasting and in the Sabbath, an outward mean is of no value, being
separated from good works, the issue and the effect of the same, that if we
would, God should be merciful to us, we should also show our selves merciful
to others. So then the Lord takes not here away the one, but shows the one
to be fruitless without the other, and is so far from taking away the
Sabbath, that rather he goes about to inform them in the true use of the
Sabbath. The meaning therefore of the Prophet his word, is this: If thou will
not rest in the bare ceremony of thy holy days, but wilt do thy holy service
to me, and duties of love to thy brethren: then shall thou show thy self to
take true pleasure in God and his worship. Where we must learn so to delight
our selves with the means of our salvation, that seeing we can but i^part give
our selves unto them in the week days, we should greatly rejoice when the
Sabbath day comes, contrary to the practice of the people ^^ Amos his time,
who would say, Amos 8. 5. When will the new month be gone, that we may ^^^^
corn? and the Sabbath that we may let forth wheat, and make the Ephah small,
and the shek^^ great, and falsify the weights by d^^^it? Wherefore we
conclude, that here is not the abrogating, but the pure celebrating of the
Sabbath, which appears by effect, when it draws us nearer to God, and
causes us to take greater pleasure in his ways.

There remains that, which is Esai. 66. 23. And from month to month, and
from Sabbath The interpretation of Esaias. 66 2^.
to Sabbath shall all flesh come to worship before me says the Lord Where it
is said, from Sabbath to Sabbath, behold (say they) here is set down a
continual Sabbath to be observed every day in the kingdom of Christ, and
therefore there ought not to be one prescript day only in the whole week. But
the reason is most weak, and contains a manifest absurdity. For if every
day should be a Sabbath, and we in the Sabbath are commanded to do no manner
of work; when should we travel in our ordinary callings, whereunto the Lord
himself has permitted us six days? Thus we see the six days of our
ordinary callings should be pulled away If they say, that a man may follow his
calling, and yet worship God sufficiently, and as becomes the holy Sabbath,
then they must grant, that we may do our ordinary works on the Sabbath, as
also they suspect the Lord of want of wisdom. But if we should look narrowly
into these men's lives, we should find, that whilst they cry out to keep
every day a Sabbath, they in truth in the mean time observe no Sabbath at
all. Besides, in that there needs one particular day wholly to be given to the
Lord, it is certain, that the dearest children of God, who upon the other
days redeem time to Gods worship, earnestly desire this.

Now concerning the place it self, which they seem much to misconstrue, we
must understand two things. First, it is not simply to be taken, but in the way
of comparison: secondly, it is meant of the kingdom of glory, and of the
second coming of Christ. In the way of comparison it is understood thus: that
the people of God should not content themselves to worship him on the Sabbath
only, but also in the other six days it should be lawful for them to have
holy assemblies and Christian meetings: which though they now should do but in
part, by reason of their ordinary calling, hereafter they should do it both
continually and perfectly in the kingdom of heaven. Which thing was performed
even of the Apostles, who, although they observed one solemn day, yet had they
their godly assemblies for holy exercises on other days also. True it is, that
the Family of love pretends a show of the kingdom of God in this life by
rising from sin, saying, that we here sit in heavenly places. But the
scriptures in this case speak of the beginning, not of the consummation of God
his children in glory. For in this life we possess but in hope that, which
perfectly we shall enjoy. We be here admitted but into the entry of this
kingdom, we here take up our hold, we receive our deeds, our lease and
evidence are given us in this world to assure us, that hereafter we shall have
the full fruition and perfect possession. Wherefore another Prophet says,
Ierem. 31. 33. 34. This shall be the covenant that I shall make with the house
of Israel. After those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward
parts, etc. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor and every
man his brother, saying, I know the Lord: for they shall all know me from the
least of them to the greatest, says the Lord. Where we may see, that though
the full accomplishment of our glory and knowledge is in heaven: yet true it
is, that here it is begun, and shall be finished hereafter, when we shall
perfectly know God, whom now we know but in part, and as it were in a mirror.
For every one, as it is Hebr. 5. 12. concerning these times, should be able
through God his spirit to teach others according to that calling, wherein the
Lord has placed him. And as that place reaches not, that all should be
Doctors, but that there should be knowledge in all, though in greater measure
in some: so our Prophet means not, that every day should be a Sabbath, but
that Christians in every day of the week should provide for the worship of God
in some measure, though more fully and more solemnly on the Sabbath. So we see
the force of this to be in the way of a comparison, that Christians should not
satisfy themselves concerning the worship of God with the Sabbath: but that
also, as their calling would permit, they should worship from Sabbath to
Sabbath.

As for the second answer: to prove against the maintainers of a continual
Sabbath, that this place is meant of the Church triumphant, and not of the
Church militant, it shall easily appear, if we consider diligently what goes
before, and what comes after: which A rule for the interpretation of
Scriptures.
rule is worthily to be followed in sifting out the true sense of the places
in the Scriptures. Now in the verse going before, mention is made of the new
heavens, and the new earth: whereby he means not the first appearing of
Christ in humility, but his second coming in glory, as may appear, 2. Pet.
3. 13. where the Apostle repeateth the same words, saying, We look for new
he^uens, and a new earth, according to his promise, wherein dwells
righteousness: Surely if the Prophet had meant this to have been in Christ
his coming in the flesh, it is most like it should have been in the
flourishing estate of the Church and glorious times of the Apostles: but that
it was not so, it is manifest by the Apostle his own words, We look for new
heavens, etc. In the verse following, the Prophet speaks of the worm that
shall not die, and of the fire that shall not be quenched: which undoubtedly is
understood of the hels, whereinto the wicked shall be cast at the last
judgment day, as may be gathered by our Savior Christ his words, Mark. 9. 43.
44. where he makes mention of hell, Where the worm dies not, and the fire
never goes out. Wherefore by the premises and sequel, we conclude with the
learned, that the Sabbath here mentioned, must be kept in the kingdom of
heaven. And therefore their continual Sabbath, which they should have in this
life, is a devise of their own brain, and not gathered out of this place. And
thus much of the reasons, which seemed to prove the Sabbath ceremonial, taken
out of the prescript words of the old Testament. As for that which we
alleged out of Ezechiel chap. 20. it is already answered sufficiently in
confuting their first reason, which was drawn out of Exodus 32.

Now it remains in like manner to consider of their arguments, which they
take out Answer to their arguments, taken out of the new Testament.
of the new Testament, and that either out of the history of Christ, or from
the writings of his holy Apostles. And because the four Evangelists agree in
one harmony, we will briefly reduce all their reasons into one or two
principal places, namely, Matthew. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Mark 2. 27. In
Matthew. 12. it is said: At that time Jesus went on a Sabbath day through the
corn, and his Disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ear of corn and
to eat. 2. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold thy
disciples do that which And Luke 6. 1* it is said Sabatum secu^d^ primum: so it
seems this is understood of a ceremonial, and not of a moral Sabbath.
is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath. 3. But he said unto them; Have ye not
heard what David did when he was an hungered, and they that were with him? 4.
How he entered into the house of God and eat the show bread, which was not
lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for
the Priests? 5. Or have ye not read in the Law, how that on the Sabbath days,
the Priests in the Temple brake the Sabbath and are blameless? 6. But I say
unto you, that here is one greater than the Temple. 7. Wherefore if ye knew
what this is, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have
condemned the innocents. 8. For the son of man is Lord, even of the Sabbath.
The occasion of this doctrine of Christ is, that he going abroad to preach with
his Disciples, they for hunger pulled the ears of corn. Hereof arose by the
Pharisees this Controversy, who accused the Disciples for traveling on the
Sabbath day, as though they had done a work on the Sabbath, which was not
lawful to de done, because the Law said, that no man should travail on that
day. Our Savior Christ hearing this accusation, defends his Disciples:
whereof some conclude, that our Savior here abrogated the Sabbath. The
examination of Matthew. 12. 1. 2.
But what could they have forged more untrue? For if, as they say, he now had
abrogated the Sabbath, then our Savior Christ did not obey every part of the
ceremonies unto death: which to affirm, let them tell the danger of it. Nay
rather according to the judgment of the better learned we affirm, that Christ
is so far off from speaking against the Sabbath in this place, that he
sets down the pure observation of the same against them, who peruersely and
untruly did judge of it. And here we see the Pharisees deal very cunningly
with them, For they might as well have accused the Disciples of theft, as of
breaking the Sabbath, had they not known, that as the Law permitted a man to
go into the vineyard for to gather grapes, so he carried no clusters away: So
they, to satisfy their hunger, might presently eat of the ears of corn,
carrying none away with them. Howbeit, they could not see, that this their
travel was not like their ordinary traveling on the other days, and that it
was agreeable to the Sabbath, the Law permitting a Sabbath days journey. This
some (curiously) have defined to be the space of a mile, some two, ^ome three
miles: unto whom as I do not deny the liberty of their judgment, so I A
Sabbath days journey, what.
think it to consist of that distance, as a man may conveniently travel for
some holy purpose, without any hinderance of the ordinary exercise of that
day, and without wearisomnes either to body or mind, whereby he should be the
unfitter for the Lords worship, or his duties. And therefore they that dwelt
but so far from Jerusalem, that they might o^ that day conveniently go to
the Sacrifices, and return home without any of the former hindrances, made a
Sabbath days journey. And now in our times a man may lawfully go so far for
the more comfortable or holy use of the day in hearing: so that neither his
body be ouerwearied, nor any due time of hearing be pretermitted, and that
without prejudice or breach of the Lords day. Wherefore seeing our Savior
CHRIST and his disciples traveled to so holy an end, and no further then by
a Sabbath days journey was lawful, the end of the journey, which ought to
measure this and like actions, proves, that herein there was no breach of the
Sabbath. Neither is it likely that the Pharisees reproved and controlled the
Disciples for traveling, seeing even they themselves with them were companions
in the journey, but rather they did it for their plucking the ears of corn:
whereby they showed, that the ceremony of resting was not the chief thing in
the Sabbath, (as now a days some do think it) but rather* because they made
provision for their bodies, contrary (as they imagined) to Exodus 16. 24* Well,
it is most probable, that the Disciples being gone far from the place, from
whence they did set out, (because if they had then fainted, they would there
have recreated themselves) and far distant from ani^ place where they might
eat, (for if they had been near any place, they might rather have refreshed
themselves with other things then with corn) they through fainting and for
want of other necessaries, were constrained to satisfy their present
necessity with these things, which if they had not done, they should not have
been able to persist in their calling, which was agreeable to the Sabbath: the
works whereof did never restrain from eating, which notwithstanding they
might as justly have reprehended in the Disciples, as their plucking the ears
of corn. The arguments whereby CHRIST does answer them, may briefly be
referred to five heads. The first is set down in these words, verse. 3. Have
ye not heard what David did, when he was an hungered, and they that were with
him? 4. How he entered into the house of God, and ate the shewe-bread, which
was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only
for the Priests? Behold he speaks here of the ceremony of shewbread, which
was broken for the preservation of men's lives: whereby he shows, that
Ceremonies, as a thing of less importance, must give place for life's sake. So
that this is spoken of the end, because the thing which is forbidden for a
common end, is not broken for a particular use. Wherefore David and his
company did eat the shewe-bread to serve their necessity, and that without
breach of the Law, how much more may my Disciples eat the ears of corn, to
enable them the more to attend upon the ordinance of God? It is a rule in the
civil law, that it is against civility too greedily to hunt after the
syllables of their Maxims, and too carelessly to neglect and permit the true
sense of the Law. In which thing our Savior trappeth the Pharisees, who were
too severe censurers of the letter, and too severe obseruers of the matter of
the Law. Our Savior therefore in effect means thus much, that as it was not
lawful to eat the show bread usually or ordinarily, and yet to eat it upon
necessity it was not unlawful: so usually to gather corn on the Sabbath,
even in time of Harvest, it was not lawful; and yet extraordinarily, and upon
necessity to gather it was not unlawful on the Sabbath, which permitted the
works of necessity, whereby men might be the better enabled, and the less
hindered to do the works of that day. And for this cause, seeing the
Disciples without this help should have been unfitter either to have preached
to others, or heard our Savior, and by it were enabled the more to either of
these things: it is evident, that they were so far off from breaking the
Sabbath in so doing, that rather they should have broken it in not so doing. So
that Christ does only not abrogate the Sabbath in this place, but also
reprehending the Pharisees for their misconstruing of the Law, and too strickt
taking it, without due consideration of the end thereof: he sets down a
more pure observation of the same.

The second reason, which is drawn from the Law it self, and from the
Priests own The second reason.
practice, may be gathered out of the fifth and sixth verses: Have ye not read
in the Law, how that on the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple brake the
Sabbath, and are blameless? 6. But I say unto you here is one greater then
the Temple. As if he should have said, Verily ye misconstrue the Sabbath;
ye must better consider, what kind of works the Sabbath forbids, to wit,
the works of men's ordinary callings, not being fit for the dignity of the
Sabbath, and nothing tending to the worship of God: but if they beseem the
dignity of that day, and are done for God his holy worship, they are not
unlawful. Advise your selves (I pray you) do not even your own Priests on
the Sabbath Day slay their beasts to sacrifice? Do they not circumcise on that
day? And do ye not carry your children to the Temple to be circumcised, which
are works both in respect of your Priests and you; and yet in that in these
things ye are made the fitter to serve God in his worship, ye think them
not unlawful? Likewise know, that this plucking of the ears of corn in my
Disciples, is no work of their ordinary callings, but to make them more able
for the worship of God. In that he names the Priests, he shows that he
rather speaks against the persons, than against the cause, and strangleth
them in their own argument. For the answer in effect is this: If my Disciples
profane the Sabbath, then did your own Priests the same. Under this we may
couch the answer of our Savior Christ to the Jews, who accused him for
healing of the sick man on the Sabbath day, Ioh. 5. 17. My Father works
hitherto, and I work: that is, as my Father ceased from the works of
Creation, yet he ceased not from doing good on the Sabbath: so though I and my
Disciples have ceased from our ordinary callings, yet cease we not after the
Father his own example, to do the works of mercy on the Sabbath. For the
works of God his providence are to be done every day. Seeing he then
vouchsafes to put us in his stead to do good things, Work of the Sabbath.
we may lawfully do them, though with some bodily labor, as we may on that
day resort to the imprisoned, visit the sick, relieve the needy, reconcile
the uncharitable, and admonish the unruly; And why? we seek not herein our
own profit, but the profit of our brethren: we desire not our own glory,
but the glory of God. In which cases we are not forbidden, but commanded to
do good on the Sabbath.

If we look narrowly into the history of our Savior CHRIST, we shall see it
was most usual unto him to heal the sick, to restore sight to the blind, to
open the mouths of the dumb, and to frequent like exercises on the Sabbath
day. And for what cause? Because on other days men following their ordinary
callings, could not so well follow him: but on the Sabbath day, their other
business set apart, they attended on him willingly, and resorted together: so
that, if he had done these things on the other days, he should have hindered
the ordinary callings of men, by the concourse of people: or else he should
have done them to the less glory to God; if no company nor concourse had
been made. Wherefore as both the people on that day were fittest to come to
Christ: so Christ was then most ready, when his works also might most make for
Gods glory. Besides, he did then these things rather, that* he might weane
the Jews from their superstitious opinion of the Sabbath, and bring in the
pure use thereof, in exercising the works of love. Now, if the outward rest of
the day had been the chiefest thing therein, as the Pharisees then dreamed, and
many now a days have thought: then how would Christ have done these things,
who was to do and fulfill all things commanded in the moral Law, and left
nothing undone in any one jote of the ceremonial Law, until the veil of the
Temple of his body was rent? Thus we see how the chief end was moral, and
not ceremonial: and as it is moral given to all men to further them in the
means of their salvation, it is as needful for us, as for the Jews. Again,
Christ was asked of no one question more than of the Sabbath, and in all his
answers he rather inueigheth against the perverting, the^ intends the
abrogating of the Sabbath. In like manner, he means nothing less then the
abrogating of the day in his Apology against the Pharisees* but rather lays
open their folly in proving to their faces, that they cavil too much for the
perverting of the Sabbath, seeing they are driven to reprehend that in others,
which they themselves do. The reason of his defense insinua^eth thus much: If
ye think it an holy duty to cut the flesh of children on the Sabbath,
because it is done in your Temple, which otherwise might seem a spice of
murder and cruelty: Again, if ye think the Temple commands the work of
slaying your beasts for sacrifice, which being done in the marketplace were
too butcherlike; then I give you to understand, that my disciples do nothing
unbeseeming the Sabbath, so long as I am present with them, who am greater then
the Temple.

The third reason is contained in the seventh verse: If ye know what this is, I
will have mercy The third reason.
and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the innocents Here our Savior
Christ, as before he had defended his Disciples by testimonies out of the Law:
so now excuses them by the witness of the Prophets, and ^iteth a place out of
Hosea. chap. 6. 6. as if he should say: What works does the Sabbath forbid?
are they not the works of our ordinary calling? What works does the Sabbath
command? To sacrifice only? No: but to do the works of mercy also, which
is the end of all our sacrifices. Why then seeing the law does not forbid the
duties of love to be done, will ye deny this work of mercy to my Disciples,
that when they fainte, they might not be refreshed? That this place of the
Prophet is thus to be construed, that the Lord will not have sacrifice alone,
but mercy withal, we may prove it by other places of the scriptures, as 1.
Cor. 1 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: where the
Apostle means, that he was not chiefly and only sent to baptize, but to
preach also. So that the place is to be understood in the way of comparison,
that when one of the things cannot be conveniently done without the other be
undone; then mercy, which is better than sacrifice, must be preferred, as
being the issue whither Sacrifice is referred. And in this respect, though
simply in themselves considered, and in respect of the persons to whom they are
performed; the first table of the Law, and the duties thereof are to be
preferred before the second table, and the duties thereof: yet in comparison,
when one of these must of necessity be left undone, because both cannot be
done together: seeing the Lord most allows of our obedience, when testimony
thereof is witnessed by practice to his Saints, and in the exercises of love,
we perform that in truth, which otherwise we labor for but by means, the
Lord desires mercy, and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of his will more
then burnt offerings. So that herein the Disciples do not only not break,
but keep the Sabbath. This argument Christ uses, Mark. 3. 4. where he being
reproved, because on the Sabbath day he healed the man that had a withered
hand, said to his accusers, Is it lawful to do a good deed on the Sabbath
day, or to do evil? to save the life, or to kill? As also Luke where he on
this manner answered the Pharisees, who watched him whilst he healed the man
which had the dropsy: 5. Which of you shall have an Ass, or an Ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day? As if he
should say, why do ye watch to take me in this thing? Will ye permit the
works of mercy to be done to beasts, and will ye deny them to be done to men?
Why? will ye help your beasts being in peril, and may not I help this man
being in such danger? How beit we must here note, that our Savior CHRIST in
showing how in this law is humanity to creatures, gives ^o jot of liberty to
worldly men, who under pretense of this obedience, seek rather their own
private gain in rescuing from perils the creatures, then the glory of
Almighty God, which may redound to him by the more cheerful and comfortable
service of the creature being thus redeemed. Now, if any shall here further
inquire, whether in seeding time, or the harvest season, when the times before
have been and still are like to be unseasonable and intemperate, they may
somewhat on the Sabbath give themselves to sowing, or gathering of their corn:
I answer, No. For it is by special words expressly forbidden, Exodus 34. 21.
Six days shall thou work, and in the seventh day thou shall rest: both in
earing time, and in the harvest thou shall rest. And surely of all times
laboring in harvest 1
seems most unlawful. First, if as God his benefits grow on us, we must grow
in thankfulness, Profaning the Sabbath harvest how great a sin.
then reaping at that time, we ought to render most thanks, and not to think
the worship of one day sufficient in seven, much less to cut it from the Lord
in part or in whole. Secondly, seeing in the week going before we have even
wearied both our own bodies by labor, and much more the bodies of our beasts
in tra^^^le: besides that, in working 2
on the Sabbath, we contemn the ordinance of God most unthankfully, which so
well in his law in this case has provided for us, we deal too unnaturally
with our selves, and too injuriously with our cattle. Again, if we on this
day make no conscience of the worship 3
of God contemned by this worldly laboring, we manifestly bewray our want of
faith in Gods goodness, wisdom and providence: as though he either would not
preserve that, which hitherto he nourished out of the earth: or that he having
dealt so mercifully in many benefits before, should now ^^ one fail us: which
undoubtedly he would not do, did not our sins provoke him thereunto.
Wherefore if so it come to pass for our sins, we must rather in patience,
repentance, and wisdom, submit our selves to the punishment, than profanely
and obstinately to seek by such means to shake it off. True it is, as we
have said before, that works of necessity be lawful on the Sabbath: but we
must understand Two kind of necessity.
it of necessities present, and not of perils which are imminent, that is,
which are like to come, but yet are not certain to come. For when the danger
is present, as an house is on fire, bloodshed by reason of a fray is like
speedily to be committed if help be not, or in such like cases, because the
Lord has as it were cast the remedy upon us, and put us in his own stead for
ministering of help, then may we use our liberty: but when it is to come, and
it is still in the Lord his hand, we must cast the whole remedy upon him, if
the danger f^^l^ knowing that he in his providence and mercy will remove the
evil, or else in sending it will punish our sins.

But to return from this to that, from which we a little digressed, the
reason of Christ here used is yet pressed further, Luke 13. 15 where he
answers the master of the Synagogue, who had indignation at him for healing
on the Sabbath, Hypocrite, does not each one of you on the Sabbath day loose
his ox, or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to the water? 16- And
ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound for eighteen years,
be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day? That is, will ye water your
cattle on the Sabbath, which thing your Rabbis think not unlawful: and
think ye that I break the Sabbath for helping a faithful believer? Is not
this rather hypocrisy in you, than any new doctrine in me? But here some will
object: Christ might have done this the day after to the woman, who in so short
a time would no more have perished, than the ox, if he had not been led to
the water until the day following. To this I answer, as the works which we
do to God his creatures do not fight with the keeping of the Sabbath, because
in respect that cattle by not attending on them, would be made less profitable
to their owner, though thereby they should not utterly perish: so in respect
that this woman should have remained more unfit for God his glory, and the
keeping of the Sabbath, if she had not bin helped, although it may be she
should not utterly have perished, this work of our Savior Christ was nothing
against the Sabbath, he not seeking his own glory and profit, but the glory
of his father, and the profit of another.

Now follows the fourth reason in the 8. verse. The Son of man is Lord even
of the Sabbath: The fourth reason.
That is, God the Father making the Sabbath, is the Lord of the same: the Son
of man is equal with the Father, therefore the Son of man is also Lord of
the Sabbath. Again, as the Lord made a law for man, but none for himself: so
ye are too presumptuous in the presence of the Lord to control my disciples.
For, if I being the lawmakers, give a special privilege to my Disciples, as
indeed I may do, urging the law, where I list, and dispensing in the law to
some, as I please; is it then meet that you should censure them, whom I do
privilege? Wherefore seeing it is I that have appointed the Sabbath, and
therefore best know who keep it, and who break it, I give you to understand,
that these men, whom ye falsely accuse, because ye know not the pure keeping
nor breaking of the Sabbath, have not broken it. Suffer me then, I pray you,
being Lord of mine own ordinance, to dispose of it, as best seems to me.

The fifth argument may be borrowed from the second of Mark. verse. 27 the words
whereof The fifth argument.
are these: The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Many
think this reason to make much for their purpose; but they are deceived in
their own ignorance. For, says Christ, this is the cause why my disciples
have not rested so much, as ye think they should have done; the Sabbath, that
is, the rest, was made for man's good and comfort, and not man for the rest
alone, but for the sanctifying of the Sabbath: so that albeit they have not for
some good cause observed the rest, which must give place to the profit and
commodity of man, yet have they not broken the sanctification of the day,
which chiefly is required of them, in that, if they had not eaten this corn,
they had fainted, and so have been made unfit for the hallowing of the same.
We say, meat was made for man, that is, for the relief, sustenance, and
comfort of man, not man for the meat, to wit, for the eating and consuming of
meat: but that in enjoying the co^forr of God his creatures, he might praise
the Lord the more freely. Neither can any man hereof justly gather, that
therefore on this day he may fill himself with meat, as he lusts: because
that were rather to unable, than to enable him to keep holy the Sabbath.
Again, we say in like manner, that labor, that is, the commodity that comes
by labor, was made for man, not man for the labor, but for the glory of God,
which by labor in his lawful calling he may gain to the Lord. Wherefore
seeing the rest was appointed only but as means, whereby man may the more fitly
sanctify the Sabbath, and the disciples did eat this corn, that they might
be the fitter thereunto, it is manifest they did not violate the sanctifying of
the Sabbath. Besides, though no man can say, that the Sacraments are
figurative: yet the Sacraments were made for man, not man for the Sacraments,
that is, for the bare use of the elements: although it must needs be granted,
that to use the word and Sacraments in pureness and holiness for the further
strengthening of our faith, is one of the chiefest and most principal duties
of man. How be it in respect they be but means, and are to give place to the
end, to the which they are ordained, I am persuaded, that though the
congregation were busy either in hearing the word preached, or in receiving
the Sacraments ministered: yet if an house being on fire were in love to be
helped, the former actions were to give place to the latter. For we read Act.
20. 10. where Paul being occupied in preaching, and espying a young man, who
was in a dead sleep, fallen down dead, made no conscience to cease from
speaking, to go down to lay himself upon the young man, and to embrace him,
until his spirit returned into him, and afterward went up again and continued
his preaching. Wherefore in all these reasons we may see how Christ did show
unto the Jews, that they peruersly did stand in the ceremony, and did not
abrogate the Sabbath. Here then is a far contrary argument to that, which
these men affirm. For seeing our Savior Christ might in one word have showed
it to be a ceremony, if he had purposed any such thing, and not have so
amplified the matter, we see he rather speaks against their superstitious
opinion and abuse of the Sabbath, than affirms any such thing, as these men
do surmise. To these former reasons we may add that, which is Matthew. 24. 20.
Pray that your flight be The sixth argumen.
not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day. This, say they, shows, that
the persecution of Jerusalem should be by so much the more grievous to the
Jews, if it fell on the Sabbath, because then it was not lawful for them to
fly: so that if they stayed, they were like to lose their lives by falling
into the hands of their enemies: if they fled, they should break the Law of
God, and so become subject to the punishment thereof. But this was nothing in
the purpose of our Savior Christ, who therefore forewarned them to pray, that
the destruction of the city should not fall on the Sabbath, because then it
would be the more grievous punishment unto them, when besides the havoc of
their own bodies, they should see the glory of God thrust through the sides,
the Temple polluted, the worship of God profaned, the word of God blasphemed,
and the Sabbath of the Lord defiled. The truth whereof appears in this, that
troubles and the time of their visitation should come upon them, when the
Sabbath should not be ceremonial, as now it was, when Christ spoke unto them,
but at such time, as men should worship God in spirit and truth, without all
shadows and figures, when Christ should be ascended into heaven, as indeed it
came to pass. So that this should increase the grief of so many as sincerely
worshipped the Lord, that when they should rejoice in the holy worship of God,
they should mourn and lament for the enemies horrible blaspheming the name of
God, and that when they should sing the praises of God, they would sigh and
houle to see the open despite of God and his truth. In respect of which
miserable calamities, our Savior Christ foresheweth the woeful estate that
should be in those days, of them which were with child, and gave suck. For
though the fruit of the womb and multiplying of children, in respect of
themselves, were the good blessings of God; yet the estate of those times
should be so dangerous, that even the blessings of God should be turned to
curses, and the children, which otherwise were a comfort unto them, should now
increase their trouble, discomfort and sorrow. Wherefore it is certain, that
Christ neither meant, that every day should be alike: for then he would not
distinctly have pointed at this day: neither did he think it to be a
ceremony, because he knowing the time when ceremonies should cease; would have
been so far off from nourishing them in their superstition, that being the
Prophet of God, he would in this, as in other things, rather teach them the
pure use of the Sabbath.

Thus having spoken of those places in the Gospel, which might seem to make
against Answer to places taken out of the Epistles.
the Sabbath, now let us speak of those places in the epistles of the
Apostles, that we may see whether they contain any sound truth for their
purpose, howsoever they be thought to have some hold in show. These allegations
are either out of the epistles of Paul, or the epistles to the Hebrews: out of
the epistles of Paul* which he wrote to the Romans, to the Galathians, or to
the Colossians. The place which they bring out of the epistle to the Romans is
in the 14* chap. verse. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive unto you, but
not for controversies of disputations. 2. One believes that he may eat of
all things: and another which is weak, eats herbs. 3. Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him which eats not, judge
him that eats: for God has received him. 4. Who ar^ thou that condemnest
anoth^r man's s^ruant? he stands or fall^th to his ^wne master: yea he shall
be established: for God is able to make him stand 5. This man esteems one day
above another day, and another man counts every day alike: let every man be
fully persuaded in his mind* 6. He that observes the day* observes it to the
Lord: and he that observes not the day, observes it ^^t to the Lord, etc. In
this last verse they would gather, that a man might make choice of daie^ as he
will, and as in a thing indifferent. And some learned expositors affirm, that
the Apostle in this chapter entreats of things, which in their own nature
are indifferent: and therefore here we are to use the^ in love. As I grant this
to be the general scope of the place, so I deny it to be the principal end. For
as the Apostle speaks of things indifferent, so he also speaks of things
not indifferent. And this we shall see, if we consider of the last verse of the
chapter going before, and of the first of the chapter following. Thus it is
written, chap. 13. verse. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no
thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. The effect whereof is thus
much, if it be compared with the first verse of the chapter The exposition of
Romans 13. 14.
following. Although ye have put on Christ, and truly know him by his word: yet
if another man professing the same Christ with you, has not attained to the
like measure of knowledge and the same proportion of faith, which ye have, I
would ye should not judge him for his wickedness any more, than ye would he
should judge you for your strength: but rather bearing with his infirmity,
which in time may be changed to a more perfect strength, labor by all means
to win him to soundnes of judgment. Wherefore in that he says: Him that is
weak in faith, receive unto you: he means them that are not established in
the doctrine of the Gospel, not them that are weak in a ceremony, or in
things indifferent: so that if any be found weak in the doctrine of
Christianity, I mean in some point of it, and yet be sound in all other
things, they should not be further entangled with intricate controversies,
which they cannot conceive: but so gently entreated, and mildly dealt withal,
as both the good things which are in them may be nourished and confirmed, as
also they may be won to the sight and sense of things, wherein as yet they be
weak. Neither must we think, that the Apostle means here such
imperfections, as may be in the most per^ect, but rather such weakness^s, as
are fou^^ in most Christians. This is the general scope of the Apostle in this
place: whereu^to also agrees the conclusion, which is in the first verse of
the chapter ^ollowing: We w^i^h are strong, ought to bear^ the infirmities of
the ^e^ke, and not to please our s^l^^s. 2. Theref^re let every man please his
neighbor in that, that is good to ^difi^a^ion. 3. For Christ al^o would not
please himself, but as it is written, The rebukes of t^^m that rebuke thee,
fell on m^. Where P^^l his sense is such: If we have gotten more knowledge, How
the strong is to help and not to despise the weak.
and attained higher graces than other men have, we are not in respect thereof
to despise others: but we must in wisdom and patience sustain their error a
while, and strongly support their weakness, not that we should nousl^ and
nourish them in their error or weakness, but that by humility and patience we
might the better build them up in knowledge and true godliness. To this end ^e
alleges the example of our Savior Christ, who did not only bear with the
infirmities of his friends, but also with the errors of his enemies. So that
this then is the true use of Christian faith mingled with love, that who so is
come to Christ, as we are, our wisdom may sustain their error, and our
strength may support their weakness, and as Christ did bear with his weak
disciples, so must we with our weak brethren, not counting them as no
Christians, because of infirm judgment they dissent from us in some
particular, but in love overcome their infirmities, because they consent with
us in the general The sum hereof is also set down 1. C^^. 3. 11. Other
foundation can no man l^y, than that which is ^^id, Jesus Christ. 12. And if
any man build upon this foundation* gold, silver, precious s^ones, timber, h^y,
^r ^^u^ble, 13. Eu^ry man's wor^e shall be made manifest: for the day s^all
declare it, because it shall be revealed by the fire: and the fire shall ^rie
every man work, of what sort it is. 14. If any man's work that he has built
upon, abide, he shall receive wages: 15. If any man's work burn, he shall
lose, but he shall be safe himself: neuerth^l^ss^ yet as it were by the fire.
In which place we see, that so long as we be in Christ by faith and repentance,
although our faith be mingled with some weakness, and our repentance with some
error, though we build with our gold, silver and precious stones, some timber,
hay, or st^bble; yet the Lord will bear with us, much more then for this
respect in like causes must we ^eare one wi^h another Now for example sake the
Apostle brings in this instance: On^ bel^^u^th t^^^ he may ^^te of all
things, and an^t^^r which is we^ke, eats herbs* etc. Some think that this
eating of all things was meant of the Romans, and that the eating of herbs was
vnde^stood of the Jews then being at Rome. But this seems not * Yet we rea^
Acts 28. 17. of Jews at Rome.
to be a ^ound opinion, in that we read not in any Ecclesiastical history,
that the Jews were at Rome: neither does the Apostle write a mixed epistle
partly to the Romans and partly to the Jews, but writ^th it w^olly* and
intitul^th only unto the Romans. Again, we cannot gather out of any records
of the writers, that the Jews did ^ate herbs alone. Of meats. When we believe
we have the w^rd for our warrant.
True it is that pedagogically the use of many creature^ was forbidden to the
Jews: howbeit it does not seem likely that they were tied so strictly to the
eating of herbs. This I am sur^ of, that even now adai^s the devil has
persuaded many Christians newly come to Christ, that if they eat any thing
either in quality more delicatly, or in quantity more liberally than bare
necessity does require, they have sinned. And yet in these men there is, no
doubt, a general good meaning: but yet in this particular they hold an error.
In this exampl^ the Apostle sets down the stronger part, and the weaker;
the stronger part is prefixed, which is a work of faith: the weaker part
follows after, which is the weakness of faith. For mark, he says, One
bele^ueth that he may eat all things: here is a work of faith, because ^^
has the word for his warrant: and then he says, another eats herbs, Or
more truly read these words thus: Another eats herbs, he does it in weakness
of faith, not believing that he may use other meat^*
he says not he believes, that may eat herbs, for he does it in weakness
of faith, and has not the word for his warrant, neither does he believe that
he can use other meats. This example inferred, the Apostle uses this
exhortation; Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: as if he
should have said, let not him that is so strong in faith, therefore think him
to be no Christian, that has this error, to think himself more holy, i^ he
eat nothing but herbs. It is added, Let not him that eats not, judge him
that eats, and this is very necessary. For it is much incident to the young
ones in Christianity to judge others, The nouices in religion are commonly
hasty in judging.
who are not so abstinent as they are. Here is not then the person so much
condemned, as the fact. For though we may judge his sin, and rebuke his error,
yet must we not judge his person, as though God were not able to recover him.
Now to prove this, the man of God brings an argument only for confirmation of
the doctrine immediately going before, and it is drawn from the greater to the
lesser. This man esteems one day above another day, and another man acounteth
every day alike. Which reason is thus much in effect: although there should be
some so weak in knowledge, that they should make no difference of days in
respect of their uses, which undoubtedly is a great error: yet I would not that
for this respect a man should count him for no Christian, much less then must
this be done to one, that of infirmity eats herbs, which is a less error
than the other. The stronger opinion is set in the first place, the weaker in
the last. For as this is the stronger, one believes that he may eat all
things: so this is the weaker, another eats herbs: as this is the work of
faith, this man esteems one day above another: so this is the weakness of
faith, another counts every day alike. He that observes the day, says Paul,
he does it not without knowledge and judgment, but observes it to the Lord:
so that the Sabbath day is the Lord his day. This is the strong opinion, I say,
to distinguish one day from the residue, which was unknown to the Gentiles,
who although they had many holy days through a corrupt imitatio^ of the Jewish
observation, which they had heard of, yet were they ignorant of the true day.
But now hearing of the Lord his day, some among them began to doubt of it, with
whom the Apostle wills the stronger to deal in love. In our days we see
that because there has bin much crying out against holy days, some also will
not stick to cry out against the Sabbath. Well, if a papist in all other general
points of doctrine should be truly converted unto Christ, and for want of
instruction doubts of the Sabbath, we are in love to deal with him, and for
a season to support his weakness. How be it we must remember that the weak
must not always be borne with, as appears by the Apostles words chap 15. 2.
Let every man please his neighbor in that, that is good to edification. So
long then as the error is of weakness, and that it is but an infirmity in the
man, from which by the knowledge of the truth he would be rid and be delivered,
he must be borne with. But if it proceed of illusio^, obstinacy, and of a
prefract judgment as deceived by the devil, then he must not be borne with,
no not even now a days: nay, if we be herein faulty, the error is not so
tolerable in us, as it was in them, in that they wanted the old and new
Testament, both which are so abundantly opened unto us. But if one truly
repenting him of his sins, and faithfully believing in Christ, shall through
ignorance be afraid of the Sabbath, as of a servile ceremony, he is so far
to be borne with, as he desires to come to the truth, and if he come once to
be obstinate, he is no longer to be borne with. But how prove you that this is
the stronger opinion to esteem one day above another day, and that this is the
weaker to count all days alike? I answer, the Apostles did observe one day,
and commended it unto us by their own practice, which no doubt they would not
have done, had it been the weaker part. Besides it is not unlike but a law for
observing this day was also made by them, Act. 15. and therefore it must be the
stronger part. And although the Jews could not be brought from their day, yet:
the Apostles might have one day. Again, in that the Apostle would have none
judged, that of weakness shall not observe the Sabbath, and yet he does not
only himself judge the Galathians, but also as being ielous over them, he
tells the^ that he fears their falling away, because they observed days,
and months, and times, and years; it is apparent that this is the stronger
opinion, especially seeing that Coloss. 2. 16. he says. Let no man condemn
you in respect of an holy day, or of the Sabbath days: that is, if ye will not
use their solemn Sabbaths of their ordinary feasts, yet are ye free, and the
Church must not judge you No^, that the Apostles practiced this day, it is
evident. Revel. 1 10. where it is called the Lords day. As also 1. Cor. 16. 2.
Every first day in the week, which in an ancient Greek copy is called the
Lords day. Moreover, Act. 20. the Church kept this day, because in it the Lord
drew light out of darkness, and CHRIST on this day rose from the dead, and the
holy Ghost was sent in it, whether we may call to mind in it our Creation,
Redemption, and Sanctification. And where it is commonly translated, 1. Corinthians. 11. When yes come together, in the Syriake translation it is found, O^
the Lords day, when ye meet. Wherefore it is like, that the Apostles observed
this day, and therefore also it appears in this place, which we handle, that
it is the stronger opinion, wherein though a man fail through in firmity, he
is not to be judged. Thus we see, how this place makes nothing for the purpose
of them, that would disanull the Sabbath, but is brought in rather by the way
of an argument, that if a brother counted all days alike, which was a great
weakness, yet should he not be judged: so far off should they be from judging
him, that of weakness eats herbs, which is the less error.

Here, if any shall object, that our first parents did eat nothing but herbs
and fruits, and therefore we should content ourselves therewith: I answer,
that their nature being in innocence, was so sound, whole and perfect, that
they needed not other nourishments, as we do, who by reason of our weakness and
frailty, which accompany sin, had need of other creatures, all which are pure
unto us by the word and by prayer. Now, if our fathers not needing other
creatures for their corporal food, stood in need of the Sabbath, much more
we standing in need of our creatures, have need of the Sabbath. The second
reason, out of the Epistle.


The second reason is taken out of Galath. 4. 10. Ye observe days, and
months, and times, and years. 11. I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed
on you labor in vain. To this I answer, that we must not stand upon the
titles of letters, but observe the scope of the writer, and weigh the drift of
the epistle. The state of the cause is this; the Galathians were Gentiles, who
by Paul his ministry had received the Gospel: afterward certain false
Apostles, as all the learned agree, crept in, who did make them believe, that
because the same civil policy of religion should be there, which was among
the Jews, besides the purity of Christianisme, went about to intermingle the
superstitions of Iudaisme. The Apostle therefore shows, that Christ being
come to put away figures, all that maintained such days, months, and times,
which the Jews observed, as they were Jews, should obscure Christ. The Jews
had their solemn assemblies and conuocations, Leuit. 23. 2. certain times in
the year, the first and last days whereof, they kept as Sabbaths to the Lord,
of which Paul here speaks, and therefore he says ye observe Sabbaths, he
says not, a Sabbath, for which assuredly he is not here grieved with them. For
Paul had planted this day among them, as appears 1. Corin. 16. 1. Concerning
the gathering for the Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so
do ye also. Where we may see that ancient custom of the Primitive Church,
which was, that after the word read for the space of an hour, after the ^^^mon
ended, and the Sacraments administered; many did use to give not of constraint,
but of good will to the poor. Now seeing he had appointed the Lords day in
Galatia, it is not like that he would so sharply have reprehended them for his
own ordinance, as to say unto them, that he feared their backsliding from the
truth by it, but rather of those Jewish holy days, which being peculiar unto
the Jews, had their beginning and their ending with them. And if we say, that
that day should not be kept for a ceremony, but some other, that were not to
abrogate but to change the ceremony: as he that stripping himself of one sort
of clothing, and for pride inuesteth himself with a new suit, puts not away
but changes his pride: or as he that of a filthy lecher is become a
covetous miser, riddeth not himself from sin, but changes from one suit of
sin, whereof he is weary, to some other. The Papists therefore, though they
have not the same days, yet having new days in their stead, have not
abrogated, but altered Iudaisme. Justinius Martyr affirms, that they had no
holy day but one in the Primitive Church. He speaks then flatly against the
ceremonies, which by the eternity and perfection of Christ his sacrifice are
abolished, Heb. 9 and 10 Our first father Abraham, when he believed, received
circumcision as the seal of his faith, to which Baptism is subrogated unto
Christians. The particular sign that appertained to the posterity of Abraham,
is gone: but the water in Baptism does appertain to all in a general
equity. Likewise as the Sabbath did put them in mind of their deliverance, it
is gone: but as by it we remember Christ his resurrection, we retain it. To
conclude, the Apostle means not in this place that Sabbath, but those holy
days of the Jews, which being the beginning and ending, the first day and
last day of their feasts were Sabbaths.

The third reason, Coloss. 2. 16. Let no man condemn you in meat and drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath dai^s, 17.
Which are but a shadow of things to come* but the body is in Christ. This is
also understood of the Jewish distinguishing of meats and days. For the
Colossians were troubled with false Apostles, as were the Galathians. And what
is the reason that they were so encombred with Jewish observations* Forsooth
the religion of Christians, which rather consists of pure simplicity than
pompous solemnity, has but the word barely preached, the Sacraments without
vain shows administered, prayers in humility offered: and therefore it
seems not so polished, so glorious, and so garnished, as the Jewish religion,
which did draw the greater part of men after it. Thus our fathers seeing the
Jewish religion so vernished, and the Gentiles religion so pompous, and
Christian religion full of simplicity, drew the Gentiles from the simplicity
of Christianisme, and brought in this heap of ceremonies. Wherefore here Paul
tells them, that these things were but instructions for a time, and
pedagogical: and therefore did not so appertain unto them, as they should
need to trouble their consciences about them, though they observed them not.
Let no man condemn you, says the Apostle, in such Jewish ceremonies, as for
the not observing of them they should count you no Christians. Here is the
same drift of the matter, which was of the former; here the Apostle descends
from generals to particulars, there he ascends from particulars to generals.
Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day, which was an octonarie: for
eight days long did the feasts of the Jews last, or of the Sabbath days, he
says not of the Sabbath: for he means those Sabbaths, which were
appertenances of the former holy days, not that holy Sabbath which was common
to the ^ewes, with all other the people of God. And whereas in the former part
of the verse it is said, Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, he
shows, that the Jews had certain beasts and birds unclean, and
drink offerings, which were forbidden them, howbeit unto Christians all things
are pure.

But some will say: what need we now to fast, who will censure us? I answer,
the Lord himself. For albeit we that are Christians, are not to be charged
as the Jews were, with one special day: yet as the Jews, with all God his
people, did humble themselves before the Lord, either for the removing of some
judgment which presently did lie upon them, or for the preventing of some
perils which were toward them, or for the obtaining of some grace, which they
wanted, (and yet without all observations of days (so we must join with
them. And therefore whosoever refuses the exercise of humbling either
privately or publicly, the same is to be controlled by the word. If any be
commanded publicly by the Magistrate, whether the cause be just Public fast,
commanded by the Magistrates, must be kept. Simile.
or not just, we are to obey; if the cause be just, it is not the
commandment of the Magistrate, but of God, and who so breaks this, is
surely to be condemned. The similitude here annexed of the Apostle, is very
fit: for as the skillful painter first portraiteth, and then painteth with
fresh and lively colors, that which before more rudely and obscurely he did
frame and fashion with a black coal: so these rudiments more darkely did
represent that which now is lively described unto us, the truth of all things
in Christ. The body is Christ: as if he should say, ye have received Christ,
and the things which he has prescribed: and though ye have not the Sabbaths,
and holy days of the Jews, yet have ye the true Sabbath, and pure holy day,
which Christ has left unto you. Here then the Apostle is so far from
abrogating of the Sabbath, that he makes no mention, nor includes any
meaning thereof in these words. And thus much for the reasons, which they
think they have gotten out of the epistles of Saint Paul.

Now let us consider of that place, which is in the epistle to the Hebrews,
chap 4 verse 3. The interpretation of Hebrews 4.
For we which have believed, do enter into rest, as he said to the other, As
I have sworn in my wrath, If they shall enter into my rest: although the
works were finished from the foundation of the world. 4. For he spoke in a
certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh
day from all his works. 5. And in this place again, If they shall enter into
my rest. 6. Seeing therefore it remains that some must enter thereinto, and
they to whom it was first preached: entered not therein for vnbeleefes sake. 7.
Again, he appointed in David a certain day by To day, after so long a time,
saying, as it is said, This day if ye hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. 8. For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not after this day
have spoken of another. 9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of
God. 10. For he that is entered into his rest, has also ceased from his own
works, as God did from his. 11. Let us study therefore to enter into that
rest, least any man fall after the same example of disobedience. Behold, say
they, the Sabbath which Christians must observe, is to rest from sin. I
answer, this is not proved. For this was as well to the Jews, as it is to the
Christians. For it is said, Psalm. 95. To day, if ye will hear his voice, 8.
Harden not your heart, etc. This the Prophet wrote after Caleb and Joshua had
entered into Canaan, whither though many entered not, yet some entered: so that
they had even that rest then, as well as we have now. Wherefore it does not
follow, because the resting from sin is also enjoined to the Christians as a
pure use of the Sabbath, therefore it takes away the other. Again, the
resting of God from his works, cannot be a figure of resting from sin, no
more than God his works can be a figure of sinful works. Now seeing the Lord
here uses an argument of proportion between his works, and our works, his
ceasing from his works, and our ceasing from our works, because between the
figure and the thing figured, must be some proportion and resemblance, I pray
you what proportion is there between God his works and our sins? what
analogy betwixt God his resting from his works, and our resting from sin?
Again, that it cannot be here meant of the rest from sin, it is manifest,
because that which is here spoken, is set down to Adam, Genes. 2. 2. 3. at
what time there was no sin in the world, and therefore no resting from sin,
and therefore no figure of resting from sin, because all the learned herein
agree, that there were no figures before sin. Besides, and fourthly the
Apostle shows, that this rest is meant of the kingdom of heaven. For as
David spoke this of the land of Canaan, so the Apostle speaks it of the
kingdom of heaven. Wherefore he concludes; Let us study therefore to enter
into that rest, where we shall not only rest from sin, but from all our
ordinary works of our callings, where shall neither be eating, nor drinking,
nor marying, nor giving in marriage. And as the people before were threatened,
that for their unbelief and disobedience they should not enter into the land
of Canaan: so we are here threatened, that unless we study and strive against
these things, we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Howbeit, although
the Sabbath was not a figure unto Adam of resting from sin, yet it was unto
him a sign, that he should come to the kingdom of God, where should neither
be eating, nor drinking, nor marying: all which seeing Adam had, it is manifest
that he was not in the kingdom of God as yet. The Sabbath then did put him in
mind, that he should not always be working, but that he should be translated,
though not die: (for although he was created in innocence, yet not free from
being translated to a better place at God his good time) but, as the Apostle
says, he should have been changed as were En^ch and Eliah, though after a more
excellent manner. We have now the Lords day, which assures us, that as now by
faith and hope we enjoy the life to come: so hereafter these two ceasing, we
shall more fully and perfectly enjoy the same: and as our Sacraments purely
used, show a thing not to come, but already past; so this day truly kept, is a
resemblance of a thing not past, but to come. For as on this day from the
morning to evening we praise God, if we keep the day holy, and yet withdrawn
and interrupted with many by-thoughts, and secret distractions: so in heaven
being freed from worldly, carnal, fearful, and manifold affections and
troubles, we shall more continually praise the Lord. What is then the alluding
of this word rest? This it is. As God rested from his works, after he had made
the world: so we must rest from our works. What from the works of sin? no,
from the works of our callings, and consequently from the works of sin much
more. So the analogy betwixt the Lord his rest and ours, teaches us that we
must rest from our ordinary works, and this rest puts us in mind of that
continual Sabbath, wherein when we cease from A Sabbath in heaven.
working, eating, drinking, sleeping, marying, and all such works, as we are
subject unto with corruption: then also shall we undoubtedly cease from sin,
which kind of rest in fulness we must not look for in this life.

This is a general rule in Divinity to be observed, that of one place of
Scripture there is A general rule concerning Scripture.
but one natural and proper sense: although by consequence, searching out the
contraries, the causes, the effects, and such like, other things may be also
gathered out of it. If the words be more proper and natural, the sense is more
proper and natural: if the words be borrowed and metaphorical, then is the
sense borrowed and metaphorical. Now allusions are not so much for the proof
and confirmation of the matter, as for the amplifying and illustrating of the
same. For example, 2. Corinthians. 13. 1. the Apostle says: This is the third time
I come unto you. Where we must understand, how the Apostle had been with them
once in bodily presence, and twice wrote unto them, and yet he says, this is
the third time I come unto you. He alludeth then to this, as ye see, O
Corinthians, in the law, that two or three witnesses were sufficient to
confirm the good, and condemn the evil: so I have been with you thrice,
which is sufficient to confirm the faith of the godly, and to leave the
ungodly without excuse. Again, Romans 10. 18. we read, But I demand, Have they
not heard? No doubt their sound went throughout all the earth, and their words
into the ends of the world. Here we see the Apostle alludeth to that Psalm. 19.
4. which is meant of the day and the night. This is then the allusion, As the
day and the night spread over the whole world, so the Apostles were sent to
preach over the whole world. Again, Galat. 4. Paul alludeth to Agar and Sarah,
in which place he shows, that as in Abraham's family was the image both of
the true Church and malignant Church, the one persecuted of the other: so like
should be the estate of the Church continually even unto the end. In like
manner the author to the Hebrews uses an allusion, that as God rested the
seventh day from the works of the creation: so we also should rest from the
works not of sin, as these men would have it, but of our calling. For this
Adam should so have done, though he had not sinned, and therefore it is not
meant of resting from sin. Thus we see, where the Christian Be gathers
honey, there the heretical Spider sucketh poison, who affirms, that in this
life they rest from sin, and here they have their heaven.

And thus much for those reasons, which are out of the very words of the
Scripture: no^ of those arguments which are drawn by consequence out of the
Scripture. Their maine Of their arguments drawn by consequence out of the
Scripture.
reason is this, which deceives many: That which is gr^ffed in man's nature,
whereof the Gentiles were not ignorant, and which continues to the kingdom of
Christ at his second coming is moral* and that which was not natural,
unknown to the Gen^iles, an^ lasted but unto the first coming of Christ, was
ceremonial: but such was the Sabbath, therefore the Sabbath is a ceremony*
and not a moral precept. I answer first, that natural and moral, which they
make all one, must not be confounded* True it is, that our first parents had
the law of God written Object. The Sabbath unknown to the Gentiles: ergo,
ceremonial.
in their hearts, before it was promulgated in the mount: whereunto, as we
said, the ceremonies (serving as rudiments for a time, and as appertinances) of
the law were adjoined. And albeit the moral law be the explaining of the
natural law: yet it does not follow, that that which is in the moral law, is
no more than that which is in the natural law. We know our first father Adam,
besides the law of nature, had the Sabbath in express words given him: and
although he had the great books of Gods works, yet he had the Word and
Sacraments also: both which were without his nature, and had them not in his
own How the moral and natural law differ.
nature. So the things here spoken renew that which was given, besides that
which he had by the law of nature. The Gentiles then can no more by the light
of nature see the true Sabbath of the Lord, and the time wherein he will be
worshipped, than the pure means and manner which the Lord has appointed for
his worship: and therefore both Papists, Heretics and Gentiles, are as well
deceived by ignorance in this observation of the fourth Commandment, as they
be in the second. Again, I may answer, that in some manner both the second
and fourth Commandments are engraffed in man's nature. For never any were
found so profane, which would not grant that God ought to be worshipped, and
that not only inwardly but outwardly also by means. And the Gentiles by the
instinct of nature would acknowledge, that as there was a God to be worshipped,
so there should be some time which should be sequestered from other business,
and should be bestowed on matters concerning the worship of God. But to
discern aright what these means be, wherewith the Lord will be served, and
what this time is which the Lord will have for his honor, the Heathen were so
far off, that how many nations so many heads, how many heads so many kinds
of religion. The Gentiles, whose vain traditions were but disordered
imitations of Moses laws, which they had heard of, had indeed their holy
days, which not being used in faith by reason of their ignorance of the word,
could nothing please God. Yea we may read how strictly and superstitiously
the Gentiles kept their holy days: so that with all other they agreed after a
sort in this general point, that there should be both appointed means, and
certain set times for the worship of God. Again, it is like that the Gentiles
were not ignorant of the law of fasting, as may appear by the Niniuits: but
how to order it a right to the glory of God, they were altogether ignorant,
Romans 3. 1. Psalm. ^47.
because they wanted the word. Wherefore herein we count the true glory of
Christians to consist that the Lord has given us the truth, and has not left
us to our own inventions in the means of Gods worship: and herein is Christian
dignity, that as we have the manner of our religion prescribed of God
himself; so we have also the time, which he for that purpose has himself
sanctified. It follows not the^, because the Sabbath is not ingrasfed in man's
nature, therefore the Sabbath is not moral, because in truth neither were the
laws of the means of Gods worship, nor of fasting so ingrafted, although in
some manner they were. Their reasons by consequence are either from the old
Testament, The first objection.
or from the new. Their argument from the old Testament is this: We read not,
the law of the Sabbath was put in practice before the law was promulgated in
mount S^nai: therefore it is not moral but ceremonial* This is no good
reason, we find it not written, therefore Answer.
it was not. For so they may argue against ^asting, and many other things which
were used, and yet the practice of them not left in writing Who can disallow of
marriage and of spousals? do not the Gentiles, the laws civil, and the Roman
law approve them? and yet what record have we left concerning these things in
writing before the law? Look into the history of the Kings and Judges, in the
books of the Chronicles, where you shall find mention made but once of the
Sabbath, and we have it once commanded by precept, Genesis 2. 2. and commmended
by practice, Exodus 16. 26. in which place the man of God speaks in the
preterperfect tence, Behold how the Lord has given you the Sabbath. Their The
second objection.
second reason is drawn from the streightnes of the law to be executed (Exodus
35. 2. 3.) on him that gathered sticks, which they say must not be enjoined us.
Concerning this, it makes Answer.
no more against the moral observation of this precept, than the other
ceremonies did against the other precepts, whereunto they were joined. The
Jews being in their nonage had rules peculiar to themselves, with these we
are not entangled: how beit they had other general commandments, which being
common to us with them, appertain still unto us. As for example, to teach our
children the commandments of the Lord, appertains What things appertain to
the Jews only, and what to us with them. Kindling of fire on the Sabbath day
lawful to us.
to us, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. but to bind them upon our hands for a sign, and as
frontlets between our eyes, appertains to the Jews: to bury the dead
belongs unto us* but to enbalme them with spices, who had not so clear a
testimony of the resurrection, belongs to the Jews. Is not the law of
murder as well enjoy ^ed us, as to the Jews? yet we may eat blood, which they
could not. We ought to be as temperate as they, yet we may eat the fatnes of
meat, which was forbidden them. And so in all the commandments the moral
observation belongs to us as well as to them, the ceremonial keeping, to
them and not to us. And the same we conclude of this place concerning the fire
making on this day.

Out of the new Testament they also gather two reasons. First, they say it is
not mentioned nor urged so much in the new Testament, as are the other precepts
I an answer, this is Out of the Testament.
no good reason: but is rather to be returned to the Anabaptists, who reason
that the judicial laws are not to be used, because they are not urged. Nay
rather look what the holy The first objection*
Ghost has set down more sparingly in the old Testament, he has more fully
and plainly supplied it in the new Testament, and what thing the law contains
more fully, that the Answer.
Gospel handles more sparingly* because the Lord in his heavenly wisdom
would not trouble us much with one thing. But we know it is named, Matthew. 12.
and 24. Mar. 2. John. 5. Act. 20. 1. Cor. 16 and 16. Reuelat. ^.

The second argument is this: The Apostles changed the day, which (say these
men) they The second objection.
never would have done, had it been moral. I answer, it was never commanded
nor appointed what one certain day should be kept among seven, but that there
should be observed Answer.
a seventh day: which being kept it is sufficient* and the law remains
unviolated. And yet we permit not, that any man at his pleasure should now
change this day. For that which the Apostles did, they did not as private men,
but as men guided by the spirit of God, they did it for the avoiding of
superstition, wherewith the Jews had infected it. Again, as the Jews used
the other day, which is the last day of the week, because it was the 2
day wherein the Lord made all things perfect: so the Apostles changed it into
the day of Christ his resurrection, who was the beginner of the new world, on
which day we received a more full fruit and possession of all the benefits in
Christ his conception, birth, life, and death. Besides, this was the first day
of the creating of the world, wherein the Lord drew light out of darkness.
Lastly, the holy Ghost is said on this day to come down upon the 3
holy Apostles. So that this day does fitly put us in mind of our creation to
be thankful 4
to God the Father, of our redemption to be thankful to God the Son, and of
our sanctification Aspeciall use of the Lords day to remember three great
benefits.
to be thankful to God the holy Ghost.

Now if any can allege more effectual or equal reasons unto these, he may
alter the day so it be with the consent of the Church. Wherefore the equity of
the law remaining, it is not abrogated* Circumcision, as we have showed, is
considered two manner of ways, either as the seal of Faith, Romans 4. or as a
sign of that circumcision which we have in Christ made without hands. In this
manner considered, it is ceased, as it is a seal of Faith it Change of the day.
remains, not the same in form and manner, but the same in effect. For
although we have not the same help of our Faith, yet we have a help. The
Jews had Sacraments more in number, but we more excellent in signification.
Though we have not many Sacraments and holy days, yet we have two Sacraments,
and one day more effectual, than all they were which the Jews had. We see
therefore in truth no reason as yet, why we should not observe the Sabbath as
Moral.

Thus having confirmed the doctrine of the Sabbath by the holy Scriptures, and
proved Of the observation of the Sabbath.
that there is a moral use of the same, as well for us as for the Jews; and
having answered all the contrary objections, that might seem to make against
this doctrine: it follows now according to our first division, that we
should speak of the observation of the Sabbath it self, showing how it is
kept, and wherein it is broken. For both these are expressed in the
Commandment: wherein is set down the affirmative, to teach how to keep it;
and the negative, to show how we break it. First then we will show, how the
Sabbath ought to be kept: then afterward, we will declare how it is broken.
Where it is said in the beginning of the precept, Remember to keep holic: and
in the end thereof, the Lord hallowed the Sabbath: so that it is not simply
said, Remember to keep: but to keep holy: neither is it simply mentioned,
that the Lord left the seventh day, but blessed the seventh day and hallowed
it. How the Sabbath is truly kept.
Hereby is insinuated unto us, that in this day we should grow in love toward
God, and tender affection to our brethren, we are taught that then we keep
the Sabbath aright, when we use it to that end for which it was ordained, that
is, when we use in it (as we have before showed) th^se exercises, whereby we
may be the more sanctified, and God the more glorified Note.
both on this, and in the other days of the week. These exercises be such, as
are either private or public. The public exercises are twice at the least to
be used every Sabbath, and they be these. First the word read and preached*
then prayers fervently made with thanksgiving, singing of Psalms, reverend
administration of the Sacraments.

And first, for reading and preaching of the word, we read, Nehem. 8. 8. And
they Reading and preaching.
read in the book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused
them to understand the reading. Also we may see this in the practice of the
Apostles, Act. 13. verse. 15. And after the lectures of the Law and Prophets,
the rulers of the Synagogue, sent unto them, saying: Ye men and brethren, if
ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. And as the Ministers
did read and preach the word, so it was the practice of the Church to hear,
as Eccles. 4. verse. 17. Take heed to thy foot, when thou entrest into the
house of God, and be more near to hear, than to give the sacrifice of
fools. And it is said, Nehem. 8. 3. The ears of all the people hearkened
unto the book of the Law. And concerning praying, thanksgiving, and singing,
the Prophet of God uses a vehement exhortation to the Church, Psalm. 92. 1.
Come (says he) let us rejoice unto the Lord: let us sing aloude to the rock
of our salvation. 2. Let us come before his face with praise: let us sing
aloude unto him with Psalms. And Psalm. 65. 1. O God, praise waits for thee
in Sion, etc.

Now for the Sacraments generally we are to mark, that as in the time of the
law the sacrifices were most used on the Sabbath day: so our Sacraments
succeeding the sacrifices are then most to be frequented. As for the supper of
the Lord, it appears Act. 18. 1. Cor. 11. The great ignorance and carnal
security of the people must cause us to be more wary whom we admit to the
Sacraments.
(as it seems) that it was administered every Lords day, although now adays
the ministers may not so do, for the great ignorance and carnal security of
people. For the administration of Baptism, although there be no express
places of the scriptures showing the practice of it on this day: yet there are
many good reasons agreeable to the word, which will prove the same. First, we
know Circumcision was used on that day, and therefore Baptism which is come
into the place of Circumcision, is to be used on the Sabbath day. Again,
Baptism is a public action of faith, whereby a member is to be received into
the Church, and therefore the prayers of the whole congregation ought to be
made for it: all must be hereby put in mind of the benefits which they have
reaped by Baptism, and so make a double profit of their presence hereat.

Now seeing old and young, men and women, masters and servants, fathers and
children, Baptism.
cannot so generally and conveniently meet on the week days, by reason of
their callings, as they can on the Lords day, their business set apart: it
seems by good reason that the Sabbath is the fittest day for this Sacrament.
Again, if the Lord in his infinite wisdom and goodness commanded Circumcision
to be used on the eight day, both for the avoiding of superstition, if any tied
the grace of God to the outward sign, as also for a sufficient time, wherein
the children might gather some strength to the cutting off of their flesh; why
were it not a thing requisite, that Baptism should be deferred to the Lords
day, both Children dying before Baptism.
for the removing of their superstitious opinion, who think the children dying
unbaptized to be but damned; and also for the better enabling of the child to
be dipped in the water, according to the ancient manner and pure nature of
Baptism? Wherefore for these causes Baptism cannot be denied to be a public
duty of the Sabbath. Concerning private exercises on the Sabbath, they are
either going before the public, or following after, or coming Private
exercises on the Sabbath.
between. The duties going before are either in examining our selves, or
stirring up of our selves. The examination of our selves consists partly in
surueying our estate past, and partly in considering of our present condition:
in surueying our estate past, we are to call to mind either what sins the
week before we have committed, to the more humbling of our selves in prayer:
or we must remember, what graces of God in our souls, what benefits of God on
our selves or in our friends we have received, to the better provoking
Preparation to observation of the Sabbath.
of our selves to thanksgiving: in considering of our present condition, we are
to examine how we stand affected, whatmeasure of faith, repentance and godliness
is in us: if there be any special want or occasion of public prayer, we must
crave the prayer of the Pastor and congregation: if any peculiar cause of a
solemn thanksgiving be offered, we must give the Preacher and people word of
it: as also if there be occasion of some want, we are to pray for the Minister
that his mouth may be opened, to make some happy and holy supply by the word of
it. How requisite this examination is, our civil practices may declare. We see
worldly thriuing men, if not every day, yet at the least once in the week they
search their books, cast their accounts, confer with their gain their
expenses, and make even reckonings, whereby they may see whether they have
gained, or whether they have lost, whether they are before hand or come short:
and shall not we much more, if not once a day, which were expedient, yet once
in the week at the least, call our selves to a reckoning, examining what has
gone from us, what has come toward us, how we have gone forward in godly
proceedings, or how we have gone backward, that if we have holy increases,
Examination.
we may give thanks and glory to God; if we come short, we must humble our
selves, and endeavor the week following, to travail with our selves the more
earnestly to recover our former loss. This examination had, we are further to
stir up our selves before we come to the public exercises. This consists
in reading, meditating and praying, whereby we may provoke a spiritual
appetite the more hungerly, desirously, and lovingly to resort to the
congregation. How necessary this is, the long and woeful experience of
non-proficients in the school of Christ, does lamentably show. For what is Non
proficients in the Church.
the cause why in the prayers of the Church we so little profit? What causes
the word to be of so small power with us? whereof comes it that the
Sacraments are of such slender account with us? Is it not because we draw near
to the Lord with vncatechised hearts, and uncircumcised ears, without prepared
affections, and vnschooled senses: so that we come unto, and depart from the
house of God with no more profit, than we get at stageplaies, where delighting
our eyes and ears for a while with the view of the pageants, afterward we
vainly depart? If we at any time are to entertain some special friend or
stately guestes, it is civility to avoid all things noisome, and to procure
all things handsome in our houses: and shall we not think it Christianity at
such times as the Lord has made special promise to visit us, and to become
our friendly guest, to purge the loathsome affections of the heart, and dispose
our souls in some holy order for his entertainment? Are we so diligent to
present our selves on the Sabbath in our best attire, because then we shall
come before the whole congregation: and shall we be negligent to attire our
souls, seeing we are to appear before God and his Angels? Do we outwardly
profess this day to be a more solemn time than any other day of the week:
and shall we in inward practice deny the same? Wherefore in this holy
preparing of our selves, we are to imitate the wisdom of worldly men, who
having a suite to the Prince, or some noble personage, Simile.
which has not that happy success and issue, which was hoped for, by and by
begin to call themselves to account, to consider with themselves in what
circumstance they failed, whereby less circumspectly, and less advisedly they
attempted their enterprise, accusing themselves of folly, and inconsiderate
dealing in their cause, whereby, a^ woeful experience teaches them, their
request fell to the ground. Unto these men herein we must not be unlike, when
in dealing with the Lord we profit not so much by hearing, reading, praying, or
any other public exercise, as we should: neither must we stick to reason with
our selves, and to contemn our selves as faulty, either in omitting something
to be done, or committing something to be undone, before we address our selves
to our public duties.

Now that this examining and stirring up of our selves may the better be done,
it is requisite To rise early on the Sabbath.
(contrary to the long and loathsome practice of the most part of men) that we
rise early on the Sabbath day. We see young men will rise early to resort to
matiages, to feastings, to go a maying, to ringing of bells, or such like
vanities: the Papists will break their sleep, that more timely they may have
their Masses, and popish practices: the here tikes also to attend on their
vain revelations, will recover sometime by early rising: all which are to our
shame, that for holy and heavenly exercises, to serve the Lord in spirit and
truth, will redeem no time, whereby the Lord his Sabbath may be the better
sanctified: but on the contrary, by bathing our bodies in our beds on that day
more than on any other, as persuading our selves too great a liberty therein,
we make it a day of our rest, and not of the Lords rest.

The Israelites are said to have risen very early to their idolatry: the
Prophets are reported to have stretched out their hands betimes in the morning.
Wherefore for shame of the one, for the imitating of the other, let us stir
up our selves more early on the Lord his day, as making the Sabbath our
delight, Esaias. 58. whereby we may be no less careful to bestow the first
fruits of the day and the sweetness of the morning in the pure service of God,
than Idolaters in their Idolatry, young men in their vanities, wordly men in
their covetousness, and here tikes in their heresies use to do. If we thus shall
examine our selves in our sins committed, and gifts of God received; if we
shall humble our selves for the one, and be thank full for the other; if we
shall suruay our wants, pray for our pastors, prepare out selves, and use all
these exercises in wisdom, and rising early (unless upon some special cause
or weakness, which requires rather our wholly keeping of our beds, than our 2
vprising) let the experience of the after fruits and good increases of the
public exercises Exercises after and between the public.
speak, and let trial report, if the word be not more precious, our prayers
more powerful, our receiving of the Sacraments more effectual, more
profitable unto us. Now concerning those exercises which follow after, or come
between those public means, they are either for the increase of faith and
repentance to make the public means more profitable to us, or the exercises of
love, whereby we may show some fruit of the other. The exercises of faith and
repentance are reading, comparing of things heard, examining and applying them
to our selves, praying, thanksgiving, and meditating. First, I say, after our
public hearing we must privately give our selves to reading of those things
especially, which when we heard, we did not sufficiently understand: also to
the comparing of place with place according as they were alleged, to the
better trial of the doctrine received, and more establishing of our faith
therein. To this end we must use private prayer for a sound judgment and pure
affections, that the Lord would vouchsafe to work that upon our affections,
which in judgment we have received. Neither must we forget to be thankful, in
praising of God and singing of Psalms, for those things, whereby we either see
our knowledge to be bettered, or our conscience touched. To these we must join
meditation, either about the means of our salvation, or about the works of God:
upon the means, as in accounting Meditation.
with ourselves, what things being read and preached, chiefly did touch and
concern us, what special feelings, and comforts the Lord gave us in our
prayers, what increase of faith in God his promises, and of repentance in
purposing a new life we had in the Sacraments, that thus we may make a private
and peculiar use of the public and general means. About the works of God,
partly concerning those properties which are in himself, Meditation concerning
Gods works
as his mercy, justice, wisdom, truth, power and providence, partly
concerning his creatures, and works of his hands, wherein he has left
certain impressions and qualities necessary for our use, and profitable for
our instruction. For the former, the practice of the Prophet and duty of all
good professors, Psalm. 92. does sufficiently show, that it is one special
work of the Sabbath to commend and declare the kindness of the Lord, to rejoice
in the works of his hands, to praise his truth and to show forth his
righteousness. In which Psalm the man of God protests that the works of God
are only glorious to the godly, and how the unwise and wicked men cannot
consider of God his works, nor discern his judgments, because they measure
the condition of men by their present estate, not looking either how God has
dealt before, nor considering how that though the faithful seem to wither,
and to be cut down by the wicked, yet they shall grow again and flourish in
the Church of God, as the cedars do in mount Lebanon. Now as with the exercise
of the word we have the Sacraments to strengthen our faith: so with the
meditating of the works of God we are to strengthen our selves with the
beholding of God his creatures, as the heavens and the scope, beauty, and
continual course thereof, and the earth, which should have been all as
pleasant as the garden of Eden, if Adam had continued in his innocence, whose
work as it was by the light of nature to view the creatures of God, so also is
it our work by the light of Gods grace and holy spirit to do the same. To
this end the Prophetical king, Psalm. 19. sets down the exquisite
workmanship, proportion, and ornaments of the heavens, saying, The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the works of his hands. 2.
Day unto day utters the same, and night unto night teaches knowledge. 3.
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. 4. Their line
is gone forth through all the earth, and their words into the ends of the
world: in them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun. 5. Which comes forth
as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices like a mighty man to run his
race. 6. His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his compass is unto
the ends of the same, and none is hid from the heat thereof.

The Prophet Esaias. chap. 1. 2. 3. says, Hear, O heavens, and hearken, O
earth, etc. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib: but
Israel has not known: my people has not understanding. In which place we are
schooled of insensible creatures, how we should do Consider how obedient in
six days the beasts have been unto us, and on the seventh how disobedient we
be to God,
our duty unto God. Wherefore it is good to consider, how in six days we
have had our ^east obedient unto us, and how disobedient we are to the Lord. O
God how have thy creatures attended on us, when we speak to them, they heard
us, when we did whip them, they followed us, in all our business they attended
on us, and yet we have not listened to the calling us by the word, we have not
profited by thy chastisements, nor attended upon thy commandments. The stork,
says the Lord by Jeremiah the prophet, knows his time, but my people knows
not me. And experience may make us blush to see, how the birds against the
stormy winter may convey themselves unto warmer climates until the spring
time, and man alone either vnsensibly does not foresee, or unadvisedly will not
avoid the perilous times to come. To conclude, Matthew. 16. 2. 3. our Savior
Christ reprehendeth the folly of Pharisees, saying, When it is evening, ye
say, Fair weather: for the sky is red. 3. And in the morning ye say, To day
shall be a tempest: for the sky is red and lowering, O hypocrites, ye can
discern the face of the sky, and can ye not discern the signs of the times?
True it is, that this spiritual use and holy meditation of the creatures of
God should be our whole life: howbeit because our distractions in our lawful
and ordinary callings will not permit this so fully in respect of our finite
nature, we must remember on the Sabbath day to use a recovery, and by Christian
diligence to make recompense for our former negligence herein. And in so
heavenly a variety, which both by precept and practice we have received of our
forefathers for this purpose, we shall much profit and set forward this
exercise, if in wisdom of the spirit we endeavor to frame our meditations
especially about those things, whereof by reason of our callings, in respect of
our countries, in consideration of the season of the year we have most
special occasion offered. Now if by reason of some dulnes or deadnes, by the
corruption of nature and secret punishment often incident to the dearest
children of God, we cannot so reverently, cheerfully and comfortably To avoid
dulnes and deadne^ in the private exercises of the Sabbath, seek to the
communion and fellowship of the godly.
do these duties required by our selves alone, we may humbly use the remedy,
which by the communion of Saints the Lord in this case has provided, that so
frequenting the holy company of the godly, learned and zealous, unto whom the
Lord has given greater liberty both of graces and of spirit, we may be
humbled in regard of our own wants, and take the supply by them and in them,
that if we cannot either for ignorance or blockishnes read the things heard,
compare the places by public ministry received, pray for the fruit of them;
if we be not able to refresh our selves with considering the works of God:
then we must attend upon the reading, conferring, and praying, thanksgiving,
singing, and meditations of others; that so at the least we may either have our
judgments cleared, or our affections better stirred up. Neither must we blush
or be abashed to acknowledge our wants unto our brethren, but with all
humility earnestly deal with them, and enquire of them, how they can compare
and reconcile the places delivered, how they can amplify it by meditation, how
they feel their affections renewed, how they can frame a prayer of it, how they
can gather of the creatures and works of God some fruitful matter of
thanksgiving, that by their godly participation we may have either our
ignorance helped, or our infirmities relieved. For undoubtedly this is the
cause, why so many do rather in ignorance and deadnes bear the Sabbath as a
burden, even in that they are ashamed by asking the help of others to bewray
their ignorance, or display that corruption of nature, which indeed they see
and seele in themselves. Against which worldly and carnal shame we must fight,
if ever we will triumph over that endless shame of the wicked, and provoke our
selves by that wholesome and mutual society, which becomes the children of
God, either for the increase of spiritual gifts, or for a charitable
supporting of the infirmities one of another. And these briefly be the
exercises of faith and repentance, whereby we may either stir up our selves,
or be stirred of others.

Now it remains to entreat of the duties of love, because the Lord his
Sabbath is not a day of knowledge alone, but of love; not only of hearing the
word by preaching, but Of the duties of love.
also of doing the word by practicing: and these duties either respect the
persons of our brethren, or they concern such things as are about our
brethren. The things concerning their persons, are either in regard of their
souls or of their bodies: the exercises respecting the things that are about
them, are either appertaining to their goods, or to their credit. The duties
unto the souls of our brethren, are to teach the ignorant, to bring sinners to
repentance, to bind up the wounds of them that are afflicted in spirit, to
comfort the weak, to strengthen the hands that fall down, and the knees that
are ready to faint, to stir up them which be dull, to admonish the unruly, to
confirm the faith of them that believe, to encourage them in weldoing, which
have begun well, and to rebuke the wilful offenders* And though these should
be the exercises of every day, yet especially they belong to the Sabbath,
wherein we make a supply of the wants, which we have on the week days. The
duties of love required to the bodies of our brethren, are the visiting of the
sick, the relieuing of the imprisoned, the helping of the poor and miserable,
the feeding of the hungry, the clothing of the naked, the comforting of the
distressed, the bestowing of our goods on them that are needy.

In the primitive Church as they did every Sabbath receive the Sacrament, so
they laid Collections for the poor on the Sabbath.
something down to the use of the poor, which they did both to give some
thankful testimony how the Lord the week before had blessed them, as also
to show some godly token of their pity to their afflicted brethen. Concerning
the exercises of love toward the credit of our brethren, if we shall hear of
any secret reports tending to the discredit of others, we must not only
carefully suppress it, but wisely endeavor to recover their former credit.
This requires heavenly wisdom, both to admonish the author of evil reports,
as also to signify unto the man evil spoken of, what hazard and shipwrake of
his good name is pretended: yet still concealing the person, and urging the
report, that if the party be guilty, he may the sooner step out of his sin,
the Lord having discharged such To disgrace others by reports.
a warning piece against him; or being guiltless, that he rather seek to
prove by the rumor, than to pursue the author. But alas, the sin of our age
has not only brought in the ignorance, and banished the practice of this
Christian duty: but also which more is, in stead of healing, we would the
credit of others, and it is hard to discern whether there are more willing to
report evil, or not unwilling to hear evil reports of others. Who Psalm. 15,
3. Note.
sees not the common profession of our Sabbath to be a table talking and vain
babbling of the infirmities of others, tossing to and fro the credit of our
brethren as a tennis ball: and this not only used among brainsicke and
unstable women, whose tongues labor of some greater infirmity, but also of
men, who indiscreetly either set abroch, or draw out to the full measure and
past measure the discredit of their neighbors, so that they are so far from
saluing such sores, and stopping such breaches, that they lance deeper and
road further, then any have done before them. Two things in these duties to be
observed.


Furthermore, in all these exercises both public and private, both concerning
faith, and the duties of love, both with our selves and with others, two things
especially of us must be observed. First, we must at night try our hearts,
with what truth, with what care, and with what sincerity we have done these
things: because as God abhors hypocrisy in every thing, so especially he
cannot abide it in his own worship. Secondly, we are to examine our selves,
with what profit either to our selves or to others, with what comfort, with
what increase of good things we have been conversant in these duties, that we
rest not in the work wrought, but that we may offer up the fruits of our holy
increase in a good conscience to the Lord. The first thing then is to travail
with our hearts for sincerity, because though generally all the commandments
require spiritual obedience, yet those more peculiarly which immediately do
bind us to our God. This we shall do, if we do the duties Sincerity in all
duties.
of faith faithfully, the exercises of repentance carefully, and the duties of
love lovingly. On this manner then may we expostulate with our selves: Has the
Lords increase of mercy brought me a days increase of holiness? how is my
knowledge increased, my affections touched, my faith strengthened, my
repentance renewed, the love of the Saints in me confirmed? How did the word
prick my heart? how were my affections quickened by prayer? how much was my
faith strengthened in the Sacraments? Has the Sabbath been our delight? are we
nearer to God in faith and repentance? are we nearer our brethren in love and
benevolence? are we better affected to the glory of God? is sin more
grievous unto us, than it has been? If it be, give God the glory in Christ; if
not, let our losses cause us to make some godly recovery in time to come. These
things little thought of, is the cause why for the most part and almost
generally we rest in the ceremonial use of the Sabbath. Now let us consider a
little of the goodness of God in giving so holy a variety of good things, the
consideration whereof partly may humble us, and partly comfort us. For in so
rich and princely vicissitude, though we do many things, yet some duties
private or public, Outward actions without inward affections.
with our selves or with others, may be left undone; if we do the outward
actions, we fail in inwerd affections: and this ought to humble us. Howbeit,
we may here also suck out some comfort, to the more alluring of us to these
holy exercises, in that though we be weary of one exercise, we may refresh our
selves with another: if we profit not by one, we may profit by another: so that
if we be altogether void of delight, and reap no profit at all, we cannot but
excuse the Lord, and accuse our selves. For if we cannot thrive in private
exercises, we may gain by the public means: if we can find no delight by
ourselves, we may join with others; if we cannot profit by reading, we may
profit by praying: if not by praying, then by meditating; if not by
meditating, then by conferring; if not by conferring, yet by singing; if not by
singing, yet by viewing the creatures of God; if not by these, then by
teaching, admonishing, and visiting of others; if not herein, by suffering our
selves to be taught, admonished, and instructed of others. Wherefore as in a
solemn banquet furnished with diverse meats, the weakest stomach not liking
one dish, may refresh Simile.
it self with another, unless the appetite be altogether gone: so in this
heavenly variety the Lord has provided, that the most weak may comfort his
conscience, if not with one spiritual dainty, yet with another, unless it
be so sickly, that it is altogether graceless, and void of hope of
recovery, which the Lord in his mercy keep from us. And thus having showed
what is commanded, let us go forward to those things which are forbidden.

The Sabbath (we say) is broken either by general impediments and lets,
whereby we How the Sabbath is broken.
cannot sanctify the day: or else by those evil fruits, which follow the not
keeping of the same. For as there be two things commanded, to wit, rest, and
sanctification of the rest: so two things are forbidden, namely, labor and
travail, so far as either they hinder the sanctifying of the Sabbath, and
the profaning of the Sabbath rest. First of the impediments of sanctifying of
the Sabbath, which in their own nature are indifferent, we must know, that as
the furtherances of this sanctification are commanded, so the hindrances are
forbidden: and as rest is so far commanded, as makes to the sanctifying of
the day* so our works are not simply forbidden, but so far forth as they be
hindrances to the holy observation of the same. And these be either lawful
works, or lawful recreations and pleasures. And therefore, as we say in the
Commandment going before, that all vain, Works how far forbidden on the
Sabbath.
light, usual, and accustomed oaths are forbidden, and yet affirm, that all
such oaths are commanded, as are taken up in the defense of God his glory,
our brethrens welfare, or in any other cases of weight and importance, when the
things must needs be known, and otherwise than by an oath cannot be known; so
we say in this precept, all usual affairs on the Sabbath are here forbidden,
and we grant, that if these fall out for the glory of God in the preservation
of his creatures necessarily to be done; or so, as they may enable us the more
to any duties of the Sabbath, then they are not only not forbidden, but also
more straightly enjoined us. And therefore as no others creeping in under
pretense are allowed, but such as are weighty, likewise we permit no works of
pretended necessity, but such as in that they cannot be done the day before,
nor the day after, are for the former considerations necessarily required. And
whereas the Lord does not only give leave to draw the Ox or the Ass out of
the ditch to preserve their lives, but also to lead them to the water to make
their lives more comfortable to them: so we permit not only things needful to
The dressing of meats on the Sabbath.
the life of man, but also things convenient to the use and comfort of man, as
the dressing of convenient meats, whereby a man may be made more cheerful in
the duties of sanctification; so that both in using them we refresh and not
oppress our selves, and in preparing them we use the time before, after, or
between the public exercise. But as God has permitted this leave: so we on
our parts are to take heed that we abuse not this liberty. For when the Lord
is so equal, liberal, and favorable in granting and pardoning our
necessity, and furthering our conueniences; he will not doubtless leave
unpunished the greedy gaine-feekers, which under the forge of necessity abuse
their liberty and his liberality. The lawfulnes of which permission is taught
us by Christ himself, the faithful interpreter of the law, and that not only
by precept, but by practice. For in that he healed the sick, and cured the
diseased on the Sabbath, allowing the people on that day to resort unto him, he
shows how things concerning the glory of God are lawful to be done on the
Sabbath. And we see in that the law permitted the leading of the ox to the
water, how things convenient are not at that time unlawful, so that thy be not
abused, or ouerused. Things forbidden on the Sabbath.


This moderation prefixed, let us sift more narrowly the things that are
forbidden. These are either the works of our calling, or lawful recreations.
The works be such, as either are more usual in the six days, or being but
at certain special times in the months or years used less usual. First
concerning the works having their ordinary course in the week days, as
plowing, sowing, using of handierafts, and such like, there is no question, and
the most profane person will not call them into question, but it is taken as
granted, that these works must give place to the worship of God, that men
being freed from them may be the more sanctified. And these things are flatly
forbidden in the Law and in the Prophets, who would not suffer a burden to be
carried on the Sabbath, by which one work they did more secretly point at all
the rest. But the words of this commandment are a sufficient demonstration of
this matter. Who so the^ make the Lords day a packing day for their earthly
business, either in making it a custom to have their servants follow their
callings, or travail in their affairs, or else when they themselves will do
that that day, which they will not do at other times, when in spiritual
disposing of their business they might provide better, they are prophaners of
the Sabbath, and shall be judged for contemners of this law. And whatsoever
these kinds of professors pretend in word, and brag of knowledge and Christian
liberty, they cloak their sin under religion, and draw the curtain of
Christian profession to cover the lewdnes of their unchristian conversation,
and so living as beasts they shall dye as beasts, or worse than beasts, in that
they shall go to the hels, when the beasts shall go to the earth. It is too
too lamentable, that in a Christian commonwealth, where Christ and none before
Christ is to be preferred, where the fruit of so many years, teaching this
duty, ought to be showed: that men as Heathen, who never knew of the
creation of heaven and earth by God, or never heard of the redemption of man by
Christ, or never tasted of the sanctifying power of the holy Ghost, nor at any
time understood of the mystery of the Trinity; should make no conscience of
the Sabbath, but only vouchsafe it worthy of a eiuill duty.

But some will pretend a more usual necessity in certain and peculiar
callings, of which, as they say, stands a further question, as among makers
of coal, and iron, Heardsmen, Shepherds, Carriers, Drouers, and traffic
men, all which indeed have great and laborious callings: yet must we say, and
hold this ground, that in these and like ordinary callings, the ordinance of
the Lord does not hinder the good order of man, but they are so Whether it be
hard for some callings to keep the Sabbath.
subordinated the one to the other, as if we give to each of them their time
and their place, the works of man may be used, and yet the worship of God
preferred: because as our callings serve to Gods worship, so Gods worship
sanctifies our callings. True it is, that the Lord requires not only the
worship of the Sabbath day, but also of other week days either privately at the
least, or publikly, if our callings so permit: and howsoever we deny not unto
these men some larger liberty on the six days, yet they must not be exempted
from the duties of the Sabbath day, which generally is laid upon all men, and
especially on these men, whose labors as they are the more troublesome and
continual in the week days, so they ought the rather to rest on the Sabbath
days. And seeing they will not discharge themselves of the like graces with
other men concerning their creation, redemption and sanctification, if they
make not a supply on the seventh day for their liberty in the six days,
they are inferior to the condition of beasts: for the beasts on that day have
their rest, and they have not. Besides in pretending such excuses, they openly
bewray their want of spiritual wisdom. For there is no such calling: But if
they were as wise to God, as they are politic in increasing their riches, they
could tell how to divide their times and seasons for the easing of their
bodies, and refreshing of their souls on the Sabbath. And here men are to be
charged with looking to their servants. For the commandment is flat and
express* Of servants.
even thou and thy servant. It is not sufficient for men to come to the Church
themselves, but they must bring their servants also. The Lord saw how men would
be ingenious in deceiving their own souls, by not bringing their charges and
families with them to the congregation, who notwithstanding being created,
redeemed and sanctified, are as highly indebted to the worship of God as the
masters. But let them not beguile themselves, for the blood of their souls
shall be required at their hands, who being too lordly and tyrannous
governors, make their servants either equal to beasts, or worse than beasts,
caring for nothing but for the world, never thinking on hell, whereunto they
are hastening.

This law does here also attach Shepherds, and Heardsmen, Bakers and Brewers,
which Of shepherds, heardsmen, etc.
kind of men if thou have retained, then art thou charged to bring them to the
house of prayer as well as thy self. For God having made the^ men, would not
that thou should use them as beasts for thee; neither must thou abuse his
travail to make him like the ox, whereon he tends. But worldly wise men
will provide by changing of their places, that their business may be done
cheerfully: and why then should they provide for the worship of God so
carelessly? Again, if Shepherds and Heardsmen can find means to go to
faires and markets* if they can pick out time to go visit their friends: why
may they not also provide to hear the word of God on the Sabbath day? Well, be
not deceived, God is not mocked. Look how a man sows, so shall he reap. In
some places Brewers and Bakers Bakers and Brewers.
pretend great necessity. If it be so, then our general rule permits a
liberty, but yet on this manner: if they cannot dispatch their business on the
six days, they should rise betimes on the Lords day, that they may do all
they have to do with as little loss as may be: and if they must needs begin
their work against the day next after the Sabbath, let them do it as lately
in the evening as they can, that at the public exercises they be not
interrupted nor drawn away. Thus much therefore we say, that as we prescribed
in the other callings, so for milking of kine, making of beds, and dressing of
meats, as for trauailers, Bakers and Brewers, that their business, if it be
necessary, must be done either early in the morning, or lately in the evening.

There are two kinds of calling of more difficulty, the one by sea, the other
by land, the Mariners and Posts.
one of Mariners, the other of posts. For men being on the Seas, cannot come
conuenie^tly to the public places of religion, and in civil matters there are
often great necessities and unknown to private men. Concerning the first, we
say they are either in necessary affairs, or they are not; if not, they are to
be counted as flat breakers of the Sabbath; if they be in their lawful and
necessary callings, the times must be so divided, that their bodies may be
cased, and their souls refreshed. Howbeit, if the present necessity grow to
be more violent, then holds the general rule of things that cannot be done
before or after. To this we add, that in some respect, because the Mariners
have intermissions by reason of their often Mariners.
changing, there might be means appointed for the worship of God privately.
For there be vicissitudes of laboring spent in quaffing, drinking, and
sleeping; which leisure they might have as free for the worship of God
privately, as any on the land. Besides the proportion of six and seven
observed, that they may do some one day in seven, which they should do on the
Sabbath it self. For then the Lord accepts the equity of the law when upon
necessity we cannot observe the prescript time of the law. Furthermore, when
their Note.
ships lie at road and at ancker, when they either are stayed by tempest, or
mend their tackling, or wait long at havens for their traffic, then what
time has before been lost, it is now to be redeemed; if it be not at the set
times, yet as we said, at some times observing the proportion of the law.
Thirdly, if they were as prudent in heavenly things, as politic in earthly,
though they cannot so conveniently have access to the public means, yet in
the whole company (for fear of pirates they go for stronger fence many
together) by a general contribution they might allow a Minister among them.
Again, considering that the Mariners are either such as be of the richer fort,
or such as be of a meaner condition; we say, that the richer and more wealthy
Merchants swim so in their gains, as if they Preachers by sea.
have but hearts to pay the tithe of their increase, they may not only
conveniently find a Minister in the ship, but also liberally provide for the
worship of God on the land. As for the poorer fort* if they cannot offer an
ox, let them offer a turtle dove; if they cannot offer a dove, let them offer
a little fine wheat flower: I mean, if they cannot provide a grave preacher,
yet at the least, they may procure some good man to read the holy word of God
unto them, to deliver the plain and pure sense of the Scriptures to them, and
to help them Simili^.
in prayer and other holy exercises of religion. For if they can in their
several ships maintain a guide skillful in seafaring to conduct them in there
nauigations, then by a general purse they may far more easily sustain the
charges of a teacher, who in great dangers may strengthen and comfort them, in
all estates may guide and safeguard them to the haven of heaven. Fifthly, in
respect that they have greater blessings on the Seas, receive greater
testimonies of Gods favor, taste more bountifully of Gods power in imminent
and fearful dangers, and more liberally have experience of his providence in
their marvelous preservation, than their brethren on the land; I think they
ought not to be less zealous, but more careful of the worship of God, than
others on the land. Though then the prescript form of the law cannot always
be used, and yet the proportion of the law may be The prophanes of many
seafaring men.
observed: and seeing God is the Lord of the seas as well as he is the
governor of the land, he is no less to be worshipped in the one than in the
other* and yet the want of this his worship has distinguished the seafaring
men from others by their monstrous prophanenes, and brutish irreligiousnes. And
yet in that this evil is not so general, but that even in that calling there
are some that fear the Lord, it is manifest that the fault is not in the
calling, which in it self is lawful, but in the corruptions of the persons,
who are degenerated into an hellish atheism.

Now concerning Posts thus much briefly: Either the Posts travail on the Lords
day Posts:
upon necessity, or without necessity. If they go on the necessary affairs
of the land, and such as by foreslacking would be more dangerous, and the
speedy dispatching of them would be more profitable to the whole body of the
realm, the liberty is permitted, and is greater or lesser according to the
gravity and slendernes of their affairs: but if they have no necessity, the
rule of God his laws take hold on them. Howbeit for the most part subjects are
not so precisely to judge of them, because Princes matters are not known to
all men: but they are rather to pray, that both the Princes heart may be right
herein, and that the Lord would move them evermore to use those ways which are
most convenient.

And thus much generally of the usual works of our calling. It remains to
speak of those works which have not the ordinary course of the week days,
but are nevertheless used at certain set times and seasons, as Faires in
certain months and quarters of the year, as the seeding in the winter and in
the spring time, and the harvest in summer and in Autumn. Hereunto we may add
special iourneies taken in hand not usually, but extraordinarily, and the
gathering of Saffron at the time of the year. Al which things have their
several seasons, and are unnaturally thrust on the Lords own times, howsoever
men have pretended a necessity, and flesh and blood hunting after liberty,
disputes to the contrary. First as for Faires and Markets, which by politic,
wise, and worldly men on the Lords Of Faires and Markets.
days are maintained: it argues the want of godly wisdom where they be
used, because without any prejudice to the worship of God they may not
conveniently be observed. For if no necessity, profit, nor pleasure could
cause the Papists to have their Faires on their Christmas day, Easter day, holy
Thursday, and Corpus Christi day; then it is a shame for us, that in truth and
zeal ought to go before them, to defile the Lords day herewith: yea I add,
it is intolerable, because a firm statute and civil law enforces a plain
inhibition of all such worldly conuents and assemblies on that day. These
faires are for the most part either solemn Marts and of greater continuance,
or petie Markets and of less resort: if they be more solemn Markets, then the
continuance of the gain in the week days may easily afford the Lord his
right on the Sabbath days: if they be the petie Markets, then they are within
the compass of seven days, and they may be used on the six days between
the Sabbaths, not charging the Lords day with them.

Concerning seeding time and harvest, we have heard them on the Sabbath by
express Seed time and harvest.
words forbidden in Exodus. And here one thing makes me to marvel, why men
plead rather for the liberty of the harvest, than of the seeding time, when
the time is alike for the one and for the other, and he that restrained the
one, restrains the other: yea and there is more wisdom and less labor
required in the seeding, and there is less heed and more labor used in the
reaping time. And yet many think it strange to sow and plow on the Sabbath
day, who make no conscience to mow, reap, and cart it on that day. But here to
Blindness of men.
the commandment let us join the promise. If we be careless to provide for
the worship of God, the Lord will ease himself for caring for us. But, if we
first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, all these things shall
be given unto us. And intruth the necessity of the harvest rather charge us
with many more duties on the Lords day, tha^ discharges us of any one. First
the labor of the six days at that season is so great, as men cannot How we
ought more carefully to observe the Sabbath in the harvest than any other time
of the year.
1
conveniently give themselves to the worship of God, either publicly or
privately, and in that respect especially in that time they are to make
conscience of the Sabbath, wherein they must endeavor to make some godly supply
for their former defects. Under this we may couch another reason. Although
greater possessors have larger liberty in the works of this calling, yet have
they servants and cattle, which at harvest time especially labor: 2
for whose good and ease seeing the Lord has provided in every Sabbath, we
cannot without unmercifulness to the creatures, and the controlling of God his
ordinance, in these busy times especially, deny our servants and cattle their
rest, because they had then most need to cease on the Sabbath day, when they
most travail on the week days. Again, experience 3
teaches us, that if the weather in this quarter of the year be more
unseasonable, men are then most ready to unclasp their hold on Gods
providence by their carnal diffidence. Again on the other side, if the times
are more temperate, and the fruits of the earth 4
more abundant, then we securely hide our hearts in the earth, and tying our
affections to our enlarged and full fraught barnes, we vomit out our
surfeiting conceits with the rich man, and say, O my soul take thy rest, thou
have store laid up for many years: and so we bury our souls in the
abundance of our increase. But what is it to have a handful of corn, and to
gain therewith a vial of the wrath of God? What does it help, when the Lord
either to correct our sins, or make trial of our faith, does send foul
weather, that a man should blot out the print, and rub out the mark of Gods
work with such contemptuous disobedience? Ought we not rather in such a
scarcity, as the Lord appoints by Joel, to erect a new Sabbath in prayer and
fasting, than to pull down the old Sabbath by toyling and laboring, that the
Lord seeing our repentance, might stay the windows of heaven, and surceasing
from his punishment might leave some blessing behind him* Now therefore to
cure our diffidence, to help our impatience, and to correct our covetousness,
as also to witness our subjection to the blessed will of God, the Lord often
sends this trial in the time of harvest. Again, if according to the
largenes of Gods liberality we may enlarge our taidour, Simile.
if as the Lord reaches out his benefits to us, we ought to reach out our
obedience unto him: at what time of the year do men more abundantly receive
God his mercies than now, when the providence of God comes to the issue, and
grows to a perfect accomplishment; when the earth is ready to travail and
to bring forth of her bowels, whatsoever by the blessing of God it has before
received and conceived? And consequenly at what time is required of us a
greater measure of thanksgiving, and when does the Lord more deeply charge us
with a care of his worship, than when he does as it were surcharge us with the
weight of his benefits? If then either the commandment of God may bind us, or
the promise of God touch us, either the toyling of our bodies may pity us, or
the distractions of our minds may move us: if either the wants of our souls
may enforce us, o^ the benefits of God ravish us, we shall confess, that though
at all times carefully, yet at this time of the year most carefully and
specially we should provide for the worship of God, the refreshing of our
souls, and the relieuing of our bodies. Besides, if the calling of justice,
which for the worthiness of it is more necessary; if the tilling of ground,
which is a thing more needful, on this day stoop and surcease, to give place
to the worship of God; then reaping and carting, for which neither dignity nor
necessity can so well be pretended, must needs cease: and better it is that
man should reap somewhat less of his private gain, than that so deep a
wound should be stricken into the sides of Gods public glory: and more
convenient it is that a few should smart, than a great many should be offended.
And yet true it is, that our axiom of necessity has it virtue as well at
this time, as at another. Howbeit, I hope, I need not here put you in mind of
the distinction of necessity present Double necessity.
and necessity imminent, the one granted, the other denied. A present need
requires a present help, as an house being fired, our aid forthwith is
required: for that God in this case has subordinated us as his Bailiefes and
Lieutenants for the preservation of his creatures. But, if we presuppose and
forecast dangers to come, God makes men's doings dotings, and infatuateth their
devises, for that seeing he opens and shuts the windows of heaven, and
the closets of water, seeing he can make the heavens as brass, and the earth
as iron, and sends the first and the latter rain: so these things are not in
our hands, but in the Lords power, who either proves their faith, or punishes
our sins, and tries us whether we will serve him more sparingly when he
punishes us, or more securely when he spares us.

The other question following is of gathering a saffron. If men be wise and
provident to Of gathering Saffron.
serve God, the Saffron grounds, I think, may also be so kept, as that there
will be no such loss as worldly men pretend. But if the nature of it be such,
as some do affirm, that on that day it perishes, if it be ungathered, on
which day it comes forth; then I do think, that by the law of necessity
this thing happening, it may be gathered on the Sabbath: yet with these
conditions, that as many gather as can conveniently be gotten, that no public
exercise of the worship of God be omitted, that their minds be holy and
spiritually occupied that gather it. Now if some will object, that there is
somewhat in the order of nature, which fights with the ordinance of this law:
I answer, for as much as this thing comes on the Lords day but seldom
times, that therefore it is not a thing ordinary, but as a work of necessity.
Now to fold up this question, we required in gathering that we should be
spiritually minded, which they may show in giving it a mark of separation,
that is, that they bestow it on the poorer, if the be of they more wealthy
sort: if they be of meaner condition, yet they may impart something to their
more needy brethren, as testifying thereby that they seek not their gain,
but the glory of God.

It remains briefly and in a word to speak of travailing, which if it be
ordinary and Of traveling.
usual, is in no case lawful: but if it be extraordinary and necessary, as
often it happens to Lawyers, or Physicians, the according to the necessity
it is more or less permitted. We see that many Papists will not stir out on
their Saints days, whereby is detected the want of our spiritual love, which
make no conscience to cease on the Lords day. And so the religion devised by
man finds better entertainment and a further practice, than that which was
ordained by God. If any man object the loss of his living, if he should not
labor on this day, I oppose against that the loss of God his glory, and that
with his interrogatory, whether the miserable pelf of man should not give
room to the immortal glory of God. And experience confirms the truth of
Gods word, that in vain men rise early, and so late take their rest, in vain
they build and take so great pains, when the Lord denies the blessing. And
what were it to be rich by policy, and poor by God his displeasure? What
though the bag be heavy, and their consciences troubled? What if they be
rich with men, and poor with God? Again, who is it that so disposed of his
iournies and his affairs? so as some making conscience of their Sabbath, are
in their iournies in one day better prospered, in their affairs in one hour
more furthered, than many others contemning the ordinance of God are in many
hours, and in many days? Who directs men to be provident in their sales
and bargainings? Who besotteth and infatuateth others? Who sends a man (that
not for a simple desire of gain, but for a single care to walk in his
calling, uses the trade of buying and selling) more chapmen in one hour, than
another man has in an whole day, whose heart is inflamed, whose eyes are
inkindled with loving gain, and looking for profit howsoever it come by hook
or by crook? Men ascribe this to chance, and so they often by the just judgment
of God receive a blanke, that is, trusting to the blind world they receive not
so much gain, as will acquit their charges. Can men travail day and night by
sea and by land, and that for a thing transitory, and will they reach out no
hours for the defense of God his worship; Do they fear thieves, if they
enlarge their journey for the keeping of a good conscience; and are they not
afraid of thieves, when for their worldly affections they can travail early
and late? Because herein the terror of their own consciences will preach more
forcibly to them, than I can speak, I will leave them to that practice of the
man of God, which is used Nehem. 12,

And thus having spoken of the works of our callings, now we are to speak of
the Of the works of our pleasure^*
works of our pleasures. Concerning the lawful recreations of this life,
which Christianity does permit and not forbid (for of unlawful pleasures being
always out of season, and especially on the Sabbath, we have nothing to say)
whether they may have place and time on the Lords day or no, here is the
question. In this part of the treatise, I say, we do not speak of profane
and idle pleasures, but of them which bring some further use after they be
used, and which are permitted by the word of God, so measure in them may be
used, and they be sanctified unto us by the word and by prayer. And yet even
for these we dare not give the time consecrated to God, unto playing and
pleasures. Neither are we curiously to frame any exquisite division in this
matter, but first we will consider of the feasts and bankets accustomed on this
day, and afterward of other recreations and exercises at that time frequented
and used, which though in their time, place and persons they are not unlawful,
yet at this time on the Lords day we deny them to be lawful. As for feasts,
we may Of feasting and banketting.
part them into Love feasts, Church feasts, and sumptuous feasts, which carry
with them some further expenses and larger liberality, as are those which are
used at marriages, at the admitting of men into their civil offices, or else
are taken up for some special benefits received, or some extraordinary
judgments removed, or some other causes like unto these, as when men carrying
some port and countenance in the common wealth, according to their degrees and
callings, at some times do ordain.

Touching these solemn and sumptuous feasts, thus much we affirm briefly.
Such as on the Lords day institute such solemnities, and stuff every office,
and bumbast every corner of the house with men and women, are to be admonished
duly to consider of that, which is reported of David both in the history of
the Kings, and in the book of the Chronicles, ^* Sam. 22. 25.
who having a vain desire and superfluous appetite, would not defer, but
longed to taste of the water of the well of Bethlehem a well fenced city, and
from whence water could not be conveyed by hand, without some ieopardie to them
that fetched it. Wherefore three of his most worthy men have this business
assigned them, to the compassing whereof their lives were hazarded. At their
return, grace making his after fruits better than the former, after better
deliberation used, he powered forth the water on the ground, saying, God forbid
that I should drink the blood or the lives of these three men: showing thereby
both his offense in sending them, and the free mercy of God in saving them.
Wherefore for as much as these pompous preparations cannot conveniently be used
on the Sabbath without the hazard of men's souls (though the Lord in mercy may
save their souls) as in that diverse offices in great families require diverse
persons to perform diverse duties, and so that which is a day of rest, is made
a day of toyling. The equity of the not kindling of a fire must bind
Christians, although the sanction does not constrain them: whereas the
Israelites of an inch of liberty would take an ell, for a childish instruction
this thing was restrained them. And although we have a further liberty to
kindle a fire, for as much as we are in colder countries than the Israelites
were, yet the equity of the law must teach us, that we ought not to turn this
liberty to be servant of our wanton desires, or to foster carnal
licentiousnes, and hinder the worship of God.

If it be demanded whether this day be fit for marriage or no: I answer, it
is, because on Objection.
that day as it is a day of rejoicing, there is a more lawful liberty of
speech, and a more liberal use of cheerful behavior. Howbeit, let them not
on that day, if they marry, make their solemn cheer: but seeing they may
have a convenient company some other day, let them either both marry and
feast some other day, or marry on the Lords day, and feast another. And if it
be demanded, whether Love feasts may be kept on this day or no; I an swear,
there is difference between loue-feasts and solemn feasts. And if men were as
wiseas they were in the times of Popery, they would be politic to find out
some means to, provide for the glory of God, and yet not altogether neglect
the convenient furniture for their table. I am not to appoint, neither do I
undertake to prescribe how meat should be prepared, or how offices should be
divided: yet by experience I can give testimony of some who for their religion
bear credit in the Church, and for their authority carry some countenance in
common wealth, and yet on the Lords day have their tables both Christianly and
worshipfully furnished without any hinderance of the worship of God at all,
notwithstanding the number of their daily retinue and ordinary family is
great. It is one thing to provide feasts of intertainement more than competent,
and another thing to use louefeasts nothing less than is convenient, the one
oppressing and disabling us to holy exercises, the other refreshing and
enabling us to the duties of religion.

Now concerning the exercises and pleasures of the body, leaving all vain
pastimes at all Of pastimes and recreations.
times unlawful, but most especially on the Sabbath, and to speak of such
recreations, as in themselves are lawful, and may lawfully be used of the
children of God in their time and place; as those of shooting, training up of
soldiers, and such like, all which their pleasures carry a profit either
present or in time to come, to the Church or commonwealth; we deny not simply
then their places, but think them convenient, and commendable with the
testimony of the holy Ghost: 2. Sam. 1. where Jonathan is commended of David
for his shooting. Howbeit, the Sabbath day is no fit time for these uses,
which we If travel be forbidden in seed time and harvest, much more pleasures
all the year long.
will show briefly. First we must know, that the Lord having forbidden the
works of our ordinary calling, which carry with them a more special promise
of profit and warrant of reward in their time, forbids also lawful
pleasures: because if the use of those be forbidden, being lawful and
necessary for the upholding and maintaining of man's life, then these things
not so needful, though convenient for recreation, are much more inhibited. And
this we shall see more plainly, if we remember that rest is so far
commanded, as it is an help and furtherance to sanctification, and labor so
far is forbidden, as it is an impediment of the same. In regard whereof, if
pleasures be no less lets and impediments to the hallowing of the Sabbath,
than bodily and ordinary labors; then pleasures have no more liberty on the
Lords day, than our outward works. Furthermore, we must be circumspect not to
rest in any drowsy or sleepie security of the flesh: but in what measure
soever we detract from the ordinary works of our calling, in that proportion
must we add to the sanctification of the day: not much unlike to good
Christians, who bestow on their souls whatsoever they take from their bodies.
Which wisdom and diligence though we use most carefully, yet for as much as
we shall leave as many duties unperformed, as we shall have performed, I see
not what leisure we can lawfully lend to recreations. If any carnal professor
shall press this thing more vehemently, me thinks he may blush at the
defense of it, seeing this kind of keeping holy days in pleasures and
playing, was used even of the Heathen, who sat down to eat and drink, and
rose up to play: first balacing their bellies with feasts, and then refreshing
themselves with play. Wherefore as we now deny Church feasts as imitations of
the Heathen: so we deny holy day plays, as remnants of ancient profaneness.

But if it be here objected, that the Jews had their solemn feasts, musical
instruments, and exercises of pleasure, yet the men always by themselves, and
the other sex by themselves; not with that monstrous mixture of men and women,
which is a chief sin and arch-enemie to religion of our age, and that with
holy Psalms made by David and Moses, not with vain minstrelsie used of
profane Atheists: I answer, as Paul speaks 1. Corinthians. 13. of his own
person, that they being as children spoke as children, they understood as
children, they thought as children, being but in the rudiments: but we
becoming men, must put away childish things. Again, the superstition of the
Papists checketh this abuse, who would admit none outward exercises on their
Easter, Whitsontide, and The unclean sin of dancing.
holy Thursday, at what times they thought a bird would scarsely build her
nest. Did not the Papists break their superstitious holidaies, and shall we so
profanely pollute the Lord his Sabbath? Our Easter day, our Ascension day, our
Whitsontide is every Lords day: and therefore we ought to make a special care
of sanctifying of this day. What shall I say of the zeal of worldlings, which
may control by contraries the security of our sins? For all worldly men
seek never for pleasure, whilst profit does drop; as we may see in them that
live on Faires and Markets, as Chapmen and Inholders. So long as they hope to
gain a penie, how wait they, how diligent are they, how little play they, how
busy are they? And why? Forsooth it is their harvest, it is their market,
which (say they) they must attend upon whilst occasion lasts. Behold the
policy and painfulness of the world may teach us, what we ought to do for
our souls. Is not the Sabbath the harvest time and market day for the soul,
wherein we should gather in whilst the Sun shines, wherein we we should be
very diligent, whilst our gain is promised, wherein we must provide for a
living and maintenance, and lay up store, laying all pleasure aside until the
time to come?

And to return to the Papists, what posting Priests, what mumbled mas^es, what
hunting prayers, what hasty service had they, when any other solemnity should
be used? What Esai. 58.
then, will some say, no use of recreations? I do not simply deny profitable
exercises, but what shall we do with them on the Lords day? If all our delight
were in the Sabbath, if all our springs were in it, if we made it our chiefest
joy, what place should or ought to be left to such carnal delights, to such
fleshly pleasures? If any shall object, that it was not a necessity Objection.
to lead the ox to the water, and yet it was lawful, and therefore things
convenient in some cases permitted: men have the use of pleasures convenient. I
answer, that Answer.
the ox so led to water, is not to play and friske on that day, because that
may without detriment be deferred, and the other cannot: and the pleasures
convenient, as eating and drinking moderately, may on that day be used, in that
without them follows some detriment, and yet we permit not to play, which is
a thing that without hurt may be for borne on that day for Gods sake, if
without hurt we can forbear it an whole week for the worlds sake. To be
short, spiritual wisdom ma provide both for the Lord his worship, for our
callings, and for the laws. And like as in regard of inconvenience, the
politic laws restrain bowling in some men, not that in it self it is
merely unlawful, but that for all estates for certain causes it is not
convenient, in that they would detain some from their callings: from which if
they should rest, they should incur both the loss of better things, the
misspending of time, and hinderance of their honest gain. In which respect of
hindering better things, we deny playing on the Lords day.

Yet there may remain a question, whether sick persons may have their
exercises on Sick persons.
this day, or no? We answer, if they be extremely sick, it is a time of
praying, and not of playing, according to the axiom of James, chap 5. If they
be not so dangerously sick, they need i^ not: for if they can bu^ie their
hearts, hands, bodies and minds about playing, then their late visitation and
the fruit of it should rather cause them to refresh themselves with reading,
singing, or a more liberal exercise of conferring with them that be godly. And
to knit up this part, let us remember in the former objection drawn from the
law of the Realm, that the civil law does not so much permit the liberty,
which good men know to use well, as it does restrain the licentiousness,
which evil men use badly: because better it is that good men should want their
liberty, which they may do, than evil men should be confirmed in their
licentiousness, which they ought not to do: so that evil men may be made
good, and good men are nothing hurt. And because love asks not her own, but
is content for the good of others to depart from it own liberty, though we
could (which indeed we cannot) use recreation without the hinderance of God his
worship; yet we should not use it being a grief to the godly, an offense to
the weak ones, a matter of rejoicing to the ungodly.

It remains in the last place to show, how the Sabbath is profaned either in
thought, How the Sabbath is profaned in thought, word, etc. The difference
between the not sanctifying and profaning of the Sabbath.
in word, or in deed. For there is a difference between the not sanctifying,
and the plain profaning of the Sabbath, in that the one is not altogether
desirous to break it, the either has no desire at all to keep it. Neither is
the Sabbath only broken by profaneness, but also by idle works, and not
careful keeping of it Some profane the Sabbath by corrupt judgment, as
Heretics: some by a corrupt life, as carnal professors; the one a high malice
of Satan, the other a dangerous deceit o^ the devil. When men too worldly
minded, make the Lords day a day of riddance, a packing day, a counting day to
make odds even with all men, but even things odd with God. And it is the
lamentable sin of our age, to press the Lords ordinance and appointed day
with all relics of law matters; with the dregs of ancient quarrels, or new
broched brawlings, with posting to Justices; not to be reconciled, but to be
avenged, not to finish, but to re^iue controversies, and to ^ub old injuries
until they bleed: so as that day that is sanctified and ordained for love, is
a day of hatred; of a day of reconciliation, it is made a day of dissension;
and this cannot but proceed from a profane stock. Others as seeming more
favorable, though they make not this day a time of pa^pering of the flesh
(which is a time of purging the flesh) yet they make it a day of palpable
darkness, which should be a day of bright shining light: by hunting
Profanation of the Sabbath.
of bears, by haunting of plays, and such like, that if they begin the day in
the spirit, they w^^l end in the flesh, receiving some good motions in the
morning* they bury them in the evening, and giving the Lord the forenoone,
they recompense the devil with the afternoon. Yea in some place the Lords day
is the Devils day, being fraught with so many fraies, stained with such filthy
fornication, and burdened with the sins which their ordinary callings on
the week days spue^out, in that on those days they cannot be frequented for
want o^ company. Now whether we speak of the not sanctifying, or of the
Thought.
profaning of the day, we affirm the Sabbath to be broken in thought, word
and deed. For the whole law being spiritual, Romans 7. and this being a
principal part of that law, it must needs be that this precept, as well as
the rest, takes up as well the inner as the outward man. Besides, it is a
general rule in the law, that whatsoever is unlawful to be done, the same is
unlawful to be thought or spoken of: and look in what measure the wicked
actions of men are forbidden, in the same manner is the wicked affection and
communication Word.
forbidden also. Many have notwithstanding made such proceedings in sin, that
when they should reckon with their souls, they reckon with their servants, and
when they should make even with their consciences, they strike even with their
chapmen, and yet persuade themselves of small breach of the Sabbath, because
(as they say) they do but speak a little with their tongue, and scribble with
their pens. Then we must know, that as what we may do, that we may talk
of: so what we may not do, that may we not talk of. Wherefore laying aside
our filthy songs, our table talk of worldly matters, our carnal devices and
worldly compasses, which we are fetching in our thoughts, whilst we sit in
the congregation, our privy discourses of our success in our callings, and
our politic disposing The nourishing and harboring of evil thoughts in our
hearts on the Sabbath will deprive us of all fruit of Gods worship.
of our week following; all which shut out of the doors better things, and
ouerquel the vigor of good things. Wherefore as the nourishing of ill thoughts
is at all times unseasonable: so to harbor them on this day is most
abominable. Many will temper their tongues, and stay their hands, but yet will
give some liberty to their hearts: as though the Lord condemned not as well
the hypocrisy of the one, as the wickedness of the other. Now we must
remember to every general point to join our particular practice, that we may
obtain the blessings laid up for the obedient, and avoid the curses laid up
for the disobedient: which the Lord assist us in, for Christ his sake our Lord
and only Savior.

Amen.
FINIS.
NOTES OF OUR SALVATION.
LIkewise these be true notes of our salvation, when we search the Scriptures,
in them to find Christ, and in him eternal life, as men search for silver and
gold, Proverb. 2. 4. 2 When we esteem the word of God more than our appointed
food, Job. chap. 23. verse. 12. and covet so to be fed with it that we may
grow thereby, 1. Pet. 2. ver. 1. 2. 3. 3 When we are swift to hear, slow to
speak, and slow to wrath, laying apart all mailciousnesse, and the ex^rements
of sin, and receive with meekness the word that is grafted into us, that it
may save our souls, I am. 1. verse. 21. and obey from the heart unto the form
of doctrine whereunto we are delivered. Romans 6. 17. 4. When we meditate in it
day and night, Joshua 1. Psalm 1. 2. desiring that all our actions, words and
thoughts may be directed by it. Psalm 1. and 119. 5 If we long after the holy
assemblies, Psalm. 84. Psalm. 122. 1. and make the Sabbath our delight, Esaias. 58.
6 When the Ministers are most dear unto us, Act. 10. 16. Romans 10. 15. and we
most joyfully minister unto them in all our goods, Gal. 6.
The necessity of an upright heart is thus by these consequents thereof proved.
1 WIthout it we cannot assure our selves to be justified and sanctified in
Christ Jesus, Psalm. 32. 2. Heb. 10. 22. 2 Without it we cannot assure our
selves, that we have truly repented us of our sins, Joel. 2. 12. Ezech. 18.
22. 23. 3 Without it we cannot assure our selves that our ways do please God,
Psalm 119. verse. 1. 5. 10. 11. 80. 4 Without it we cannot hear Gods word
fruitfully, Luke 8. verse. 12. 16. 5 Without it we cannot pray unto God
acceptably. 1. Tim. 2. 8. Psalm. 119 58. and 145. and 66. 18. 6 Without it we
cannot be assured that we are truly baptized. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Matthew. 3* 8. Rom 2
29. 7 Without it we cannot receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to our
comfort. 2. Chron. 30. 18. 19 Psalm 4* 45. 8 Without it we cannot fast Dan* 10.
12. 9 Without it we cannot worship God at all truly. 1. Ioh. 4. 24. Esaias. 29.
13. Psalm. 15. 2. Psalm 24 4. 10 Without it we shall never see God. Matthew. 5.
8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Psalm. 15, 2. and 24.
4. 11 Without it we shall never receive blessing from God, but look for
confusion and destruction. Psalm. 125. verse. 4. 5. Psalm 119. verse. 6. and Psalm.
80 Psalm. 7. verse. 10.
Notes of a true and upright heart.
1 WHen we are persuaded that God the Father, by the blood of Jesus Christ,
and the working of the holy spirit does cleanse us from our sins. 2 When we
are persuaded that the spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, does by
the word thus cleanse us, and therefore make conscience of all things in the
said word, without respect unto man's advice, counsel or commandment, without
the same or contrary to the same word of God* Respecting, I say, all the
Commandments of God, without preferring one before another, laboring to know
them, if we do not: and if we do, to do after them according to the measure
of grace we have received. 3 When we are truly desirous, and labor to avoid
all the outward occasions which might either bring on, foster, or bring us
back to any sin we have fallen into, or may fall into hereafter. 4 When we
mourn for the very first motions of sin whereunto we have yielded, or we
fear we may yield unto hereafter. 5 When we are desirous and labor to use
all and every of those means, which God has ordained in his word to bring us
unto purity of heart. 6 When we do all those former things as well secretly by
our selves, as before others. 7 When in doing these things we simply and
singly seek to approve our selves unto God, without either looking for praise
or profit, rebuke or loss from men, not seeking chiefly these outward things
at Gods hands: but principally his kingdom and the righteousness thereof.
Matthew. 6.
FINIS.
A PROFITABLE TREATISE CONTAINING A DIRECTION FOR THE READING AND UNDERSTANDING
OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES: BY MASTER Greeneham.
THose things which God has joined together, no man may sever a sunder.
Therefore preaching and reading of the holy Scriptures being of God joined
together in the work of our salvation, may not be severed asunder. In all
Sciences, Arts and Trades, teachers and masters are requisite ordinarily for
the sound learning and practicing of them: we must be persuaded much more that
it is necessary to have guides to go before us in the way to salvation. That
preaching is the most principal means to increase Preaching Gods ordinary
means to salvation.
and beget faith and repentance in Gods people, must be granted, Deuteron. 18.
18. 33. 10. Leuit. 10. 11. Mal. 2. 6. 7. 2. Chron. 36. 15. Esaias. 50. 5. 57 8.
53. 1. 55. 10. 11. 57. 19. 58. 1. 61. 1. 62. 15. 6. 7. Mat. 13. 3. 28. 19. 20.
Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. 14 Rom, 10. 14. 15. 1. Cor. 1. 21. 1. Pet. 1. 23. 25. And
where this ordinary means of salvation fails, the people for the most part
perish: Prou. 29. 18. Hos. 4. 6. 2. Chro. 15. 13. Esaias. 56 9. Matthew. 15. 14
Luke 11. 52. But that the reading of the Scriptures publicly in the Church of
God, and privately by our selves, is a special and ordinary mean, if not to
beget, yet to increase Reading of the Scriptures publicly in the Church.
faith in us, it is likewise proved, Deuteronomy. 6. 6 11. 18. Psalm. 1. 2. Ioh. 5. 39.
Mat. 14. 15. Romans 15 14. 2. Pet. 1. 19. Nehem. 88. Act. 13. 15. 15. 21. The
manifold fruit which comes of the reading of the Scriptures prove the same.

Reading rather establishes than derogateth from preaching* for none can be
profitable hearers of preaching, that have not been trained up in reading the
Scriptures, or hearing them read. Many inconveniences come from the neglect of
reading, as that the people cannot tell when a sentence is alleged out of the
Canonical Scriptures, when out of the Apocrypha, when out of the Scriptures,
when out of other writers, that they cannot discern when he speaks his own,
or a sentence of the Scripture.

Again, reading helps men's judgments, memories and affections, but
especially it serves for the confirmation of our faith: which may be proved
by the example of the men of Beroea, Act. 17. 13. It serves to discern the
spirits of men, 1. Ioh. 4. to make sou^der confession of our faith, to stop the
mouths of our adversaries, and to answer the temptations of Satan and the
wicked.

But because men sin, not only in neglect of hearing and reading, but also
in hearing and reading amiss: therefore the properties of reverent and
faithful reading and hearing, are to be set down, which are these that
follow: they be eight in number.

1. Diligence. 2. Wisdom. 3. Preparation. 4. Meditation. 5. Conference. 6.
Faith. 7. Practice. 8. Prayer.
The three first go before reading and preaching. The four next come after
them. The last must go before, and be with them, and come after them.

1 If diligence be necessary in reading profane authors, then much more in
reading (...).
the Scriptures. Diligence makes a rough way plain and easy, and of good
taste, which otherwise is hard and vnfauourie. In our diligence we must keep
an even course, and not to be like those who upon some sudden good motion, or
by reason of some good company, or by reason of some good action draw near,
or for fear of danger, etc. read for a time, and soon after give over
again. Read Prou. 2. 12. Matthew. 13. 54.

2 With diligence must be joined wisdom, which is in choice of

Matter. Order. Time.
For want of wisdom in the matter they read, many sin in studying other
books Matter.
before the Scriptures, and in the Scriptures in searching things not revealed,
and pretermitting things revealed, as John and James sought who should sit at
Christ's right hand, and left hand: but they sought not to come thither. And the
Disciples said, Act. 1. Will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?
not asking the means to come to the kingdom of heaven. And in things revealed
many will curiously and busily search for things not profitable, as
genealogies, and caresly neglect the things that are to be searched. And some
ignorant how to reform themselves, will be talking of reforming the Church.
And if the Preacher must give milk to the weak, and stronger meat to the
stronger Christians: if he must thus apply his doctrine to the hearers, then
much more the hearers themselves must apply their own reading to their own
capacities.

Wisdom is in order: as that men must be first grounded in the principal
points of Order.
doctrine: first we must lay the foundation and build upon the same: also we
must keep an order in our readings, and not be now in this place, now in
another: for order is the best help for memory and understanding: he that
reads little after a good manner, profits more than he that reads much
otherwise: as he that ^impeth in the way, does better Simile.
than he that runs in another way, or out of the way. Therefore for want of
order many read much, but profit little.

Wisdom must be used in discerning the times: for we must not read always,
and Time.
do nothing else, as some offending in the one extreme, are after driven by
Satan to the other. The Sabbath is wholly to be spent in such exercises: on
other days, in the morning, at noone, and in the evening, that is, when we may
redeem the day from the works of our calling, as David and Daniel did pray at
these three times, under which is contained all the worship of God. We must
do as much as we can every day, and no day Nulla dies sine linea.
must pass without a line. God has made every thing beautiful in his time,
Ecclesiast. 3. verse 11.

3 Preparation follows: If any man go away without any profit, and either
understands not, or understands amiss, want of preparation is the cause.

Preparation is

1 In fear of God his Majesty. 2 In faith in Jesus Christ. 3 In a good and
honest heart, with a greedy desire to eat up Gods word.
In all apparitions God always sent fear before, as his apparitor, it
ingendreth teachablenesse, Fear.
and meekness of mind, as we see in Isaac, who (as it is said) feared, and
then he said, I have blessed Jacob, and he shall be blessed. We see it also in
the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 7. and in the men Act. 2. From want of this
reverent fear, comes all checking of God his word, and that men dare be so
bold with it: but they that fear will be swift to hear, and slow to speak,
James. 1. 19. and will lay up his word in their heart, with the Virgin Mary.
Though they understand it not, though they kick at the word and spurn against
it, yet if God once teach them with his fear, then will they acknowledge it to
be the blessed word of God.

Fear comes upon men sometime they know not how: and if then they go to God,
they shall find some excellent blessing, either in having their understanding
enlightened, or some good affections put into them.

This fear is in respect of God his Majesty and our own corruption, to
correct the pride of reason, and to control our affections: and experience
will show, that when our reason and affections are tamed by misery, calamity,
sickness, and inward grief, then we are very teachable. And when men err, then
the pride of their reason is punished, as in heretics How to attain a cl^^re
understanding, sound judgment, and good affections. 1. Cor. 2.
and profane persons* Contrarily, God his good spirit rests upon the humble
to clear their understandings: but they first crucify their understanding and
affections, and offer them up in a sacrifice to God.

Faith in Christ is the second thing in this preparation, we must bring that
with us when we come to read, looking on him as on the Messiah, that must teach
us all things: he is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to whom it is given to open
the book of God. He opened the hearts of the Disciples going to Emaus.
Preachers build hay and stubble, because they do not only glory in him, but
do seek credit and preferment by preaching themselves. All heretics differ
among themselves, yet they all agree in this that they e^^e from Jesus Christ.

A heart prepared to learn is required, Pro. 17. 16. Wherefore is there a
price in the heart Good heart.
of a fool to get wisdom, and he has no heart* Our Lord Jesus Christ says,
that those that brought forth fruit (when they had heard) some thirty, some
sixty, some an hundred fold, they were such as received the word with a good
and honest heart, Luc. 8. Here says a godly and learned man, men are shut out
because they come without a heart

Now follow the properties that must follow our readings: Whereof the first is
meditation, the want of which makes men depart without fruit, though they read
or heat diligently. Meditation makes that which we have read to be our own.
He is blessed which meaitates in the law, day and night. Psalm. 1. 2.

Meditation is either of the

Mind and understanding. Heart and affections.
Meditation of the understanding, is when reason discourses of things read, or
heard, Meditation.
which the wise of the Heathen call, the refining of judgment, the life of
learning. They that want this, how much soever they have heard or read, yet
shall they never have sound and settled judgment. And this is one cause why it
is said, that the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men.

Meditation of the affections, is when having a thing in judgment, we ever
digest it and make it work upon our affections. It is continual searching of
our selves, and laboring to lay up all things in the treasures of our hearts.
The other will go away except this be joined with it: for judgment will away
except we frame our affections unto it.

Meditation in judgment goes before: then this must follow, that we may be
sound in judgment before we either fear or cheer up our hearts, least we
have false fears or False fears and false joys.
false joys. Many are of sound judgment, and yet have not their hearts purged
and touched: they can give counsel to others, but cannot follow it themselves,
because they join not affection with judgment. Meditation without reading is
erroneous, and reading without meditation is barren.

The next thing is conference. In natural things man stands in need of
help, then 2. Confere^nce.
much more in spiritual things he stands in need of others. And as iron
sharpneth iron: so one friend another, Pro. 27. And as two eyes see more, two
ears hear more* and two hands can do more than one, so this is a special
communion of Saints, and God has promised, that when two or three are gathered
together in his name, that he will be present with them by his spirit, as he
was corporally with his Disciples going to Emaus.

Conference is either with

Ministers of God. Our equals. Or others.
This rule must be kept, that conference with our equals must be of those
things which we heard of our Ministers, as it must be kept also in meditation,
which is a conference with our selves. We must for a time like babes hang at
the mouths of the Ministers, because we cannot run before we go: nay we
cannot go without a leader. No man may presume to understand above that which
is meet to understand, but labor to understand according to the measure of
sobriety, as God has dealt to every one the measure of faith: and when they
have laid the foundation, then build the walls and pillars. The Eunuch would
not interpret the word without a guide, but he laid it up in his heart, as the
Virgin Mary did. For want of true humility conference is slandered, because it
is used after an evil manner, as before they be surely grounded in principal
points of religion, to talk of other matters above their capacity and
knowledge. Secondly, we must come in love without anger, envy, or desire of
victory: therefore in conference we must use the preparation spoken of before:
the want of which makes much ^anglings and wranglings in company.

Lastly, we must procure things honest before men, that it may be done wisely,
without confusion and destruction: and not by too great a multitude, that we
may afford our doings before men; not with the doors shut, least any man
should hear. This is the difference between the conference of the godly and
religious, and the conuen^cles of Heretics.

The next thing is faith: The word must be mixed with faith: Heb. 42. The word
which 3. Faith.
they hear a profited them nothing, because it was not mixed with faith. But
all have not faith: therefore the Prophet Esaias said, Lord who will believe our
report? And Luke 18. 18. Suppose ye that the Son of man when he comes shall
find faith on the earth? All the former must be used to refine faith: for as
gold before it be pure is seven fold tried in the fire, so faith which is much
more precious than gold, must go through all these means.

Faith here is an increase of all that in * preparation. A Merchant must have
something Supra. Of preparation. A general faith.
before he be a Merchant, but he occupies to increase and get more: so we must
believe in Jesus Christ by a general faith going before: but we must use all
the forenamed means to increase our knowledge and faith in all particulars.
One may be a faithful person generally, and yet an unbeliever in particulars.
As Christ's Disciples to whom he said, If ^^ had faith but as much as a grain
of mustard seed, etc. As Abraham, Rebecca, and Zachary had.

There is a difference between faith and opinion or knowledge: for our
knowledge and opinions vanish away in afflictions: but as gold is tried in the
fire, so faith will abide the fire of affliction. Satan winowed Peter, but his
faith failed not: for Christ failed not, for Christ prayed for him, and for his
Disciples, and for all believers, that their faith should not fail.

Next follows practice: That we have a desire that the word may bring forth
increase 4. Practice.
of faith and repentance, Psalm. 119 98. By thy commandments thou have made me
wiser than my enemies, for they are ^^^^ with me. The practice of Infidels is
nothing, because it is not joined with faith. But Christ says, Blessed are
they which hear and do. And so says Iame^, that this is that assures us
that we have faith. He that does this, is compared unto him that builds his
house upon a rock, and our works are not the foundation of the house, but
then we have builded upon Christ when we join the fruits of our faith with
knowledge, they will speak for us to our consciences, and to others. Our
Savior Christ says, Want of practice makes men blinder after some measure of
knowledge.
That that servant that knows the will of his master and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes: for it is worse to offend of knowledge than of
ignorance. And why should he give us any more, if we practice not that we have?
For to him that has shall be given, but from him that has not shall be taken
away, etc. Why do many hearing the word, either continue or increase in their
blindness, but because they would not practice that they knew, and also even
that they had is taken from them? If a good conscience be not joined with
faith, faith shall be taken away and errors succeed. If then we be forgetful,
we must confess that the want of practice is the cause thereof. The rule of
reason in all things is, that the best way of learning is by practice: then how
much more if we practice will God increase our talents?

The last thing is prayer, which must be used both in the beginning, in the
middle, and S. Prayer.
in the end. Prayer must be in all the former means: for without it we can
never use them, nor have any blessing by them.

Prayer contains under it,

Prayer. Thanksgiving.
For prayer, that it must be used when we read, it is plain, 1. Cor. 2. The
eye has not seen, etc. meaning not only the joys contained in the kingdom
of heaven, but even those that are contained in the word. And again in the
same place, As no man knows the heart of a man, but the spirit of man: so no
man knows the meaning of the Lord in his word, except God give him his spirit
to declare it unto him. And if we must pray when we come to our meat and
drink, that God may give nourishment to us by them, then how much more must we
pray God to nourish us by his word: for else we cannot profit thereby; And as
no man dare touch meat and drink before he pray, and we have no title to it
before it be sanctified to us by prayer: how impudent are they that dare touch
Gods book without prayer, or think that otherwise they have title unto it?
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God gives the increase: so if any be
senseless still, and yet have heard long, it is because God has not revealed
his will unto them. Men may be diligent, yet they shall err if God give not his
spirit: and though they meditate and confer, yet they shall be punished for*
giving liberty to their rouing brain and to their tongue, except they pray
for Gods spirit. Many rest in knowledge and want faith why?


Many rest in knowledge, and want faith, because they want prayer: and we rest
in knowledge, and never practice, because we pray not to God to write his law
in our hearts by his spirit, that now, not we, but he may work in us. They
that take any thing in hand without prayer, howsoever they say they abhor
Popery, yet they practice it, because they take upon them to have some power
in themselves. Thanksgiving.


For thanksgiving, if we be bound to praise God when he has fed our bodies,
how much more when he has fed our souls? And shall God be justly offended
with us, if we thank him not for our refreshing, with meats, sleep, etc? and
shall we not tremble for fear of revenge, if we have not praised God for any
light, or any good motion that he has put into us? For want hereof, after some
lightning follows some darkness, and after much feeling comes deadnes: and
by this means Satan goes about to take all Gods graces from us. David says,
Blessed art thou Lord, O teach me thy statutes. This shows that we must ever
praise God before we come to read. Many are fervent in asking, but cold in
giving thanks. And if we would give thanks to God, it would much ease us in
asking, and God would not punish us in taking his graces from us.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE RESVRRECTION
Psalm. 16. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in the grave: neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Philip. 3. 20. Our conversation
is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ. Verse. 21. Who shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able
even to subdue all things unto himself.
ARe we persuaded with the Prophet of God Psalm. 16. that we shall be raised
and freed from corruption? that our death is a sleep, our grave as a bed?
and that, that God, that raises the Sun daily out of his den, will draw
us also out of the earth? then have we true faith, which undoubtedly we shall
find more strong, if long before death come, we would exercise our selves
with the meditations of death. Many we see by deferring all unto the last
end, die heathenishly; many, who would seem to have more heroical
Meditations of death.
spirits, desire unnaturally to dye, not that they are surcharged with the
burden of their rebellion and corruption, but because as beasts, they neither
can rejoice in things in heaven, nor fear the pains in hell. These are more
drowsy and senseless beasts, than those, who are more loath to depart, in whom
appears more nature, and some conscience; but the other degenerating from
nature, are a far more monstrous and dangerous kind of people. Howbeit the
common sort of people commend this kind of death, they say thus, he departed
as meekely as a lamb, he went out of the world as a bird goes out of the
shell, he died very quietly never speaking a word; nay they might say more
truly, he died beastlike, he gave no token of repentance, in acknowledging A
dull kind of death.
his sins, he showed no fruit of faith how he was saved in Christ, he gave
no testimony of his hope in witnessing a joyful resurrection, and changing
to a better life. Thus we see, how ready we are to extremes, either fearing
death too much, or fearing Great quietness and m^^knes in the death of many
sinners.
it too little. Well, if we will be rid of that fear in excess, behold here
is a remedy: My flesh does rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in
grave. But there are othersome, who can yield quietly to death also; what is
their reason? what is their faith? forsooth they say, they must pay that
willingly, which is due of necessity; and seeing they owe God a death, they
had as lieue die at first, as at last, when the debt is paid, it can be no
more required. It is far otherwise with the children of God, who of all
others have the greatest preferment by death, yet having tasted of the land of
the living even in this life, cannot satisfy themselves in the multitude of
many days with the sweet s^ppe thereof, until their measure be brimme full.
Then they dying in the ripenes of years, and in the fullness of days, are
gathered in their due time into the Lord his barn, as a ricke of corn. Then
they having fought a good battle, run their full race, and kept a true
faith, can with joy in Christ look for the crown of glory which is prepared
for them. To this wholesome meditation and fore-thinking of death, the daily
mortality and dropping away of others ought to stir us up. For we see many
round about us of the same complexions, of the same age that we are of,
breathing, of the same air, using the same diet which we do, who go before
us, and are gleaned from those miserable calamities, which our long contempt of
the word has threatened to Simile.
fall upon us. Let us labor then to lay up our flesh in hope, that our
departure from hence, may be as the sailing over the Seas; as the travailing of
a woman; as a delivery out of prison, and a returning from exile. Certainly a
man is never more tried to be a Christian, than in contemning death: for
Heretics concerning other things, may have as great gifts as The death of
Heretics. Note.
other professors, but in death they will bewray their hypocrisy, either in
murmuring as dogs, or in vnsensiblenes as blocks. But in Christians there
appears such an heroical alacrity, tempered with so gracious humility,
that they desire not to live, but to keep a good conscience; they refuse not
to die for nothing, but for hope of a more happy inheritance. It may be, that
others, as we said, may show some cheerful countenance to die, but it either
proceeds of some frenzy unadvisedly, or of rashness especially, or of
numnesse carelessly.

Neither would I have any to accelerate their death, or to read me as some
have read Plato, that thereby they should hasten the time of their deliverance;
but that we should learn, when God does beck for us, we should be ready
to remove; and that for none other causes, but for faith, and in hope of Gods
promises; a full feeling of our sins discharged; a sure confidence of God his
power in raising us up again; and a steadfast hope of a more glorious
possession after this life. By these means we shall so rest in the hands of
God, that when nature decaieth, we shall have our departure with calmnes, and
in a good time shall through a natural ripenes rather voluntarily fall of,
than violently be pulled off. Wherefore we see that this rash and indiscreet
desire off death, is either in minds that are abject, or in men, in whose
flesh their spirits are already buried: as also that the triumph of the godly
proceeds from hence, even a full assurance, that he which raised them up
every morning will raise them in the last day; and that he which raised Christ
their head, will also raise them his members. This is that which will stay all
quiuering of the flesh, wherewith many are so benumbed, that they cannot with
gladness drink of that cup whereunto the Lord allotted them. If ever this
doctrine of the resurrection was needful, it is now adays most needful,
wherein wicked Heretics would deprive us of the comfort of it. It will not
serve in the time of temptation, whether it come immediately The implicit popish
faith cannot help in temptation.
from the devil, or med^^tly by his instruments, to rest in our infolded faith
with the Papists, or to say we believe as it is in the Creed, we believe as
the Church believes. But to leave the devil himself, he has suborned such
privy and treacherous adversaries of this doctrine, as with impudent faces
will agree with us in matter, and in word will grant the resurrection; and yet
shift away in their manner, and in sense and truth blasphemously deny the
power of the same. Thus Hymineus and Philetus would not flatly deny the
resurrection, Heretical opinions concerning the resurrection.
nay they would grant it, but how? they said it was past. Thus cunningly
Satan would overthrow the manner of the resurrection, by permitting them to
dally in the matter.

Again, shall we think that the Sadduces did generally resist it? no: they
had their false glosses, and their forced interpretations, with whom Satan in
policy would pretend a maintaining of that, which in purpose he sought to
mangle and mar. The Philosophers had many glancing and glorious speeches of
the immortality of the soul; but when they came to this point, concerning the
rising again of the flesh, nothing was more ridiculous and incredible unto
them. In so much that many of them, of the Epicures and Stoikes, mocked Paul
disputing of this matter, and said, What will this babbler say, as we may
read Act. 17. verse. 18. And when he spoke of the resurrection from the dead,
some mocked, and others said, we will hear thee again ^f this matter. Surely
if the rising again had been nothing, but the renewing of the mind, as some
fondly dream and falsely affirm, it may be thought, that the Academicks
would have conceived this doctrine, and Platoesidaea has as great secrets. But
here is the point which they stick at, and can by no means digest it, that
the natural body, after it is consumed into the air, fire, water, or earth,
should afterward revive, and receive supernatural qualities: and as
Philosophers Few Christians do truly believe the resurrection.
and Heretics cannot brook this kind of teaching, so sure it is, that few of
the common professors receive it in truth, as their lives do manifestly prove.

Besides, there is another evil more perilous than these. Through the close
subtlety of Satan this mystery of iniquity is cunningly conveyed into the
heads of the more learned sort, to discourse of certane places of the old
Testament, which godly, learned, and ancient Fathers have construed of the
resurrection, and are denied of these men. As these places, Job. 19. 25. 26.
27. and Esaj, 26 19. and Daniel, 12. 2. It may be, and I do think, their
intent and purpose was not to misconstrue the places. Howbeit, it was Satan's
policy to abuse the truth, and undermine our faith: it was the secret
judgment of God to suffer Satan so far to buffet them. Wherefore that we
may the better be armed against the day of trial, and The parts of special
points handled.
that we may stand strongly in the day of temptation, in our possession; we
will by God his assistance, first set down those express testimonies in the
word of God: whereby this doctrine is confirmed. Secondly, we will allege
those reasons out of the Scriptures, which 1
implie this thing, though they do not plainly affirm it. Afterward we will
vn^ase the 2
shifting visard of Heretics, whereby they would counsel men to some liking
of their opinions. 3
Wherefore, that we may the better answer the devil and his limbs, let us
first consider of that translation of Enoch, Genes 5. 24. wherein the Fathers
have observed a manifest testimony of the resurrection: with whom I agree in
part, but not in general: because Translation of Enoch.
I dare not affirm with them, that the body of Enoch is in heaven, seeing as
yet Christ alone is risen from the dead, and was made the first fruits of them
that slept. And albeit that Enoch and Eliah did not fall asleep as did the
other Fathers, yet because it is said, Hebr. 11. 39. that the Fathers in old
time, among whom Enoch is mentioned, received not the promise, that is the
fulness of the promise, it cannot be, that Enoch his flesh is yet in heaven.
And howsoever he was taken away by unknown means, nevertheless that GOD
that could so hide the body of Moses, that even the devil looking for it
could not find it, has also laid up the bodies of Enoch and Eliah, in such
means, a^ are hid from us. And as His opinion concerning Enoch and Eliahs
body. Heb. 11. 33. Matthew. 22. 32.
the Lord has infinite means of hiding, so has he incomprehensible means of
finding as well of the body of Enoch, as of the body of Moses. Now whereas it
is said, Heb 11. 33. that they suffered that they may receive a better
resurrection, it must needs be that there is a rising again of the flesh.
Again, we read Exodus 3 6. that the Lord said unto Moses, I am the God of thy
Fathers, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. In which place it may seem
not a sufficient proof to confirm so great a matter. Howbeit our Savior
CHRIST uses it as a bulwark against the Sadduces, Matthew 22 32. where our
Savior Christ to prove the resurrection, infers the same words, adding to
them thus much, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: where we
see how Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob being alive, have their bodies in the Lord
his hands in keeeping, as well as their souls. Wherefore seeing both the
Prophets and Christ himself have used this place to that end, we also may
safely use it to prove the Resurrection.

It is said moreover, Job. 19 25. I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he
shall stand the last Job. 19. 25.
on the earth. 26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet
shall I see GOD in my flesh. 27. Whom my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me. This
place the very Heretics will grant after a fashion, that is, with a most
wicked mind, understanding it only of that rising again unto sanctification,
which is in this life. Others there be, which are of a reverent judgment in
other things, who expound this of the renewing and restoring of his flesh to
freshnes and soundnes, after that it was corrupted with sores, and eaten with
cankers. But* admit it were so, which in truth cannot bear that exposition;
how could he have believed that? but that he, being persuaded that God, who
when his body should wholly be resolved into corruption, would raise it to a
more glorious perfection, could much more* restore soundnes to his body now,
whilst this corruption was but in part on him? How could he do it? but by
hope in the power of GOD, which with greater case could renew his flesh and
bones, being but corrupted, than revive the same being altogether dead* and
thoroughly consumed? as we read, Ezech. 37* 5. 6. wherein is set down a
notable type of this rising again. 5. Thus says the Lord, unto these bones:
Behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. 6. And I will
lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you with skin,
and put breath in you, that ye may live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
True it is, that the chief purpose of the Holy Ghost is, to foreshewe the
bringing again of the people out of captivity, howbeit under a most excellent
figure of the rising and restoring of the flesh in the last day. So that the
place imports thus much: if the Lord could restore sinews, flesh, skin,
breath, and life to rotten bones; much more he could restore the Israelites to
their country. The same sense may be applied to that, Esaias. 26. 19. Thy dead
men shall live: even with my body shall they rise. Awake and sing ye that
dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs: and the earth shall cast
out the dead. In which place is signified thus much: As herbs in time of
winter seem dead, and yet in the spring time sprout again, by reason of that
sap, that lay hidden in the root; and as the bodies of the faithful seem
utterly to perish, when they are in the earth, and yet in the last day shall
rise again, through that seed which is given in Christ: even so the
Israelites, who in time of their banishment, seemed to die as winter herbs,
and to perish as dead bodies, should be brought home again, and restored to
their former liberty. Which place could not but show the return of the people
under the type of the resurrection, in that the Prophet says, Even with this
body shall they rise. Notable is that place, Daniel 12. 2. Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and
some to perpetual shame and contempt. Whereunto agrees that saying of our
Savior Christ, Ioh. 5. 28. Marvel not at this: for the hour shall come, in
which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice. 29. And they shall
come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life: but they that
have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. Now when we shall see
that there is nothing more clear of the doctrine of faith, contained in the
new Testament, than that of the resurrection, and that there is no new doctrine
in the same, but it is also in the old Testament; although indeed that is more
manifestly, and in more perfect beauty set down by the Prince of Prophets,
than by the Prophets his forerunners; what shall we say there is in the new
Testament not proved in some measure already in the old? The Jews believed no
one article more, than that of the resurrection, as may appear by that ready
answer of Martha, Ioh, 12 24. at what time our Savior Christ came to raise up
Lazarus her brother: for he saying unto her in the verse going before, Thy
brother shall rise again, by and by she answered: I know that he shall rise
again in the resurrection of the last day. Again, we read Act. 23. 8. that
the Pharisees confessed the resurrection.

Now it is known, that the faith of the Jews was grounded on the word, which
as yet was only in the administration of the old Testament, and not in the
new: for as yet it was not extant, or in no credit at the least with them:
wherefore seeing not only the primitive Church has believed herein, by the
evident light of the new Testament, and the Jews before believed it by the
light of the old, it is manifest, that the doctrine of the resurrection is
proved in the old: and among many places, this of our Psalm is not the least,
where it What is meant by soul, Psalm. 16.
is said, Thou shall not leave my soul in grave, nor suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. By soul, we must understand, he means his natural life, as
it is taken in the Scripture, 1. Cor. 15. 45. where the Apostle borrowing his
speech from the second chapter of Genesis and seventh verse says, The first
man Adam was made a living soul: and the last Adam was made a quickening
spirit. The reason why he proved the rising again of his flesh, is here
drawn from the power of our Savior Christ, of whom these words are meant,
Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, as both Peter in his
notable Sermon, Act, 2. and Paul Act. 23. do plainly affirm: for the Apostle
says, that David was buried, and saw corruption, and therefore he spoke not
this of himself, but of Christ his head, in whom was found no quality of
corruption at all: so that David as a member of Christ, gathered this by the
eye of faith, that there should come an holy one out of his loins, who by his
own mighty power should raise up his own body from seeing any corruption,
and by the same power should also raise his body, which should see corruption,
that it might rest with his, and be made like his, as we may read, Philip. 3.
20. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ. 21. Who shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like to his glorious bo^ie according to the working, whereby he is
able even to subdue all things unto himself. So that the Prophet looks for a
resurrection of the flesh, after it shall be corrupted, contrary to the
heretiqu^s, who dream of a spiritual resurrection from sin, which by no
means can be understood of Places of the new Testament.
Christ, in whom was no sin, and therefore no rising from sin. And thus
much for the places of the old testament, now we will allege those places of
the new. First, let us consider of the words wherewith our Savior Christ
confu^eth the Sadduces: Math. 22. 32. I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of
Jacob. God cannot be said to be the God of Abraham being dead, except he raise
his body again, which he has in keeping, as well as his soul. For he says
not I am the God of Abraham's soul, but I am the God of Abraham, the God of his
whole man: wherefore it must needs be that Abraham must rise again. M^t. 25.
31. When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. Likewise Luke 14. 13.
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the l^me* and the blind,
14. And thou shall be blessed, because they cannot recompense thee, for thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just As if our Savior Christ
should say, although thou may think, that all the things thus given are lost
here, yet there comes a time when thou shall reap the recompense
plentifully, and have thy reward with the just, Ioh. 5. 28. 29 The Lord shows
the resurrection of both estates and wills them not to marvel, that he
should raise their souls to life, which would raise their bodies from death.
^8. Marueil^ not at this, says he, for the hour shall come, i. the which all
that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man. ^9. And they
so^ll come forth that have ^^^: good, unto the resurrection of life, but they
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Ioh. 11. Martha
(as we showed before) plainly testifies of the resurrection, and confesses
her faith therein. Act. 3. 19. The Apostle Peter calls this rising again,
the time of refreshing: a thing most comfortable; for as the wearisome way
saying man recreateth himself with his Inn at night; so the godly shall
surely, after their troubles be renewed and refreshed at the presence of
Christ. Act. ^3. 6. Paul shows to the Pharisees, how he was accused of the
hope and resurrection of the dead. And Act ^4. 15. Paul protests his Note.
faith of the resurrection, that it should be both of the just and the unjust,
which thing wrought in him, as it ought to do in all, a careful conscience of
well doing: and therefore he adds in the verse following. 16. And herein I
endeavor my self, to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward
men. What is more largely proved and confirmed than this, 1. Cor. 15. 10. in
the whole chapter throughout? Besides, 2. Cor. 5 10. We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, says the Apostle, that every one may
receive the things that are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. Philip. 3. 21. it is said, that Christ shall
change our vile bodies, the place is set down before. The manner and end of
this resurrection is also set down, 1. These. 4. 14. 15. 16. 17. If we believe
(says Paul) that Jesus is dead and is risen, even so them which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. 15. For this say we unto you by the word of
the Lord, that we which live, and are remaining to the coming of the Lord
shall not prevent them which sleep. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shoute, etc. The Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 11.
painteth out the manifold martyrdomes of the saints, and shows how some were
racked, and would not be delivered, others were tried by mock^ and scourgings,
by bands and imprisonments, they were stoned, they were hewn in sunder, they
were tempted and so forth, and why did they endure these things? The Apostle
tells us, verse. 35. That they might receive a better resurrection, than any
deliverance they could have here. Again, verse. 39. These obtained not the
promise, that is, not the accomplishment of the promises, verse. 40. Why? God
providing a Note this interpretation of Heb 11. 39. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect, for even
the first member of Christ dying many thousand years ago, shall not receive the
fulness of the promise, that is, in body and soul, until the last member be
ready. But of all places most excellent are these, 2. Pet. 3. 10. The day of
the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens Revel. 10.
11.
shall pass away with a noise: and the elements shall melt with heat, and
Reave. 20. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and one that sat on it, from
whose face fled, both the earth and the heaven, and their place was no more
found. 12. And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand before God, etc.
13. And the Sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up their dead* which were in them.

Now as we here have received the truth of the doctrine, so now let us see
into it further by reason: that as on the one side we cannot deny there is a
resurrection, seeing the word does confirm it, unless we will depart from the
faith, and deny the word: so on the other 2 Confirmation
side, when we shall see, how these things are, we cannot withstand it even
with reason, unless we be senseless. The reasons therefore which we will use,
are partly drawn from God 1
himself, partly from the order of nature, and from the creatures, and partly
from the commodities, 2
which accompany the truth of this doctrine, and from the inconveniences, 3
which ensue the contrary. Those proofs, which are drawn from the Lord
himself, are to 4
be considered, either in his own person simply, or as we consider of him in
his Mediatorship, and as the second person in the Trinity. Concerning those
things, which are in his own person, we must observe his truth, his justice,
and his power: his truth, because heaven and earth shall pass, but no title
of his word shall fail; and his promises in Christ Jesus are Yea and Amen.
Wherefore, whatsoever the Lord has set down^ in his word to 1 We must beleeu
what the Lord says, how contrary soever it seem to natural reason. Matthew. 25.
33. Luke 16. 23.
be done, it must bear with us that credit, that it is our part with Abraham
to yield to it, though outward means seem clean contrary, and with Marie to
believe it, although no visible means are apparent His justice is so espoused
to his truth, that whatsoever we have heard out of the word, the equity of
his justice does require both to the accomplishment of his promises in
rewarding the godly, and the fulfilling of his threatenings in revenging the
ungodly. This we see Matthew. 25. 33. where, by the rule of righteousness, he
se^teth the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left. Luke 16. 23.
it is set down, how, the rich man being in hell torments, lifting up his eyes,
and seeing Lazarus a far off in Abraham's bosom, cried, Father Abraham have
mercy upon me, etc. But Abraham answering him according Gods justice and
mercy require a resurrection, that the wicked may suffer for their sins, as
well in their bodies as in their souls, and that the godly may be crowned, etc.
to the proportion of God his Justice, said, ver. 25. Son, remember that thou
in thy life time receiuedst pleasures; and likewise Lazarus pains, now
therefore he is comforted, and thou art tormented. To this effect, worthy to
be observed, is that place, 2, These. 1. 6. it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. 7. And to you which are
troubled; rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven,
etc. Where we see, how it stands with God his righteous judgment and
justice, that his persecuted Church, and afflicted Saints, who in this world
go for naught, should in time be refreshed with a recompense of glory, and
that their cruel persecutours being wanton in their sins, and triumphing in
their cruelty; should have their crown of shame and endless contempt in
torments. The equity of which justice is in this, that seeing the wicked have
not only dishonored God in their souls, through all the fruits of
reprobation, but also have used the members of their bodies as instruments of
sin, and weapons of iniquity, unto the full number of sins; so they should
not only suffer the vengeance of God in their souls, but also in their
bodies: and as Gods graces have shined, not only in the souls of his Saints
before him and his Angels, but also have much beautified their bodies, and have
taken up the members also as instruments of Gods glory; so the Lord will not
only advance the souls of his, but also their bodies.

If this were not, where were the fulfilling of God his promises* where should
be the executing of his threatenings? for Abram, Isaac, Jacob, Lot, Joseph, Job,
David; Esaias, Jeremy, Daniel, and all the rest of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and holy men and women, in the world were but as
Pilgrims, and desiring a better and heavenly Country, suffered in this world
troubles, persecutions, trials and all manner of evil. Again, the wicked
prosper in their goods, bodies, wives, children, they have no bands in their
death, they are lusty and strong, they feel not the sores of Job, nor the
miseries of Joseph, Psalm. 73*
pride is a chain unto them, and cruelty covers them as a garment, their
eyes stand out for fatness, they have more than heart can wish. So in this
world the faithful feel not the promises: the unfaithful feel not their
punishments. It must needs be therefore by God his justice, as it is certain
by his word, that seeing in this life the holy ones are not fully rewarded, nor
the wicked ones fully revenged, in the life to come the one should rise to
heavenly io^es, the other should rise to hellish torments. And as we see, that
there shall be a resurrection of the flesh, because the word has said it,
which is true, and justice will put it in practice, because it does require it;
so the power of God is able to perform whatsoever 3 The power of God to
perform all his promises and threatenings.
the word does show, or justice does desire to be done. It is not without great
cause, that in the entrance of our Confession, we acknowledge the Lord to be
almighty. For what were his mercy, or what were his justice, if he could not
perform that with might, which he does promise, nor bring to pass with power,
that which he threatens? Howbeit when we say God is almighty, we give to
understand, that he can do whatsoever he will do. For true it is, he cannot
fail in his truth, he cannot alter the covenant gone out of his mouth: what
then? is there any thing impossible to the Lord? no: the Lord will do what is
good and can do what he will. Neither does it any more derogate from God his
almighty power, to say, he cannot lie; than it does extenuate the commendation
of a mighty Captain, to say, he cannot be conquered. This power of God is
either seen in his Creation, or in his Providence, or Preservation. In his
Creation thus, if God our of nothing could draw out heaven and earth; if out of
the earth, which being a formele^se mass and sumpe, was by the spirit of God
hatching over the waters brought a comely order; if out of the darkness the
Lord drew light; if of the dust of the earth God made man, and out of his he
that made all things of nothing; can more easily restore our bodies again
being rotten, or changed into the elements.
ribbe drew a woman: is it not as easy for him, drawing these and all other
things out of nothing, to draw our flesh, being made, out of the earth, in
which it was corrupted? is it not as easy to draw a man out of the earth
again, as to make a man of the earth at first? Is it not as easy, though
rottenness does seem to hinder the resurrection, to renew a body out of many
bones, as out of one bone to frame a whole body? Is not the Lord as able to
restore the body, which he dissolueth into the elements, being made into it
former fashion, as before it had any being, to tie the flesh together with
sinews, to convey strength into the bones, and to beautify all with a skin
Let us as well consider God his power, in reducing men's bodies into their
former estate, as his mighty hand in unloosing them. For as he brings
flesh to rottenness, the rottenness to worms, the worms to dust: so can he
if he would reduce and bring backward the dust to the worms, the worms to a
putrified matter, the putrefaction to flesh, the flesh to immortality.

The providence of God does teach us herein, if we either consider of it in the
course of 4 Providence of God.
nature, or in governing his Church. In the course of nature, as Esaias 26. 19.
Awake and sing, ye that aw^ll in the dust* for the deaw is as the deaw of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out her dead* Here the Prophet shows* that
that God, that made Aarons rod to bad, and that draws out lively colors of
dead flowers, and flourishing branches out of withered herbs, will also raise
us in our bodies to the brightness of his glory, which have been laid in the
filthiness of the dust. Again, 1. Cor. 15. 35. But some man will say, How are
the dead raised up? and w^^^ what body come they forth? 36. O fool, that
which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it di^* 37. And that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body, that shall be, but bare corn, as it
fa^eth, of wheat, or of some other. 38. But God gives a body at his
pleasure, even to every seed his own body, etc. See, the Lord calls them
fools, that will not believe this. Can the Lord raise grain out of the earth,
and will he not raise man out of the earth, for whose sake the grain is
renewed? Again, shall we doubt, that he, who holds the waters in his fist,
and swadleth the maine seas (which in their own nature are above the earth)
that they should not pass their bounds, break out of their bottels,
cloisters, and chambers to ou^rflow all; is unable to draw our bodies out of
the dust? Sure it is, that flesh and blood can hardly admit this doctrine; and
therefore we had need to arm our selves with these and such like meditations.
If we weigh more deeply the providence of God in his Church, either whilst it
was more particular in one family, or more general in more, we shall have our
faith in this doctrine the more confirmed. For he who accomplished his promise
made unto Abraham, in blessing all the nations of the earth in his seed, even
when the ordinary course of nature was dead both in Abraham and Sarah, by
bringing Isaac out of their loins; and fulfilled his covenant unto David his
servant, in bringing Jesus into the womb of Mary, whilst as yet she knew no
man, who was the promised seed to bruise the Serpents head: is no less able
to take us out of the dry womb, and dead bowels of the earth, according to
his promise* Genesis 22. Abraham at God his commandment is ready to offer up his
son Isaac, in whom all the promises were to be accomplished, neither was he
hindered by unbelief: and why? The Apostle says, Heb. 11. 19. He considered,
that God was able to raise him up even from Abraham's faith concerning the
resurrection.
the dead, from whence he received him also after a sort: neither would he tie
the power of God to ordinary means. Thus we see he overcame all unbelief by
faith in the resurrection. What if we consider, how mightily the Lord restored
and multiplied his Church, after he had ouerflowed the whole earth with water?
What if we call to mind the mighty preservation of the Church, in delivering
them through the red sea, when the waters dividing themselves stood as a wall
on either side of the Israelites? What if we consider how mightily the Lord
co^ducted his people safely thorough the wilderness forty years, giving them
Manna from heaven, water out of the rock, healing them that were stung of
Serpents, with the beholding of a dead Serpent, and preserving their apparel,
that it was not worn in so long a time? Shall we not think that the same God
is able to raise the bodies of his Saints out of the earth? It is recorded, 2.
King. 4. 36. that Elisha, the man of God, restored to the Shunamite her son
being dead: and 2. King. 13. 21. we read that a dead man being cast into the
sepulcher of Elisha, and touching his bones, revived, and stood upon his feet.
Did God thus confirm the doctrine of Elisha, and will he not much more
confirm the doctrine of his dear Son? Could Elisha by the power of God give
life unto others, and shall not the Lord advance his own person in himself,
at the last day? Daniel 3. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refusing to serve
the false gods, and the golden Image, which Nebuchadnezzar had set up, who
might have had policy to have kept their faith to themselves, as our Familists
do now adays, were cast into the hot fiery furnace, and yet by belief in God
were so preserved from it, that the fire had no power over their bodies, not an
hair of their head was burnt, neither were their coats changed, nor any smell
of fire came upon them. Dan. 6. the Prophet of God refusing the commandment
of the King, was cast into the den of Lions, who by faith obtained the Angel of
the Lord to shut up the Lyo^s mouths, that they could not hurt him. Jonah 2.
we read, how he being in the fishes belly three days and three nights, at
the commandment of the Lord was cast out upon the dry land. Matthew. 27. 52.
it is said, that the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints
that slept arose: 56. And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and
went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. What shall we say of these
things; Did the fire, contrary to it nature, cease to burn the bodies in it
at the presence of an Angel, and will it not restore the bodies, being burnt,
at the power of God and presence of Christ? Did the Lions spare the body from
devouring, and shall they not deliver again the bodies having devoured them?
Can the Whale deliver Jonah after three days, and will not the sea surrender
her dead? Did the dead arise before their time, to show Christ his passion, and
shall they not arise at their time to appear at his glorious coming? Cannot
that God, that made Angels to appear in humane shape, make men appear out of
the earth in their own shape? And why did the Angels from heaven, the dead
bodies from earth, so suddenly receive that estate, and so suddenly lay it
down, but to show, that their time of perfection was not yet come?

Now let us see those reasons, which are drawn from God as he is our Mediator,
wherein 5 Christ our Mediator can and will raise us.
we will consider certain things done in his own person, and things to be
observed in the means which lead us unto him. Luke 8. 55. Our Savior Christ
arises from death to life the daughter of Iairus. And which is a further
degree, Luke. 7. 14 he revived the widows some lying on the bear in a coffin
ready to be buried. Nay, which yet is a further degree and more marvelous,
Ioh. 11. 44. he raises Lazarus, (Marthaes brother) having been dead four
days. Lastly, Matthew. 26. he mightily raises himself, having been dead three
days and three nights, and that without all quality of corruption. Who then
dare doubt, under pain of damnation, that the same Jesus Christ can raise our
mortal and corruptible bodies, or that he will not change our vile bodies, and
make them like his glorious body, by tha^ mighty power, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself? Behold Pilate seals the stone which covers
Christ in his burial, armed men are prepared, and watchmen sit at the grave,
neither could all these things keep under the power of Christ from rising What
then? Forsooth (which is most unlike) they invented, that poor silly souls
came and stole him from the armed men. Well, he was seen first of Mary, then
of certain Disciples, afterward of more than five hundred We see now his rising
was corporal, it was no spiritual resurrection; in what sort he rose, in like
manner shall we rise also: but he rose in the flesh, then shall we rise in the
flesh, and therefore not in the spirit alone, as our brainsicke heretics
imagine. Now he rose not for his own cause, no more than he was purely borne,
holily lived, and innocently dyed: all these things he did for us, that we
might be sanctified, that we might be justified, that we might be glorified.
Neither did he Christ suffered in soul.
suffer in the body alone, but in the soul also: whereby he showed, that he
freed not the soul alone, but the body also, because the body as well as the
soul was guilty and punishable for sin. He rose not in soul alone, but in
body also, whereby he brought grace, and restored holiness as well to the body
as the soul, seeing both body and soul had lost the same by transgression. He
ascended not only in soul but in body also, because he would give glory to
the body and the soul, seeing he had purchased them both. Wherefore it must
needs follow that there shall be a resurrection of the flesh. For if by faith
we are made bone of his bones, and by faith are made partakers of his flesh,
Ioh. 6. and Christ did all these things in his body, the virtue whereof we must
receive from him: how should all this be, if there were no resurrection? The
means, whereby we come unto Christ, require also that this should be so. First
we know, the word pierces our bodies, as well as our The service of the body
in hearing, prayer, Sacraments.
souls: for the eye is to see the Sacraments, the ear to hear, the tongue to
speak the word, and the body has it duties as well as the soul in receiving
and obeying of the word: and therefore the force and fruit of the word, shall
as well be showed on our bodies as on our souls. Likewise in offering our
prayers we have the use both of the soul and body. For we lift up pure hands,
and kneel with our knees, we eleuate our eyes, we cry with our voices, we
prostrate our whole bodies: and therefore as God has made both for his glory
in this life, so has he appointed to glorify both in the life to come. Again,
in the Sacraments there are actions of the body as well as of the soul, for
the body is dipped into the water and taken out again in the sacrament of
Baptism: and therefore if Baptism be a token of our resurrection to grace,
and that in body and soul, we are not to doubt, but that the body shall rise
again as well as the soul. In the Eucharist also we are solemnly occupied in
both parts: for as the soul in believing, so the eyes in beholding the bread
broken, and wine powered out, the ears in hearing the word, the hands in
handling the outward elements, the mouth in tasting them, are devoutly
occupied: and therefore the fruit of it must appear as well in the body, as
in the soul.

Now to prove this by other creatures of God; the Angels desire this day, and
the other 6 Al creatures desire this day. Romans 8.
creatures sigh and groan waiting when the Son of God shall be revealed: the
devils fear it, and therefore they cry to our Savior Christ, Why persecutest
thou us before our time? Again, the very confusion, which is in things,
shows that there is a time when they shall be brought into order again, as
they were created in order at the first. And man himself especially must look
for it, and cannot be without it, whether we look to the manifold profits
which come by it, or to the wonderful inconveniences by the want of it. Why
do men endure the cross so patiently? why do they abstain from evil so
carefully? why do they follow that which is good so cheerfully, but that
because they look for a glorious resurrection, which is the full end of all
God his promises, and without the which the most godly are most miserable, and
the most wicked less unhappy? For if this were not, what sanctification would
appear, what sin would not appear, how few would be good, how many would be
ill, how should God be dishonored, how should good men be disinherited, who
would care to worship God in their bodies, or who would make conscience to
keep their bodies from sin?

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF EXAMINATION BEFORE AND AFTER THE LORDS SVPPER.
1. Cor. 11. 28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this cup.
THese words are ordinary and well known: and they contain a sanction or
decree, whereby the Apostle takes order for every man's examination before the
participation of the mystery of the Supper. And two things chiefly are to be
stood upon in these words. First, the necessity of examination, Two points to
be considered in examining our selves. (...).
and then the manner of it. For the first, it may seem, speaking in the phrase
of our teaching: Let a man examine himself, that it is but an aduising, or a
counsel rather than a commandment: yet in the original tongue, the word
runs in that term that Princes Parliament laws, and commandments do use
to run in: the word, I say, is as much as if it were said: Be it enacted, be
it decreed, or provided; so that the indifferency in our tongue, in the
original seems a necessity. Now albeit the commandment ought to be of
sufficient credit with us, and we without all ado to yield unto it: yet
having received it by faith, we are to enter into the reasons of this straight
examination, and find out the causes of the execution hereof.

The reasons may be reduced into two heads: it stands either upon a great
reverence Tworeasons why every one is to examine himself.
of the person with whom we are present, as we see men busily prepare
themselves when they are to come before some honorable personage: or beside
the dignity of the person, upon the excellency of the profit of the things
received, in respect whereof we are also to prepare our selves, as in receiving
Physic we prepare our selves that the prescript may more effectually work
upon us, so that for both these things we prepare our selves, and they both
meet together in the Lord his Supper.

For though we should not have an eye at all to the profit, yet the very
reverence of the Gods presence must move us to examination.
person with whom we sit, ought to make us have regard to this thing according
to that rule, Prou. 23. 1. When thou sit at meat with a ruler, consider
diligently what is before thee, and prepare thy self well to sit at the table
with such a man. Albeit Joseph when Pharaoh sent for him, knew not why he was
sent for, and thought little of that success of his going which Genesis 41. 14.
sell out afterward; yet because he was to stand before a King, and because he
was a miserable prisoner, he shaued his head and changed his raiment, to go to
so high and royal a personage. The same is confirmed unto us in that parable,
where we see that not only they are rejected which make excuses and refuse to
come, but such also as having once been admitted, Matthew. 22. 1. 2. Luke 14. 1^.
come unprepared without their marriage garments to honor the marriage of the
Kings Son, because they did not orderly address themselves. Therefore this
table in the Church being but a representation of the table, whereat our hearts
do communicate in the kingdom of heaven, where is present not only the
beloved spirits and host of Angels, but the glorious Trinity, we are, I say
in respect of God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and all the Court
of heaven with great solemnity to prepare our selves.

But yet we ought to do it more, if we consider what great preparation has
been used in things inferior to this in the law; though then there were no
commandment for this, yet by right of proportion a most reverent respect
should be had thereof, and therefore we ought to yield unto it. As for example,
thus we are to think, that if it be eating of the 2. Chro. 35. 6.
Pascall Lamb (which seal compared with this seal in the Gospel, there is no
comparison indeed) they were some days before prepared: the same regard of
reverence should be had of us in the participation of the Lords table, and so
reasoning from the less to the greater, from the Law to the Gospel, from the
passover to the Supper, it may be an argument unto us to prepare our selves
thereunto. We need not stand long on this comparison, seeing a thing of less
account, I mean the shewbread, would not be given to David without 1. Sam.
21. 4.
some stipulation, that is, without he were in some respects made fit to
receive it; so that here we are gone a degree lower. But if we will go yet
lower than this, come to the Arc it 2. Sam. 6. 6. 7.
self, and see how he handled Vzzah, who put his unprepared hands to the Ark,
for which the Lord was so mightily displeased, that he slew him for it. Nay
which is more, if we shall Exodus 40. 10. 11. 12. and 27. 3. 4. 5. etc.
come down to the very ground of Gods presence, where Moses could not appear
until his shoes were off: nay if we go to the snuffers and pannes and
candlestickes, which none could meddle withal without sanctification: we may
rise now upward as before we came down, and we may reason from these small
things to the Arc, and from the Arc to the shewbread, and from the
shewbread to the Passover, and from the Passover to the thing we have in
hand to learn an argument of preparation. And if Joseph of Arimathea and
others John. 19 38. 39. 40.
of the godly men and women which were with him, committing the body of Christ
to the grave, would wrap it not only in a clean cloth, nor in every kind of
linen, but in a clean syndon, which is a very fine linen: then what
reverence are we to use in taking not the dead body, but the living body, yea
the glorified body of the Lord in heaven?

But if the Lord take us a degree lower, and leave his own presence to
persuade us, and shall come to our own private practice: if we put not our
own common meat, our profane meat (for so I think I may call it, and worse
too, in respect of that holy mystery) Simile.
into an unwashed platter, nor a drop of drink into a cup uncleansed; then he
that shall put the things exhibiting the very body of Christ into an unprepared
heart, and unsanctified soul, shall be most guilty of that judgment which is
pronounced for him, that is, He is guilty of the body and blood of Christ:
yea, as our Savior Christ, and the Prophets complain 1. Cor. 11. 27. Matthew.
16. 3. Matthew. 15. 17. We can never end when we prepare to feast with men: we
can never begin well any preparation to feast with God.
that men are too skillful in sky points and in humane statutes to take the
best advantage they can, but the matters of the law are strange unto them: so
may he complain that this is vile meat, and which he himself says is after
cast into the draught, receives such estimation at our hands, that we prepare
so diligently the very instruments of them; yet when we come to sanctified
things, we show our selves as careless in them, as in the knowledge of his
commandments. Thus then we see how in these respects the Lord may require due
reverence in regard of the things pertaining to him, comparing them especially
with the care that we have in our own things.

Now to set the presence of God aside, and to look to our own profit, as
before we put apart our own profit to consider of so great a presence: the
fruit is great, and so great, that the writers of the Primitive Church, have
compared the mystery of the Supper to the tree of life which was in Paradise,
and the abuse of this mystery unto the unlawful eating of that tree, because
I say they do make Christ that tree of life; so that who so eats of Our own
profit must move us to examination. Gen 3. 22. Matthew. 9. 20. 21. 22.
Christ, shall eat of life. And to the profit, if to the faith of the toucher,
the very hemme of the garment of Christ did afford such a benefit, as the
healing of so grievous a sickness; then we may rise to consider the profit which
the touching, nay which more is, the receiving of the body and blood of Christ
does bring us: setting the faith equal in both, it is like that this exceeds
the other by many degrees, and yet few, I doubt, receive the fruit of this
woman. We come then now to say that all these profits are lost without
preparation; and as one of the Fathers says, they that come unprepared find
not Christ, that is, the body of Christ, but with John they light upon the
napkin or the clothes of Christ, wherein he John. 20 4. 5. 6. 7. ^. Hag. 2. 13.
14
was wrapped so little fruit they have that come unprepared. The reason is (as
Aggeus says) that if a man be polluted and touch an holy thing, it is certain
the thing that is holy becomes The polluted person polluteth all things Tit.
1. 15. 16.
polluted too, and unless he be holy that comes to the holy thing, the
thing hallowed does him no good. So that he that comes to these holy things
unprepared, shall turn the nature of them to himself, and it shall be unto him
as it fares with them that take Physic; if a purgation taken to purge
choler, do not work and purge the choler, beside the loss of the benefit, it
turns into a worse choler, and the humor is not only not Simile.
lessened, but much increased: So if your mind remain polluted and
unprepared, those things in the Sacrament besides your not profiting by them
(which is to be wished) make us far worse then we were before, and for our
unworthy receiving of them bring either temporal or eternal judgments upon
us. Therefore for this cause in the Leiturgies of the Primitive 1. Cor. 11. 30*
Church: the first word was a proclamation of holy things, to wit, that here
are Sanctasanctis, that is, holy things for holy men. But is this loss
all^no, there is loss of other things, there is I say, a punishment joined
with the loss, for it is not as in outward things, if that your enterprise
take not effect, it is but the loss of so much labor, but here is purchased
an unspeakable punishment, which the Apostle after specifieth, that we eat
and drink judgment to our selves, according to the proportion of the fault,
as either for neglect of the 1 Cor. 11. 29.
mean, in which manner Moses offending for not circumcising his son, was
corrected: or else for contempt of it: and then are we not acquitted from
condemnation, and we are in Exo. 4. 24. 25.
danger to be with Judas in the full and entire possession of the devil. So
then in both these respects jointly now considered, both in respect of the
reverence of God himself, and in regard of the profit that we shall surely
have, it shall be good for us, duly to prepare our selves, knowing as it is 2.
Chro^. 20. that the want of success in things of the Church, depends 2.
Chro. 20. ^^
on the want of preparation. For this cause these holy men the virtuous
predecessors, were always careful in every particular mean to be prepared,
as namely going about to pray, they had their eiaculationes, that is, certain
short prayers, before they entered into Mark. 15. 42. Preparation for the
Sabbath.
the solemn action, and they took half the day before the sabbath to prepare
them to it. Now if preparation be necessary at these things in several, seeing
all these concur in the Sacraments, excuselesse must he be that runs to
the Sacraments unprepared. Now as the Commandment does bind us to this
Examination: So the contrary inferred, 1 Four sorts barred from the Lords
supper, Children, Fools, ignorant persons, and impenitent persons.
shuts out four sorts of people. First, if any for want of years, as
children, be not able to examine themselves, all such are removed: Secondly,
if any for want of wit, discretion, judgment, the use of r^sa^on, and such
internals, the defect whereof (howsoever they are in age) makes them as
children, cannot try themselves, as foolish and furious persons, these are
also excluded: Thirdly, if they have a natural conceiving with gifts of reason
and humane understanding, and yet are ignorant in the grounds of Religion, and
in the doctrine of the Sacraments, which chief points of salvation are
necessary to be known; if I say, they have not attained to these rules, all
such are debarred; And last of all, if they have a general notion of these
things, and understanding of these rules, and in the abuse of their knowledge
remain wicked, stubborn, and impenitent persons, that never go about 2
to prove themselves, all these also are to be separated, as unfit, and
unworthy Guests of this Table. 3
4


The subject of Examination is our selves and not others, as the Apostle says,
Let every one examine himself: As every one looks to the preparing of his
own meat, so must The subject of examination is our selves.
every one look to the sanctifying of his own heart; for this spiritual
meat is better than the heavenly Manna; if we spoil it not through our own
malignitie And because if there be but one Publican in the Church we look to
him, and our eye cannot easily go from him; therefore the Apostle would have
our examination reflexed on our selves, as the Sunne-beames in the air.

Touching the manner of examination we must consider the nature and use of the
word. The Word in it proper tongue is taken from the Goldsmiths shop, and it
is a trying, as it were of mettalles, and therefore the learned would have us
try our selves by the rules of Goldsmiths; and this is not by the sound or
Echo that it makes, (for in the best it is deceiuable) but setting aside
this, they come to the touchstone and furnace (which are two things of proof
to try withal) and they match with the touchstone the word, and compare
Simile.
with the furnace the cross. But because those be more universal, I think
they may rather try the whole course of a man's life in general, than this
several point in hand. Others, because the bread and the wine be food, follow
herein the rules of the physicians. If a man have a full body, though his
repletion come of a very good humor, as of blood, Simile.
it needs not filling but emptying; again, full bodies, if their fulness come
of evil humors, are not to be nourished but rather they must be purged, as
flegmatike bodies which are full of moisture: Even so fares it with all those
which think themselves full enough of their own righteousness, and such as are
stuffed with corrupt humors and gross sins, are not to come hither having
no interest or claim therein, until the one be emptied of the fond conceit of
his own righteousness, and the other purged of the loathsome disease of 1. Cor.
11. 31. 32.
his own wickedness. Notwithstanding, if we consider the words that follow,
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged; and again, but when we
are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned
with the world, it may appear, that the Apostle understands it of a
judicial examination, as before a judge. And the very word though it were
derived from the goldsmiths, yet the use of it is from a judicial manner of
proceeding. Simile.
Well then, let us take it this way, that in this trial we must so proceed
with our selves in judgment, and when we are by our selves alone, we must
erect our judgment seat in our selves, and examine our selves precisely
whether we eat worthily or unworthily. For the plainnes of it, we cannot be
better directed than by that rule, 2. Cor. 13. Prove your selves whether ye are
in the faith. that is, (as I interpret it, and most men of sound judgment
think with me,) whether the faith be in thee, and whether ye have received
the spirit of Christ which is his vicar. For by this ye shall know whether ye
are worthy or unworthy, for surely he shall eat Christ's flesh and drink
his blood, that has his spirit, But how shall we try our selves whether we
have the spirit, or no? I answer according to that saying Ephesians. 3. 17. When
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. And this now is enough, for having
this, we have Christ's spirit, and so Christ himself, and consequently we
need not doubt of the other. Here it is good to take this word faith as
largely as we can, and take it in as general a sense as the law, that is, for
the whole word. Read as it were an indictment to our selves against our selves.
And so first we are to sit in judgment on our selves according to the whole
form of Gods justice, and it is good to take the record of our selves, and
that catalogue which the devil himself has in store against us, which yet
indeed he hides and will bring forth, because he reserueth it to lay it to our
consciences in the hour of death, when all our sins shall flock together
against us to drive us to despair* It is good I say according to the ten words
of the law to frame ten several actions, enditements, arraignments, and so
many several sentences of condemnation, and then we shall find a great
spoil of obedience in us, and we shall see our selves marueilously to be
defective, Thus having arraigned our selves, we must further consider how
unkindly we have dealt with so kind a Savior since our calling, and so
pronounce a perpetual confusion due to us with a shame for that which is past,
with a grief for that which is present, and with a fear of that which may
come Bucerus. Tunc optime habet qui pessim^ habet.
hereafter. And when we can bring our selves out of conceit with our selves,
and have brought our selves into the worst taking that can be, then he is in
the best taking, that takes himself to be in the worst. For the principal
purpose of our examination is to show us our indignity, and to bring our
selves into the lowest conceit of our selves that can be. Having in truth
pronounced this shame and confusion of face to be due unto us, God will suspend
his judgment and cease from his sentence of anger, nay he will say, This man
behold, has condemned himself, I need not to condemn him: he has done
enough, let my sitting in judgment upon him cease, seeing he has so
straightly examined himself, I remit all, I will examine no further, he is
free, let him come and so let him eat and drink. Thus I say our examination
must be in a judicial form, that is, we must enquire of our selves whether we
be guilty or Wherein the examination of our selves consists.
not guilty, worthy or unworthy. And because every man is ready to persuade
himself that he is worthy, to bear out this point we are to try our selves,
whether we have faith; and because faith has relation to the truth, and the
truth must try us, which says, Cursed is he that continues not in every
point of the Law to do it: we must search our books of remembrance, Galath.
3. ^0.
considering what God has against us, and examine our selves according to
every word thereof. Then because we must be constrained to conclude that we be
unworthy, we must in the next place go out of our selves, and faint after the
righteousness that can make us worthy. For a man that finds himself to be
left in the estate of condemnation, Matthew. 5. 3. 4.
to him will seem a good saying, and worthy to be received, That JESUS CHRIST
came into the world to save sinners: and to him the name of a Redeemer will be
most precious. And therefore at this second return comes to be considered
of, that Faith which comes 1. Tim. 1. 15.
by the blessing of the Gospel, whereby we seeing our own ignorance, do
seek wisdom out of our selves, being conscious of our own unworthiness,
and sue for obedience in the Son of GOD: and seeing we are altogether aliants
from God by reason of these things, we seek for our perfection in CHRIST, and
upon this condition is righteousness given unto us. Then because the examination
of this stands in another point, for that a condemned person will redeem his
pardon by a price, be it never so great, if by any means he be able to make
it, and a man spares no cost for that which indeed he does love, as we may
see in the example of a vile love of Esau, who setting his love even upon
meat, was content with the loss of his birthright to buy it, if we truly
esteem Christ his death, we will give any thing for it. And truly God
requires nothing at our hands, but even that small condition Ephesians. 4. 52. To
be courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiving one another even as
God for Christ's sake for gave us. Where we see that as God has for. given us,
so we should forgive others* ^or a man that purposes truly to have Christ, it
is little to give ^oue: that as the Godhead head wrought in love toward us, so
we must work in Christian charity required.
love toward others. This as a necessary thing is first to be required, the
rather for that we escaping the sentence of condemnation, and that by no other
means but by remission, which is as a bridge to escape by, it were very
rigorous and hard dealing, we our selves having gotten over, and others being
as desirous to come over, if we should pull up the bridge Simile.
from them: this would be too savage even among the heathen. This point of
loving others, God so loves, and so accounts of, that if a man were ready
to come to the Lord his immediate worship, he is content this duty should
rather be left to him undone, then that duty should be undone to our brethren.
And in the parable of the debtor we see this more effectually. For so long as
the debt is directly the Lords, he breaks out into no Math. 18. 28. 32
such words, as he does when the servant takes his fellow servant by the
throat: saying, Pay me that thou owe; So that the retaining of enmity to
our brethren does after a sort more offend God, then our offending against God
himself. This is all the Examination before hand. How we may e^te and drink in
the Eucharist.


When a man has by due Examination found himself unworthy, and unworthy in
respect of himself, then is he to be transformed. And here note a thing
contrary to our common diet. Though in our ordinary food our meat is changed
into us, and becomes of our substance, not we are changed into it: here in
this meat, I say, it is contrary, we are transformed into it, not it into us;
so that we may say of this spiritual food, as of the nature of the leaven. The
leaven is not unleavened and changed into the meal, though it Simile.
^eth hid in the meal, but the meal is transformed into it, and leauened by
the leaven. So may we say of this sacramental food, we are tra^sformed into
it. Wherefore seeing the Apostle says, Le^ a man examine himself, and so let
him eat; our examination must end in eating and drinking, and not in
abstaining. They then, that thought they honored the Sacrament with
abstinence, they by this rule plainly dishonor it: for it is said, Let him
examine himself, and so eat: not so let him abstain. And the Sacrament is
abused, as well by forbearing, having examined our selves, as by receiving it
unworthily.

The things received are called Bread and Wine. Concerning the nature whereof,
better What we receive in the Eucharist.
relation we cannot have, then Psalm. 104. where seeing the use of Bread and
Wine to be to nourish, to strengthen, and to comfort, we shall the better
mark the Analogy in this. The body of Christ represented by Bread, must have
that effect in the soul, which bread has in the body; but bread has this
effect, to strengthen the body of man, as appears by the cited testimony of
the holy Ghost, therefore our souls by CHRIST receive strength against sin.
We read in Genesis, that Abraham's servant returning from their pursuit, Genesis
14.
had their hearts strengthened by bread, which they had of Melchisedech, and we
know that the Paschall Lamb was to give strength to the eaters thereof; so our
Savior CHRIST calls us unto him, that he may give us spiritual strength
for newness of life, in the strength whereof we must so labor for
righteousness, as if heaven were to be purchased by our works. For CHRIST his
body is not only quickened, but quickening, not only Christ's body
sanctified, but sanctifying. And as in the body, such be the humors, as in
the mea^e; so in the soul, in the active parts of righteousness, we receive
such meat as may enable us to labor for the kingdom of heaven. This is that,
which the holy men did take in the Sacrament. On the other side, the blood of
CHRIST must work that effect in our souls, which wine does in our bodies. The
effect of wine is also set down, Psalm. 104. but more Christ's blood
lively, P^ou. 31. it is said, wine is to comfort them that are in the present
estate of death: for such wine was ordained, Then look what the gladness is
of the body after the wine received, so there is the same analogy by
spiritual comforts in the blood of Jesus Christ, seeing that we can no more
go through that or active.
absolute righteousness than the Angels, than the heavens, which are impure in
the sight of God, and in whom he finds imperfection. We must therefore come
to the passive righteousness, we must have the blood of Christ sprinkled
abroad in our hearts. By the one we must labor so, as if we would ouermatch
Righteousness active and passive before God and m^n.
the righteousness of the Pharisees, and of the most Iu^ticiaries in the world:
but when it comes before God, to live or to die by our righteousness, then we
must let go the old Testament, and take care for the blood of the New
Testament, which is given us by the ministry of Faith. For our action of
eating and drinking, as the Church has retained it, there is a commandment
given, that we lift up our hearts unto the Lord, and we must be as Eagles
flying up to heaven, by having careful meditation at that time of things
invisible, of setting before us the suffering of CHRIST, in breaking of the
body* in shedding of the blood of CHRIST, which being ruminated, is the
sending up of our Faith, by the working of the HOLY GHOST.

The principal end, is the remembrance of the death of CHRIST, which he did
commend Why we receive the Eucharist.
to us, at his last parting from us, which ought much to stick in our minds,
because the last words of a friend, ready to depart, do often leave both
impressions and affections in us. Indeed, when we read of his death, it does
somewhat move us; when we hear of it, it Meditations of Christ's death.
moves us more; to meditate of it, moves us in a third degree; but besides all
these, to have as it were before our eyes a visible Crucifying of Christ, does
move us most of all. This in wisdom he used, that we might not forget him,
as before, GOD the Father after the great deluge drowning the whole world, for
a remembrance of the work of delivering us from water, he left us a Rainebow.
And when he had supernaturally fed the Israelites with Manna from heaven, he
would have a pot full of it reserved in the Arc of remembrance, for a
memorial of so great a work. We being delivered by the blood of Christ from
the floods of our sins, have received Baptism to keep us in remembrance
thereof. We being nourished with the Manna of Christ his body, are commanded
to use this mystery, to continue an holy remembrance of the same.

Now for that union, which is betwixt CHRIST and us, as we have nothing in
Adam, How we are united with Christ and his members in the Eucharist.
but that which conueyth death to us: so it is needful that we should be
joined to one that may give light to us, the means to be thus united, is this
sacrament. And what union can be greater then that, which is between the thing
nourishing, and the thing nourished? This union, though by no reason it can be
expressed, must be believed, how Christ by being borne of Mary, has united
our nature to him: and this union has every reprobate with Christ, in that he
has taken upon him the shape of man: and so far any castaway may be said to
have interest in the flesh of Christ. Where is then the difference? Truly here
is a difference, if the arm joined to the body have no life, no sense, no
benefit of vital spirits, it may be indeed united to the body: but it is not
a part of the body* so the wicked living Spiritual union and communion with
Christ.
without Faith, have no soul as it were, but are as it were senseless, and
liuelesse hang-byes, and therefore are no true members of Christ. We must not
then think it sufficient to be joined to the flesh of Christ, as the kinsmen
of Christ, who speaking of this spiritual conjunction with him pointed unto
them, that by faith received his word, saying, These are my brother, my sister,
and my mother: These have the true union with Christ: the other have affinity
with Christ in his flesh only, in his incarnation. Therefore with the symbols,
to a true receiver Christ is really given, and so all whatsoever belongs to
Christ in the purchase of his redemption. Neither are we to look only to our
union with Christ, but to that joining Communion with the members of Christ
of our selves with them, that are of the same mystical body, be they never so
many, that receive with us. For this tries all, and it is an union of love, and
in respect here of this mystery has been called a Communion. And because our
union with Christ does nothing profit God, though a thousand worlds of men were
united to him, he has set over the profit to others; so that (if I may so say)
is Christ is meat and drink to us, so we should be meat and drink as it
were to others: for that whatsoever we have in wisdom, we should bestow to
the behoof of the ignorant; whatsoever we have in holiness, we should make
the best of it to the winning of others; whatsoever we have in outward things,
we should communicate it to others, according to the quantity of their wants
and our abundance. So shall we be members not only of the natural, but also
of the mystical body of Christ. There is yet another end, Seeing there is
such a nature in the creatures, that the outward things have suffered many
injuries, before they became good food, as the corn being cut down in it
per^ite age, pressed out of the husks with the flaile, loosing all his
intralles with the violence of the Mill, and after passing through the parching
heat of the Oven, is made Simile.
good bread: so the flesh of Jesus Christ went under many pains, and the blood
of Christ as the grape in it most flourishing estate was pressed out of the
veins, and sustained hard passions, and shall nothing of us then suffer with
him? Because we cannot wreake ouranger on the Jews, as Pontius Pilate, as
Caiphas, and the rest, for that they are dead and gone, and The Jews did no
more crucify Christ then the nails, the cross and the hammer, but our sins.
Zach. 12. 10. 11.
yet to say the truth, they were no more the crucifiers of Christ than the
nails, the cross or the hammer, but it was our sins which did crucify him,
it was our vile thoughts, our corrupt speeches, and our own sins which did set
Caiphas, Pilate and Judas, on work, and they were but our servants and
hirelings in the action of his crucifying. Therefore as we would wreake our
anger on them, seeing they I say, were but hired, and we have the things in our
selves, which did chiefly crucify him, let us do that despite to our sins,
let us arraigne the^, let us crucify them, let us nail them to the cross,
let us kill them, and bury them for ever. This is that, whereon we should spend
our choler, and let us beware of crucifying of Christ again, which thing
though it cannot be indeed, because all the Deputies and high Priests are
gone, yet we may be truly said to crucify him again, when we bereauing him
of the fruits of his death, put new passions of grief upon him. For though it
was no grief to Christ to dye, so he might enjoy the thing he died for; yet to
loose the fruits of his torments, this does in a second degree torment him.
This is an active crucifying, now comes in a passive crucifying. And this is a
cup not of the Communion (for that needs the son of thunder, the child of
Zebedeus) but it is the cup of the cross, whereof he himself did drink:
this is the Baptism, wherewith we must be baptized as he was, that is, not
with the water of Jordan, for every child of a seuen-night old may be washed
with it, but of affliction, whereof we must taste. And as Christ has now a
Crown of glory, but he had another crown before, even a crown of thorns:
so in this feast we have a cup without bitterness, but there is a cup of
bitterness, which either we have drunk or must drink, or both. The drinking of
that cup binds us to drink of this. And surely suffer we must, some have their
passion in death and inwardly, and that is most sore; better it is to have it
before death and outwardly, for surely drink we must: if we participate of the
one, we must also participate of the other.

But as it is good to use this trial before, so there is another examination
more profitable Of examination of our selves after the receiving of the Lords
Supper.
that follows after. A man may by the sight of the soil gather by some guess
what fruit will come up, and what it will bear; A man may by the ingredience of
the medicine conjecture what effect will ensue upon it: But when we see the
fruit come up, it is far more sure; and when the purgation has wrought, we
may more certainly judge of the effect of it. And because these accide^ts of
repentance from dead works, faith in Christ, and love toward men going before,
may deceive us: it is good to put the matter out of all doubt to try our
selves Simile.
afterward, if we can hear the word more joyfully, if we travel for
righteousness of Faith more soundly, and make the skore of our sins less then
they were before, they are comfortable fruits of the truth of our hearts.

Now if any say that these signs antecedent, the beginning whereof is in
repentance and Objection.
sorrow for sin, the end whereof is charity, and these also that follow
after are very good things, and yet entering with himself into the trial, he
finds himself more discouraged than encouraged: to him I say, if a man had
Repentance and Faith in most perfect and Answer.
ample manner, that man were not to receive with the Saints: for these
mysteries were provided for their help which have wants, and therefore for
imperfections no man must discourage himself to come hither. Only let him
look to this, that he do whatsoever he does, though not perfectly, yet
sincerely. Then as it is most sure that by our examination we should fall into
the agony of Christ to sweat blood, and if it were possible even to be
covered with the drops of blood: so because man's nature cannot be brought to
this, by reason of that cold sweat and cold repentance that is in us. Christ
therefore was brought into this sweat by a glooming heat: Christ I say, who
enduring this agony, became not only a satisfaction for our sins, but also
for our imperfections in good things, he doing good things absolutely;
therefore Christ fell into these bathes, that his perfection in suffering might
satisfy for our imperfection in well doing. The rather we are to stick to
this, because if we cannot bring our selves immediately into the first degree
of sorrow, yet that We must be grieved that we can be no more grieved 2.
Chron. 30. 18. ^9.
we stay not to come to the second degree; that is, that we be grieved, that
we can be no more grieved, and if we come to this, this shall be sufficient.
And to all such as thus in truth shall prepare themselves, do those prayers of
Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 30. belong, that the Lord will fulfill the measure of their
righteousness, and pardon their sins that prepare their whole hearts to
seeeke him. And thus much for the trial before and after the Lords Supper.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF GODS FEAR.
THe style of Moses, Psalm. 90. 11. does vehemently set down the paucitie of
Few fear God.
them that truly fear God: he says who fears, etc. we know the thing
sought for and enquired after, is not known to the Asker; for then the
question were vain and superfluous, and the very nature and institution of a
question is to have relation evermore to the increase of knowledge in some
thing not sufficiently known: wherefore it is like that Moses knew few fearing
God aright, and in general this style is very needful in all Gods things,
for we are slenderly acquainted with them, but in evil things there is no
question or enquiry to be made, as being a thing coming into the eyes, ears,
and hearts of all men enough, and as we see by daily experience too much. Now
if we will go from Moses time, to David's time, we shall see he makes the
like question, Psalm, 15. 1. Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, etc. as
one that saw a great want of men desiring that way, but come to the contrary:
and Psalm 14. he shows that all are gone out of the way, all are corrupt,
there needs no question to be made of such. Go yet further to the days of
Esaias, and we see his style to iumpe with both the former, as Esaias, 53 Who has
believed our report? as though they could hardly be found that would credit
his words, but even in the very first chapter he was not afraid simply and
without inquiry to say, that all were so full of sin, that there were no
place void of wicked men from top to the toe. If we come to Christ his time,
he says in his days, Who is a true and faithful servant, who is a trusty
servant, who when his Lord comes, he shall find faithful* but of the
ambitious Pharisees we know there was great store. If we chronicle from Moses
to David's time, from David to Esaies time, from Esaias to Christ his time, and
from Christ to the end of the world, we shall find it a matter of
controversy to have men fearing God; but of the other sort it is a thing
without all manner of controversy. And here we must not think, that it might
be, many feared God, but they knew not men's hearts: for God himself, the
searcher of the heart, acknowledges the same that they do, as Esaias says, 59.
4. No man calls for Justice, no man contendeth for truth. 16. and when he
saw there was no man, he wondered that none should offer himself: neither is
this excess of evil noted only in the persons, but even We have no time to
do good.
the times are full of evil. Genes. 6. 6. It is said the thoughts of men's
hearts were evil continually, or every day: Micah says, they spent the whole
night in evil, and so goes further: so that Moses having set down all the
day, and Micah all the night, we may say all time is stuffed with evil; if we
have any time, for good it is in purpose, not in practice, it is in the time to
come, not in time, present: in regard whereof the Prophet says, the silly
fowls and birds of the air, the Storke, the Dove and others keep their time,
but we never can find our time to do well in. Beyond all this, as all persons
and times, so all places are tainted with this evil: Heaven it self has not
been void of wickedness; for even from thence fell the wicked Angels:
Paradise was not exempted; the Temple was not free from notable hypocrisy; the
number exceeded even in the actions themselves: wherefore David cries out at
the view of such a pack, Lord, who does understand the errors of this life?
Our days may be numbered, as we see Psalm. 90. but our sins are without
number, and therefore are compared to the sand of the Sea. Then we see in
regard of the person, time, places, and actions, few do good, and therefore
such is the complaint and question of the men of God in this behalf.

The fruit which we are to reap by this, is thus much: that if we see occasion
of offense, and matter of grief be offered us, we see no more than Moses saw
long ago, than David, Esaias and Christ himself saw in their times before us,
in comparison whereof we may make our advantage, that seeing the time of Moses
was a time of affliction, and the days we live in are days of peace, it is
less marvel to see evil in the days of peace than in the time of trouble:
and therefore Luther upon this question, who fears? Psalm. 90. makes this
answer, no man before affliction: showing that affliction should specially
lead us to fear, and being once affected with fear, we should either say,
Lord what shall I do? or with David say, What shall I repay unto the Lord?

Seeing the Lord is feign to complain of the small number of such as fear him,
we must take order to mitigate this complaint, that it fall not more justly
upon us. In the time of Moses at the least there was Joshua and Caleb; in
Christ's time Simeon and Anna: At the least we must look there be one true
worshipper, as in Elias time, and so doing we shall make the question vain,
and surely if we desire to be such, few will put us by our desire: for as our
sins be well called an hereditarie sickness, which if it were not so, we
would purchase them fast enough: so that knowledge and fear of God not being
hereditarie, are not withstanding cheapened of few men.

Great cause there is then why we should fear, it is an act of the everlasting
Parliament, How we should fear: and why we do not fear.
that we must once die, Hebrews 9. and Job says that our life is but short,
and do we not hear that all of all kinds are gone this way, all wise men,
all men of pleasure, no Patriarchs escaped it; no Prophet was exempted, our
ears can testify this, do we not daily miss our friends? when Gods wrath
has taken them away, and the grave has buried them in silence. Do we not
daily in coming to the congregation, pass over the graves of men, sufficient
monuments of the execution of the general day? Do we not use as a general
proverb, as sure as death, and yet the servants of God complain, that we
know not the wrath of God. Surely we do not know this for all that, which
Moses Psalm 90. proves by two reasons: first, he prays to be taught in it;
and if it were already exactly known, then should this prayer be superfluous:
again, he argues of the effect, that for so much as there follows no fear,
therefore there is no knowledge of the wrath of God, for the want of fear
sends a want of faith herein: and were we persuaded that Gods wrath were such
a thing, we would fear; and therefore we fear not, because we are not so
persuaded of the wrath of God in it. In natural things we will not easily
run into things feared, nor fear those things which we think not to be
evil; and therefore because we fear the fire will burn, the water will
drown, we are hardly brought to run into the fire or into the water: much
more should we so do in things supernatural, if we did truly fear them,
wherefore though we know in some part the wrath of God, yet we are not come
to the perfect knowledge of it required at our hands.

Hitherto we must understand, it is one thing for man to determine of
knowledge, and another thing for God to judge of it; as Esaias pronounced a
difference between our esteeming of fasting and Gods judging of it, Esaias 58.
for that if we see a man abstain from meat, we think he is a good devout
faster, but the Lord determines otherwise: so we may pronounce a difference
between the valuation of knowledge in our eyes and in the Lords eyes. It is
nothing for us to say, this have we quoted, thus have we read, this have I
uttered, and therefore I know this; for this is nothing in Gods judgment: for
as he determines of the fast, so will he determine of the knowledge of them
that pass the ancient Rabbis of the Jews, and outreach the wise men of the
Heathen. And no marvel, for as we say there is a wise kind of ignorance, a
learned unskillfulness: so surely there is an ignorant knowledge, Docta
inscitia.
a sottish kind of wisdom; and this now possesses the whole world. And that
we may walk within our warrant, we shall fetch our proof from the sixth of
Esaias, which place, for the excellency of it, is often repeated in the new
Testament. Matthew 13. Acts 28. and Romans 11. where we see there may be a
seeing without seeing, a kind of hearing, and yet no hearing indeed: Even so
there may be a knowledge, and yet no knowledge before God, Knowledge without
practice is no knowledge.
the cause is for that the Lord accounts of no knowledge, which comes not into
practice: and if we have never so much knowledge, and practice it not, it is
nothing in Gods book. And according as this is God his reckoning, so it is our
usual account; for if we have taken pains to put precept unto precept, and
to teach one that has not profited by our pains, how attentive soever he
seem; yet we account him, and accuse him as one that heard not at all. Better
is no candle, than a candle under a bushel: and the Lord accounts no light
under a bushel for light. Better to have no ears, than the ears of an Idol.
And indeed they are no ears, for they hear not: so it is no knowledge that is
separated from practice. We do beguile our selves in our accounts, when we
think we have a great knowledge, for that we have heard many Sermons,
whereunto because we have not joined Unprofitable hearing how dangerous.
practice, we may well blot out of the score many of those Sermons: for such
Sermons in Gods account be to us as no Sermons. We can say and cry, that where
there is a want of the means, there is a great token of Gods curse; and I will
not deny it, it is so indeed: but yet be it known, that with a singularity
of the benefit, if none profit by it, there goes a singularity of judgment
where it is abused: and a more notable judgment remains for such a place,
than for the other, because it had been better never to have heard, than having
heard so much, never to profit. It is good says David, that I have been
afflicted, for I have learned thy law: indeed in this respect it was good for
him; and yet it is not good for some to be afflicted, who not profiting by it,
become the worse for it, as it was to Lots wife, who was made a pillar of salt.

Two things hinder ripenes of knowledge, the one is that men are proudely
ignorant, Why we profit not by our knowledge.
persuading them falsely to know that they know not; the other is hardness of
heart, whereby they are obdurated against the true profit of knowledge: for
either we think we have some deep knowledge, or else we become stony and
senseless; that if Gods judgments be spoken we fear not, if his promises be
offered we rejoice not, whatsoever is spoken we move not: into such an heart,
how much knowledge soever is powered in, though it seem to run over, yet the
quantity of it will amount to nothing.

Because we will not see Gods wrath, as it is, we see it in justice: for by
Gods wrath is justice signified unto us. And surely howsoever other qualities
in God do not affect us sometime, yet wrath stirs us up. Affections are
commonly stirred up by their objects, as fear by wrath: Now if we fear the
anger of a man, and specially of a Prince, because the wrath of a Prince
seems so great a thing to us; what shall we think of the wrath of God,
Simile.
which one way or other we shall surely meet withal, either for to bear it,
or else to be reconciled to him for the avoiding of it? Wherefore to reveal to
us this wrath, it is Moses his office to teach us to see our sin, and so to
bring us within the compass of the law, and of that forfeiture which the law
does award us, that so we may esteem the more of that mercy which is offered
in Christ. Now the cause why we esteem not mercy, is because we account so
slenderly of our sins, and therefore we do lightly value our sin, because
we think no more reverently of Gods wrath against sin: for such is the sense
of our sin, as is the fear of his wrath And so we esteem peace as we
account of war, and make a prize of our plenty, as we do of our scarsitie.
If we consider rightly of the want and famine of Samaria, or of Idumea, and see
the heads of Asses sold for so much; then we shall be fit to judge rightly of
plenty: we are therefore in our afflictions to level at the wrath of God,
which is the cause, and not to stay in our affliction, but still look to our
sin, without the sight whereof, we shall either stand carping at Gods
judgments with Jonas, or we shall fall to curse the day of our birth with Job:
so far shall we be from making our true profit by it.

Therefore we know not how to profit under the cross, because we know not the
causes How we must behave our selves under the cross. Si^^al^.
of it, but wedwell in the effects, and complain of the thing done, not
looking to the cause and original of it, which we see in that a man being
crossed by a wicked man, he storms against the man, but looks not to God:
wherein he does as if a man should quarrel with the staff wherewith he is
beaten, and never look to the smiter: for a man is but as the rod of the Lord,
or as the staff of the devil; we deal (I say) with the stripe, not with the
devil, by whose instigation that is done. And as we deal with the devil in
his motives, so we deal with the Lord in his visitations: we could tear the
rod, but not be humbled under him that uses the rod. And what do we profit by
this behavior? Admit we could wrest the rod out of Gods hand, what gain is
that for us, against whom he will take up a sword and a mallet, or a great
rock, wherewith he will not stand to beat us, but out of hand to break us in
fitters? And therefore good wisdom it is not to wrestle with the effect, but
to meet with the cause. Now then there are two things which blindfold us, that
we cannot Two causes of our blindness in afflictions.
see Gods wrath in our afflictions: the one, because we are not straight
consumed with the anger of God: so long as men waste away by little and little,
and are not beaten down at one blow, they put off all suspicion that God is
displeased with them, and never acknowledge his wrath, until it come like an
ambassador of death. Some are consumed by apoplexies, and suddenly fall dead:
some by hecticks, and piece by piece fall away. This is so much the more
dangerous, because it is the less sensible, and rather kills us than
forewarneth us. It is as dangerous to moulder away, and as easy to dye of an
hectic, as it is to fall dead and to be taken with an apoplexy: And therefore
it is not good to tarry for the dead blow. Another cause is this: that as Gods
iudgement^ are to many, mercies, and proceed from his love toward us: so
though we see it not, many of his mercies we sent to us in his judgment, and
proceed from him in wrath. So Jeremy says, that the Lord gave Josias in wrath
to reign over his people: and yet Josias was a good King. The use of all this
Note.
is thus much, to show us that the Lords anger works in him, as do al other
affections when they have not their work in us. Hereof it is, that because we
are not displeased with our selves for our sins, God is displeased with us;
because we mislike not our corruptions, God shows his misliking of them;
because we are not angry with our selves, God is angry with us. Sin
deserves wrath, and sin must have wrath either at our hands or at* the Lords
hands. If we be wrathful with our selves, and take an indignation with our own
selves, as 2. Cor. 7. the Lord will remit his wrath; if we will judge our
selves, God will not judge us.

If at any time we come to judge of Gods wrath, we account of it as of an
impotent How great Gods ^ratl^ is.
thing: wrath does work, the wrath of the least does move, and I would we
feared the wrath of the Lord as much as we do the wrath of Princes. But we
think of Gods wrath as of his mercy, we fear him as one of silly anger and
small power, we thank him for his mercies as a niggardly God, and pinching
giver. When we deal in duties to Godward, we cut them, we mince with him, we
measure and stint him, as though we would be even with him: but when it comes
to our wickedness, we are both large and bold: we do as men that thought the
Lord was either blind, and could not see our doing, or as though his arms were
bound up in a cloute that he could not strike us. The weakness of God is
stroger than any strong thing in man, 1. Corinthians. 1. the very weakness of God
is stronger than the strength of men. But how shall we conceive of this
weakness? In a man we account that weakness, which his little finger hardly can
touch. Now then if we will come (as it were) to Gods little finger, and take
but the confession of all the wise men in Egypt, and of their Magicians: and
we shall see, that in those rare and notable plagues which came on the land,
they said it was the finger of the Lord. Come to the afflictions of Job,
wherein he lost goods, cattle, and children, and the devil (I say) makes all
that but a touch of his little finger: and yet this spent all. The breath is
counted in a man but a weak thing: but come to the very breath of the Lord, and
we shall see all that is in a man is as grass, and the best things in him as
the flower of grass, when the spirit of the Lord blows upon it. Esaias. 40.
17. and Psalm. 18. 8. it is said, Smoke went out of his nostrels, and a
consuming fire out of his mouth: so that great is the power of his very
nostrels, and mighty is the very weakness and infirmity of his wrath. If this
be the weakness of God, what is his strength, his strength (I say) when he is
compared to a giant, or to a lion: to a giant of all men the greatest; to a
Lion of all beasts the strongest? If he be so mighty when he touches us but
with his finger, how terrible is he if he strike us with his arm? Now what
shall we say when he comes not only with strength in himself, in his finger,
in his nostrels, and in his arm; but he is armed, he has his sword whet and
his bow bent against us, as a man prepared for the battle? So that if we be
far off, then he has his bow to fetch us; if we be near, then he has his
sword to strike us. But what speak we of a sword, or of a bow, when he has
not only these, but powers and whole armies of his creatures against us, as of
fire, of hail, of thunderbolts, yea of the least and vilest creatures, as of
lice and flies, to come on us? So that if the sword find us not, his
thunderbolt shall meet us; when the hayle does not make an end of us, the fire
will consume us; if the fire would not burn, the mallet would b^uise us:
further than all this, he has his chariots and thousand of chariots in the
whirle-winde, and his pillars of fire to terrify us: and which is more, he
has his thousands and twenty thousands of Angels to make a spoil of all at
his beck: so great is the wrath of the Almighty, his power will not fail,
all his works will assist him, and when one has done his duty, another will
follow: so that we shall surely be weary of suffering, before he be weary of
afflicting, or weak in punishing. But to pass over the speaking of his
strength: let us look to our own weakness, we are but as potters vessels, if
we hit but one against another, we break, we fall into shards at every knock:
and if the Lord lift up his rod against us, we shall be brought to dust; if a
little rod will not serve to do it, he will take a crow of iron and fling at
us. To be short, the Lion comes before him, the Unicorn serves him: Behemoth
is taken with his sword, Leuiathan cannot stand before him. And the difference
between the power of God, and the power of Princes is as great: Princes can
only seize on the body, and all their wrath can go no further than this life:
but the Lord attacheth as well the soul as the body, and his anger is as hot
and hotter in the life to come, as it is in this life.

Our knowledge must end in fear: that ignorance is bold it is plain: but that
experience Of the fear of God, and why men do not fear.
should tremble at things either imminent or present that is it which Moses
thought so strange a thing, that he durst conclude, Psalm. 90. that if we fear
not we are ignorant. No marvel, it pleases the holy Ghost to join fear,
and the wisdom of God always together, either as the beginner, or as the
finisher of it. That it is the beginning of wisdom it is plain, Proverbs 1.
that it is the end of wisdom it is manifest Ecclesiastes 12; so that it is
not possible to have true wisdom without this beginning, neither can we
attain to the perfection of it without this ending. Now the causes why we do
not fear are these, either for that we are wise in our own conceit, or else
we be stony hearted, both which evils are cured in us by fear. The first is
proved, Proverb. 21. where it is said: Blessed is the man that fears: but he
that hardneth his heart shall fall into evil: where is a plain opposition
between the fear of God and hardness of heart. The second is to be showed Pro.
3. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear the Lord: where we see the
fear of God corrects this conceit of our selves in us. This we say then,
that he that fears not, has either pride or hardness; and if these two, then
no wisdom, and consequently he is convinced not to have knowledge. Fear and
wisdom makes a man a man: it is the conclusion also, and Love without fear.
shutting up of all love; the reason is, love grows secure without fear, and
being secure it loses her spouse, as we see in the song of Solomon: where the
Church bewailes the loss of her Love, whilst she fell asleep: wherefore I
say, as in the beginning, we must have a fear of wrath; so in the end we must
have a fear of losing. In Hebr. 12. when the Apostle b^^ore had spoken of
Love, least that we should securely lose it, he ends all with a trembling
sentence, and shuts it up with a fiery clause, God is a consuming fire. It
is given to all Sin breeds fear, and how much.
since Adam, after we have sinned to fear, and to hide our selves, in regard
whereof the thief trembles at the sight of the Judge, and the very dead tree
strikes a fear into the conscience of the superstitious worshipper. Nay I may
say the devil trembles, and every sinner shaking off fear, after he has
sinned, justifies the devil himself in this respect, and so in shuffling off
the forewarning of Gods judgment, he passes all in wickedness, either in the
Church or without the Church, or in hell Neither must we simply fear, but have
a certain measure of fear: we may say as Abraham said in Genesis, if there be
no fear of God, then there is surely no place left for the Church of God.
Through the mercy of God we cannot yet say so: for though the Church at this
day be not so justifiable as it should be, nay it is condemnable in respect of
that which it ought to be: yet we cannot say but Abraham has a place with us:
wickedness is not yet come to such a pitch, that there is no fear of God with
us. How be it herein we be defective, in that our knowledge and fear of God is
not proportionable to our teaching, and the justice of God: For setting our
continual teaching with our discontinued profit in learning, and seeing the
marks of Gods judgments are set in the bowels of the Nations round about us,
this thing rightly weighed, our fear is nothing, our knowledge is little, the
Lord may have his action against us, because though we have some thin fear,
yet it is nothing proportionable. Wherefore as it is not sufficient that our
meditations in the law be meditations, but that in strength and comfort they
exceed all our thoughts of the world; and as God requires not only an
hearing, but such attention in hearing, as we hear nothing more heedily and
carefully: so we must fear and that accordingly, and this according is that
which will condemnevs, because (I say) our affections are not according to
their object. But behold a greater evil, for as we set not our affections high
enough in good things, so we rack them too far in evil things. We fear not
God enough; we fear the world too much; we love the word too scantly; we love
our profits too excessiuely. So there is a jar in both, our fear in
spiritual things is defective, in worldly things excessive. And surely though
we could not do it in such measure about the best things, because we cannot
reach so high in lesser things (which thing if we could do, it were a great
part of an Apology for us) yet for that we fear so much in lesser things, and
fear so little in greater, this will indeed accuse us. Again, that our fear
is not according to Gods wrath, it is known by taking that small measure and
scantling of it, which we are wont to do; for whereas the word has made the
fear of God to be our measure for the fear and forsaking of sin, Job. 1. we
by making our fear of God light, make also our departing from evil light.
Thus we see the Lord must have an order in things; first we will have his
kingdom provided for, then other things in their place: we in keeping so low
an ebb in his fear, make up his indictment he has against us.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF HYPOCRISY.
THere are two things required in Religion, the substance and the ceremony
There is more required in Religion than an outward sho^w.
or visard, and we have but one of them. The first is a marvelous hard thing
to circumcise our hearts, to make them bleed; we think it enough to hear,
for opinions carry the common people: for they be like children, if they see a
face in a glass, they think it is a man, and begin to talk of it and to it.
This ceremonial hearing in times past it would now and then (as they say) do
good: but now as one says, is nothing but to hear, eat, drink, and talk.
That a show is sufficient to move the multitude, it appears by Absalom, who
although he were a beast; yet when he had made a vow, and Iesabel had
proclaimed a fast, the people followed them, and said the Queen was become
religious, and Absalom was worthy of a kingdom, and so the like hypocrites
have an opinion of just men. The duty of reprehending is the duty of a good
man, and under the law it was thus: the accuser was wont to throw the first
stone: the thief on the cross said; Thou being in the same condemnation,
dare thou reprove? Here is a case of praemunire, which what it is on earth we
know, and what it is in Heaven we shall know at that day: examples we have in
Aaron, N^dab, Ab^hu, Vzza, and Ahaziah.

Seeing there be such a sort of sore eyes, and so few Chirurgions, it is good
to stay in reprehension, Why and how the Lord is sometime hot in speech.
till we have cast out our beams: and this is but reasonable, that a man
should first cure himself. But because many will not stay for all this, Christ
waxes angry as it were, and calls them hypocrites: where says Chrysostom,
he shows himself very angry: for this word when he uses it or such like,
as O cuill servant * O painted tombs * generation of vipers, it is not any
little offense that he speaks against.

The name of an Hypocrite is abhorred of God and man. As it was said of
Octauius and Of hypocrisy how it should be abhorred.
Antonius, they hate a tyrant, but not tyranny: so it may be said with us, we
hate an Hypocrite, but not hypocrisy. Thus we may see first in real
hypocrisy, we cannot abide a course cloth with a fine list, nor fruit fair
without, and rotten within; nor timber straight without and hollow within; nor
light waights and false wares. In the Commonwealth he that poysoneth a man,
and he that kills him with the sword has not the like punishment, because
the first is greater, in that he kills him hypocritically. In the Church the
fathers appointing punishment and penance for diverse sins, set down for
hypocrisy, the greatest punishment, in prima quadragesima. Peter was first
moved at this against Anani^s and Saphira, Act. 5. Paul among many dangers,
sets this down as a chief one, that he was in danger among false brethren.
S. John the Evangelist in his Revelation proph^cieth, that the Church should
never be more grieved, than by such as had women's faces and hair, and Lions
teeth. The complaints of the Prophets against them is manifest in their terms,
Pots with scumme cakes bak^n on one side. Ostriches with great f^athers and of
little flight. But Christ inueigheth specially against the^, for he threatens
seven woes against them that be hypocrites, where he never is found to do the
like against any sinners. To look more clearly into this sin, it is opposite
to God the Father, he is a being, this a certain show; God is one, and has
made him one, but the hypocrite he makes himself two, an heart, and an heart:
the hypocrite leaves a little place for religion, and the rest he leaves for
that which he loves more than religion, and in this division he gives the
worst to God, that is, that which is without; he opposes himself against God
in his heart. God is truth, and the hypocrite has a lying profession,
unhallowing the name of a Christian, and seducing those that are simple, which
is a common note of hypocrites; so they are deceivers and deceived, as Absolon
and Ishmael. They are opposite to God in his goodness, he is good, they are
evil within, and that which is worse, they cover evil with good. We may see
God his detestation of this sin by his expostulation, Psalm. 50. he abhors
it so that he forbad his people the very resemblance and representation of it,
as a linsie woolsie coat, a hollow footed beast, and miscellen corn: he shall
not come into my presence: and in the Psalm he says, he could not abide the
sight of him: and surely the surest punishment against any sin is to have our
portion with the hypocrites.

That we may know an hypocrite, we must judge him by that which is within. A
father Special kinds of hypocrisy.
says, we must look on him without, for example in admonishing, his outside
is, brother cast out the mote, but lift up his eye lid, and you shall see his
eye not answerable to his tongue. The Syriak word signifies, Vultum assumens.
a face taker, his visour may be admonition, but it is a broken visour, for a
man may see the timber through it, and so he is an impudent hypocrite. For the
nature of hypocrisy, it may be described thus, Est signum sine signato.
it is a sign without a thing signified: as when one thrusts an hood over
his head, or his head out of an hood, and has no learning, an hood being made
to signify much learning: and so there are more of these hypocrites Sub
splendido pallio latet nequitia.
than we would think of. We have Elias his mantle, but where is his spirit?
This hypocrisy is a sin of many corners and degrees. In every sin there is a
mystery of wickedness, and a gross substance of wickedness, a leaven and lump
of iniquity; so we may divide hypocrisy into the mystery and the lump: the
mystery takes hold on us all; and there Non videri volunt quod non sunt, sed
quantum non sunt.
be two kinds of it. The first and the best ouersay themselves, but they do
something; they commend more in word than in practice. The other are such as
say and do not, this is gross hypocrisy. Again, hypocrisy has two ends.
God his glory should move us sufficiently, but we must have some other end
with it, and this is in the best men. Augustine says, that there are but few
which be not spotted with hypocrisy, but because his step was too wide, he
mends himself, and says next, Surely not one. The lump or actual hypocrisy
has four kinds. The first kind is, when a man is delighted with faining any
good, or intention of The first kind.
any evil. The second kind is a perilous and close hypocrisy, wrapped up
round in a sheeps skin, that no man can spy him, but that eye that sees al
things, and, if any man calls him The second kind.
an hypocrite, he brings himself into danger, because he is not able
manifestly to prove him one. Of him Christ gives a caveat; for this hypocrite
he is exempted from the Church discipline: the rule is plain in Timothy: some
men's sins go before to judgment, and some men's sins follow after. But
with us, if peace continue long, we shall wish with Athanasius, I Vtinam omnes
essent hypocritae.
would all were hypocrites. The third kind is, an hypocrite uncased, he is
called A Sunneburned hypocrite: who judges all men to be as he was before he
was laid open: he comes The third kind.
to be uncased by this means, Augustine says, when that is withdrawn from
him, which he hoped for, it soon appears whether he be a woolfe in a sheeps
skin. We may The fourth kind.
see it in the matters of the Church, when there is preferme^t looked for. The
fourth kind is in a sheep skin, but his ears hang out so long, that he is
easily espied, these are the broken visourd hypocrites: to play the hypocrite,
thus there needs no great wit: for an ass may be such an hypocrite, and any
that can take him by the ears, may say, Thou hypocrite.

There are seven notes to know an hypocrite by, in reprehending one, first they
do (...) epsy Notes to know an hypocrite. Matthew. 7. 3.
epsy things, they do not (...), as Master Beza notes. Hypocrites are narrow
lookers, in Hebrew they are called spies, shifters, or sisters. The Christian
man would rather they should be cast out (if they be infirmities) and he never
see them, as Sem and Iaphet covered their fathers nakedness, and saw it not; but
Cham beheld and laughed at it: these are those which The first note
proclaim men's imperfections: it was Joseph's commendations to do the
contrary; he would not make Marie a public example, though he had great
suspicion. The second note.


The second note is (...) they never set upon themselves, they have no leisure
to do it, but they have small delight in it: if one tells them of any fault
in their eye, they reply, why me thinks your eyes are not well neither. First,
he will say they aile nothing at all, or deny it in part, or if he grant it,
he says it does not hinder his sight, or it is not so well as Omne peccatum
extenuari potest.
it might be; and these hypocrites cast out no faults, but such as are
extenuated, and it is a rule in Rhetorike, every sin may be extenuated.

A third note is, that he will say, my brother: the Chaldie paraphrast wills
us to observe, The third note.
he is an hypocrite, for behold his tongue. They salute their brother in the
morning with an high voice, so the Pharisees said to Christ, We know thou art a
good man, and have no Cypria^saith, Decoratissimas habent orationes.
respect of persons: but in their conceit, and among themselves they said,
Tush, he is a Galilean.

The fourth note is this, they come with a Sine, let him alone, they will do
nothing but as The fourth note.
you will suffer them, all is love and charity. But if he have authority, he
must not say, Suffer me, I will cast him forth: for says one, Thou stand
not to entreat thy beast, thou powrest in with a horn: so thou must admonish,
whether he will or no. Nay they will say, Sine me, Suffer me, he must needs
do it.

A fist sign is of an hypocritical Ephramite. The Tribe of Ephraim said, Why
were we not The fist note.
called? But good men care not who do it, so it be done: the other show that
they desire not the fact, but the glory of the fact. Thus they epsy, and
cannot cast out any sin: it is twenty to one, that such hypocrites cannot so
much as epsy sins aright, and yet they will promise a casting out too, they
take upon them more than they can do.

The sixth note is, they will be doing with motes: It may be asked, whether
these fellows The sixth note
have no neighbors with beams in their eyes? Certainly they have: why then
do they speak so to that brother, that has the mo^e? This is an infallible
note of an hypocrite: for as Chrysostom says, It was rather to make a
stop-game, or that he might seem very just: for which cause he spieth out the
best to reprehend, that he may seem as good as he. Note.
For the way to make men even, is either to grow higher, or because he could
not do that, he will pull the other lower: which indeed he cannot do. But
hypocrites thinking their tongues are their own, will be bold to do it to
them which are good.

The last note is, Matthew. 23. They lay great burdens on others, but touch them
not themselves The seventh note.
with the least of their fingers. You do well (say they) to lead such a
strict life, they will have other men live like Angels, and they themselves
like Devils. Some more effectual notes, and of more common use than these are
set down, Matthew. 23. But some may say and gather hereupon: If it be a gross
hypocrisy to reprehend, I will not deal with it at all: and these are either
fearful, or wickedly subtle, and they are worse than the other. We must not
mislike the doing of an hypocrite further than God misliketh* his misliking
must be our rule: and he blames him not for the outside, but for the inside.
A reprehension is good, but in him it is ill accidentally, as the best things
in the Gospel may be. The Pharisees were reprehenders, and our righteousness
must exceed theirs, that is, comprehend theirs and more. Augustine says well:
Sheep may not therefore cast away their skins, because wolves sometimes are
coated with them. Every outward thing in their hypocrisy was good, making of
Proselytes, keeping Saints memories: and he that hates them for their abuse,
shall prove himself a fool in the end. Another kind of men may conclude and
think, that those that are such open offenders and riotous, not to be
hypocrites, and it is all they can boast of, I am no hypocrite. But we know
that he is a singular hypocrite, by Open offenders. Matthew. 7.
Christ's own testimony, that has a beam in his eye: Surely they are of the
brotherhood of hypocrites. Esaias, chap. 9. speaking of young men, of wild
youths, says, they are all hypocrites. Iustine says, Every evil man is an
hypocrite, more or less: none is worse than such. And yet if a man should see
him in a mantle, and hear him to pronounce Jehovah in Omnis malus plus minus
hypocrita est.
six lines, seven times, he would think well of him, he being darkness
turns himself into an Angel of light; and as he is an hypocrite himself,
so is his crew. The flesh she complains she is very weak, and cannot rise,
and the spirits are dull, they cannot study. But David omitting his spiritual
watch, fell seven times worse than he did before.

The world is an hypocrite, you may see by the tares, which all good writers
expound Many kinds of hypocrites.
hypocrites, that there be bundles of hypocrites, though few bear the name;
Christ says in the Gospel, Hypocrites, Esaias prophesied well of you, you come
near me with your lips, etc. Of these there be many bundles: such are all they
as will not go one inch further in doing their duties, tha^ the precepts of
men. A man might marvel at Saint Paul, that he called some the circumcised of
God, and the Israel of God, as though there were any other Israel or
circumcision: there are indeed the circumcised of Parliaments, and the
Israelites of Princes. Many there are who, if Josias his statutes were
abrogated, would be ready to take the statutes of Omry.

There is another kind of hypocrites called Heretics, as the Nouatians,
Anabaptists, None readier to accuse me^ of hypocrisy than hypocrites.
Familists. The worst kind are those in the Church, which open well, until they
have a morsel cast into their mouths. Diverse color their hypocrisy under
the cloak of affected popularitie, as Absalom. The cast of hypocrites is to
join to great men, that if they make a escape they may not be meddled withal.
Secondly, they will join themselves to good men, and if that cloak will not
serve, they fly to statutes as in Daniel: and last of all to the cloak of
religion, as Pilate to Christ, I adjure thee by the living God: and as the
sons of Jacob did to the Sichemites, they gate them to circumcise them, that
they might kill them.

There is a kind of dissemblers, that think it but hypocrisy to take upon
one the duty of admonishing, and they say of themselves, that they are not
clean fingred, but clean hearted, and that they are glorious within, for all
that the world sees. But James says, they must be clean fingred too. One
says to Augustine: It suffices me that I have a pure conscience: or that I
have a good conscience. Augustine answers: Let not that content thee: but
remember the words of Christ also: Let your light so shine before men, that
they seeing your good works, may glorify your heavenly father, Matthew. 5. This
is certain (says he) if there be a beam in thine eye, there is a whole
stacke in thine heart. How comes it to pass Si trabes sit in oculo strues est
in cord.
then, that they that are more careful than the rest, are called hypocrites?
Christ indeed might call the Pharisees so, for he knew their thoughts: but no
Prophet ever called any hypocrite, that had not a beam in his eye. But this is
the pestilent practice of the Devil The wicked term the godly hypocrites, and
godliness they call the hypocrisy.
to vex the children of God with that sin, which they cannot with any
outward witnesses or compurgators so well discharge themselves of, being a sin
in the heart. If a man be accused of adultery, he might show the contrary by
circumstance of time, and place, and so acquit himself: but for this sin no
oath will serve, for then he is thought to be greater hypocrite. Give me all
the Saints (says Augustine) and say to them, and see how they can discharge
themselves. Then the matter is this: two things are required in a Christian,
which God gives Job, that we be both straight without, and sound within.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF ANGER.
MOses in the twelfth of Numbers is commended for the meekest man upon the
earth: yet Exodus 32. 19. he is said to be angry, and also is commended for it,
and his anger is allowed: where we learn, that every anger is not forbidden
in the word of God; but that only, which is either without, or not for a ^ust
cause; and which is not measured by the word. For anger is in us, as other
qualities of the mind are: that is, if it That there is a holy anger.
be ruled by our corruption, it is evil, and is forbidden in the word, as a
work of the flesh: but if by Gods good Spirit it be sanctified, and ruled by
Gods word, it is a duty commanded; and we ought to bring it ^oorth as a fruit
of the Spirit. And many of Gods servants in the Scriptures being angry for good
causes, and observing measure, are commended for it: whose examples in the like
causes we ought to follow.

That we may therefore know spiritual and Christian anger from fleshly and
carnal anger, and that we may discern the works of Gods Spirit in us, from
the corrupted works Trial of our anger.
of our flesh: it shall be profitable by some notes to make a difference
between them, that so they may both be known.

The first note or difference between these two kinds of anger is this: If
we can patiently The first Note: To pass by injuries done to our selves.
swallow up and overcome injuries and faults committed against our selves, yet
in the cause of the Lord, we can be very hot, earnest, and jealous; this is a
good sign, that our anger proceeds from the Spirit of God within us. But
contrariwise men in their own causes, and quarrels, and when the injury is
done to them, will be very hot, and angry, and marueilously much moved: but in
the Lords cause they are as cold as ice, and there is no heat within them,
which is a testimony unto them, that their anger is fleshly, and that it does
greatly displease the Lord. Therefore if when we see a man commit any sin,
and we also know, that it tends to the dishonor of God, and the hurt of his
own soul, and if then we can be grieved, and if then we cannot choose but be
angry; hereby we may know that our anger is good, because the glory of God, and
the profit of our brother did thereunto move us, and not our private injuries.
Now if we would be glad thus to make the glory of God the chief cause of our
anger; let us first learn to pass over injuries done against us, and quietly
to bear them, and by that means we shall better learn more safely to be
angry, when the thing concerns the glory of God, for if a man has not
learned to put up his own injuries patiently and without revenge, he shall
mingle it with the other, and so shall pass measure, and most commonly he
shall make both unprofitable.

Secondly, some men can never be pleased, and every light trifle does stir
them up to The second Note of holy anger: not easily provoked.
anger, which cannot but be evil: and this proceeds altogether from the
flesh, this anger cannot be allowed. But spiritual anger is not easily stirred
up, and when it is, then it is measured by the quantity of the fault: a small
fault, a small and short anger; a greater fault, a greater anger, and of a
longer continuance. For herein must we be like our heavenly Father, who is slow
to wrath, chideth us not continually, marketh not what is done amiss, nor
recompenceth Psalm. 133.
us according to our deseruings. But continually uses more means to cause
Simile.
us to love him, than to cause us to fear him. And thus ought it to be with us
also, if we will be children of such a father: so that we ought to strive and
labor to be loved rather than feared, and by love to allure, rather than by
fear to compel. Again, with the Lord we ought to be greatly grieved for
great offenses, and for smaller offenses to be lesser grieved. Now if a man
find himself to be of a hasty nature, and quickly angry; know also that
such a one exalts folly, and that anger rests in the bosom of fools. But
a man of a patient spirit passes in wisdom. Yea, let him know, that such
anger is not good, and therefore labor earnestly that it may be repressed in
him: which that he may dolet him think and know that before holy anger there
must go prayer, that the Lord in mercy may rightly direct him in the same. If
therefore we cannot, or do not before our anger, or when the occasion is
offered, pray unto the Lord, that he may keep us upright in the same: we have
to suspect our anger, for we are in danger to fall and offend therein.

Thirdly, it is a mark of Christian anger, when we are angry with sin in
whomsoever The third Note of holy anger: to be angry with sin wheresoever
we find it.
we find, or whosoever commits it; for many will in their own matters and
causes be very angry, and in them will pretend a careful zeal of Gods glory:
but if a sin be committed which touches them not, they can easily let it
pass; as if a man's own wife be a whore, his children disobedient, his
servants stubborn, and wilful, or if any sin be committed which touches him
near, the^ will he exclaim and cry out for that God is dishonored and will say,
Who ever saw such servants? What wickedness is in children now adays, that
they be thus disobedient? and what women be these to do thus wickedly? In the
mean time if another man's servant be disobedient, if his wife be an whore, he
cannot be angry, he cannot be grieved Such men as these must needs suspect
their anger, for herein they bewray want of faith, want of love, and want of
care of the glory of God, which as it is advanced by the obedience of others,
as well as by ours; so it is likewise dishonored by the sins of others, as
well as by ours. But when the sin does not concern us, if then we cannot be
contented, but the very zeal of Gods glory, and the love of our brethren does
move us thereunto: then may we think that our hearts be upright in that anger.

Again, there be diverse, which when their enemies offend, then will they be
ready to cry Note.
out against it, and will be highly displeased withal: but if their friends
offend; they can bear with them* and think the sin in them small or nothing
But Christian and spiritual anger is clean contrary, for it rather bears
with the fault in his enemy, than in his friends, and will sooner more sharply
rebuke it in his friend than in his enemy. Therefore such friends as can
smooth a man in his sin, are neither to be liked, nor desired: for, Open
rebuke is better than secret love, and the wounds of a lover are sweet. We
see that if a man's Admonition.
child or his wife, or some special friend were sick in body, they use all
means, that they might be restored to their health; and if they did not, their
wife, children, or friends would quickly think they loved them not: And why
should it not be thus in the spiritual sickness of sin* How does a man love
me, when he will not use all means to deliver me from the danger of sin?
When therefore our friends do fall into sin, if then we can be angry, and
that, when they do most favor us, because the cause is Gods, and concerns
their salvation: if then we can remember old love, and temper wisely love with
anger to reprove them, it is a sign that our anger is not fleshly but of the
spirit.

Fourthly, there is a note of Christian and spiritual anger, which though it
be very like to The fourth note of holy anger: To be angry with our own sins:
Matthew. 7. Ioh. 8. 7.
the former, yet it discerns one from another, as much as any other does. For
many men will be angry with other men's sins, but they can never be angry for
their own. Against such as these, the Lord speaks, saying: Hypocrite cast
out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then thou shall see to cast out
the mo^e out of thy brothers eye. And again in another place: He that is
clear among you, cast the first stone at her.

When we therefore can be first angry with our own sins, and more angry with
them, than with others, yea when we can throw the first stone at our selves;
then is our anger of the Lord. For no man can ever be angry in uprightness
of other men's sins, which cannot first be grieved, and angry with his own.
If our anger begin first with our selves, and that for every sin that is in
us, so that there is no sin which we are willing to favor in our selves, or
desirous to continue, and lie in it still, and no man is more grieved for our
sins than we our selves are, and we do more accuse and condemn our selves
than any other does, or can do; and again if a sin be not in us, yet we be
afraid least it may be, and therefore we use means against it: then if we
be angry with the sin of others, we have this good warrant, that our anger
is good; yea, if we be accused or thought to be corruptly angry, either with
our own causes, or with our enemies, insomuch that me^ condemn our anger, yet
we have the testimony of our hearts and consciences to tell that it is not so,
and therefore herein may we take sound comfort.

Fifthly, some men there are, who when they are angry with one, they will be
angry with The fifth Note If our anger stretch beyond the bounds, or hinder
holy duties.
all, and their anger does so chafe and overcome them as it were, that they are
unfit for duties either to God, or their brethren. This anger is altogether
fleshly, and to be condemned. That anger then which makes us unfit to hear
Gods word, to go to prayer, which disquieteth our minds and troubles us, that
anger, I say is to be misliked, though it were for a good cause, and in Gods
behalf: for the works of Gods spirit do not one let or hinder another, but
rather do further one another: insomuch that if we were cold in prayer before,
yet this earnestness in Gods cause does quicken us up, and makes us very
ready unto prayer; if we were dull in hearing the word before, we are now
better affected, and this true zeal and anger in the Lords cause, and for his
glory, will put an edge to every good thing we go about. True anger does not
let us from doing our duties unto God, nor diminish our love toward our
brethren; but rather stirs up in us a compassion over them, for the wrath of
God which we see hang over their heads. And for that cause, we are in pu^^
moved to pray for them more earnestly than before; so far are we from taking
revenge* yea there is a greater care in us, how we may help them out of their
sin, than to punish them for their sin. So that here anger for the sin
is joined with a loving compassion over the party: and the one does not so
much move us to take revenge of them, as the oher does move them to pity their
case. Here then is a special difference betwee^^ them* for Christian anger
has ever a grief joined with it, both for the dishonor of God, and the hurt
of our brother: but carnal and fleshly anger has a joy and pleasure in it,
and ^eedeth it self therewith, and is puffed up. Such godly anger was in
Christ against the Pharisees, Mark. 6.
where it is said that he was angry and sorrowful; and in another place,
when he saw the destruction of Jerusalem, for their sins, for which he had
bin angry with them: it is said of him that he wept. Likewise Paul, threatening
the Corinthians that for their sins he would Matthew. 23. 37. 1. Corinthians. 5.
come to them with a rod; says after, I am afraid that when I come, the Lord
do humble me, and I shall bewail many that have sinned* contrariwise he
describes fleshly anger to be such, as puffs men up, when they see the
sins of their brethren.

Now that we may come to have an holy anger wrought in us for sin, it is
needful that we labor for that affection which was in the Prophet David when
he says, The rebukes of Psalm. 69.
them that rebuke thee, have fallen upon me. Where the Prophet shows, that
every sin which was committed against God, he thought that it was committed
against himself: and was as grieved and angry therewith, because the glory
of God (which was committed to his care) was stained, and God himself
dishonored; and this did make him angry and zealous in the cause of the Lord:
and this zeal must be also in us. Which that it may be tempered, and not too
rigorous, we ought* also to consider how the Apostle Paul appheth the Romans 14.
same place, when he would exhort them to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to deal over sharply with them: he brings the example of Christ, who
suffered for the sins of the people, as for his own, and so accounted of them:
So then we ought to think, that the sins which by our brethren are
committed, are committed of us* and are ours: which if we can do, it will
much abate rigor and sharp dealing in admonition, as also in the punishment
of sin. The Apostle in another place says, Bear y^ one another burden,
and so fulfill the measure of Christ. Now if we shall join these two
affections together in us* first to think, that every sin committed against
Gods majesty, is committed against us* and again, that every sin which our
brother does, we in our own persons do the same: the first will breed in us an
anger and zeal for the glory of God: the other will work in us patience and
compassion, because of our own flesh, and of the Image of God, which Note.
our brother bears: and thereof will come a zealous anger joined with love
and compassion of the party.

By these notes may true Christian and spiritual anger be tried and discerned
from that which is fleshly and carnal, that we may follow the one as
commanded in the law, and wrought in our hearts by the spirit of God; and that
we may avoid the other as forbidden in the law, and proceeding from the
corruption of our flesh, that we may neither be fools which are always angry
for every thing, neither of the damnable and blasphemous family of fleshly
love, which will not in their perfection be angry at all: other differences
there be; but if a man do well consider of these, and practice them, he
shall easily discern the rest.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF BLESSEDNESS.
HE may be said to have tasted true blessedness, whom the Lord before all
beginnings has chosen* to salvation; whose salvation purposed by God the
father, is performed by God the son: to whom the election by God the father,
and redemption by God the son is ratified by God the holy Ghost: in whom
this assurance of faith is wrought by the word preached: faith breeding peace
of mind; this A golden chain of the causes of Salvation.
peace causes joy, joy being accompanied with security, security working in
love, love laboring with a care to please God, with a fear to displease God*
from whence issues a desire of weldoing to others, indeuouring to bring them
to the peace with God and man, which he tastes of himself. Lastly, he is
truly blessed, who besides all the former things, knows how to use
prosperity moderately, and adversity patiently, waiting and looking for the
accomplishment of God his promise in the kingdom of heaven. More particularly
we will entreat of true happiness by the causes and by the effects of it.

The original cause is the love of God, in ordaining us to be heirs of life
eternal, 1 The cause of our happiness, Gods love.
Ephesians. 1. 4. Matthew. 25 34. Wherein is laid open the bountiful riches of the
mercy of God to us ward, in that before the foundation of the world was laid,
the foundation of our salvation was made: before we sinned, the remedy against
sin was found: before the malady, the Lord had prepared a medicine; before
we were damned, he had purposed a way how we should be saved. In respect
whereof, seeing we are rather to rejoice in this, that our names are written in
heaven, than if we had power (without hurt) to tread on Scorpions, or had
spirits subdued unto us, Luke 10. 19. 20. we conclude with the Prophet,
Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man O God* whom thou chusest, and causest to come
unto thee.

The substance of this blessedness is our redemption in Christ Jesus, which is
the Lamb of 2 The substance of our blessed nesse, the redemption of Christ.
God, that takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1* 29* by whose blood we
have the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1. 7* and by whose Spirit (when we
have believed the Gospel) we have the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 4.
14. The excellent price whereof is set out unto us herein, in that being filthy
in the blood of our sins, he washed us with his own blood, Heb. 9. 14. in
that he being just, suffered for us being unjust, 1. Pet. 3. 18. in that we
being of no strength and ungodly, he died for us, Romans 5. 6. in that we being
enemies through sin, were reconciled by him to God the Father, Romans 5. 12.
Wherefore seeing he is Blessed whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered, Psalm. 32. 2. let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, as though
it made him happy, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither let the
rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, that
he knows the mercy of the Lord, wherein consists our salvation Ier. 9.
23* 24. And let us all learn the meaning of the salutation of Elizabeth to the
virgin Marie, Luke 42. Blessed art thou because the fruit of thy womb is
blessed.

The formal cause is the illumination, of God his spirit, making us capable of
the former 3 The formal cause of Salvation. Romans 8.
mysteries, sealing them to us with such assurance in our hearts, that we dare
boldly cry Abbafather, that we dare boldly say, If God be on our side, who
can stand against us? Such blindness, folly, and incredulity possesses us by
nature, that of our selves we can neither see into these mysteries of our
salvation, nor believe the thing we see concerning our comfort until we have
received of this Spirit, which comes from above. For none comes to Christ,
unless the father draw him; and how draws he but by inlightening the hearts
of John. 6.
his elect by the holy Ghost, Ioh. 6. 44? Wherefore seeing these things are not
revealed unto us, but by the Spirit, 1. Corinthians. 2. 14. we end with that
blessing of the Lord Jesus to Peter, Matthew. 16. 17. Blessed art thou Simon,
thou son of Jonah: for flesh and blood has not opened this unto thee, but my
father which is in heaven. 4 The instrument all causes. Faith.


The isntrumental cause is partly within us, as faith, and partly without us,
as the word, and the appurtenances accompanying the same, as Prayer, the
Sacraments, the discipline of the Church* Faith being the ground of things,
which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen Heb* 11. 1.
does so apply the promises of God to our proper and peculiar comforts, that it
seals us up to the Lord, affoording a certain testimony to our hearts, that
we have not in vain received of the good spirit of God. Now, because there is
a certain kind of faith, which Satan himself does broach in his school, and
propounds as a principle to all his scholars; seeing the Papists urge faith in
their unwritten verities, A false faith.
the Familists will have it in their foolish revelations. The Turk requires
it in his dry speculations of Mahomet, and the wizzard will seem to demand it
in his deuillish incantations: we must not believe every spirit, but trust to
the word only* which is our sure loadstarre and touchstone, and being it
self firm, does make our faith in it most firm, sure and unchangeable. This
blessedness to have the Lord communicate himself to us by his word, is
privileged above that praise, which the woman gave our Savior Christ, Luke
11. 27. as may appear by his sharp answer, Yea blessed are they that hear
the word of God and keep it. We conclude then with the Psalmist, Blessed are
they that dwell in the house of the Lord, they will ever praise him. Blessed is
the man whose strength is in the Lord, and in whose heart are his ways, Psalm.
84. 4. 5. If the Queen of Saba counted those men happy, that might stand
before Solomon, and hear his wisdom, 2. Chron 9. 7. if David thought it a
high recompense and princelike benefit to prefer the son of Barzillai to
sit at the table of Solomon: 1. King. 2. 7.
how great is our happiness to hear the wisdom of Christ? how high is our
blessedness to sit at the table of the Lord, where not Solomon, but a greater
than Solomon is present; where not Solomon, but a wiser than Solomon speaks
unto us? Behold then the causes of true blessedness, which are our election,
redemption, illumination, and sanctification: all which are sealed unto us by
the holy Ghost, the spirit working faith through the word preached, Christ
Jesus so sending his Spirit to renew us, God the Father sending his Son to
redeem us, redeeming us to call us, calling us to justify us, justifying us
to sanctify us, sanctifying us he seals us by his spirit: and so by all
these does he lay the sure groundworke of our salvation and eternal
blessedness.

Concerning the effects of blessedness, some are inward and some are outward,
the effects inward are partly in respect of our selves only, and partly in
regard both of our selves and of others: those in our selves are either
concerning mortification, or about our sanctification. The first of these is
both truly and orderly couched in that sermon of the Lord Jesus, Matthew 5. The
first degree of blessedness.
Marth. 5. where those men are set in the first rank, who are emptied both of
the opinion of their own wisdom, and of all persuasion of their own
righteousness: and of those it is said, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the (kingdom) of heaven. Now because many have lost their hold in
judgment, who have not so thoroughly given over in affection: in the next
degree happiness is promised to such, who are so far descended into The second
degree.
the sight of their own vileness and sense of their natural coruptions, that
they are not only convinced of an unrighteousness inherent in their
judgments, but also are much humbled for it in their affections, of whom the
Lord of comfort has thus determined: Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Further, for that Satan labors and prevails much in
over coming exercised minds with petty shames (a thing often incident to
afflicted consciences) the next be atitude is allotted to them, that are meek
in spirit, The third degree.
who mourn rather in themselves, possessing their souls in patience, tha^
murmur against others, as laboring in a secret disdain of them: and of this
sort of mourners the Lord Jesus has pronounced this judgment, Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Neither must we be of too abject a
spirit, as they that will patiently suffer all things, because they would be
troubled with nothing (for that were rather a stoicall and unchristian
sottishnes, than an heroical and Christian meekenes): but willingly submitting
our necks to the yoke, by the Lord his appointment imposed upon us, we are
rather patiently to wait for the time of our deliverance, and by laboring to
keep a good conscience, we The fourth degree.
are to hunger and thirst after righteousness: where with upon the credit of
the Lord his own word, we shall in his good time be satisfied.

Now that we may continue sanctification with mortification, as we join
together Christ his passion and resurrection, let us add somewhat of those
quickening graces of the spirit, wherein some effects of Blessedness do
appear most evidently: the first is peace Effects of blessedness.
of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5. 2. whereby we find both truce
with God, and are at league with his creatures: so as both for our comfort in
the promises of God we 1 Peace of conscience.
have access to him, to rejoice under the hope of his glory: and for our
confidence in the promises of God, we can lie down and sleep in many perils,
because God has either means to deliver us out of them, or else is ready to
sustain us in them, Psalm. 3. 6. and 4. 8. 2 Affiance and trust in God. False
peace and joys.
Of this thus speaks the Prophet: Blessed is the people that can rejoice in
thee, they shall walk in the light of thy countenance, O Lord, Psalm 89. 13.
Now, least we should deceive our selves with some false peace and illuding joy,
we put unto this peace of mind sincerity, which the holy Ghost has linked
together, Psalm. 32. 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. And Psalm. 119. Blessed are
those that are upright 3 Sincerity.
in the way, and walk in the way of the Lord. Beware, least this vprightnes of
mind be boisterous) and void of love, without which all is as nothing but a
swelling pride: so with this we make known our faith by fruits, and our
feeling by sweet effects: For love the enemy of security is careful to
please God, and fearful to displease him: and blessed is the man that fears
always, Prou. 28. 14. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and walks 4
Fear.
in his ways, Psalm. 128 1. Lastly, this fear is joined with a care to please
God in the obedience of his word, Luke 11. Blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it. Those effects, which concern not only our selves but
others, are of two sorts, and comprehended Matthew. 5. The first, a Christian
care to work in others a taste of that sweet reconciliation, which is from
God to man, or from man to man: whereof it is said, Matthew. 5* 9. Blessed are 1
Peacemakers.
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Many may
undertake this duty, but upon some sinister affection: and therefore we require
a fellow-feeling of the evils of others, mourning both for their inward defects
and outward necessities, of whom Christ has said, Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy. Of the other the Psalmist speaks, 2 Mercy.
Note.
Psalm. 40. 2. Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, etc. And when
wisdom joined with compassion and pity, mixed with policy, does work such
a moderation in our affections, as that we may use such a merciful severity,
where it is needful, and a severe lenity, where the matter so requires it:
this causes us to avoid on the one side taking of offense; for, Blessed are
they (says the Lord Jesus) that are not offended at me: and on the other side
it teaches us to reach out our hand to the needy: for it is a blessed thing
to give rather than to receive, Act. 20. 35. The outward effects are
prosperity, as a sign of God his love; and adversity as a thing sanctified
unto us in the cross of Christ, Psalm. 128. Many temporal blessings are
propounded, not universally, but as restrained to them that fear the Lord,
because indeed they have the surest interest in them and right unto them The
like felicity falls out, Psalm. 144. but to such as have God for their Lord.
And much more is, a certain gain and handsell of happiness arises even out of
the bitterness of affliction, to them that fear God, in that thereby the Lord
strippeth them from some sin, wherewith they might have rotted; or whetteth
them up to some actions of godliness, wherein their zeal began to freeze for
cold; or to try their faith, which else would have been dross; or for the
good of others that might make their profit thereby. The Prophet his testimony
of this is, Psalm. 99. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and
teach him in thy law Hereunto may be joined that beatitude of the Lord of
all blessings, Matthew. 5. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. To draw at the last to
the consummation of all, this we make the full heap of all happiness after this
life to be filled with the Lord of life, and with the sweetness of his presence,
who is happy above all, that can be thought and counted happy. This is
foreshewed, Matthew. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you. And Revel. 14. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, etc.
For thus shall we be joined to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
then shall all tears be wiped from our eyes, then shall our infirmities be
taken from us, then shall we dwell with the Angels, and with all the hosts of
heaven in most happiness, and blessedness it self. We see now by this chain not
forged by our own brain, but framed out of Gods his word, that he is indeed
blessed, whom God chooses, whom Christ redeemeth, whom the Spirit renueth, whom
faith staieth, whom the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, and discipline build up in
the Lord, in whom faith breeds peace, peace sincerity, sincerity love, love
a fear of displeasing, and a care of pleasing God: in whom this care strives
to a mortification in poverty of mind, this poverty coming from a mourning
heart, possessed in a meek spirit, which hungreth after righteousness: all
these things being joined with that sanctification which lamenteth the sin of
others, and relieueth the wants of others, knowing to use prosperity and
adversity as pledges of God his favor, and vndoubtingly looking for the
kingdom of heaven in the life to come. If any of these linkes be missing, the
chain is broken: if any of these members be wanting, the body of blessedness
is imperfect.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF FASTING.
Matthew. 6. When thou fastest, prepare thy self secretly, not before men, but
God which sees in secret, and he will reward thee openly. Esaias. 1. 16. The
fasting that the Lord requires, is, that you put away your evil thoughts,
ceasing to do evil, and learn to do good: applying your selves to equity,
and delivering the oppressed, helping the fatherless to his right, and letting
the widows complaint come before you. Esaias. 58. Unto whom he is like that
fasteth, and yet cease not to sin. Behold when you fast, your lust
remains still: for you do no less violence to your debtors, ye fast to
strife and debate, and smite with the fist of wickedness. Zach. 7. 9. Fasting
without true works of mercy is unprofitable. Show mercy and ^ouing kindness
every man to his neighbor. Dan. 9. Daniel prayed unto the Lord with fasting.
Joel. 2. 12. Let us turn to the Lord with fasting, weeping, and mourning. 1.
Sam. 7. 6. The children of Israel fasted, confessing their sins to God. Acts.
14. Paul and Barnabas prayed and fasted at the ordaining of Elders. 2. Cor. 6.
4. Paul proves himself a Minister of God by fasting and praying. Luke 2. 37.
Anna the Prophetess served God by fasting and praying. Psalm 35. 13. Jesus
Christ humbld his soul. Psalm. 69. 10. Weakened his knees. Psalm. 109. 24. And
became lean with fasting.
SOme fasts are general and private, as the fast instituted of Hester and
Mardoche, which was commanded generally to all the Jews, but yet privately
practiced in their several houses: some are public and particular, as the
fast of Ezra in the behalf of the Jews, which married strange wives. This
must needs be confessed first in him to be singular: Secondly, when they that
feared the words of the Lord would adioyne themselves unto him, to be
particular, yet done in the Temple before, and for others to be public. It may
be granted that the fasts now of our time in the same sense, may be said to be
generally used, that is in all and every place of this realine, for that they
may be used according to Gods holy ordinance, and in this sense it is often
taken, both in the Scriptures, and common speech; but as it is taken in our
proper sense there cannot as yet be any general fast observed: when all those
things can in no measure be performed, which in that kind is necessarily
required. It may be indeed, that such days of general mourning may come
(which God for his Christ's sake turn away from us) as of general wars,
plagues, and famines: for then men will be easily brought to general fasts
with the Ninevites. But these kinds of fasts as they are now used, and as in
the Scriptures they are commanded to be used, be to be taken up in the
wisdom of the spirit to move us to mourn for many spiritual evils
present, the very causes of general dangers to come, which by these means may
be prevented, and can be understood of no kind of men, but of them which are
truly taught out of the word of God, to see and feel their own sins, and the
sins of others, and to fear those judgments of God to come. And here holds
the direction of our Savior Christ, concerning the rent cloth, and new wine;
for because Matthew. 9. How expeaient it were that some public fasts should be
observed in our time.
it cannot be so general, rather then there should be none, it is better that
the doctrine be truly delivered, and some example thereof showed, to provoke
others by an holy emulation thereunto, that both the people may be delivered
from their ignorance, and also being taught the truth of the doctrine, that
they should not think the use of it impossible. Besides the true fast both
public and private truly taught, and faithfully practiced does deliver us from
our errors: wherewith we have bin entangled, keeps us from carnal liberty
which otherwise we might take, confuteth the erroneous, and dangerous opinions
of the Papasts about fasting, and stops their slanderous mouths, who of
long time have accused us that we fast not at all.

The necessity of fasting in our Church may easily be seen, for that we abou^d
with so many sins: fasting is necessarily to be used with prayer, for the
preservation of Religion, and of the Estate, and that the word of God may be
divided aright, that the consciences of me^ being terrified with their sin,
they may see how they have deserved the change of Religion, and alteration of
this prosperous government, though God in his mercy has hitherto continued
both, and will do still, if we still bewailing our sins, and amending our lives
believe both his threatenings and his promises to be true. But above all,
Fasting in these days is necessary, because our sins do more abound than
before, greater tokens of Gods wrath do appear than before, more fear of
danger both in the Church and Commonwealth than before, which being manifest,
it is requisite not only that there should be ordinary preaching Munition for
war, and all means for peace, that they may be blessed unto us, ought not to
want preaching, prayer and fasting.
and praying for his Majesty, his Council, the Church and Commonwealth,
which w^ always used: but also extraordinary use of those means with
fasting, to prevent the wrath of God that may ensue. And concerning the
ordinary defense against evils to come, it must be confessed, that as they are
subordinated and joined with spiritual means, they may be good; and without
them they will not prevail, because they want the help of prayer and fasting.
It were too great security to rest in the ordinary means of defense, as of
wisdom, policy, multitude of arms, furniture of weapons, etc. and to boast
in these, because God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. So
the^ the neglect of this exercise of humbling our selves will declare our
security, and security shows our pride, and does bewray our infidelity.
Neither is ye end of prayer or fasting, the neglect of ye ordinary means, but
the pulling away of our confidence in them; that we might rest in the only
power and goodness of God. Which how necessary a thing it is, plainly
appears in the two great overthrows which the Israelites had of the
Beniamites, whereas they being more in number, better appointed in the defense
of a good cause, were notwithstanding constrained twice to retire with great
slaughter, until at the last by casting off all confidence in themselves, by
prayer and fasting acknowledging themselves to be nothing, they obtained
victory. For then shall corporal means most prevail, when all the spiritual,
which God commands have been truly used: And they are fittest to use the
outward means of defense, which have learned to convey their faith from the^,
by the public exercises of humiliation, unto the promises of God. If with
fasting and prayer we can wrestle with the Archangell of God, then shall we
never be afraid of Duke Esau nor all his Edomites; if we be Israelites to
prevail with God, we cannot be but Jacobs to prevail with man. What should I
say of our forefathers, which by this faith have obtained their victories? The
time would be too long to tell of Gedeo^, Baruch, Sampson, Iepthah, David, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Ezechia, who through faith H^b* 11.
obtained the promises, subdued kingdoms, escaped the edge of the sword, of
weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies of
alia^ts, of some of which it is pressed, that they did these things by faith,
helped by prayer and fasting: and of the most part of the other it may bewel
understood. Seeing we are compassed about with such Note.
a cloud of witnesses, shall we be so bewitched as to dream of the like
victories without the like faith, or to imagine of the like faith, without
using of the like means? But it may be some will object, that this exercise of
humiliation weakeneth the hearts of true subjects, and incourageth the enemies:
this was of old slanderously objected to Jeremy by the unbelieving and carnal
Princes, who would yet seem to be wise politikes. I have heard indeed of the
Arch*atheist Machiauel* that writes of the Religion of Christians, that it
being practiced in truth does weaken their hands, making them cowards; and
emboldeneth their enemies against the^ (although there be no doubt many that
think so) yet never have I heard godly or wise men say so. Neither does this
kind of humiliatio^ lift up our enemies the Papists at home or abroad, but
their own proud hearts and malicious attempts against Gods people: by both
which (seeing that pride will have a fall, and before glory goes humility) we
may assure us the rather of the victory, having so many promises in Gods word
for the same, confirmed with so many examples. In the stead of many in the
Psalm. 119. this promise shall suffice: They draw near that follow after
malice, and are far from the law: thou Pride and malice in Papists.
art near, O Lord, for all thy words are true. The terrible judgments of God
against the pride of Moab and other Nations (who conspiring together against
the people of God) at the last were made their own executioners, and the great
destruction of blasphemous Senacherib his host. Ezekiah king of Judah being
set free from the siege, both these being wrought by public and private
fasting, do most evidently confirm the same: which examples may serve for us
to look after others which are many in number. True it is indeed that the great
security with the floods of our sins flowing over the banks in every place,
have hitherto rejoiced our enemies heart; and if once they arm themselves with
Gods wrath, (which the Lord turn away for Christ's sake) then will they
certainly fray us: which to prevent all means will not help us, unless in
fasting, weeping, and mourning we rent our hearts, though not our garments,
unfeignedly acknowledging our sins, and trembling at his judgment, that so we
may turn unto God with our whole hearts by repentance, by faith, believing him
to be gracious and merciful, slow to wrath, and of great goodness. And this
doing, we may assure our selves, that the terror of the Lord shall be stricken
out of our hearts, and the spirit of gladness and power shall be powered upon
us: and through faith helped by prayer and fasting, shall we do valiantly.
Thus the spirit of God moved Joel the Prophet, to threaten the people of his
time living under a prosperous Reign: unto whom this objection might as justly
have been made, as against the exercise; and a great deal more, because his
Fast was more general, his threatenings more fearful, his descriptions of
their dangers more terrible. Again, some may object, that fasting is an
exercise of sinners: what shall we say then? shall the hypocrisy of man make
the appointment of God of none effect? yea, was it not therefore appointed,
that he which comes hither of custom, may yet go away with conscience? may
he not being reproved, and rebuked in his own soul, and seeing his hypocrisy
laid open, labor from thenceforth to approve himself, or at the least be
without excuse against the day of the Lord. May there not be also at this
exercise, some that come in truth, and in the fear of God, whom God will
accept? is it meet that these children of God should be bereft of the use
thereof, for the abuse of the wicked? Moreover we are to be circumspect that we
require not a daily fast? for as in Physic Simile.
it is a thing most absurd to prescribe a continual use of violent vacuation,
and seldom of ordinary food: even so it is as absurd divinity, to say, it
is sufficient that preaching be used at sundry times, in sundry places, and
that fasting should be daily used: when as the ministry of the word of God is
as often to be used, as milk for babes to be nourished; or as meat for strong
men to grow up to the fulness of the age of Christ: and fasting is to be
admitted, but as letting of blood, or purging some corrupt humor, when some
great cause urges the same. We lament the want of diligent Preaching, which
some without a continual course whereof think to be sufficient: A Christian
heart may appeal to Gods blessed Diligent and continual preaching. 1. Tim. 4.
16.
word, the true judge of all them that are teachable, but the judge of all,
even of the froward in the last day; yea, we may appeal to the great inquest
of all Gods children which know their own sins; yea to the experience of
twenty * years, which is a witness so sufficient, that no exception can be
made against it whether to work all and every point of that This was written,
A^. Eliza* 2^.
knowledge, with a care to practice it, in any sufficient measure, in all
places, so few Sermons so little preaching in most places, be not very
insufficie^t? The Law says, that the mouths of the Priests should always
keep knowledge, both that they might teach the people by public doctrine and
exhortation; and that the people might require of them by private conference*
The Prophets are commanded to cry and not to cease; and the Lord is said by
their Ministry to rise up early, and to stretch forth his hand all the day
long: and the Kingdom of God is like to the father of an house, that brings
forth of his treasury things new and old for the daily food of the family.
What is this that every true Minister is charged with, as he will answer it
before the judgment seat of Jesus Christ to preach the word in season and out
of season? Surely once in a quarter, and once in a month, may soon seem to
be out of season, or scarce in season: But sure I am that twice on the Sabbath,
(if Gods word be the judge) can be termed no more but in season: and to preach
longer and oftener on the fasting days, may not be called in the Apostle his
sense, out of season. Now to fast every day were more than the Pharisees did,
who fasted but twice in the week: if we will be counted the sons of
Patriarchs and Prophets: and the disciples of the Apostles, to take that
liberty of Gods creatures, that they did, why should we be burdened with the
traditions of Esaues, Heremites and Heretics? It is said of Basil the great,
and Nazianzene the learned, that they use thus to macerate their bodies with
very often abstinence: but what follows after, they were made (as a great
learned Censurer says) unprofitable to the Church, lying sick sometimes half
a year, sometimes an whole year. Why then should we tempt God to lay an yoke
upon the disciples necks, which never our fathers were able to bear? Seeing
we are dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world; why, as though we
were in the world, should we be burdened with traditions? as touch not,
t^ste not, handle not, which all perish with using, and are after the
commandment and doctrine of men; which things indeed have a sh^we of
wisdom, in voluntary religion, and humility of mind, and not sparing the
body, but are of no value, save for the fulfilling of the flesh. Sobriety.
Moreover we must learn to make a difference between a temperate and
moderate use of Gods creatures (which we call sobriety, and ought always to
appear in the life of Christians) and an utter abstinence from the use of the
creatures, called Fasting; which neither by Gods word ought, nor yet by
natural reason can be continually or daily. And here let us learn to avoid
the extremities, and to keep the mean in fasting, which master Bucer has
taught us, who says that if we ^schue not fasting at all, or fasting too much,
we shall fast aright. Call they this a fast, for a man to abstain every day
from a meals meat? to use prayer at morning and at night, although that he
spend the most part of the day, and the whole night in the commodities,
refreshings and pleasures of this life? this is no sound Divinity. The blessed
Baptists course, and rusticall diet of locusts and wild honey, which he used
according to the nature of the barren and wild soil wherein he lived, makes
nothing for this purpose, unless those that will have it used, put on also the
Camels hayte^ His disciples which foolishly followed him without a warrant of
that (which he did upon good ground) are said to fast, not every day, but
oftentimes.

The hyperbolicall phrases of praying and fasting, and of the continual abode
day and night in the Temple of the ancient Anna, a widow of fourscore and
four years, living in contemplation, will not serve to prove, that a daily
exercise of fasting should Who fit to fast often.
be used of married folks, and others that lead a life active, either civil
or ecclesi^sticall, who for their years may endure the traueiles of their
mind and body, and by their calling are bound six days in the week,
without some special occasion to follow the works of the same, and on the
seventh day to celebrate a feast unto the Lord, and not a fast with the
Maniche^s. Thus the most excellent servants of God, David, Daniel, and Paul are
most notably commended unto us for their holy exercises of prayer, and fasting:
whereof one (as we read) they used daily and according to their ordinary
wants: the other upon special and extraordinary needs, which God did press
them with. These examples are we bound to follow, so far forth as they
followed Christ, who although he fasted (no doubt) very many times, yet
notwithstanding his life was so far from a daily fast, that it was thought a
continual feast. Indeed the Popish fast may well enough, and without danger
to the body be continually and daily used, and yet many ways dangerous and
hurtful to the soul; but other fasting being daily used, would be both
hurtful to the body, in puffing it up with winds, and filling it up with
corrupt humors, and also to the soul in that pride would be engendered and
noisome opinions also nourished in it. A true fast requires not an emptiness
of the belly only, because the kingdom of heaven is neither in meat nor
drink, and that if we eat we are not the worse, and if we eat not we are
not the better, and seeing the bodily exercise profits little, yea oftentimes
hurts much more in puffing up the mind, than it can do good in pulling it
down: we must as much, and as carefully use the word, and prayer, and other
holy exercises, public and private for the increase of spiritual things, as
we use abstinence from natural, adding so many means to the inward man as we
take from the outward: that we may not only humble our selves in body, but in
both together, that we wait on Gods good time to receive from him comfort to
our spirits, as we look and make account shortly to take sustenance for our
bodies. Besides, the true fast requires us to rest from our ordinary profits
and pleasures, and if it be public to hear also two, three, or four Sermons
in one day with long and fervent prayer; and serious meditation before, in the
midst and after these exercises, reverent reading of the Scriptures, of singing
of Psalms joined with fasting, as it is perfectly taught in the perfect use
and true end of this exercise. The Prophets Isaiah and Joel thought it not
enough to exhort the people to true repentance, but called also for the public
exercise of the same, which doctrine of the Prophets is sealed by Nehemiah and
Ezrah, and the rest of the people, who notwithstanding had their notable
profiting in the knowledge of the law, yet seeing the secret threatenings of
the Lord against their spiritual evils, added this mean of a fast beyond the
ordinary use of the word, leaving an example to the Church for her instruction
in all ages. Were we as sharp sighted, as tender conscienced as they, we might
discern greater judgments threatened of the Lord against us, and feel more
spiritual evils in our selves than ever they did: for to let pass that great
plague of the Lord upon our times, as the Ministry so ignorant and dissolute,
such sacrilege by impropriations, and irreligious Patrons which are not all
this while amended; the carnal life of Protestants, the stiffness of Papists
which cannot thus long be converted, the dangerous dissembling of Atheists and
Machiauelists in the Church and commonwealth: the long bitter contentions of
the true professors, besides many more evils not to be spoken; and many known
and professed evils in these days, against which hitherto neither law has
been established, nor the preaching prevailed: and we forget our brethrens
calamity in the persecuted Churches, with whom we have thus long, and still
do forget to mourn. Has not the Lord himself blown a Trumpet to our Fasts?
let then those which are the Ministers of the Lord be continually exhorting
hereunto. God grant them to rebuke sin, to threaten the law, move
Repentance, and to urge Fasting.

OF THE SENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST.
Acts. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, etc. 14 But Peter standing with the eleven, lift up
his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea, and ye all that inhabit in
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken unto my words. 15 For these
are not drunken, as ye suppose, since it is but the third hour of the day. 16
But this is that, which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. 17 And it shall be in
the last days, says God, I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.
IN the former part of this chapter is set down the work of God in sending
down the holy Ghost on the Apostles, as also the effects hereof, both in the
Apostles, and in the hearers, wonderful in the one, diverse in the other, the
Apostles speaking with such strage tongues, the hearers hitherto not greatly
moved, but secretly murmuring and saying, they had drunk deeply, and so
became eloquent. Whereat Peter taking this good occasion confuteth them by two
reasons, first telling them it was but yet nine of the clock, or the third
hour of the day, at what time men use not to be drunken. Nay, says he, it is
so far off, that we are drunken, as ye suppose, that it is with us clean
contrary. For the thing is not come to pass, that one of your own Prophets
foretold you, it is not superfluity of drink, but an abundance of God his
spirit, not promised by special privilege to us alone, but to all sexes,
conditions, and estates of men whatsoever, if ye be prepared to receive it. For
as the Lord has bestowed the gifts of his spirit on us, so will he also do it
to you, if ye wilfully refuse not: and therefore the Lord is ready now to
work wonders in the world; and whosoever either wittingly refuses, or carelessly
abuses these graces, shall be snared in these judgments, yet so, as the Lord
being more ready to magnify his mercy, than to show his justice, will
accomplish this, that whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, shall both
escape the judgments threatened, and also obtain these. And thus much both
generally and briefly for the scope of this place. More particularly we may
observe three special points: first, the liberal testimony of Joel, and his
rich commendation of the grace of God in bestowing such graces on his Church
under the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and this is set down, verse. 17. 18. the
second thing is, that at what time the Lord will thus deal with his people,
the Lord will send many judgments, as heresies, offenses, dearths, plagues,
and wars, which here are declared in figurative and borrowed speeches of
blood, fire, vapor of smoke, and such like, whereby he will punish and avenge
himself for the contempt of so gracious mercies, as verse. 19. 20. and the
third thing is the means how we shall escape such heavy judgments, and
attain to such heavenly graces, and so persevere in them, which is declared
verse. 21. But before we enter further into the deep discourse of these
particular points, we will observe the occasion and the circumstances of this
speech of Peter: the occasion was, that the people not profiting by the former
and marvelous work of the Lord, the Apostle takes occasion further to
instruct them that were teachable, and to reprove the scorners: and yet he was
not so offended at them, in that God his wonderful works did nothing profit
them, as that therefore he left off all, but he stirs up himsel^e the more
earnestly, and endeavors familiarly to teach them. Whereby we are to learn
not rashly, suddenly, or unadvisedly too much to be offended at the not
profiting, slender profiting, or back sliding of some; but rather we must
labor to attempt the matter with a new onset, remembering always, that not
only a woe is threatened to them, that give just occasion of offense, but also
unto them, that in Christ do take offense; and therefore taking a view of our
selves either in natural or spiritual gifts we must try our selves, how
patiently we can sustain without offense, either the want or resistance of the
like gifts in others: and yet we see, that if after some means used, men go
slowly forward, and not make such speedy proceedings as is desired, men for
the most part are ready to leave off all, and are glad to draw out of the yoke
of their duty, as thinking themselves well exempted, and as it were
discharged; when as spiritual men in such cases think themselves to be
stirred up to the more earnest and painful using of the means; to which well
meaning minds, and to men of so upright an heart, the Lord often gives good
increase of gifts, that they may employ the use of them unto others. And surely
if flesh and blood might judge in such a case, we would think that this
present occasion might have made Peter give over and go from the people; but
he more meekely and modestly as the foreman of the quest, follows the matter,
and answers unto them as we have heard. We may read Acts 6. how there did
arise a murmuring between the Jews and the Grecians, in so much as the
Apostles credit began to be called into question, that they had not care of the
widows, which was a duty belonging unto them, as though they had the faith of
God in respect of persons. This might seem to be able to discourage them* but
contrariwise through the blessing of God his spirit they espied their own wants
in themselves, and began to seek a new Ministry. Now if they had taken the
matter too much to heart, they might have become unprofitable, but they meekely
passing over the offense, and wisely looking to the counsel of God, thought
themselves to be but men, and that they could not infinitely be ocupied or
busied in many things, ordained Deacons in the Church. This then we must make a
special use of, when for some good means used, or otherwise much unkindness is
offered us even of our friends, or we find little thanks for our travel, nay
sometime reap reproaches at their hands for our reward; that then we grow not
slacker in our duties, or wax cold in love, and droope in our affection
toward them; which if we do, we shall bewray that our affection was merely
and only natural, and not spiritual. True it is and cannot be denied, that a
kind heart and liberal mind is most broken with reproaches, but yet this
offense must be overcome, and striuen against in us, after the example both of
Peter in our present text, and of the rest of the Apostles in that former
place, Acts 6. who rather took occasion to accuse themselves, than to cease to
be profitable to the Church of Christ. Neither is it, neither ought it to seem
to us a strange thing, that the graces and gifts of God have found such cold
entertainment, yea which is a thing more contrary, great repulses and
reproaches. Much learning, says Festus, Acts 26. 24. makes Paul mad: the
works of God his spirit here are counted drunkenness. Ezechiel is thought to
sing a fond song; Christ was thought to cast out devils by the power of the
devil: John Baptist was thought but a melancholic man; Iehu being threatened,
called the Prophet a mad brain (for so they judged of the Prophets, digressing
somewhat from the set order and compositions of words and precepts of their
art.) So that the graces of God seem often to men to be clean contrary. If
this has been always the judgment of the world, that, because they could no
longer hear men, or further see into things, than either reason or art did
guide them, they thought the Prophets, and Apostles railing spirits and barren
soiles; we must not think it a new thing. And hearers are here greatly to be
circumspect, that they think not so basely of men zealous in gifts of the
spirit, as that they should account them mad, melancholic, or cholerike men,
and such as either would hurt themselves, or do some hurt to others; but
rather reverently acknowledge, that there is a secret and mighty power of the
Spirit, which the Lord often conueieth into the hearts of the godly. Men can
for the most part well away with an ordinary course in preaching, and so long
as it falls into an oratorie style, and just proportion of words, or so long as
a man shows a witty invention, and comely composing of the matter: but if a
man press into the consciences of men, and with some vehemency speak against
their familiar sins, straight way they say, surely this kind of teaching
bewrays him to be brainesick. And that we may be the more weary herein, let
us consider who they were that inueyed thus against the Apostles* were they not
men out of every nation fearing God, and such as were somewhat religious? yes
surely. And who nowadayes will sooner and sorer open their mouths against
zealous preachers, than men claborate in art, and skilful in precepts, who not
being able by reason to see into this vehemency, judge them that use it too
austerely? Wherefore as this must correct judgment in hearers, least they
justly offend God in being unjustly offended at them that are zealous for the
Lord of hoasts sake: so also it must teach the Ministers of the word patience,
if sometimes they be wrongly co^strued, and so recompense their fury with
meekenes, as the Lord may humble their adversaries the more, even by their
meek dealing, of whom they thought so hardly: which undoubtedly oftentimes is
most effectual even to break the hearts even of the most obstinate
gainesayers. And it cannot be gainesayd, that these men seeing the Apostles
meekenes, were far more won, and sooner humbled, than if he should have
breathed out furious speeches, and so have ceased from his holy business. And we
shall see by experience, that men thinking one to be curious, singular, or
precise, after the Lord has sanctified some cross upon them, and humbled them
in some measure underneath his hand, they are more humbled at the meekenes and
long suffering of him whom they offended, than by any other means, because
they then perceive they have resisted the grace of God, and persecuted the
gifts of God in him.

In the last days: That is, when Christ should be manifested in the flesh,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in
glory, shall these gifts of the spirit abound. It is called the last day,
because of the stabilitie of the Church, and perfection of the word, in that in
it we look for none other doctrine, until Christ come in judgment. 1.
Corin. 10. 11. After that the Apostle had feared the Corinthians with the
example of the Jews, he comes ^o apply his doctrine in this manner: Now all
these things came unto them for ensamples, and were written to admonish us,
upon whom the ends of the world are come. As if he should say, these things
seemed not to serve for them alone, but for us in the last days. And Heb 1. ^
it is plainly in evident phrase said, At sundry times and in diverse manners God
spoke in old ^im^ to our fathers by the Prophets; in these last days he has
spoken to us by his Son, etc. All which places in sense at the least agree
with this place, together with that Galath. 4. 4. where it is called the fulness
of time. For the estate of the people before Christ his coming was childish
and paedagogicall, and therefore men looked as John's Disciples for another that
should come: and the Samaritanes had this general principle among them. That
the Messiah when he came would restore all things, and set them in order.
Whereby we must learn, not to look for any new doctrine, or revelations of
men. Christ himself is come, and has made things perfect: Christ the prince of
Prophets whom they looked for is manifest in the flesh; by how much the
Prophets were nearer him, by so much they had the clearer sight of him; the
further they were from him, the dimmer was their knowledge of him. The Lord
himself has spoken, the book is now shut up with a complet conclusion; if
any man shall diminish of the words of it, God shall take away his part out of
the book of life; if any man shall add unto it, God shall add unto him the
plagues threatened in the book. And therefore all Heretics, Papists, and
Turks, will not stick to agree in this common error. The Turk though he does
not deny Christ and the scripture, but gives them their time and place, yet
will have a way for his Mahomet, who must expound the word to him as he please.
The Papist in plain terms dares not deny Christ and his Gospel, yet can he
not see all sufficiency therein, but complaining of some defect, he looks to
unwritten verities, and leans to old traditions to be given to the Church,
and therefore he will have the Pope to be Christ his vicar, and look
whatsoever their Synodes do conclude, that must be established as a catholic
truth, measuring the scriptures by their traditions, and not their traditions
by the scriptures. The damnable Family of love make the word (which is a thing
fearful to be thought, much more to be spoken of) but a nose of wax, or a
shipmans hose, and yet they will have their H. N. who is the eight person and
the last man, who must be joined with the Gospel, and so far forth as he
with other gray headed, and illuminate elders do interpret the Scriptures, they
will agree. We now against these and all other heretics confessing the
scriptures of God to be perfect and absolute to salvation, join none other
thing with them, but say, that we live in the last days, wherein Christ left
the fulness of doctrine, of prayer, of Sacraments, and discipline to the Church
by his Apostles; and therefore we mind no revelation, Mahometicall
interpretation, nor traditions of men, but though an Angel come from heaven,
and bring an unwritten verity varying from the truth of God his word, we
utterly reject him. Neither as running too far on the other hand do we
utterly and simply refuse all orders of the Church, although sometime there be
no express word, but if by consequence, if by cause or effect we can find it
agreeable or not repugnant to the word after trial had with the holy
scriptures, we will receive it: thus to make the word the touchstone the
heretics will not agree. Besides, as in all other arts it is requisite, that
whosoever will attain sound knowledge of them he must credit their
principles, for otherwise as the very heathen saw, there is no farther dealing
in the learning of them; so we have certain general truths and rudiments,
whereby we train up new comers to Christ, and try both old and young by them:
which thing our heretics will not admit. We hold then certain general rules
of the power, providence, and wisdom of God, of our redemption and salvation
by Jesus Christ, of our effectual sanctification, of the forgiveness of our
sins, of the hope of the glorious resurrection and of a better life, of
obedience, prayer, discipline, and holy conversation in despite of all
heretics, against which though they dispute, declame, rail, and write, we
will never leese the hold. Secondly, which is a thing unto these men
unacquainted, we use to mark the scope and drift of the writer, we compare the
things that go before, with the things that follow after, we confer one
place with another, the old Testament with the new, the allegories with the
plain speeches: we see a perfect harmony in the scriptures, we refuse all
dissenting and disagreeing doctrine to the scriptures; all which neither Turk,
Papist, nor Familist will do; and therefore we have the truth in these last
days, which neither Mahomet, Bishop of Rome, nor H. N have: and therefore we
will not be judged by their revelations, traditions, and dreams, but by the
scriptures, whereby we judge them: and in this sense we say the last days, or
fulness of time, because we have the truth. But yet the villanoust wretches
which heap up to the brimme the measure of their sins, will not also stick to
say with us, that these are the last days, that is, as they interpret it, who
so comes into the house of love and is illuminated, is now risen again, and
has heard the last trumpe, and is become of an Angelical nature, needing no
eating, drinking, or marrying, after the manner of men: and these are our
ranging rogues, who will tie themselves to no calling, but live as they think
in the resurrection. See how needful it is to understand this phrase aright
of the last days. We call not them the last days, in respect that no further
time shall be, but in respect hereof that these days shall not be ended until
Christ come, and give up the kingdom to God the Father: and as these last
days were begun at his first coming in humility in the flesh, so they shall
end at his last coming in glory to judgment.

It follows in our text: In the last days, says God. All the Scriptures are
worthy to be heard, because they proceed from God, and not from man, although
man may be the pen of the holy Ghost. Wherefore it is said, 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21.
First know this, that no prophecy in Scripture is of private motion. For the
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost. The Prophets wholly to disauthorise
themselves, in all their weighty embassages, use to say: Thus says the Lord
of hosts: Thus says the Lord the holy one, and such like: whereby they would
purchase the greater credit, whilst they remove the imagination of men from
all dreaming of man's doing, and set their faith a work in acknowledging it to
proceed from God. Wherefore we must so hear the word, as though we heard God
himself speaking to us, yea as though we either went up to heaven, or God came
down to us. Likewise whether we read, hear, or meditate privately, we must
still think our selves in the presence of God, who narrowly watches over the
pure use of his holy word, remembering that holy speech of Cornelius, Act. 10.
verse. 33. unto Peter the Apostle, Now are we all here present before God, to
hear all things commanded thee of God. It is also said in that exhortation to
the Church to praise God, Psalm. 95. verse. 2. Let us come before his face with
praise, etc. This is that which will humble us, when we know that we come
before God and his Angels, whose presence is described Ezekiel. 1. and therefore
the Apostle. 1. Cor. 11. 10. to move the women of Cor. the more, tells the^,
that they are in the presence of the Angels. This meditation breeds religion
in hearing, without which whilst, we behold a man speaking as of himself and
by himself alone, we are never moved, threate^ he, promise he, menace he,
comfort he, exhort he, reprove he never so much. No, we cannot thoroughly be
wrought upon, until we can say; Surely it is the Lord speaks to us* it is the
word of the most high God uttered by man, we will not receive it as the
doctrine of men, but of God, either as the doctrine to save our souls, or to
confound us; it is the mighty power of salvation, if we believe; it is a
mighty power to cast us down to the hels, if we do not believe. It is the
word of God that moves, not the word of man. For if a man were a Turk, how
should he move a Papist? or how should a Papist move a Turk? If he take away
Mahomets dreams from the Turk, or the Fathers traditions from the Papist, or
the eight man his revelations from the Familist, and vrgethem with the word,
they are gone: so that it is the only word of God, maugre the head of the
devil, that vnblindfoldeth all their errors, and is able to move them, and
convert so many of them to the truth as God will have saved. Thus we see what
the persuasion of God his presence and the authority of his word works in
us. Now before we go into the other particulars, let us by the way consider
somewhat of the reason here used.

Before he used a reason of probability from the circumstance of the time, now
he comes to a reason of necessity, because never drunken men could speak
the wonderful things of the Spirit. This argument is drawn from contraries:
men full of drink cannot so show forth the works of God, men thus endued
with God his spirit cannot be drunken. On this manner Paul thus reasons,
Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with
the Spirit. As if he should say: if ye be filled with wine, there is excess,
if ye labor of excess of wine, surely you cannot have the Spirit* Christ also
uses this argument: No man can serve two masters, etc. If a man wholly give
over himself to God, he cannot serve the world; if all our mind, heart, and
affections be given to the world, we cannot serve God. They then that are
filled with wine and are drunken, cannot have the holy Ghost. I say drunken,
because otherwise there were no reason. For one may drink wine moderatly, and
yet speak wonderfully of the works of God, and a man may after eating and
drinking utter the graces and praises of God, to show that he has not
immoderatly abused God his creatures. For it is a flat argument, whereby we may
prove our selves, that, if after our repast received, we can discreetly,
reverently, and humbly speak of things to God his praise and glory, we have
not been immoderate or intemperate deuourers of his gifts* This is a profitable
argument, and worthy our meditation. In what worldly thing soever we exceed,
we cannot apply our selves to God his kingdom. For if the kingdom of God be
our chiefest delight, we shall use this world, as though we used it not. We
are wont to marvel much, that after the word preached, our prayers made, the
Sacraments received, there yet appears no change nor alteration in us, our
affections are as they were, our life is the same that it was before: but we
do not consider, that before we came to the word, prayer, and Sacraments, our
hearts were fraught and ballaced with worldly cares, so that there was no place
left void in our affections for the word; and that our hearts were so pestred
and thronged with vain pleasures, that there was no room for God his spirit
to keep residence in, and for religion to dwell among us. The due
consideration whereof must waine us from the world and surfeting pleasures,
which lock up our hearts that the Lord cannot enter in. We cannot well run
with the Hare, and hold with the Hound, we cannot hold fire and water
together, we cannot reconcile Christ and Belial, light and darkness, God and
the devil. If one be up, the other must down, if one be down, the other will
up. Again, we marvel that after the word preached, we are so overtaken with
our accustomed pleasures and profits, seeing that whilst we did hear, we had
a secret and sweet disliking of sin, and an irking of our selves for the
same, so long as these afterthoughts correct the former. Surely I answer out
of Paul, 2. Cor. 3. 3. because we are yet carnal, we are more carnal than
spiritual, we are babes in Christ, we have but young beginnings in Christ, but
old proceedings in the world. Why then do we come to God so halting and
limping? even because we are not come to any good growth in new birth. Howbeit,
let us beware that we continue not still to be staruelings, least it breeds
in us a sickne* unto death both of body and soul. If we were more spiritual
than carnal, and had the Spirit powered upon us in some plentiful measure, and
were fully persuaded of God his providence watching over us, of the ministry
of his holy Angels waiting upon us, and assured of the glory of the life to
come, feeling the mighty power of the word, of the law to humble us, of the
Gospel to breed faith in us, of the Sacraments to seal us, of Christ to live
in us; oh how should we live in this world! Whilst Christ lived in Paul, he
used this world as though he used it not, he felt such joy in the fruits of
the Spirit, that all other things were vile unto him So the cause why good
motions die in us so soon, and the suggestions of the flesh prevail so
strongly against us, is, because we are more carnal than spiritual. Many
rules may be given, how a man may use himself: but to set down all, either we
shall come short, or else in reaching some good measure of them we may swell in
privy pride, but learn this well, and learn all: which after a long part of
a sermon our Savior Christ concludes with Matthew. 6 33. First seek ye the
kingdom of God and his righteousness etc. This is hard: but if we come to any
mean growth in holiness, and taste how sweet the Lord is to us, then we shall
surely feel our flesh not to be so masterfull, neither shall it be so
laborious to do the good we desire to do. The argument of the Apostle we see
is this: It is so far from these men that they are drunken, that it is God
his spirit in them, than which two what can be more contrary? and it is
written even by one of your own Prophets:

In the last days I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. This is now
come to pass, and therefore Christ his kingdom is now. For whenever God his
Spirit shall come upon all, then is the kingdom of Christ come, but now God
his Spirit is come upon all, therefore now is the kingdom of Christ come* Thus
the Apostle reaches us, how we may know when, and where Christ his kingdom
is, even where as well the young as the old, the women as the men, the servants
as the masters can show forth the works of the Lord. In Popery men and
women, old and young, masters and servants, could not talk of the mysteries
of God, therefore in Popery there is not Christ his kingdom. And though our
compound Anabaptists have great things in their mouths, yet because their men
and women speak nothing but dreams, forsaking the word of God, they have not
the kingdom of Christ. In many places in the days of Queen Mary both old and
young were not afraid to show the praise of God, as well women as men boldly
professed the truth, not only masters, but servants gave testimony to the
Gospel with their blood, and therefore then in such places appeared this
kingdom. And we may safely at this day reason so in every congregation, where
old and young, men and women, can speak the praise of God, there is the Spirit
of God, there is the kingdom of Christ; otherwise, if these things are not
there, there is not his kingdom, what means so ever are used. And now to
branch out these words more particularly, first we are to note, that God
bestows such an excellent thing as his Spirit; secondly that so excellent a
thing is sent to so vile a thing as flesh; thirdly this grace is not leased out
to a few here and there, but is freely offered to all sorts, ages, sexes, and
conditions of men; fourthly, it is not distilled by thin drops, but powered
out in full measure and plentiful abundance. What more vile than flesh? what
more precious than the Spirit of God? the excellency whereof we shall see more
evidently, Joel. 2. where after the Prophet had severely threatened the Jews,
and exhorted them to convert, he comfort them again by promising unto them
the renewing of God his mercies, and not staying in telling them how the Lord
would send them again corn, wine, and oil, he comes at the last and
puts them in mind of that which counteruaileth all the rest, and says,
that the Lord will give them his Spirit to be powered out upon all flesh, which
may seal and season all other his benefits, and which never should leave them
until they were come to life everlasting. Above all gifts then in the world
this is the gift of gifts the Spirit of God, in which one the Lord preferres us
not only above all other earthly creatures, but also above many men like to
ourselves, whilst he makes us Kings, Priests, and Prophets by pouring the
same spirit upon us. The excellency of this benefit Christ himself teaches
us, where he teaches the people to pray, saying, Which of you, i^ your child
shall ask you a pe^ce of bread, will inste^d of bread give him a stone, etc?
if you, that be evil, do know how to give unto your children good things,
when they ask them, how much more shall your heavenly father give you good
things, says Matthew, his Spirit, says Luke? This is the top, this is the
head, this is the height, this is the depth of all good things even the Spirit
Now, if this is life eternal, Ioh. 17 3. to know the Father to be the only
very God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, and no man can ever do this but
by the spirit of God, whereby we know and believe this according to the word,
and so live for ever; who will deny this gift of all gifts to be most
principal? If this be the dignity of dignities, that we are the children of
God, and heirs of a better life; how precious a thing is it to have the
privilege of God his own spirit, which gives us the full title, interest,
and assurance of all these things unto us? Again, if this be the ^ulnes of our
rejoicing in the day of Christ, that he is made of God unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and that through him we are
as fully and more assuredly perfect, as ever Adam was in his creation, and we
cannot have this wisdom, unless the Spirit tells us, how we are cleared
thereby from our ignorance, we cannot rejoice in this righteousness, unless the
spirit assures us, that by it we are acquitted from our guiltines; we can have
no comfort in that holiness, until we know by God his spirit, it answers for
our impurenes and prophanenes, and so seuereth us and puts us apart to the
works of sanctification, we cannot triumph in our redemption, until the
comfortable spirit of God stay our impatient spirits by an undoubted
expectation for the glorious appearing thereof; without this spirit all things
are death, but with this all things are life. This brings knowledge in the
things whereof we are ignorant; this brings to our remembrance the things which
we have known and forgotten; this assures us of things wherein we have been
wavering; this joins us to God, and unites us to Christ; when we go astray,
we come home by the spirit; when by it we are renewed, and by the same we are
established, come life, come death, come honor, come dishonor, prosperity,
adversity, wealth or woe, the one shall not too much lift us up, the other
shall not too much cast us down. If the Lord gives us an healthful body,
credit, riches, and authority, we are hereby resolved to glorify God by these
things, to redeem the time, and so to possess them as though we possessed
them not: if the Lord denies us these things, and sends sickness, discredit,
poverty, and obscurity, the Lord will send a recompense of inward things, and
wanting bodily health, he will give the salvation of our souls; in stead of
outward credit, we shall have credit with God, and be well thought of among his
children; and if wanting worldly riches, we be enriched with heavenly things,
we have lost nothing, having changed dross and dung for gold. Without this,
wit becomes subtlety, wisdom worldly policy, authority is armed to
tyra^nie, dignity breeds ambition, riches enge^ders covetousness Physic is
made unfaithfulness, Law proves craftines, Divinity degenerates into heresy:
to be brief, without this heavenly gift of God sanctifying all gifts, the
wiser man, the fairer man, the stronger man the fitter pray for the devil, the
meeter subject for him to work upon. But to have wit, and therewith the spirit
of God sanctifying it, what a thing is this? To have riches, and the spirit of
God to use them, is a double blessing; to have authority, and in it to be
guided by God his spirit, what good may one, having this benefit, do, either
in Church or Commonwealth? If the spirit be absent, all turns to our hurt,
to God his dishonor, to the establishing of Satan's kingdom, and with this all
things are seasoned with their use, service, and ministry unto us. Oh how are
we to pray, that Ministers, that Magistrates, that every one of us may have so
great a good! The Ministers, that they may purely and boldly preach Jesus
Christ, that they may be Ministers of the quenching spirit, not Ministers of
the bare and killing letter, that they may preach the cross of Christ
sincerely, and not themselves vain gloriously: Magistrates, that they may
provoke obedience by good government, and that we our selves might live holily
both before God and men. This then is that which keeps a tenor in all
things, this gives the pith and marrow of goodness to every thing. If religion
come once but to serve for fashion, all will be confounded. Among many rules
this is a notable rule to have our hearts filled with heavenly and spiritual
delights, which fenceth out as at the door and first entry many idle
discourses, and vain platformes of worldly devises, and causes us to use this
life as though we used it not. And as they that are given to the world, are not
fit for God his kingdom; so they that are replenished with good things, have
such an inward and sufficient working in them, as they seek not after earthly
things with those greedy affections, wherewith others do. The Papists and
Anabaptists rather babbling than prophesying, show they have no true
revelations, how soever they brag of them, because they have not the spirit:
and yet in that they are so painful by their illuding spirit, wherewith they
were deluded, to delude others, this must make us ashamed either of our
ignorance, or that having knowledge and the holy Ghost teaching us, we travel
no more to win others unto Christ. For whosoever is so ignorant, that he
cannot give an account of his faith to God his glory, and the edifying of
others, he cannot say, that he has the spirit of God. If any have Christ his
spirit, he is Christ's; if he be Christ's, he must be a Prophetable to give an
account of his faith, being required, and so he is Gods; if he be Gods, then
come life, come death, come health, come sickness, come what will, all comes
well: if a man has outward things, he is not too much puffed up with them; if he
has them not, he is not too much grieved. But if we have not God his spirit,
surely we belong not to God. For have we wit, wisdom, health, power, wealth,
authority, credit, friends, or any such thing, and yet have not received the
spirit of God; what are we but a more fit substance or subject, whereupon
Satan may frame the work of sin? It is not the poor, silly, or simple
people that be the maine instruments, which the devil does use in his greatest
affairs to do hurt; but the wise, politic, rich, and mighty men of the
world. Contrariwise, if with these good gifts we have the spirit of God; what
great good may we do in Church or Commonwealth? If besides the beauty of God
his spirit, we have the flowers of outward things, what a singular ornament is
this to our garland? What shall I say more? In affliction the spirit shows us
the hand of God both humbling and comforting us, reuealeth our sins, works
in us the contempt of this life, the desire of the life to come, and so
sanctifies our cross by wisdom, repentance, and patience. Seeing then these
are the effects of God his spirit, that it feoffeth us by faith into
everlasting inheritance, it assures us of all our rich treasures in Jesus
Christ, seeing it sanctifies all inward gifts, and seasoneth the use of all
outward things: briefly, seeing with it all things seeming miserable are most
blessed, and without it all things seeming happy are most miserable, it
follows, that of all gifts the holy Ghost is the most excellent. Howbeit one
thing here is to be added, that we may wholly separate our selves from the
Anabaptists; we speak of the Spirit, as he shows his force in us, and
works in us by the ministry of the word, which two work together, and
therefore it is said Ioh. 6. My words are spirit and life. For without the
Spirit, the word is as the bright Sun to a blind man, who not for fault of a
pure object, but for want of sense is not able to discern the cleerest thing
in the world: and therefore the Prophet David, Psalm. 119 says, Open mine eyes,
O Lord, that I may see the wonders of thy law. True it is, the Sun is bright,
but what is that to a blind man? True it is the word is glorious, but what is
that to a man without the spirit of God? For so far we profit by the word, as
we receive the power of it by the inward ministry of the Spirit; we must try
the spirits by the word, and we shall then know that we have received the
spirit of God, when he gives us the pure understanding, the careful
receiving, and zealous practicing of the same. Carnal men and our late
Anabaptists be but boasters of themselves, in terming themselves spiritual men:
we are not taught so to brag of the Spirit, or any work thereof, but as it
is warranted unto us by the written word: we confess, that blind is our
mind, and that we cannot profit by the word, but by God his spirit: we look
not for the spirit in our fantasy, but for the spirit which works by the
word; which spirit spoke by Abraham, by the Patriarchs, by Moses, and the
Prophets, by Paul and the Apostles, and by our Savior Christ himself. Seeing
the spirit of God is so high a thing, we are here to complain why we hunt
after life, profit, and pleasure, and have so small care to obtain God his
good spirit, which is so precious. It is a great fault to fancy so much the
things of this world, and so little to esteem this.

And here, not of a set treatise, but by the way, we will speak of the last
part of our division, that is, of the mean how to attain to these graces of
the Spirit. We know rich men can for their increase frequent faires, ambitious
men can get preferment, carnal men will watch their opportunities, and every
man in his kind knows how to provide best for his profit and pleasure. Our
way goes on the other hand, and heth in the careful hearing of the word, the
fervent use of prayer, the reverent and fruitful resorting to the Sacraments,
and most holy submitting of ourselves to the discipline of the Lord, in
frequenting the company of God his children, and in waining our selves from
the world; by all which means the spirit may have a more voluntary, free, and
perfect work in and upon us. And although all these things are not
particularly here set down, yet mark, here is named the most proper mean
pointing at all the rest, and this, as ye see, is prayer, by the which the Lord
conueigheth his spirit into us, to make all the other means more pleasant and
profitable to us. Why then are not so many sermons now adays more effectual,
when one or two sermons touched these people so powerfully? Surely God his
spirit works not in us, as he wrought in them. Why, when any be converted,
do so few turn to the Lord, when as the Lord drew so many of these men at
once to himself? Because we are drawn away too much of our own flesh, and
taste not the sweetness of God his spirit, as they did. But can a man pray for
faith and God his spirit, which as yet has neither faith nor the spirit of
God? Whatsoever good gift we have, it is certain we have it by faith and God
his spirit in some measure in us, and then we may pray for the increase of them
in us. For it is God his spirit that prays in us, Rom 8 True it is, that many
have received God his Spirit, before they feel it, and faith before they see
it, and by this means they pray to receive faith and the spirit of God, as
they think, or rather the increase of both, think I, because they have
received them before, for else could they never truly have prayed. But they then
that are called, owe this duty to Ministers, that they must pray for the^,
even as Preachers must pray for them. Thus we shall see the prayers of the
Church, Psalm. 67. The Pastor for the people, the people for the Pastor must
make prayers and supplications. Generally, all must so let their light shine
before men, and so watch in prayer, that others seeing our godly life may say,
oh what a people in wisdom and true godliness is this, it is a good and an
happy thing to join our selves to them, what zeal, what humility, what
plentiful fruits of faith are here, blessed are the people that have such a
Pastor, blessed is the Pastor that has such a people! And here let us
remember, how the Apostles did not only pray for the increase of God his
spirit in themselves, but for the beginnings of it in others, which as yet had
not received it: teaching us thereby what is our duty, to wit, that we rest
not in our own private feelings, or in praying for the increase of them, but
that we pray that others may taste of the like joys as we feel, and that the
seed of God his Spirit may bud forth, that both we and they joining together
in devout prayer and Christian practice of our profession, may call and allure
others as yet further from us to come nearer to us. But some will say unto me:
I was wont to have better dispositions, and to feel sweeter motions, than I
have done of late, I profit little or nothing, nay I fear rather I go back.
Why, I pray you, is this? I say, surely God his spirit works not in me, as he
has done before, because I cannot have such delight in the word, such sweetness
in fervent prayer, such joy in the Sacraments, I have not such a plentiful
measure of God his spirit in me.

Now follows the second thing in these words: Upon flesh. Here are two things
in nature opposite one against another, the one most precious, the other most
vile. What more precious than the Spirit of God? what more vile than flesh,
that is, than a man merely unregenerate? That this word flesh so signifies,
it appears Genes. 6. 3. where the Lord says, My spirit shall not always
strive with men, because he is but flesh, that is, such as in whom my image is
blotted out. And Rom 7. 18. the Apostle says, I know that in me, that is, in
my flesh, dwells no good thing: In which place the Apostle speaks of
himself as of a man merely natural and unregenerate. And Ioh. 3. 6. it is
said, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that that is borne of the
Spirit, is Spirit. Where the antithesis and contrariety does show the meaning
of this word flesh. Here then is the depth, height, length, and breadth of God
his mercy commended unto us, in giving his holy spirit to sinful flesh: and
therefore we may justly cry out with the Prophet, Psalm. 8. 4. what is man that
thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him? Oh what
is man that the Lord should give him his Spirit! If the man of God cried out
thus for the benefit of outward things; how much rather are we to cry for the
benefit of God his Spirit* If Job in his book reasons, that it is a great
mercy of God, that he will take pains to chastise man; how much more mercy
is it, when he will vouchsafe his Spirit to be given unto him? If then flesh is
so contemptible a thing, that it lies without all honor, until God does send
his blessed Spirit; here is confuted the doting opinion of the Papists, who
think that there is some good thing in man, which moves the Lord through a
liking and loving of him to bestow these inestimable graces of the spirit on
him, when as of it self it is wholly, always, and in all things corrupt, and
only evil continually. Wherein these blind Divines show and bewray
themselves not to have tasted truly at any time of the spirit of God, but to
glance at it with some glimmering sight to their further condemnation, as the
foolish Philosophers For God his people do plainly feel, and to the glory of
God boldly confess, that there is no first degree or preparation in
themselves, whereby they might move the Lord once to cast his favorable
countenance toward them, but that it is only the merit and the undeserved
mercy of God, that his spirit, which works any good proceedings in them, does
also begin in them, and the same spirit both continues the work, and makes a
way for the work, which he himself must work upon afterward. It is said,
Esaias 44. 3. I will power water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: where our nature for barrennes is compared to dry ground, and the
Spirit to a fountain of water. The Lord moreover by his Prophet shows, that
until by his good spirit he does soften us, we have stony hearts. And can a
stone bleed, though you bruise, cut, and break it in pieces* Surely no more
can we be bruised, humbled, and broken in heart for sin, be the judgments
of God never so sorely urged upon us, until God by his good spirit touch us.
If it be then a great work to turn a stone into flesh, to make a thing most
insensible most sensible; then surely to make a stony heart fleshie, and our
hearts that are hardened, to melt, bleed, and to be resolved into tears is a
more excellent work, and this is the only work of God his spirit. And as
thus much we have spoken for doctrine, so also it may make for our
consolation, and for the comfort of al them that are broken in mind, and feel
the burden of their natural corruption. True it is, that all generally and
naturally are flesh, dry ground, and hard hearts: but all do not feel this,
all see not this, all lament not this: and therefore all that have not the
beginnings of faith, and have not tasted the first fruits of the spirit,
because they are but flesh; how can they feel any thing in themselves? But
when the spirit comes, that hardness is taken away, the vale is rent, and then
we begin to complain of our deadnes and dulnes, then we will cry out of our
selves as of men unworthy of any grace or favor of God. Then remember to thy
comfort the covenant of God made unto us, that is, that God will power out his
spirit on flesh, and thou shall receive of the power thereof, if thou complain
in truth, and not as a Parrat counterfeiting the work of reason. For as some
birds can counterfeite men's words, so some men can counterfeite God his words.
If then thou art not truly moved and purely affected, neither feel such
gracious working in thee, as thou desire, remember that God will power his
spirit on flesh, God will power waters on dry ground, God will soften the hard
hearts; and though in our selves we find no towardnes, the Lord will send
floods of water in steed of dryness, and fleshinesse in stead of hardness, and
comfort in stead of heaviness.

Now follows the third thing, that is, that this benefit shall universally be
powered out upon all. And this sets out the goodness of God that does give
it, in that he does it without respect of persons as well on children as on
fathers, as well on servants as on masters, as well on women as on men, as well
on young as on old: together with the fourth thing, in that this heavenly gift
shall in plentiful measure be powered out, in that the ions and daughters
shall prophecy, the young men shall see visions, and the old men shall dream
dreams. Wherein we observe first the difference between the Law and the
Gospel, between the Fathers under the Law, and those that are under the
Gospel. We grant that we al had one substance of faith and repentance, only
they looked for Christ to come, we to Christ already come. And here are to be
noted two other differences: the one, that then the spirit was given to few,
and as it were to an handful; now it is given to many and to all nations; then
to one sex more specially, now to both: the other is, that then they had
knowledge, now they have more and a greater measure both of knowledge and
repentance. For young men shall see visions, and old men shall dream dreams.
This, I say, is the first difference that this grace is offered to more nations.
For the first was bestowed only upon the Jews, for they only had the Law,
Psalm. ^47. 19. but now al is one, Christ is the head both of the Jew and
Gentile, there is one shepherd and one sheepfold both of Jew and Gentile. The
second note of difference is, that the young men should see visions, and the
old men dream dreams. This is a great benefit, and a singular sign of God
his love to his people, that they should some of them see visions, and some
dream dreams. It is said, Numb. 12. 6. that the Lord would be known to a
Prophet among his people by a vision, and that he would speak unto him by a
dream: and though then of al some did prophecy, some did see visions, some
did dream; yet now all shall prophecy, all shall see visions, all shall
dream dreams: not that all shall be Prophets, as the Anabaptists, and Family
of love do gather, but that now sons and daughters, servants* and women,
should have as great knowledge, as they that among the Jews were chosen
Prophets. Now that it cannot be literally understood (and there is great
danger if it be not rightly understood) it is proved thus: Because there was
never any age at one time, wherein all were Prophets, yet this saying was true
and fulfilled in the Apostles time, and yet not so literally, that we can
perceive, that all the Apostles prophesied and saw dreams. Peter and Paul
indeed saw dreams: but where shall we find, that all the other Apostles did
so? and yet this were not so fulfilled, unless the hearers also should
prophecy. But this was not so even at that time, and therefore it was not
literally fulfilled in them, that all sorts of men had all these gifts: and
therefore it must needs follow, that it was never so universally fulfilled,
because either at that time it was fulfilled or never. For even in the Apostles
time all were not Teachers, neither shall it ever be in any time hereafter,
because God is a God of order, and not of confusion, and has appointed and
purposed this diversity, that some should be Teachers, and some learners.
Wherefore the Apostle, after he has set down the diverse callings of
Christians for edifying of the Church, 1. Cor. 12. he adds verse. 29. Are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Yea Paul proves, that it was not
then so. For as there be diverse members in one body, and al members have not
the same office: so it is in the Church of Christ. For all are not Prophets,
all are not Apostles, all are not Teachers. As if he should say: We see it is
not so, but God has otherwise disposed it. Ephesians. 4. it is said, that Christ
when he ascended did ordain diverse offices, some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
gathering together of the Saints for the work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, until the number of the elect be
fulfilled, and not until men become perfect in this life, as some men have
foolishly dreamed. Here we see some Teachers, and the rest the work of the
ministry. Again, Paul in his Epistle to the Philippians intituleth his
Epistle to the Saints, which was the Church, and to the Bishops and Deacons,
which were the Ministers of the Church: all the Saints were not Bishops, all
the Saints were not Deacons. Besides, if all were Bishops, what need the rules
which Paul gives to Timothy and Titus for the choosing of Bishops? 1. Corin.
14. Paul says, if any man be a Prophet, or spiritual, that is, a disciple:
where he constituteth two orders, to wit, a Prophet or Teacher teaching by the
spirit, and a Christian not of the common sort, but taught of God, or one that
has received of the graces of God. And again it is said, that young men
should prophecy. Were then all young men Prophets* Indeed Titus was young and a
Minister, but he was chosen by Prophets, and foretold of, and had been
instructed in the Scriptures from his childhood. For Bishop* he is so called of
his office, because he ouerseeth, and so he is called an Elder for his
gravity: which shows, that even ordinarily then the Teachers were old.
Christ began not to preach, until he was thirty years old, and John was old
before he began to preach: and therefore ordinarily men ought to be of good
age, before they come to that calling: not that I think, that none ought to
teach before they be thirty years of age, but that it never was ordinary,
that any young man should teach: for it is given in precept, that Teachers
should not be young scholars. But it is one question, what God may do, and
another what is ordinarily done. For God can, and does often raise up young men
to shame the aged, as it may be thought he has done even in our days: but
this was never ordinary, neither yet ought it to be. Women were not ordinarily
admitted to this function, yet God to show his power and to shame men, does
sometime raise women Prophetesses. It is said here, that women should
prophecy. What was this ever fulfilled? did women ever take upon them the
room of teaching? Indeed there was a Prophetess among them, but that was not
ordinarily. And when the women of Corinth began to be bold and to speak in the
congregation, the Apostle gives out a flat rule, that women should not speak,
but learn in subjection It is said further, that servants, maids and men
should see visions. Was this ever fulfilled? did they at any time take this
office upon them? Indeed, if they had had the gifts, they had been fit, but we
see it never came to pass. And seeing it was not then fulfilled in the
Apostles time, then was it not any time fulfilled before, nor in any age since.
Yea let us draw an argument from the Anabaptists, and from the Family of love
themselves; this is not fulfilled even in them. For are all of them Teachers*
Indeed if they could do this, that were the way to convert all unto them: but
they are not. For some, yea and the most of them are learners, and those men
that seem to be teachers, are not yet according to this prophecy full of the
Spirit. For the abundance of God his spirit makes his people the bolder. Peter
was not afraid of the whole Council: Steu^n made his persecutors and accusers
ashamed, and the Apostles were always the first to answer for the defense of
the doctrine. But it is thus with the Family of love? No surely. For come to
the younger sort of them, then nouices and learners, they will say openly
somewhat, and will give some reason of their doctrine: but their Elders and
illuminate men cannot be seen, they fly the light, and go into corners. Are
these men full of the spirit, who so cowardly forsake the trial of their
doctrine, and leave the poor people to stand to it, who are not so deep in
their revelations, nor so well grounded in their mysteries of iniquity?
Undoubtedly they are not: yea rather the elder heretic, the ranker knave, and
he is called most notable, not which is most wise, but which is most subtle to
deny a truth, and to set a face on a lie. Wherefore this is not fulfilled even
among the Anabaptists and Family of love themselves. This thing then cannot
literally be understood, they must needs confess that there is a borrowed
speech in the verses following, where mention is made of blood, fire, and
vapors of smoke: whereby is meant, that there shall be great troubles,
heresies, and such like. And here the Heretics will grant a trope, though in
the former they will not. God spoke of the blessings of the new Testament after
the manner of the old Testament, Note this well.
because that was best known to the Jews. This deceived them, in that when
they heard of the new Temple, they were zealous of the old Temple, and rejoiced
in that Temple which Herod made, though it was nothing like that which Solomon
made, and this deceives the Jews unto this day. The like error are the
Papists in. For where the Scriptures say, that in the time of Christ there
should be sweet incense offered in all places: then, say they, behold the
daily sacrifice, the sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead.
Neither of these do consider, that the Lord in the old Testament does
adumbrate and foretell these things to come, and that under those terms and
phrases, which were best known to the Jews, and used of the old Prophets.
This folly of theirs do the Anabaptists see, and yet they run as far on
the other side, as also does the Family of love. One of them reproves
another, and yet neither of them will confess his fault to the glory of God,
nor return and receive the truth.

There may be also another argument, why this place should not be literally
understood, and that is drawn from the interpretation of the like places of
Scripture. Exodus 19. Moses tells the people, that the Lord has called them
to be Kings, Priests, and Prophets. This is repeated by the Apostle Peter in
the new Testament, and by John in the Apocalypse, and is applied as in this
place generally to all Christians. Now the Jews did never think, that every
man was a King sitting in a throne, thereby overthrowing the political estate*
they thought not, that every man was a Priest, taking that office of the Priest
upon him, but that they had the liberty of their consciences, and were freed
from the bondage of men, and of sin, as also that now through Christ they might
offer up first their prayers, the^ their souls and bodies to be an holy and
acceptable sacrifice to him. Neither do we at this day think any otherwise of
the kingly Priesthood of Christians. And why then should we think grossly
and literally, that indeed we are become Prophets having that special
calling, and so take away that order of Teachers and learners, which God has
ordained. For as we be Priests, so are we Prophets: if the speech must be
qualified in the one, why ought it not so to be in the other? Again, we say of
prophecies, as we say of miracles. Before the word was written the Lord taught
his people by visions and by dreams: and that he might prepare them to
receive his doctrine and confirm them in it, he both wrought miracles
himself, and gave power to others likewise to work, as we may see in Mose^*
E^iah, and Elisha: yea he gave power to do miracles, when the Law was written,
because the Gospel was not yet revealed; and when the Gospel was revealed, he
continued his gift, because the holy Spirit was not yet given; yea and when the
Spirit was powered out upon the Apostles, yet this gift was in the Church, that
as yet the Spirit had not gotten credit. But when the Gospel was revealed, the
spirit sent down, and confirmed by signs and wonders, then the use of
miracles ceased; not that there are no miracles at all now (for we do not
shorten the hands of the Lord) but yet they be but few, and those
extraordinary. Now the rules whereby we shall try them whether they be of God
or no, be these: If they do either convert and win men to the word, or
confirm them in the word who are already won: if they be agreeable to the
word, and bear the same majesty in them, as does the word, then may they be
received as from God. But when they agree not with these rules, though the
thing wrought be miraculous; yet they are much to be suspected as the miracles
of old time were with reverence to be received. For God in his secret
judgment does suffer some times such to be wrought, that the wicked and
unbelievers may the more effectually be deluded. Again, we know that
Antichrist comes with signs, yea and the same so effectual, that even the
very elect, if it were possible, should therewith be deceived. In like manner
do we say of dreams and visions, until the Gospel came and had gotten
credit in the hearts of men, there were visions and prophecies of things to
come: but these being now ceased, it is not ordinary, that the Lord should
make all Prophets, or teach by visions and dreams. But what do we stand
longer to prove that this place cannot be so taken and understood, as the words
at the first show might seem to give, especially seeing that the deuillish
ouerthwarters both of Papists and of the Family of love are so gross and
papable in this point* For such is the spirit of these men, and so contrary to
the good spirit of God, that where the Scripture ought simply, and without any
trope or allegory to be interpreted, they will there turn it into allegories,
as we see many places perverted by the Papists, and almost the whole
Scriptures by the Family of love: and whereas the Scripture by conference of
places does show, that it ought tropically to be understood, they stick
bluntly to the bare letter, as in these words, Hoc est corpus meum* The
Papists here would have no trope, and yet the whole course of the Scriptures
does enforce the same. The Family of love will in no place almost admit the
natural sense, as it flows of the words, and yet here they do bitingly
abide by the word, notwithstanding all the former reasons. And this surely
comes to pass by the righteous judgment of God, that seeing they would
neither acknowledge, nor yield to the natural sense, when they might,
therefore they cannot see where a trope should have his place. Thus it went
with their great Master and father of allegories Origin, who giving himself to
follow his devised allegories, could not through God his righteous and just
judgment see those places, that will admir a trope. For coming to that saying
of Christ our Savior, where he entreats o^ three kinds of chaste persons,
whereof one makes himself chaste for the kingdom of God sake, he taking it
too literally did cut off his own members, and so grossly did misunderstand
it* The true understanding of this place then is this, that in the Apostles
times, and in the ages following there should be riper knowledge, than was in
the ages before. But if it be here objected, that the men of our days are not
like the great men and Prophets of God, as E^^y, David* Jeremiah, or Daniel: to
this we answer, that comparisons must be always in the like. Then, if we
compare the Apostles with the Prophets, that were before them, we know, the
Apostles in cleerenes and excellency of knowledge did surpass them. And our
Savior Christ testifies of John Baptist, that he was the greatest among the
Prophets, and yet that the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel were greater
than he. Then compare our Evangelists with the Patriarchs, and they saw a
cleerer light than these did. For Abraham saw Christ but a far off and to
come, they saw him evidently, and already come. Proceed to compare the common
sort of people then, with the common sort in these days, and even we do see
Christ more liu^ly painted out before us, than they did: they had assurance
that these things should come to pass, we know that they are already come
to pass, seeing plainly the effects and issues of them. And thus we see that
God his graces are more, and more excellent, than they were in the time of the
Law. Compare Christ with Mose, and he did as far exceed him, as the Master
builder does the hired servant. Compare their common Ministers the Priests and
Levites with our ordinary Doctors and Pastors* and they go beyond them in the
evidence of knowledge. All these notable men of the Law knew that Christ should
come, and that the holy Ghost should come: but the manner of their coming they
saw but very darkly, but we see it and rejoice therein. The plain meaning then
of this place is, that whereas God did in the old time reveal his will unto
some by visions and by dreams, now al sorts of men young and old, man and
maid shall be instructed in the knowledge of God more plentifully and more
perfitly. For it is to be understood, as that Exodus 19 Ye shall be a kingly
Pri^sthood, etc. and 1 Pet. 2. and it must be interpreted as often in Esaias, as
chap. 11. in Jeremy, and in the Gospel after John it is said, They shall all
be taught of God, and that which is in his Epistle, the anointing shall teach
you all things. These do not take away the ordinary ministry of the word,
but do show, that men shall not only have the outward means, but shall also
have the teaching of the Spirit And all of these are so begun in this life,
that they be not performed to the full until we be unclothed of this flesh,
and have our full part with Christ in the life to come. This is the meaning of
the place, and herein do we go beyond the men of the old ages. And besides
this, in the very manner of delivery there is far more cleernes and evidence
now, than was in the times of the Law. For the Prophets and holy men of God
indeed labored, but the fruit for the most part was little, and the
Apostles, as Christ says Ioh. 4. entered into their labors. Y^a the Apostle
Peter goes further, and says, that they were a light shining in a dark
place: but we have a surer light of prophecy. Further, he adds in the same
place, that they served not so much their own ages and times, as us, that are
come after them Now having the right understanding of this place, we are to be
greatly thankful to God, for that he has not left us to doubtful dreams,
but has given us the certainty of the word written, whereunto served all the
former visions, dreams, and prophecies, and it is confirmed unto us by every
one of them. Thus we have the sense of this place, wherein it was fulfilled in
the Apostles times, as Peter here witnesses, and in this sense it was
fulfilled in the Primitive Church, as all good stories do record.

Let us further see, what it is that men shall prophecy, that is, they shall
be taught by the spirit of God in the word to try themselves, to try the
spirits of their teachers, to teach others, and to be able to give a reason of
their hope before their enemies: for as the holy Ghost came upon Christ, so
must be come upon every one of his members, and as he was anointed a Prophet,
so must his members also be Prophets. This sound knowledge consists in four
things. The first thing required in a Christian is, that he be able to try
himself and his estate before God, whether he be in the faith or no, whether
he be God his child or no, contrary to the doctrine of the Papists, and cold
Protestants, that rest only on common injunctions and accustomed proceedings.
Thus Paul gives charge to the whole Church of Corinth* 2. Cor. 12. Examine
your selves, whether ye be in the faith or no, and hereunto he adds a
fearful speech, unless you be refuses. Who so is not in the faith, is a
refuse: and if a man knows not, whether he be in the faith or no, then he
does not know whether he be in Christ or no. This examination must be according
to the Scriptures, for so says our Savior Jesus Christ, search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me: and in another place he says, ye err,
because ye know not the Scripture. Then we must not hang on the Preacher, nor
on this, nor on that man, but we must believe, because we have found it in the
Scripture, and have been taught it by the Spirit, according as the men of
Samaria said to the woman, when she told them of Christ. Again, we must not
simply and barely know the Scriptures, but apply them to our own use, and
make our own faith sure by them, if we be not reprobates: and this is the
first thing required of Christians. The second thing is, that we be able to
try our Teachers, not in every thing that they speak, but in things pertinent
to salvation. Thus we are commanded to do, 1. Corinthians. 5. Ephesians. 4. and in
the Epistle of Saint John, Try the spirits, whether they be of God or no: and
in the epistles of Peter and Jude it is said, that those were perverted with
heresies, that never came to know the truth, but were unstable, and carried
away with every wind of vain doctrine. Wherefore we must not be ever
learning, and yet not come to the knowledge of the truth, but the truth must
dwell plentifully in us with all wisdom, that we may discern the spirit^*
And when we have waied and found any thing according to the word, then must we
receive it as the word of God with reverence, and if we find any thing false
in it, we must be so far off from receiving it, that we must hold him
accursed that shall bring it, though he were an Angel from Heaven. Foolish
then is that phreneticall fancy of the Family of Love, which will say, we may
not judge, we cannot condemn. For every Christian taught by the spirit may,
yea, and ought in the liberty of the spirit to try and condemn all that is
not consonant with the holy word of God. The third thing required of a
Christian is, that by his knowledge he be able to instruct and admonish others.
This does Jude in his epistle require, that we should do, when he exhorts us
to edify one another in our most holy faith. This also is given in charge
Hebr. 3. that we should admonish one another, and Hebr. 5. it is said, that in
respect of the times we ought to be teachers. Our Savior Christ also
commands us if our brother offend, that we should admonish him. This duty
we owe, and this we must be able to discharge, especially to them of our
household, of our town, of our kindred, and so by degrees to all men, as we
have occasion to deal with them, and as our calling shall suffer us. The
fourth thing is, that we should be able to give an account of our hope, even
unto our enemies. This Peter requires in plain words; this does our Savior
Christ require, that if we would, he should confess us before his Father,
that we should confess him before men. These things were fulfilled in the
Apostles times, in the primitive Church, and in Queen Mary's days, and this
even among us may be found in many places: therefore this is the true and
natural meaning of this place. This was never found in the Anabaptists, who the
younger they were in heresy, the better they were in honesty: and if once
they wax old in their heresy, they grow not so much in knowledge as in
subtlety to invent men's phr^ses, to delude and deceive with new starched
terms. They will avouch nothing before a Magistrate; if they be taken, they
will reca^t; if they die, they will say it is for treason and not for heresy.
And although nowadaies there be found few Christians, which be able to try
themselves, their Teachers, to teach themselves to admonish others, and to give
an account of their hope before the adversary: yet we may less marvel at
it, though they be not ashamed of it: when as some occupying the rooms of
Ministers, and many wise and politic Magistrates cannot examine themselves,
and much less try others. Examine them, and deal with them in matters of a
better life, of doctrine, or discipline, and they can say nothing but by act of
Parliament, by injunctions, and the common proceedings. If there were a
contrary blast of heresy blown in their ears, they could not tell what to
say to it, they would follow the Court, and do as most do, affirm as the
superiors affirm, and deny that they deny; because all their religion hangs
on the Councels determination, and on the Kings proceedings. So that every one
is not a Christian, that carries the title and bears the face of a
Christian: but they indeed are professors of Christ, who are anointed with
his Spirit, wherewith he was anointed, whether in a dropping or more flowing
measure. We see then what we ought to do, and do not: wherein we may be the
more ashamed, that the Papist, the Turk, the Family of love delight so much
in their study. They be so careful to dishonor God, we are careless to
honor him: which thing ought to move us, and to make us more careful to seek
knowledge. Many so far exceed, that they begin now to be ashamed, and they
bid away with exercises of religion, they can leave them for, and post them to
others. I am no teacher, but an husband man, says one: I am not booke-learned,
but a poor artificer, says another: I was never brought up at schools with
these learned men but at home, says the third, it is not for us to be seen in
these points, it appertains rather to Doctors. The words of God are here very
flat: I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, etc. And surely, if any man
has not received God his Spirit, the Apostle pronounces him to be none of
God his children; and if we have the spirit, we shall sheew it in the fruits
of the spirit. Wherefore let us cast away these vain excuses far from us: We
are young men, we must have a fling, youth is unstable, it will be time for us
to be grauer hereafter, when we become old men. Howbeit the Prophet David
says, Psalm. 119.9 Wherewithal may a young man redress his way? etc. And
Eccles 12. 1. it is said* Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc.
If young men will appertain to God, they must have God his spirit, that is,
such gifts as they may do these things. Let none say, we are old, our memory
fails us, if our wits were as fresh as they have been, we could do something,
now we can remember nothing. For men can remember things of vanity done in
their youth, and in chronicling the^ they will wear tongues, and to fetch
evidences of lands, or money, which they have hidden, their memory fails in no
point. Well, as the Lord says, that young men shall see visions, so old men
shall dream dreams. If wisdom and the fear of God be the crown of old
age, and without these the aged man even of an hundred years old is accursed,
they had need to labor for knowledge. Old men will plead for their
privilege to go before young men in worldly things; and will they hope for
plackards to excuse them, if they come behind them in heavenly things? None
must say* We are but servants, and under others, we must labor for our wages,
and no time can we have as others, to learn such things, it is well if we
may have the Lord his day to rest on, we must have our recreation then, we
cannot always be toyling. Well, if ye be the servants of God as well as the
servants of men, men or maids, ye must by God his spirit be able to prophecy.
Is your condition hard under the Gospel; oh praise God, it is nothing so hard
as under the Law. For in times past servants were bondmen, little better in
condition than brute beasts; and yet men being at that time in such an estate,
under such heathen men* did so carefully attend upon the Lord in the word, and
in prayer, that they would redeem al times possible for to get knowledge and
feeling. Wherefore all men must look to this, men and women, old and young,
masters and servants. What will they challenge themselves to be Christians, and
glory in the title alone, and not esteem of the duty? They will leave that
part peradventure to book learned men, and to Preachers. Well, they must know
that again, whereof they are wilfully ignorant, that there is a mutual
coherence between these two things, the title and the duty. What* ye glory
that year Prophets, and yet ye prophecy not; ye boast that ye are Kings, and
ye overcome not; ye be glad to be counted Priests, and ye sacrifice not. Even
Papists, though they taught ignorance to be the mother of devotion, can say
more for their superstition, and Heretics can say more for their devilish
opinions, than Protestants for the defense of Christ his glorious Gospel. Look
but to the Papists and Family of love, how painful and cunning they are to
go, to run, to ride, to make one like of their heresies; see how they will
look for you at markets, how they will entertain you, what meekenes, what
mildenes they will use to salute you. This ought to shame us, this ought to
make us labor more for knowledge, that when temptations invade us, when Satan
accuses us, when heresy shall assault us, we may stand steadfast and
unremovable, we may edify one another, and in persecution not be dismayed,
but resist constantly unto blood. Now, as Peter has showed that which Joel
prophesied to be fulfilled, so these verses following show the judgments of
God, which should fall upon the Church for the neglect or contempt of these
graces offered. There is some question here about the time. Some understand it
of Christ his coming in the flesh-some, of his coming to judgment: others
more truly think it to be that whole time, which is between his coming in
the flesh and his coming to judgment: and so it appears the most probable
opinion both by the things going before, and by that which follows after. For
in the words going before, it is said, In the last days I will power out my
spirit, now the giving of the spirit was fulfilled in that whole time spoken
of. Again, that which follows after concerning calling upon the name of the
Lord, is also meant of that time. Now it both that which goes before, and that
which follows after, be understood of that time, then it is probable, that
that which is in the midst is likewise so understood. And although Christ his
first coming was a most glorious time, as we may see by the testimony of the
Apostle, yet his last coming shall be a far more glorious day; as we may
see Titus 2* 2 Thessalonians. 4. where his coming is described to be with Angels,
and with a shoute. Yet because this glory does appear in the whole course of
redemption, it shall be good to understand this as the places going before and
coming after, that is of the whole time, in all which he cease not to offer
these graces and to execute these judgments As for the words themselves, some
think them to be understood literally, some allegorically and spiritually. But
they admit both. First, that they have use in their natural signification, it
appears, because the Lord never leaves his Church without some instructions
in the Sun, the Moon, the Heavens, and the Earth. For besides natural
eclipses in Sun and Moon, and other exaltations, yet there have been works
extraordinary in them both, which have been as prognostications of Gods wrath
for sin. Further we may safely gather, that there was never any strange
Eclipse, Comet, apparition in the heavens, shaking of the earth, strange and
unnatural births; but after this change of nature some event came strangely
sooner or later: which showed that men had broken their obedience with God, and
were become monstrously disobedient, which the Lord makes known to us by
changing the course of nature. Therefore we say, that before great
Earthquakes, plagues, wars, Comets, famine, or such like, goes great
contempt of religion, monstrous prophanenes: so they be the prognostications of
some notable sins either in religion, or in life, or in both. Thus we
neither exclude the literal sense, and yet we do not admit that fancy, or
rather frenzy of the Family of love, because we grant, that after strange
disobedience and contempt, follow strange punishments and revenge: so that the
Prophet shows the works of God for sin either by the things following, or
by the signs going before. It is a question, why at this time, wherein he
would show himself so gracious, the Lord should send such tokens of his
wrath. Here we see a contrary order of teaching to flesh and blood, because
God will then have his mercy manifested, when he will show his justice. And
because men hearing of the Gospel, imagine of a felicity in this world,
therefore Peter to awaken them out of this dream, lets them to understand,
that unless these gifts be reverently received, God will be most angry,
because they either refuse or abuse the mercies of God so offered. The use of
this is partly in respect of the elect and people regenerate, and partly in
respect of the wicked and unregenerate; in respect of the elect, either before,
or after their regeneration; before their regeneration to bring them to seek
Jesus Christ. For though it is certain, that God in time will call them whom
he has predestined, and chosen: yet because his Gospel is not so precious
unto them, as it should be, therefore the Lord sends them crosses, sometimes
poverty, sometime sickness, sometime reproach, sometime a troubled mind,
sometime private misery, and sometime a public calamity to inuolue them
among others, because they have no more trust in the promises of God before
they be humbled. And because men will not easily or usually be humbled by the
bare word, the Lord seals it by sending of troubles, that when we can feel
no comfort either in heaven or in earth, but perdition and matter of damnation
in our selves, we should then be the fitter to receive comfort in Christ.
Again, for as much as God his children have one special fault or other, as
privy pride, vainglorie, self-love* or such like privy corruptions, that the
word of God cannot be suffered to draw us out of these sins: for this cause
the Lord sends affliction, and by his correction he draws us out of our
civil righteousness, and makes us make conscience of inward and hidden
corruptions, and puts them in mind by misery, that the same corruption is
^^rking in them, which has broken forth in others, and that naturally it did
dwell in them, though repressed by the finger of God it did not violently flame
out. Again, where others lie in sin, and know it not, because the very light
of nature is choked in them, and God his spirit can take little hold to work
any thing upon them, that the Lord might bring them to see sin unknown, and
to make conscience of sin being known, the Lord visits us with private and
public means, that as the wicked shall be without all hope, ease, or end
tormented in hell; so these in mercy and measure should have their hearts
broken: which because they would not do by the loving inuocating and inuiting
of them by the Lord, therefore it is done by some crosses. Secondly, it
respects the regenerate either to continue them in their good estate, or to
keep them from some gross sins. For God his children do sometime fall, and
always may fall, if God keep them not. Because David and Manasses had sinned,
God sent them the cross that they might not forget him. Now because the same
may be in us, if the Lord will power out his wrath upon the wicked, surely he
will not suffer his own children to be uncontrolled. We must not then, as some
are wont to do, say, Did not David sin, make ye so much at me, was not David
a great sinner and yet saved? It were well indeed, if we would bind David's
sin with David his repentance: or if we consider, how the Sun was turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood in his kingdom; if we shall see the
pillars of Gods judgments, and vapors of God his wrath against him among his
own, how his sons rebelled, they that would be Counselors, became traitors,
and how the wicked caitifes insulted over him; we would surely know that it did
little help us to reckon up David his sinning. This does God to sow the lips
of the wicked, that they should not say, that God does spare and punishes not
sin in his, and that they should not dream of escape, when his own servants
are so punished. And although God his children presently fall not, but are
ready to fall, he wrappeth them often in the crosses of the wicked, not so
much to punish any sin present, but to prevent in them some sin to come,
that thereby taking away the occasion of sinning, he might humble them before
they fall. Again, albeit they be not subject to gross sins, yet because they
are often puffed up with privy pride, dead, unmerciful, dull, forsaking their
first love, sometime neither hot nor cold, luke warm, without zeal: briefly,
in that they are not, as God his children should be, or as they themselves,
sometimes and before have been, the Lord in wisdom corrects these wants and
infirmities* that from infirmities they should not burst out into enormities;
from sinning of ignorance they should not sin against conscience; and from
secret sins, that they commit not presumptuous sins. For this cause Revel.
3. the Lord sent plagues on the Church of Laodicea* not so much for gross and
notorious sins, but because they were not humbled and zealous enough, but
such as might more easily have fallen into deeper enormities hereafter. If men
use to try gold seven times in the furnace, not for any mass of dross in it,
but to prove it; how much more had the Lord need to try our faith, although
we be not given to any great and notable crime? For as there may be two uses in
the trying of gold, the one to purge it from dross, the other to fine it the
more: so there are two uses of corrections, the one to punish sin, the other
to try their faith. And although the Lord more principally does not punish
sin, but rather secondarily, chiefly trying the patience of his children: yet
when men cannot accuse us, neither we can accuse our selves, yet the Lord will
purge us from some secret corruption, which may breed a sin in time to come.
And hereupon it comes, that privy pride, secret self-love, close
covetousness, hidden hypocrisy, and such like are counted sins of God his
children, though of worldlings they be thought good virtues. But some will say:
Is this the truth, ye stick to? Is this the Gospel, which ye profess? See,
what hurliburlies, see how many opinions there are, what a company of
religions are start up, see what denying of the faith, what gross sins are
sprung up, see what deaths, plagues, and wars are accompanied with it? Surely
it seems that this is not the Gospel. Before all things were in better case,
no such disturbance in religion, no such noise of notorious sins, no such
turmoilings on every side, all things were at good quiet: but now we have more
troubles, than ever in former times were heard of. The wicked do not only
break their necks at this block, but God his own children have daungerously
stumbled at it. For when Job, David* Jeremiah without God his spirit beheld the
prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the godly, they confessed
their feet had almost slipped, saving that they durst not condemn the
generation of God his children. To remedy this the holy Ghost says, that, when
the graces of God do most appear, then will the Lord send greatest judgments
for the contempt of his Gospel in the wicked, and for the neglect of it in the
godly. Now this is foretold, that we might not be offended when it comes: and
this use does Christ teach us to make of it, These things have I told you
before, that when they come to pass, etc. For to God his children, being but
babes in Christ, this is a great temptation. And to come to our days: Does it
not trouble men much, that there be so many unlearned Ministers, of learned
Ministers that there be so many ungodly men, that they see such oppressing
Magistrates, such rebellious people, such careless governors, that there is
such an height of subtlety in covering and cloaking sin; where is most
knowledge, such running to sin; where is most preaching, and where the
Gospel is received, that there should be such sects and heresies; when they
shall see the Papists ready to outface the Gospel, what may a man do now, or
how may he stay himself, if the Lord should leave him? Surely God has
foretold it. Even as the Sun then shining bright, the Moon giving light, the
clear air are tokens of God his love, so much more the word: and as these
being darkened and obscured show God his wrath; so the word obscured does
testify his wrath much more. Yea if dearths, plagues, famine, or such like
come, we must be forewarned of them. And our Savior Christ, when men asked him
signs, he told them of many: and Mat. 24. that there should be such wonders in
the heavens, in the earth, and in the seas, that even the very elect should be
confounded almost. Now if Christ had not forewarned these things in the equity
of his judgment, we might indeed have had some occasion of offense. And for
this cause our Savior Christ says, Matthew. 11. Blessed are they that are not
offended in me, because such confusions shall be, that men will be ready to
lay the cause of these things on the Gospel and on the word: and therefore
blessed are they, that are forewarned of these things, and know why they come.
If the Jews would not hear the Apostles speaking the truth; was it any
marvel if they were seduced by false teachers? If men do not receive the
word in love, is it any marvel if they be deluded with heresy? 2 Thessalonians. 1.
If men neglect the peace of their minds offered by the Gospel preached, is it
any marvel if they have wars? If men neglect the food of their souls, is
it any marvel if they find a famine? When we see then that men turn the
Gospel into wantonness, and write against it, is it marvel if the Lord
sends troubles? No, no, when men shall see such a confusion, let them know
that God will clear his justice, and recompense vengeance to the wicked, and
restore the godly to their joys; and yet show them that here is no place of
rest, but that they must lift up their heads to heaven, where they shall have
rest without trouble.

Now let us consider, what these afflictions work in the wicked, and to what
end they are sent unto them. Surely to plague them, and to leave them without
excuse. They are sent to God his children to humble them, to bring them to
repentance, to keep them from evil, to encourage them in good, and to recover
them being fallen. But they are sent to root out the wicked, and to consume
them from the face of the earth: and therefore he powers out all the vials of
his wrath upon the wicked remnant. And these manifold plagues have often come
to pass where the Gospel has been preached, because as it is the greatest
mercy and treasure, if it be received; so the unnatural refusal of it does
cause the greatest judgments. So the Israelites in the wilderness were
punished, first by idolatry, then by plagues, and were rooted out of the land.
And after Christ had spoken, the Apostles preached, and the Jews remained
unprofitable, the Lord in his justice, in that they would not believe the true
Christ, suffered them to be deluded by false Christ's, and that they that would
not profit by the true Apostles, should be deceived by false Apostles, and then
being punished with famine and sickness they were by the Romans subdued. When
the Gospel came to be preached among the Gentiles, and was contemned, the Lord
first punished them by suffering them to fall into vile sins, and then after
gave them over to the Turk. We see how in the West-countrie, where the Gospel
was preached and refused, the Pope was sent to them. So likewise must we make
our profit herein. When God his Spirit falls plentifully in us, and yet men
by his word will not be reformed, the Lord will send heretics and wicked men
to corrupt them. And will the Lord thus censure his own people, and will he
spare the wicked? No: when we think all is quiet, the Lord will send plagues
for refusing the health of our souls; the Lord will send famines for refusing
the food of our souls; the Lord will plague us with wars for neglecting the
peace of our minds. And Matthew. 24. the Lord has set Jerusalem a type, in that
the Gospel never continued quiet or vncorrupt in any one place above the space
of an hundred years. Well, if we see not the beginnings of these things, we
are half mad; if we will not fear the events of them, we are worse than so;
if we will not profit by these things, woeful experience will teach us our
miserable estate. We see how needful affliction ^s, whether we look to God
his children, or to the wicked. Misery makes mercy sweet, and trouble
makes grace gracious: Christ is then sweet, and Jesus is then a Savior, when
we feeling no comfort at hand, are driven and drawn out of our selves to seek
some relief abroad. And experience teaches us, that in prosperity we are
ready to nestle our selves here below, and forgetting the life to come we are
blinded with the God of this world, and so we become worldlings, staying wholly
in these inferior things Now, that God might by evidence prove, how whom he
once loves he always loves, and to admonish others a far off, he sends
corrections to teach us, that we may not stay here below. For, if judgment
begin at the house of God, what shall become of the wicked? If the Lord so
hamper the godly, how shall the wicked look to escape?

Now in these distresses and miseries it shall be, that whosoever calls on
the name of the Lord, shall be saved: for so the Lord offers grace in wrath,
mercy in judgments: so will the Lord move his chosen and elect to desire
these graces, and will cause these judgments threatened to fructify, whilst
they that pray for the Spirit, which shall convey comfort into them by the word
and Sacraments; and so shall not only be preserved from finne and iniquity,
but also remain sounder in judgment and life, passing by these plagues to
heaven, the wicked going down by them to hell. This is then the third thing
which in the beginning we noted, the plain meaning whereof is thus much: If
ye will now but join in fellowship, in prayer, and in God his worship with us,
you shall avoid these judgments threatened, and receive these graces promised
the sure pledges of life everlasting. Great is the grace and mercy of God, who
does appoint a mean to remedy such miseries, and a way to obtain such
mercies, and therefore it is worthy further consideration and examination.

A SHORT TREATISE OF PRAYER, UPON THE WORDS OF THE PROPHET JOEL, chap. 2. 32
alleged by Peter, Act. 2. 21.
Whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Joel. 2. ^2* By
calling on the name of God in this place, which is but one and a particular
part of God his worship, are meant and understood the other parts of the
worship of God. Thus the Scriptures sometime ascribe to this one other part of
God his worship: as Genes 3. Then began men to call on the name of the Lord:
and Genesis 12. Abraham builded an Altar* and called on the name of the Lord, that
is, worshipped God. Again, Psalm 50. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and
I will hear thee. In the new Testament we shall see the same. For this place
is alleged Romans 10: and 1. Cor. 1. the Apostle wishes grace to all the^ that
shall call on the name of God that is, worship God 2 Timoth. 2. Whosoever
calls on the name of the Lord, that is, worshippeth God, let him depart from
iniquity. So that under this one part of invocation, we see understood all
other parts. And in our English tongue, we rather use this phrase; We will go
to prayers, or, Are prayers done, than, we go to the word of God to hear it,
we go to receive the Sacraments, and such like; when notwithstanding we
frequent other actions of religion in the congregation besides prayer. And both
Jeremy, and our Savior Christ calls the Church an house of prayer, as
Matthew. 21. 13. Mine house shall be called the house of prayer, etc. It is an
house of hearing the word, of receiving the Sacraments, of executing
discipline, as well as of prayer: but yet this one name comprehends all.

Now before we show the reason of it, how comes it to pass that few care for
the word, fewer for the Sacraments, and fewest for discipline, yet all show
themselves friends to prayer; yea and Heretics, which in the other things will
depart from us, will acknowledge this thing? This is God his goodness, that none
do forsake this. That by prayer is meant all parts of God his worship, it is
manifest Matthew. 24. 13. where our Savior Christ says: But he that endures
unto the end, he shall be saved. Now the means to avoid these judgments come
after, The Gospel of the kingdom must be preached to all nations. John 3.
Christ by the preaching of the Gospel must be lift up, that who so hearkeneth
to the word, should be saved. These are joined both together, Romans 10. where it
is s^id, Whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, he shall be saved* and a
little after, But how shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe, unless they do hear? So that as faith saves, so
faith comes by the word of God. And Eccles* 4. 17. and 5 1* When then entrest
into the house of God, look unto thy feet, etc. In which place the holy Ghost
first teaches men to hear, and then to pray, because as they came into the
Temple to pray, so also to hear. Likewise Psalm. 95. first the Prophet says, O
come let us worship and kneel done exhorting to prayer, and after, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearis, making mention of the word,
because these must be joined together* That the Ministers of God are joined to
come to the one, and to the other, the Scriptures show, as Deuteronomy. 33. where the
Levites duty is first to teach Jacob, and then to offer incense, that is, to
pray, as Psalm 141. and 2. Sam. 12. where the people acknowledging their
sins, request Samuel to pray for them: who answered them, that he would not
only pray unto God for them, but that he would also preach God his word unto
them, threaten God his judgments, and proclaim God his mercies to them, if
they would repent. Act. 6 when the Apostles found themselves troubled with the
ordinary ministry of tables, they ordained new means, and they would give
themselves to the word and prayer. 1. Timoth. 1. and 2. Paul teaches Timothy
first, how he should preach to the people, then how he should pray for them:
and so the Lord would have the people as well to come to hear the word
preached, as to pray. We shall see this the better, if we consider what the
Lord requires of us in praying. First, a man cannot be heard, unless he do
the will of God. Matthew. 7. Not every one, that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of he^uen, but he that does the will of my father that
is in heaven. Matthew. 15. 8* 9. This people draws near unto me with their
mouth, etc. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine men's
precepts. Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him, yea to
all that call upon him in truth. And it is said in the Proverbs, that the
sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, and his prayer is his
sin. Psalm. 34. 15. 16. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are opon unto their cry. But the face of the Lord is against them that
do evil, etc. But notable is that place Psalm. 66 18. If I regard wickedness in
mine heart, the Lord will not hear me. Now, if we cannot call on God without
faith, because Iam. 2. 6. says, we must ask in faith, and waver not: for he
that wauereth, is like a wave, etc. and as Christ says, whatsoever we ask
believing, we shall obtain, seeing he taught his Disciples so to pray, Lord
increase our faith: and Iam. 5. 15. the prayer of faith shall save, because it
is grounded on God his promises and infallible truth: and seeing with faith the
Lord would have us join repentance, because 2. Timot. 2. 19. every one that
calls on the name of the Lord, must depart from iniquity; we must labor in
all our prayers to come with faith and assurance, that in Christ we shall be
heard, waiting on the Lord in newnes of life. If such faith, fear, and
holiness is required of us in prayer, seeing both faith and repentance, are
begun, continued, and increased by the word, it is meet that the ministry of
the word should be joined with prayer. Therefore where it is said, Whosoever
calls on the name of the Lord, it is as much as, whosoever worshippeth and
serves God, although great calamities come, yet if he be a true worshipper,
believing God his promises, repenting of his sins, and gives himself to
serve the Lord aright, he shall be preserved from all plagues; and either he
shall be taken away in mercy, if the Lord sees him to be weak: or else if he
live, he shall have strength to pass through them, and by them take his voyage
to heaven, even as the wicked by them make a way to the hels. We stand on this
point the rather, because most men nowadaies are of this mind, that, if they
come to the Church to pray a little, all is well, they have bin very religious,
not thinking it in the mean time so necessary a thing to come to the word
preached, which may breed in them faith and repentance. And therefore in that
all will grant prayer, some few forlorn persons excepted; we say there is no
true prayer, where is no faith, and no faith without the word: and therefore
without the word neither faith, nor prayer, nor repentance. Now, if we will
ask on the contrary, why the Lord rather names prayer, than hearing of the
word: I answer, that naturally men had rather hear than pray, and then we
are fit truly to pray, when we have reverently heard, because the hearing of
the word inferring prayer, when we have heard, we are most ready to pray. We
shall see, that ignorant and superstitious persons much commend prayer, but not
preaching: but come to them that have knowledge, and they on the contrary are
more ready to hear, than to pray, and they will longer continue in hearing
than in praying. The holy Ghost then not respecting Turks, Papists, or such
like, but professed Christians, which will brag of their worship to Godward,
teaches us, that all is nothing without prayer, knowing that neither
foundation, nor continuance of repentance can be without prayer, the word and
Sacraments are unfruitful without prayer, without which we are unworthy of
any thing, because we will not vouchsafe once to ask it of the Lord. I
appeal to the consciences of God his children, who, that I might pass by
other loathsome persons loath for to pray, know, that prayer is not a thing of
the mouth, but of the mind; not a sounding of the voice, but a yerning of the
spirit; not a labor of the lips* but a travailing of the heart: and therefore
will confess, giving God the glory to their own shame, that they had rather
hear the word two hours, than thus seriously strive in prayer one quarter of
an hour. And why? It is a small thing to lend the ears in hearing, it is
easy to feed our delight with hearing a man renewing our knowledge: but to
set on work the eye, the ear, the hands, to travel with the heart to set the
whole body in a frame of subjection, as becomes them that pray to the Lord
(which shows, that prayer is a thing both painful and laborious) we shall
prove it to be a very hard thing. Prayer brings the experience of the things
which we know, and without it we have as little proof of our knowledge* as
they have use of an hidden treasure, which never are the better for it. The
word makes known to us the treasures of God his wisdom: but faith brings
the experience of them, by applying and appropriating these mercies of God to
our selves, and prayer is the instrument, whereby this faith is continued in
us. The word tells us, that God will plague sinners, prayer brings an
experience of this: The word tells us, that God cares for us, prayer proves
this: the word shows, that the Lord has both power and mercy to show to his
people, prayer obtains the trial of this: the word reuealeth to us the
wisdom, providence, majesty, and goodness of God, prayer conueieth the
certainty of these things into us. God will be glorified wholly and only, and
cannot abide that we should be fellowpartners with him therein. If a man come
by knowledge, faith, and repentance by hearing, it is rather an infusion into a
man than an action from a man, and it is the great mercy of God: but when the
Lord brings a man on his knees, and humbles him in prayer, and constrains him
to ask all of God, that we might hear rightly, and so use the things heard,
this breaks the heart of a man, and makes him to say, Great is the Lord.
This, I say, humbles a man to acknowledge his wants, this calls down many
blessings both spiritual and corporal from the Lord. We know, that though a
father is ready and fully has purposed to leave an inheritance unto his
children, yet to acquaint them with obedience, he will have them ask things of
far less value at his hands: so God, notwithstanding he has purposed to
give unto us an heavenly inheritance, which in Christ is purchased, yet to
continue us in faith and obedience, he will have us to ask it of him. If man's
wisdom can come thus far, shall we not hereby gather the wisdom of God*
If man has this pity, shall we doubt of mercy in God? and as prayer brings
experience of God his love, so also it proves our knowledge, faith, and
repentance. For if we will be suitors at God his hand, we must not willingly
displease him. For we see, that when we would obtain a suite of a man, we will
be careful not to offend him, least we should suffer repulse: and likewise
when we pray, we must address our hearts to obedience: and therefore the
Scripture speaks of clensing our hearts of hypocrisy, and unfaithfulness. If
this care be had in suites for things corruptible, that willingly we will not
offend him, to whom we sue; then must we know, that God is Lord of the
spirits: and therefore to pray unto him without avoiding things displeasing
him, and doing things pleasing him, is but gross by pocrisie. He must needs
be a godly man then that prays often, and if we be so bold to pray,
nourishing some sin in us, besides that we are dull in prayer, we are
inwardly both accused and accursed. Hereof comes such plentiful acknowledging
of our sins in prayer, with a purpose to avoid them, hereof come such vows
and protestations of obedience: so that prayer does not only continue
repentance, but also breeds thankfulness. For it is our corruption, when we
know that we obtaiened a thing any other ways than by prayer, that then we
ascribe it to the means: but when we see God has heard our prayers, it
seals our faith, it confirms our thankfulness. True it is, that God gives
many mercies without praying: yet this must the more make us thankful, and
nothing slack us in using the means which God has appointed. That prayer
further confirms love to God, it is manifest already: now we must show how
it works love even to our brethren. When a man comes to pray, and has this
choake-peare, that he must forgive, or else not be forgiven, he must needs be
either an hypocrite in his prayer, or cease from prayer, or forgive his
enemies. It is palpable hypocrisy to desire God to forgive us many and great
sins, and we will not pardon our brother a few and light offenses. If we will
take a view of the weight, height, length, depth, and breadth of our sins, we
will confess it hypocrisy to crave pardon for so many sins, being hardly
brought to forgive others a few trespasses. And for this cause the Scripture
says: If ye forgive not others, ye cannot be forgiven. If then Prayer be
such a thing, as nature does least entertain, if it brings such experience of
God his love toward us, if it so confirms Faith, continues repentance, and
causes love both to God and man, it is good cause that this is set to infer
the other, and to make all other parts of God his worship the more effectual.

He shall be saved. That is, in the midst of diseases he shall not be taken
away, in the time of iniquity he shall not be overtaken: but in all these he
shall suffer with Faith and a good conscience. Besides, by the word of saving,
is meant the obtaining of all graces, as pledges of our salvation, and gages of
our inheritance: so that it does not barely betoken an exempting of us from the
former judgments threatened. Will a man then escape the wrath menaced, and
enjoy the grace promised, let him use true and hearty prayer, which has it
fruit commended unto us both in the chapter going before, in the election of
an Apostle, and also in the beginning of this chapter, in that being gathered
together in prayer, the holy Ghost was sent down. Now let us speak a little
of the circumstances. First, of the persons, it is said, Whosoever: Secondly,
for the extremity of the time, it is said, shall be saved, that is, from those
judgments, and endued with those graces, that even then when there shall be so
many opinions, that we shall not be able well to discern the truth, when
wickedness shall abound every where, examples of godliness be no where, when
we shall be able to find no comfort either in our selves or in others; we
shall be so governed, that we shall not only avoid evil, but coldness in
well doing; and look what is detracted through the injuries of times, it shall
be added in inward graces, and recompensed in the kingdom of heaven. When we
shall then in extremity of offenses say, Good Lord, what shall we do? whither
shall we go to hear a good Preacher* what may we do to go to some good
man and zealous professor? Remember then, if thou will stay on the Lord, and
fall to Prayer, though thou art troubled with Papists, or Heretics, or
monstrous livers, then lean to God, trust in his word, and use prayer. When
thou shall see no good neither in Church nor in Common wealth, then have
recourse to prayers, and thou shall not only be preserved from dangers, but
also thou shall enjoy God his spirit with his graces. Thus we shall see in the
volume of God his book, not only what deliverances the godly have had by
prayer, but also by what means they were delivered. Noah calling on the name
of GOD, was saved in the Arc, from perishing in the waters. Lot was delivered
out of Sodom: the Israelites obtained meat from heaven, water out of the
rock, passage through the Seas, and many other righteous persons were not
only delivered, but greatly ioyed. But if we should pass them, and look to
the days of persecution under Queen Mary, when the Sun seemed to be changed
into darkness, the Moon to lose her light, then Christians were not only many
delivered, but also in the prisons, in cabbins, in bushes, in flame and in
fire, they ever had sweet dreams, heavenly visions, and wonderful
consolation: so as they were not only comforted, but at the stake they would
prophecy of the restoring of the Gospel, and they presently would rejoice, as
foreseeing the truth should come unto their posterity.

And it shall come to pass. This imports the time of the Gospel, and here
is showed a difference between the time of the Law, and of the Gospel. If our
fathers were heard under the Law, if they received not the repulse in the
dawning of the day; what may we hope for under the Gospel, what boldness may
we receive now, when the sun shines out at the fulness? Look what proof
they had, we may have more; see what experience they had, we may have it in
greater measure, because what they had confirmed, we have confirmed. The Lord
requires of us now to trust in him the more, and we must remember that saying
of our Savior Christ, Ioh. 16. 24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name,
ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full* If our fathers prayed
fervently, why do not we? have not we mo deeds of God his favor? have not
we mo promises? have not we mo examples? all which accuse us of want of zeal
in prayer. In the old Testament they named not Christ, we are bold to look
upon God in Christ his Son. Woe then be to us, if these things do not move
us, seeing Christ stands on the right hand of God the Father, who is not now
in the loins of Abraham, or in the womb of the Virgin, or in the bowels of
the earth; bu^ ^o, as ^^^^ ^^euen we may see him sitting in heaven on the right
hand of GOD. The circumstance remaining is in this word, whosoever: which
shows that whether it be man or woman, master or servant, young or old, Jew
or Gentil, no age, no sex, no estate, no condition is excluded. True it is,
that there be privileges of the man above the woman, of the master above his
servant, of the elders above the yonge^: but this is in some things, not in
all. For in the worship of God, in the matter of God his glory, and our
salvation, there is no respect of persons with God; but, whos^euer calls upon
the name of the Lord, he shall be saved. In respect whereof we are to be
exhorted, that if we will rejoice in this privilege, we must use the means due
to them that are within the precincts of it, we must not excuse our selves, and
say; I am a woman, and the weaker vessel, I am a young man and rechlesse, I am
an old man and forgetful, I am a servant, and am not at mine own liberty.
For if we look for the grace offered, we must use the means proposed. But
yet here is a further thing than this, that not only the righteous shall be
saved, but also the poor sinner, if now he will repent, and having a pure
purpose to please God, call on the name of the Lord. Behold, o repenting
sinner, the These on the Cross; the Sun was darkened, the vale of the
Temple rent, earthquakes, and troubles, confusion was an ong men, terrors were
in himself, and yet he calling on the name of the Lord, and saying: Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, received this comfortable
answer: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Peter seeing Christ, was
pardoned. If we behold David's misery, in the troublesome estate both of Church
and Commonwealth, when he had not one of his own children to comfort him, but
to the increase of his grief, one brother murdered another, one of his sons
being a traitor, was through God his judgment hanged by the hair of the head,
his chief friends rebelled against him; he was not only in all this mightily
preserved of God, but also received plentiful graces of the Spirit. When
Manasses had caused Jerusalem to swim with blood, when the City was near
destruction, and he himself in chains; what hope was there either of the
Kingdom or Prophecy to continue? and yet calling on God his name, he was
heard and helped. If such great things were for poor sinners before Christ,
what comfort is there for them, since Christ is come? If the wretched man was
so helped of CHRIST, even when he was on the cross; what comfort may afflicted
consciences hope for in him, being advanced to the Throne and Kingdom? Nay, I
will add more, even very hypocrites by Prayer, have escaped outward perils, as
A^ab, and such like. Yea, and mark them that are in wars or in some great
distress, how praying to the LORD, they are helped. The same we shall observe
sometimes either in worldlings, or in God his children unregenerate. All which
will grant, that after they have prayed but in their manner, the Lord has
strangely delivered them. If wicked men have had this benefit, how much more
shall the godly have it? If God his children have found such grace, before they
knew God; what grace shall they have, when they know him, believe in him, and
call upon him? Here then is all doubting to be taken away, and we must cease to
say: Oh I am a sinner, I cannot be helped, mine unworthiness makes me ashamed*
Consider the tenor of this runs in an universal point to all, thou can
not be excluded, if thou exclude not thy self. And why? It is said, that all
shall be saved: which point is necessarily to be noted: For the devil will
tell us, Christ died for others, but not for us* True it is, that all repentant
sinners, compared with the number of the unrepentant, are but few: Howbeit, if
I truly abhor my sins, and my self for my sins sake, if I purpose to
leave sinn^, and travel in the ways of righteousness, if I love GOD and hate
^niquitie and depart from it, although I want all these solen ne preparations,
yet I am persuaded I shall be saved. And yet remember, that here is no such
liberty for hard-hearted sinners; neither is the Sea of mercy denied to
sorrowful sinners. For, as no sinner shall be damned that will repent, and it
truth desires to be saved: so the Lord will not justify the wicked and
obstinate sinner. Whosoever therefore has ears, let him hear, who so has
eyes let him see, who so has an heart, let him consider of this bountiful
mercy of God, whether he be in misery outward, or trouble inward; and know
from the Lord his own mouth, that, Whosoever calls on the Name of the LORD,
he shall be saved.

FINIS.
THE THIRD PART OF THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND AND FAITHFVL SERVANT OF JESUS
CHRIST, MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM, MINISTER AND PREAcher of the Word of GOD
containing seventeen Sermons, the Titles and Texts whereof appear in the next
Page following.

PROVE. 10. 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the
wicked shall rotte. VERSE. 11. The mouth of the righteous is as a welspring of
life. VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Creed for William Welbie, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swanne. 1611.

THE SERMONS FOLLOVVING ARE THESE.
1 OF quenching the spirit. 1. THESE. 5. 19. 2 Of murmuring. EXODUS 16. 2. 3 Of
zeal. REVEL. 3. 19. 4 Of a good name. PROVE. 22. 1. 5 Of humility. PROVE. 18.
12. 6 Of the education of children. PROVE. 17. 21. 7 Of repentance and true
sorrow for sin. ACT. 2. 37. 38. 8. 9. Three Sermons of the heavenly purchase
on the 13. of 10. Matthew and the 44 verse. 11 Of Christian warfare on EPHESIANS.
6. verse. 10. 11. 12. 12 Of diverse Christian instructions. PSALM. 16. 13 Of
flying evil company, Idolatry, etc. on GENESIS 42. verse. 9. 12. 14. 15. 21. 14
Of the mutual duties between the Ministers and people on HEB. 13. verse. 17.
15 Of the confession of sin and the necessary use thereof, on PROVE. 28. 15.
16 Of the effects of Christ his Cross, etc. in two sermons 17 on GALAT. 6.
verse. 14. 15.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR JULIUS CAESAR KNIGHT, AND TO THE RIGHT Virtuous
Lady his wife: HENRY HOLLAND* wishes an increase of all prosperity, and the
rich grace of Gods spirit, unto life everlasting.
THese Sermons (right Worshipful) are full of good instruction, and
consolation. I have endeavored to give some view of the^ al, by some short
aphorisms, on this manner.

I. The first Sermon, is of the quenching of the spirit, where he The first
^^^^m^n.
teaches us: 1. That albeit those be worthily condemned, that n^v^r t^sted,
nor desire to taste of the spirit of God: yet a more just and fearful
condemnation is like to come on them, that having once received it, do^ after
lose the same. 2. To know whether we have the spirit: he says, like as he
knows best, that he has l^fe, which feels it in himself* so he best
knows whether he have the spirit, that fe^eth the spirit working in
himself. Again, he that has the spirit of Christ, has some thing in him
given him of God by his word, above all that can be attained, by any natural
gift or humane industry. 3. The spirit often in regeneration, causes in the
spiritual man, a great and general astonishment, for great ^^d enormous
sins committed: and then it deals more particularly, smit^^g us with a
special grief for special sins, 4. Then the spirit teaches, how the
faculties of the so^le are all bent to rebellion against God, and specially how
reason fights against faith, and is a great patron^ of unbelief. 5* After
all this, the spirit (says he) brings us to se^ the vns^^rchable riches of
Christ, and works in us that precious faith, whereby ^^ apprehend our free
justification in Christ. And then follows the feeling of joy unspeakable, and
that blessed peace of conscience which passet^ understanding, judgment is
reformed, affections are clean altered, and there will appear in ^ll faculties
great forwardnes, and readiness, to perform things acceptable unto God 6. After
some falies of frailty, ^f we continue our former hatred of sin, and the
oftener w^ fall conceive the more d^^dly hatred against sin: if our sorrow for
sin increase, if our care continue to prevent and cut off all occasions of
sin albeit we slip and fall often, yet we may not say the spirit is
quenched. 7. Such as have the greater, and more certain graces of the spirit
of regeneration: their Like the S^^,
knowledge is well grounded, and they labor evermore for a good measure of
knowledge, to direct them in their particular duties: the Like a lightning.
knowledge of the wicked is but co^fused, and general uncertain. 8. Albeit the
spirit can never be utterly taken from the believers: yet if they wax proud*
secure, and fall to sin, the graces of the spirit, the clear understanding,
the feeling, the affection, and joy in the holy Ghost may so die and decay in
them, that they may well seem to themselves and others to have quenched the
spirit.

These and the like singular doctrines concerning this matter, are contained in
this Sermon. This argument was further enlarged and amplified in other Sermons
by him, which as yet I cannot find. For he taught also by what degrees the
spirit is quenched: and they were these. 1. By neglecting the means of
cherishing the grace of the spirit. 2. From neglecting The regenerate do not
^eese the spirit of sanctification.
the means to proceed to the grieuing of the spirit* 3. From grieuing, to
come to vexing and provoking the spirit. 4. Lastly, how some after long
prouocations, have quenched the spirit, and lost all the good light and graces
of God which they seemed before to have had. These be most dangerous degrees of
sin, and steps to perdition. And thus far of the first Sermon.

II. The second sermon is against murmuring, a sin no less dangerous than
common in all degrees and conditions of men. We be here taught*: 1. What the
nature is of impatiencie for outward things, what dishonor it brings to God,
what a torment to unbelievers, in whom ^^e want of one small thing breed^ such
^is^^nt^ntment, ^^ the poss^ssi^on of m^^ rich bless^^^^ ^^^^ot qu^^t them 2.
What remedies best s^rue to make our hearts calm in a^^ such distempred
affections, and they be these: first most highly to esteem of Gods favor,
and to pr^ferre that one benefit of the ^ardon of our sins, before all the
riches of this life. Secondly, to labor for that precious faith i^ Christ,
touching the forgiveness of our sins, and everlasting life* for if we can
once be persuaded, that Christ is ours, we shall not greatly doubt but that
with Christ we shall have all things needful for us. Let us receive this
benefit though it come alone, vea though it bring troubles with it^ and then
for outward things we shall possess our souls with patience. For (says this
reverend man) we have ^o true feeling of the forgiveness of our sins, if we
cannot (when we feel it) be therewith contented, and ready to forgo all
other things. 3. To look well to our sanctification and regeneration* for if
the Lord grant us to be the glorious temples of his most holy spirit, wherein
his graces may shine, he will not deny us the base things of this life: or if
he do, we shall have a good supply of better things. 4. To be well assured of
our glorious resurrection: for it is far greater to raise us being consumed to
dust, than to preserve us being alive. 5. Faith in Gods providence: if he made
all things of nothing, much more easily can he preserve things made: if he
cares for the beasts, much more for m^n: if for wicked men, much more for his
children: if for his children when they sought him not, much more when they
seek him with all their hearts, and desire to serve him in holiness and true
righteousness. 6. Lastly, learn by examples that it is Gods blessing in the
means, and not the means without it, which preserve us. The Fathers before
the flood fed on herbs without flesh or fish, and yet lived 700, 800* 900.
years. The Israelites lived 40. years without change of garments, or any
earthly and ordinary provision. Moses and Elias lived 40. days without meat.
These examples teach us if we have the means, not to trust in them; if we want
them not to distrust in God. And thus far the sum of the second Sermon.

III. The third is of zeal, which teaches: first, how God commands and
commends zeal: secondly* how he rewards it.

The rules to know the true zeal of God are these. 1. True zeal begins in our
selves: and so proceeds to others: and gain returns from other men, and ends
in our selves, Abraham, Job, Moses, etc. first sinite themselves, and ever be
more zealous against themselves than against other men: for by the sense and
feeling of our own sores, we be taught to deal more mildly and meekely with
the sores of other men. 2. True zeal is as willing to be admonished, as it is
careful to admonish: and that not only of Job. 31.
superiors, where we must yield of necessity, but also of equals, yea of
inferiors, whom we may seem to contemn. 3. True Zeal is not to be hot, by
fits, and cold in the end. 4. A very special mark of true zeal is this: To
be Paul.
comforted in the public prosperity of the Church, when private crosses may
make us ^ad: and contrarily, to Examples, Moles, Nehem^as, Daniel.
mourn and lament for our brethren, when private prosperity might cheer our
hearts. 5. True zeal (says he) will not spare sin in kindred: for that he
loves most naturally, that has learned to love most spiritually: and he
loves most truly, that cannot abide sin in the party beloved, without some
wise and discrecte admonition. 6. True zeal fears not the force of the
mighty, neither is it dismayed at the looks of the proud. 7, True zeal is
seen in their cause who can never recompense us again. 8. The last rule of
zeal is this, to be humbled in our selves for those sins which we epsy or
censure in other men: and specially such sins as we epsy in them which are
committed to our charge: for that the holy Ghost in his word, accounts 2.
Cor. 12. 2. last ver^e.
their sins our sins. And thus far the third Sermon.

IIII. The fourth Sermon is of a good name. And here he teaches us: 1. How
dear and precious a thing a good name is. 2. Next, what singular gainful
fruits and effects it carries with it: how God and good me^ are delighted with
us, if we have it. 3. How careful we ought to be, not to hurt our neighbor in
his good name, because it is an inestimable treasure: which being l^st, is most
hardly recovered. 4. With what care and conscience we should seek to find it,
and having found it, with all endeavor and industry to preserve it. 5. He
teaches how a good name and good report, being good things, must proceed from
good causes, as of virtue, godliness and good religion. 6. He notes how the
world accounts of Gods children as of monsters, if they have but one s^ip:
and highly esteems of a worldling, for one external gift of mind or body,
though sins swarm in him. 7. He teaches that if we will avoid an evil
name, we must first avoid all evil surmises and devises against other men*
and next we must have a godly jealousy over our own ways, that they may not
breed in men any suspicion of evil. 8. Lastly, men must be plentiful in all
good works: all which must be done, first with a simple and sincere
affect^^n^* ^^xt with in ^^^^ ^^ and di^er^tion. And thus far of a good name.

V. The si^t Sermon is of humility. The contents of it briefly are these. 1.
Where^ore the Lord humbles his children before they be crowned. 2. How pride
rots and marres all good gifts in us. 3. How dangerous and ^ur^f^^^ prosperity
is to many. 4. How to accept good means in time when God calls us to
repentance. 5. How dangerous spiritual pride is to Gods children. 6. How fear
must increase* as Gods gifts increast in us 7. How evil thoughts do exercise
Gods best children, and by what messenge^ God awaketh them. And this is the
short sum of the fifth Sermon.

VI. The sixth serves well for Christian parents, for the good education of
children. 1. He warns them, that they lament not so much for their children,
if they be dismembered, or prove idiots, as if they prove gross sinners, and
so become worse than idiots. For such assuredly (without repentance) dishonor
God greatly in this life, and cannot escape everlasting perdition after death:
but of poor idiots there is m^re hope. 2. Next he teaches Parents, that when
they find foul sins in their children, wisely to consider what causes breed
them: whether they be not themselves disobedient to their heavenly father, hand
have been to their natural parents, and yet not repented of their sins. 3.
Lastly, with what wisdom and affection we must correct our children, ever
mindful how that we punish our own sins in them. And thus much of the sixth
Sermon.

VII. The seventh and last Sermon teaches us: 1. That sorrow for sin is the
first step to godliness: for (says he) it is impossible to hunger after Christ
without it. 2. That the word of God must effect that sorrow in us, by piercing
our hearts, and teaching us that we have to do with God, and not with men,
and this will wound us with a lively feeling of Gods judgment. 3. That we must
wisely discern between the true sorrow for sin, which causes repentance
not to be repented of, and that worldly sorrow which causes death. For godly
sorrow softneth the heart to the obedience of the word: but that worldly sorrow
causes men to kick and spurn against the word, to the further hardening of
their hearts. 4. That many are galled and pricked with poverty, sickness, and
other afflictions: but few with their sins, which is the cause of their
afflictions. But let men be well assured of this (says he) that if a man be
not troubled for sin here, he is in the way to hell: if he be troubled in
this life for sin, he is in the way to heaven. 5. Lastly, that in true
repentance the pricking of the heart, and sorrowing for sin, must be
continued and daily renewed: we must be humbled with continual sorrow, that we
may be refreshed with daily comfort in Christ. And thus far the compendious
and short view of all these Sermons.

This grave and reverend Father, who has left us these holy instructions,
having continued for many years with good success, and a comfortable
experience of Gods blessing on his holy ministry, in preaching the Gospel of
Christ, his Sermons were many in number: and how effectual, let the godly
judge by these few, which Gods good providence has reserved for posterity.
Now (right Worshipful) I offer them unto your good patronage and protection:
because I am well assured you love, and what you may, you further the preaching
of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Much am I bound to remember your Worship, and that virtuous Lady your wife,
for your great love to me and mine. I can no way require your love, yet by some
poor testimony, I desire to make mine affection known in the performance of
any Christian duty what I may. The Lord Jesus Christ that has knit both your
hearts, by one spirit, in one holy faith unto himself, and in love unfeigned one
to another, grant you the true peace which passes understanding, to keep
your hearts and minds in his faith, love and fear unto the end. And thus I
humbly take my leave, recommending you and all yours to the protection of the
Almighty.

Your Worships ever to command in Jesus Christ: HENRY HOLLAND.

A SERMON PREACHED BY MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM UPON THESE WORDS:
THE FIRST SERMON.
Quench not the spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
ALl the doctrine of the Scriptures may be briefly referred to these two heads.
First, how we may be prepared to receive Two heads of all the doctrine of the
Scripture.
the spirit of God. Secondly, how the spirit may be retained when as we have
once received it. And therefore Saint Paul having labored to instruct the
Thessalonians, in the former part of this Epistle, how they may receive the
spirit, does here teach them how to keep and continue this spirit unto the
end. And this the Apostle does by giving them a charge and commandment, that
in no wise they do Quench the spirit: thereby doubtless teaching, that as the
shunning of evil, is the first step unto goodness; so the ready way to
continue the spirit of God in our hearts, is to labor that it be not quenched.
Now the Apostle upon great and weighty consideration, does here deliver this
precept: For first of all, though al those be worthily and justly condemned,
that never tasted of the spirit of God: yet as our Savior Christ says; A more
just and fearful condemnation is like to come upon them, that having once
received it, do afterward lose the same again. Moreover, without this spirit
of God, no holy exercise can have his full effect: for the word The spirit of
sanctification is effectual in all means which profit us.
works not, where the spirit of God is wanting; prayers have no power to
pearce into the presence of God: the Sacraments seem small and silly things
in our eyes, and all other orders, and exercises which God has granted and
ordained for man, they are unprofitable to man, where the spirit is not present
to co^uey them into our hearts, there to seal up the fruit of them. Last of
all, we are fit to receive no good grace at Gods hand: nay, we do not esteem
Gods graces, when we have not the spirit to teach us to set a due price upon
them: Exercises of religion unprofitable to them which want the spirit
for speak of the Law, or of the Gospel; of sin, or of righteousness:
speak of Christ, or of our redemption, and justification by him: yea, speak
of that huge and heavy weight of glory, wherewith the elect of God shall be
crowned, all this moves not, we are little affected therewith, unless God
give us of his good spirit, to profit by the same. The Apostle therefore with
good reason, gave this precept, and we, for many great causes, are to listen
unto it, least by any means the spirit of God be quenched in us, and so we
deprive our selves of all these fruits. Now, whereas the Apostle says, Quench
not the spirit, it may appear that The precept of not quenching the spirit,
belongs to the^ which have received the spirit.
he speaks to those that had already received the spirit: For, as the fire
cannot be said to be quenched, where it is not: so they cannot be said to
quench or lose the spirit, which have not as yet received it. Then know, that
this precept does properly belong to the^ that have received the spirit of God,
and they especilly are to make a special use of it: for the other, it cannot
profit them, unless that, as the seed lying in the ground a long time, does
afterward budde and become fruitful; so this continue in their minds, till
they have tasted (in some good sort) of the spirit of God, and then breed in
them some carefulnes that they do not quench it. Well then, to them that have
felt and found the spirit of God in them, to them says S. Paul in this place,
Take heed that ye quench not the spirit. Of this, if we do somewhat seriously
consider, these two questions will offer themselves, and soon arise in Two
question, concerning the que^ching of the spirit.
our mind. First, how we may know whether we have the spirit of God, or no.
Secondly, if we have it, whether it may be lost again, or no: which if they
be well and sufficiently answered, they will doubtless give great force unto
this precept For the first then, if we will know whether we have the spirit or
no; we must surely understand, that as he knows best that he has life, which
feels it in himself: so he best knows whether he have the spirit of God,
that feels the spirit working in him. And if we will further know this by
the peculiar working and effects of the spirit, then let us mark these.

First of all, if there be nothing in man but the nature of man; if nothing
but that may A spiritual man is endued with supernatural gifts.
be attained by the art and industry of a man; then surely in that man is not
the spirit of God: for the spirit is from God, it is from above, it is above
nature: and therefore the Apostle does set the spirit of God against the spirit
of the world, when he says: We have received the spirit, not of the world, but
of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14.

Besides, the spirit of God is eternal, and endures for ever: but all the
doings and devices of men they perish, and in time they have an end. Therefore
though a man have wisdom with great knowledge, though in wit and skill he
pass and excel the common sort of men: yet, if from above he has not been
enlightened; if from heaven his wisdom has not been sanctified, his
knowledge shall decay, his wisdom shall wither like grass; he has not as
yet tasted of the spirit of God, that endures for ever. And therefore says
Saint Paul: We teach the mysteries of God, which none, no not the Princes, and
the men of this world, which are above others most excellent, are able to
understand.

Secondly consider, whether there be in thee any alteration or change. For the
wise men A spiritual man must have an alteration or change. Ioh. 16.
which were expert in nature, could say, that in every generation there is a
corruption. And we see, that the seed sown is much changed before it grow up
and bear fruit: Then needful it is that in regeneration, there be a
corruption of sin, so that as seed in the ground, so sin in our mortal
bodies may decay, that the new man may be raised up, the spirit of God taking
possession of our souls. Therefore the Evangelist John does make this, the
first work of the spirit, that it shall rebuke the world of sin: and this is
so needful, that without it, there is not the spirit of God, neither yet can
Christ come and enter into that man. Here of it was that Christ compared the
Jews to children in the market place, who would not dance, though they were
piped unto: and the reason was, because they had not first learned with John to
mourn: for they that by the preaching of John, learned to lament their sins,
and for their sins were pensive in their own souls, they received Christ,
they danced and did rejoice to hear the joyful tidings of the Gospel.
Therefore Christ says, That whores and harlots entered into the kingdom of
heaven, seeing they lamented their Matthew. 11.
sins) before the proud Pharisees, which were touched with no remorse for
their sins. And for the same cause it is, that Christ calls unto him, them
only that labor and a^e heavy lad^^: teaching, that if they find not sin to
be a heavy load and burden to them, they have not the spirit of God, neither
are they fit to receive Christ. Then to be rebuked of sin, is the first work
of the spirit; which the spirit works in us by these degrees. First, 1 A
general astonishment for sin.
it raises up in us a great and general astonishment, by reason of all those
great and enormous sins that we have committed, and this does strike us
down, it does terrify us, and hold us amazed wonderfully: then it deals
with us more particularly; it brings us unto a special grief for special
sins, it does bereave us of our chief desires, and brings 2 A special
grief for special sins.
us out of conceit and liking with the best things that are in us: for then it
does display before us the vanity and darkness of our understanding, how unfit
and unmeet we are to understand and conceive those things, that do above al
others especially concern us: then does it let us see the perverse corruption
of our judgment, and that before God, 1. Cor. 2. 14. Phil. 1. 9. 10.
and in things belonging to God, we be as bruit beasts, not able to discern
things that differ, nor to put a sound difference between good and evil: then
does it let us see that our reason is unreasonable, nay, that it is hurtful
unto us, a great enemy to faith, and a great patron of infidelity and
unbelief. When it comes to our affections, it turns them 3 Reason against
faith.
vpside down, it turns our mirth into mourning, our pleasure into
painfulnes, and our greatest delight into most bitter grief. If it do
proceed further, and come once to the heart, and to the stomach and courage
that is in us, then it cutteth us to the quick, then 4 How the spirit renueth
affections.
does it at once cast us down in humility under the hand of God: for while we
had to deal with men, we were as stout as any, and would not start for the
best. We had reason to say for our selves, and courage to defend our selves
against all them that did deal with us: but now the spirit draws us into the
presence of God, it lets us see that we have to do with God, and that our
strength is weakness in respect of him. Then does our heart begin to fail us,
then do we lay our hands on our mouths, and dare not answer: nay, then do
we quickly take up our cross, because the Lord himself has done it. Behold
here how the spirit works, behold how sin is corrected: and who so can
behold here this in himself, may assuredly say, that the spirit of God is in
him, that it is not in vain within him, nay, that it is mighty and lively in
operation in his heart.

The third note and effect is, the bringing on forward of this work unto
justification: The 3. note.
for when the spirit has brought us thus far, then does it begin to open
unto us a door unto the grace and favor of God: it does put into our minds,
that there is mercy with How the spirit leads us to Christ. Psalm. 130. 4.
God, and therefore stirs us up to seek mercy at his hands: afterward, it
does let us see how Christ suffered, to take away the sins of the world, that
in the righteousness of Christ, we may look to be justified before God. And
this it does not let us see only, but does effectually work a sure persuasion
of it in our hearts, and confirms the same by two notable effects. The first
is, a joy most unspeakable and glorious, wherewith our Two arguments of our
justification. Romans 5. 1. 2. Romans 9. 1. Phil. 4. 3. 4. 5.
hearts must needs be wholly taken up and ravished, when we see our selves by
the righteousness of Christ, of the free mercy and grace of God, redeemed from
death, delivered from hell, and freed from the fearful condemnation of the
wicked. The second is the peace of conscience: which indeed passes all
understanding: While sin, and the guilt of sin remained, there was no
peace, nor rest, nor quietness to be found, but fear within, terrors without,
and troubles on every side: but when sin is once nailed to the cross of
Christ, when the guilt of sin is taken out of our consciences, and the
punishment thereof far removed, then must needs ensue great peace: for our
accusers dare not proceed against us, our sins are forgiven us, and God is at
one with us: and for this, we have the warrant and testimony of the spirit. Can
flesh and blood persuade us of this? can any creature assure us how God is
affected toward v^? no doubtless. And therefore where this joy and peace is,
there must needs be the holy Ghost, the author and worker of the saine. For as
no man knows what is in man, but the spirit of man which is in him: so none
knows the will 1. Cor. 2. 14. 15
of God, but the spirit of God, and therefore it is the spirit of God that must
certify our hearts and spirits of the same.

And hereof there does arise that, which we take as the fourth note, when we
find it in The 4. note.
our selves: to wit, the life and nimblenes that is in us to do good: for when
a man does find favor from God, for the forgiveness of sins, then the love
of God constrains him, that joy which he conceiueth inforceth him, and
puts life into him, for the performance of those things, which are pleasing
unto God: then he begins to find himself not only reclaimed from evil,
but also applied and framed to that which is good; then is Readiness to obey.
his understanding enlightened, to see into the mysteries of godliness, and
into that great work of his redemption, and into whatsoever concerns the
saving health of his soul: then is his judgment reformed, and he is made able
to judge between false religion and true, between the works of the flesh,
and of the spirit, between that which is good, and that which is evil and
displeasing in the sight of God. Then are his affections in some good measure
altered, his desire is set, not upon earthly, but upon heavenly things; his
joys are Godly anger.
not in the earth, but in the heavens; his anger is wasted and spent, not upon
his own private cause and quarrels, but upon his own sins, and upon
whatsoever hinders the glory of his God. This is the Ephesians. 4. 1^.
life of God in him; thus he lives that has received the spirit, and thus he
leads his life continually: for they that have received the spirit, Romans 8. 2.
are led by the spirit, and do live accordingly, bringing forth the fruits of
the spirit. But this has weakness Gal. 5. 22.
joined with it, and men through frailty may soon fall, and therefore their
life is said to be hid in Christ, because in full and perfect manner it does
not appear. Therefore, if notwithstanding these frailties and falls, we will
know whether we still retain the spirit of 1
God, we must search our selves, and try our hearts by these rules. First, if
through frailty we have fallen (for who is he that falls not?) we will then
know whether by our fall we Rules to know whether we have the spirit.
have lost the spirit of God or no, let us see what liking, or misliking we
have of sin: for if after our fall, we do hold our former hatred of sin,
and the oftener we fall, the more thorough and deadly hatred we conceive against
sin, undoubtedly that frailty has not as yet deprived us of the spirit.
Secondly, come and see how it stands with thy sorrow: 2
for so long as thy sorrow increases for thy sins, it cannot be thought that
sin and the flesh, have overcome and utterly quenched the spirit in thee.
Thirdly, try thy care: and 3
if thou grow in a godly care, both how thou may be able to wage battle
against sin in the plain field, and how thou may prevent sin in all his
policies, then thou have a further assurance, that sin, although it be as
great as Goliath, yet it has not hitherto prevailed against thy poor and
little David, I say, against those few and small graces, which the good spirit
of God has bestowed upon thee. But the last is most certain, and that is
this: When thou art careful to redeem that, which by the fall thou have lost,
and have a 4
care to run so much faster forward, by how much more thou have been let
by thy Simile.
fall; then it does appear that the spirit is in thee, yea it is lively and
mighty in operation, and such as shall never be taken from thee, until the
day of Christ.

Thus may we in some good and competent measure try and prove, whether we have
the spirit of God or no: for where these fruits are to be found, there is also
the spirit of God. For further confirmation whereof, we may note the manner of
speech, where he says, Quench not the spirit, We do commonly use to say, the
fire is quenched, when the light and heat thereof is taken away: and indeed
nothing can properly be said to be quenched, but the fire. Now whereas the
Apostle says, Quench not the spirit, he gives us to understand, that the
spirit is in some respect like unto fire: therefore if we do but a little
consider of the nature of fire, we shall a great deal better judge of the
spirit And among The properties of fire, whereby the graces and effects of the
spirit are resembled.
others, these properties we find to be in the fire. First of all it will
burn up, and consume things that may be burned and consumed: and therefore
lighting upon straw, stubble, sticks, or such like, it brings them to ashes,
and does make them as though they had not been at all. Secondly, it does purge
and purify those things that can abide to be purged: and this it does, first
by taking away the superfluity of dross, that has ouercouered 2
the thing to be purged. Then by fining the thing it self, and by making it
purer and purer. Thirdly, it gives light even in the most dim and darkest
places. And last 3
of all, it gives heat, and withal, does as it were put life into those
things which are capable 4
of life: for whilst a man is frozen and starued for cold, he is numbed, and
as it were without life: but being brought to the fire, he is heat, he is
revived, he is cheered, and then becomes active and nimble. These are the
properties of fire, and these do in some manner resemble and shadow out unto us
the works and effects of the spirit. For first of all, when the spirit of God
seazeth upon a man, and enters into his soul, then it begins Four effects
of the spirit.
to burn, to waste and consume in him, those things that will be wasted: after
this sort evil affections, noisome lusts, and other stubble which is in man,
by the spirit of God are consumed 1
and burned. Secondly, it does purge us from gross sins, and daily more and
more 2
does purify us, that we may be a clean and holy vessel and temple for him
to rest and dwell in. Thirdly, it is a shining lamp, ever burning and
continually giving light unto us, in 3
that way which we have to walk. And lastly, it does set us on heat, and
inflameth us with 4
a zeal of Gods glory, with a care of our duty, and with a love of all
mankind: yea, withal it puts life and lust into us, to walk in that good
way which leads unto life, and to do all those good works which may
glorify God, or be commodious unto men.

Thus we see what likelihood there is between the spirit and fire, for which
cause the spirit in the Scripture is compared unto fire: nay it is sometimes
called fire: for John says, That our Savior should baptize with the holy
Ghost, and with fire: that is, with the holy Ghost, which is like unto the
fire. Therefore, as truly and as certainly as we may say that there is fire,
where we see straw and such like things consumed, or gold and silver finely
purged, or great light in dark places, or great heat in bodies that were
nummed before: even so truly we may say, and so certainly we may persuade our
selves, that the spirit of God is in us, when we see our corruption consumed,
our souls purged from the dross of sin, our hearts enlightened and made hot
in walking, and working according to that light.

The second question to be considered is, whether that man which once thoroughly
tasted The second question, whether the spirit may be lost.
of the spirit, may lose it, and have it quenched in him. To this it may be
said, that because the spirit of God comes to, and works in diverse men,
diversely, in diverse measures: therefore we must consider of the diverse working
of the spirit, and then frame our answer accordingly. First then, there is a
lighter and lesser work of the spirit, which may be quenched in them that have
it: and that this inferior or lesser kind of working may be taken 1 The
lighter and lesser work of the spirit. Matthew. 1 3. Luk 8. Mark. 4. Heb. 6.
away, appears plainly by the parable of the seed which our Savior Christ
propounds, for that, besides them that receive the word into good ground, and
bring forth fruits, some an hundredth, some thirty, some sixty fold: he
does also make mention of some others that received the word and yet continued
not. And what, had not these the spirit of God in them? Yes doubtless, for
they received the word: yea, they received it gladly, and that which is more,
they believed that which they had received. Behold then three fruits of Gods
spirit in these men, and yet they continued not: for they believed indeed, but
their faith was temporary, it lasted but for a time, and after a time it
vanished away, and the spirit departed from them: for either the pleasures and
profits of this life did drive out the graces of God, and dry them up, or else
the fiery heat of persecution did quite consume them.

More plain and notable for this purpose is that, in the sixth to the Hebrews,
for there the Hebr. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Apostle says, That some may taste of the holy Ghost, and thereby be made to
taste of the good word of God, to be enlightened to receive heavenly gifts,
yea, and to taste of the power of the life to come. And what then? surely the
Apostle says, That if such fall, it is impossible they should be renewed:
giving us to understand, that even they which have received the holy Ghost,
that have been enlightened, that have received heavenly gifts, and have tasted
of the power of the life to come, even such may fall away, and the spirit may
be quenched in such.

There is a second kind of working of the spirit, which is a more thorough and
effectual 2 Spirit of faith and regeneration, not utterly quenched. That the
regenerate leese not the spirit of sanctification. Ioh. 3. 7. 8. Ioh. 10. 28.
29.
working, which can never be taken away from them that have received it. This
the Apostle Peter describes when he says, That the chosen of God, are
begotten again of the immortal seed of the word. This is not a bare
receiving, or a light tasting of the word: but it is a deep taste of the same,
whereby we are begotten and borne again. The Apostle S. John sets down
another note of it, saying, That they that are thus borne again, cannot sin:
that is, they cannot make an occupation of sin, they cannot fall flat away by
sin: and why? Even because the seed of God abides in them, even that seed,
wherewith they were begotten to a lively hope of life, even that seed does
abide, and will abide unto the end. Who so is begotten again by this seed,
and has this seed abiding in him, the spirit has wrought that in him, which
shall not be taken from him: and therefore our Savior Christ says, The word
that I speak, is spirit and life. And in another place he says, That none
shall take his sheep from him, for the father is mightier than all: and
therefore in another place he says, That it is impossible that the elect
should be seduced. Note.


Thus then we see the question answered: namely, that there is an inferior
working which may be lost; and a more effectual working of the spirit which
can never be taken away from them that have it. And this must not seem strange
to us, neither must we be offended that the Lord should take some, and leave
others: or that he should begin in some, and not bring his work to perfection:
for so he deals with other things in the world. Some corn is sown and never
rises: some springs, and yet shortly withers: Simile.
some grows up to an ear, and yet then is stricken or blasted: and othersome
(at his good pleasure) does come to a timely ripenes. In like manner, some
trees are planted and never Simile.
take root: some take root, but yet not blossom: some blossom, and yet
never bring forth fruit: and othersome through his goodness do bring forth
fruit in good season. If the Lord deal so with the plant and herb of the
field, why may he not deal so with us, the sons of men? If we cannot
conceive the reason of this, we must hold our peace: for all the works of God
are done in righteousness, and all our knowledge is imperfect: therefore we
must herein rather accuse our selves of ignorance, than the Lord of
vnrighousnesse: nay, we our selves do deal in like sort with those things
which be under our hand. In Colleges, Fellows are first chosen to be
Probationers, and if they be then approved, they be made full fellows,
otherwise they are not. If a man being childles, do take some friends child
to make him heir of all his goods: he will keep him upon liking, if his
manners be honest he shall be preferred, yea it may be set over all his house,
and yet afterward for some fault committed, quite cast off. Some other man
takes another child to the same end, and makes him heir indeed: so then we
must think it righteous in the Lord to deal thus with us, seeing we are in
his hand: and we must not be offended, though he call some, and do not
inlighten them: and although he inlighten some, and do not continue them, and
do of his great mercy continue some even unto the end: let us rather see what
use we must make of this doctrine.

First, we must take heed that we never quench any grace or gift that God
bestows Use of the doctrine of quenching the spirit.
1
upon us. Secondly, we must still labor to have greater measure of gifts: for
the wicked 2
may come to have some small gifts, and such as may be quite taken away from
them. Lastly, it does put a plain difference between the godly, and the
godless, between them that bear a show of holiness, and them that are
indeed the holy ones of the Lord: for 3
the one endures but for a time, and the other lasts for ever. Now if we
require a further The notes of the spirit of sanctification.
trial, whereby we may know whether we have received that spirit which lasts
but for a time, or that which will abide for ever with us: then let us mark
these rules, which put a plain difference between them. First, we must mark
that inlightning and insight we 1 First difference is in illumination.
have into the word of God. Certain it is, that both the godly and wicked are
enlightened, but the inlightening of the godly is one, and the insight of the
wicked is another: for that knowledge and insight which the godly have
received, is certain and distinct: and therefore in particular things, they be
able to apply the threatening of Gods judgments to the 2
humbling of themselves, and the promises of God to comfort themselves* Again,
their knowledge is sufficient to direct them both generally, and in every
particular duty. And last of al, it never fails them, but directs them
unto the end: but the knowledge of the 3
wicked is not so; for it is confused, general, and uncertain. And therefore
though they have a general knowledge of the threatenings, and of the promises
of God, yet can they not make particular use of the same. Their knowledge is
insufficie^t, not able to direct them in Knowledge of the godly like the Sun:
and of the wicked like lightening.
their particular actions, and therefore it does leave them in the end.
Therefore as the knowledge of the godly for the cleerenes, the certainty, and
the sufficiency of it, is compared to the Sun: so the knowledge of the
wicked, is compared to the lightning, which does not give any certain light,
it does not continue any time; and when it is gone, men are worse than they
were before. So does it fall out with the wicked: for beside that their
knowledge does soon vanish, there is also in them afterward, greater and more
dangerous darkness than there was before: herein then we do see one plain and
manifest note of difference. Secondly, we come to our affections. Certain it
is, that the wicked do desire Second difference in affections.
the help and the favor of God: but look to the cause, and that will show a
difference between them and the godly. The wicked do only seek help,
because of some extremity which they suffer; they only desire to be in the
favor of God, because they 1
would be freed from grief: and therefore it is common with them to say; Oh
that I were out of this pain! Oh that this my sorrow were taken from me! By
which speeches they show, that so they might be at rest, or live at their ease,
they would little weigh of the help or favor of God. But the godly find such
sweetness in the favor of God, that for the desire thereof, they can be content
to forgo all the pleasures of this life, yea they can be content to suffer
much, and endure the cross patiently, so that at the last they may assuredly
enjoy Gods favor. Not the godly only, but the wicked also, are grieved when
they 2
have sinned: but the wicked do therefore sorrow, because their sin has, or
will bring some punishment upon them: and the godly sorrow, because they have
offended God, and given him occasion to draw his favor from them, therefore
his correction do they bear patiently: but the remembrance of their sin,
that touches them still at the very quick. Then in their joy, and in their
sorrow, may appear a second difference.

The third difference is in love: for though both of them do love God, yet it
is after a diverse manner; the one of sincerity, the other for wages. A poor
child that is taken up, fed, and clothed, will love him that does thus feed
and clothe him: but if he received no more of that man than of another, he
would like him, and love him no better than another: even so it is with the
wicked, if their bellies he filled, their barnes stuffed, and they have their
hearts desire, they love God indeed, but yet only for their belly, and their
barnes. Thus did Saul love God, but it was for his kingdom: thus did
Achitophel love God, but it was because he was advanced to be a Counselor:
and thus did Judas love God, but it was because he was chosen to be an Apostle,
and carried the bag. But what became of their love the histories do
testify: Saul was a little afflicted, and forsook God: Example.
Achitophel somewhat crossed in his devises, hanged himself: and Judas for
gain of money, betrayed Christ. Some experience of this we may see among us;
Courtiers will be professors, and Scholars of ripe wits will be religious, if
that Courtiers may become Counselors, and if Scholars may be preferred to the
chiefest places: but if promotion come, then their profession is forsaken, and
their religion laid aside. And yet that is not all, for either they wax
profane in their life, or heretical in their opinions. Do the children of
God love on this manner? No, the holy Ghost which they have received in
effectual manner, does shed the seed of love in their hearts, and does
work in them a special liking of his goodness, of his righteousness, and of
his holiness: and therefore How the faithful love God.
of sincere affection they love him. As the natural child loves his father
naturally, and though his father bear him, yet bears he it, and still loves
him: so do the children of God deal; They have powered into them (as Saint
Peter says) a godly nature, 2. Pet. 1. 2. 3. 4.
so that they do freely love God their father: and though he afflict them, or
cross them in their desires, yet they love him, and in love perform their
obedience unto him continually: therefore Job says, Though he kill me* yet
will I trust in him: They therefore are said to have received a free spirit,
and to serve God in the liberty of the spirit. And who sees not this to be a
plain and manifest difference between them? therefore we may well take it as
a third mark or rule, whereby to prove and try our selves.

The fourth and last rule is, in considering the work and effect which Gods
mercy received, The fourth rule.
does work in us: for, herein do the wicked show their wickedness two
ways, First, on the right hand, the mercies of God do work in them a
wonderful contentation: The mercies of God, how they work in the wicked.
but not such as causes them to return the glory unto God, nay rather it is
such, as causes them to take all glory to themselves: for the graces of God
do puff them up, and make them proud, and conceited in themselves. Here of
there arises a great security, which brings first neglect, and afterward
contempt of all good means, whereby they should grow up in goodness. On the
left hand others offend, being never pleased nor contented with that they have:
nay indeed forgetting and lightly esteeming that they have, and still desiring
new. These men besides that they be unthankful, they do also murmr Notes of
sanctification.
and grudge against God, and are never pleased with him Between these two, do
the children of God hold a middle and even course: and therefore we shall see
these things in them. First, a sight and an acknowledging of the wants which
do move them, as S. Peter 1
says, Like newborn babes, to desire the sweet and sincere milk of the
word, that thereby the graces they have may be increased, and their other wants
may be supplied* and so far are they from being puffed up with pride, that
they rejoice when their pride may be pulled Note.
down, or their haughtiness abated, either by some sharp rebuke, or by some
fearful threatening, or by some moderate correction from the Lord. For they
know, that if it were needful for S. Paul to be buffeted, and that by the
minister of Satan, to the intent that his pride might be beaten down: then it
is much more needful for them, after sundry ways to be humbled. Besides, they
do not only desire the word, but they also wait upon the Lord, Simile.
until it please him to work further in them thereby: and this waiting is as
earnest as is theirs, who having watched all the night, do wait and look for
the dawning of the day.

Secondly, as they see their wants, so also they see that grace they have
received, and are for that time well appayed, and contented therewith: and
therefore as their wants do humble them, so the graces of God received do
comfort them: and as their wants do call upon them, and cause them to seek
more, so that they have, does provoke them to be thankful for that they have
received. See then a quite contrary course of the wicked, and those that of
sincerity do worship God: see I say, how contrarily the graces and gifts of
God do work in them. And therefore from the consideration hereof, we may
well draw a fourth rule whereby to make trial and examination of our selves.

So to conclude this point in a word, when a man by the spirit of God has been
enlightened 1
unto a certain and sufficient knowledge of Gods will: when he finds his
affection, 2
chiefly and above all other things set upon God: when he finds a pure and
sincere 3
love of God in his heart, not for wages, but for the work of grace, which
after an unspeakable manner does move him thereunto: and when he does
thankfully acknowledge 4
mercies received, as he does carefully attend and wait upon the Lord: til he
bestow some greater measure of graces upon him; then may he be vndoubedly
persuaded, that he has found the spirit working in him in a more effectual
manner, and that therefore it shall never be taken from him. But what then? may
such men cast off all care? No, for What the godly are to fear.
unto them does S. Paul give this charge, That they do not quench the spirit.
And notwithout cause does he give them this charge: for though the spirit it
self can never be taken utterly from them, yet doubtless if they wax proud,
if they grow secure, if they fall into sin, then the graces and gifts of the
spirit may decay and dye in them, their clear understanding, their feeling,
their affection and all may be gone; so that in their own judgment and in the
judgment of others, it may seem that they have quite quenched, and put out
the spirit. Neither must this seem so strange; for if the image of God, which
was more perfectly placed in Adam, than it is now in us: If I say, this image
might quite be lost and blotted out, as we see it was; then no marvel if the
graces of the spirit of God be for a time, as it were dead and drowned in us.
And that we may be the less offended herewith, the Scriptures do offer unto
us such examples of men, as having been once effectually called and truly borne
again, have yet afterward through some sins, lost the graces of the spirit:
such were the Galathians, for they were truly called, and effectually
regenerate by the spirit and Gospel of God, as may appear by this, that for
the words sake they reverenced the Apostle as the Angel of God; yet they were
snared with false doctrine, and fell very dangerously to the choking and
quenching of the graces of Gods spirit in them. The spirit it self was not
taken from them, nay, Christ did still continue in their hearts: but yet for
want of godly graces, he was as it were without fashion or form: so that the
Apostle did as it were travel again, until Christ was fashioned anew in
them. David also upon the committing of his sin, was brought into the like
^ase: therefore in the 51. Psalm he prays, That God will create in him a new
spirit. What? was the spirit quite gone? No, for by and by in the same Psalm
he prays, That the Lord would not take away his holy David's feeling lost.
spirit from him. How can these two stand together, first to pray, that a new
spirit may be created in him; and then, that the spirit of God may not be
taken from him? Surely the spirit it self was still in him, and therefore he
prays, that it may not be taken from him: but the graces, and gracious
working of the spirit they were dead and gone; and therefore he prays that
they may be renewed in him. By this then we see that the very chief graces of
the spirit may be quenched, even in the most godly, when they fall into sin.
But yet that no liberty may be taken hereby, let us a little consider what
grief and punishment Note.
they procure to themselves, that do by any means lose the graces of the
spirit. First of all we must know, that though the spirit of God cannot be
gotten by our labor, yet it costeth us much labor, and we must undergo much
travel, and suffer much trouble, before the spirit of God do take possession
of us: now when the graces of the spirit are lost, all this our labor seems
to be lost, and what grief is it to see the whole labor and travel of a man
to vanish and come to nothing? Secondly, when a man receives the spirit Our
joy may be lost.
of God, and by the same spirit is assured that his sin is forgiven him, and
that he is in the favor of God; there does arise in his heart a great joy in
the holy Ghost; a joy I say, that is unspeakable and glorious: and this joy is
lost and gone, when the graces of Gods spirit are gone, with how great grief
and woe, they know, that in any measure have tasted of it. Again, when the
graces of the spirit are choked in men, then they have no heart to do good,
they have no affection to goodness, but all is gone; and they are made for the
time, as it were an unprofitable burden of the earth. What grief can be
greater than this? what sorrow can sink more deep, than that a good man
should be clean withholden from doing good Moreover it is sure, that when the
gifts of the spirit are in this sort gone, then he that was most righteous
before, may soon fall into great sins, yea and which is more, they shall
also suffer the reproach of their sins. For this is a part of the covenant
that God made with his. That though he will not take his mercies utterly from
them, yet he will visit their sins with the rod, and their iniquities
with scourges: and what grief this is, the Example.
example of Gods children may show us. What grief was it to Noah to become a
laughing stock to his own son? What heartbreaking to David, by his own
son to be thrust from his kingdom? So grievous were those punishments laid
upon them, that if without any respect of hell or heaven, we could consider of
them, we had rather want all the pleasures of sin, which they enjoyed, then
we could bear the reproach and feel the pain which they suffered. Last of
all, when the graces of the spirit of God are once decayed, they can never be
repaired and recovered, but with much sorrow and great danger: for it Their
state after arelapse.
cannot but breed much sorrow of heart, to remember his former sins, to
examine and see the greatness of them, to apply Gods judgments to them, and to
provoke himself to sorrow for them. This is as it were to go through the
pikes, and through a purgatory in this present life; and yet this must be
done, before we can recover Gods graces again. Again, it is a very dangerous
thing: for in such cases men are brought as it were with Jonas, into the
bottom of the sea: and as David says, into the deep waters, so that all the
surges and waves do pass and flow over him. Now we know what danger it is for
a man to be thrust over head and ears into the deep waters: and therefore
they that are in such a case, are in great danger. Wherefore all these things
considered, the loss of all our labor, the loss of all true joy, the
unfitness to do good, the readiness to sin; the grief and danger that
insueth thereof, will, or at the least wise may cause us to beware how we^
quench the spirit. And this is the use of the doctrine, in humbling of us:
which also does furthermore serve to comfort us, knowing that we may suffer a
great decay of Gods graces; yet by the rod, or by the word of God, or by both,
they shall be renewed in us again. And thus much of this commandment that
the Apostle gives here, that we should not quench the spirit.

OF MVRMVRING THE SECOND SERMON.
Exodus 16. 2. And all the congregation of Israel murmured against Moses and
Aaron.
MANY men nowadayes hearing the often murmurings of the children of Israel, We
be as ready to murmur as the Israelites.
do even spit at them, and account them as the worst people under the Sun,
which would so often and so obstinately rebel against the Lord. But these men
do little consider either the temptations, wherewith the Israelites were
provoked to murmur, or the corruption of their own hearts, which will as
bitterly murmur upon less occasion. For albeit they were an obstinate and
stiff necked people, as Moses witnesses of them, ever since they came out of
Egypt until now: yet here no doubt they were vehemently tempted, when they
from the plenty of all things, which in Egypt they enjoyed, were brought into
a rough and desert wilderness, being six hundred thousand men, besides women
and children, and great store of cattle, having neither meat nor drink,
wherewith they might be nourished. Wherefore let us cease to wonder at this
people, and let us in them see our own corruption, and we shall find it to be
as great as ever theirs was. For do not many men, I pray you, even among us,
beholding the riches of others, or the plenty of things which the Lord
bestows upon his Magistrates, or ministers, for the faithful discharge of
their duties, do they not, I say, murmur against Gods servants set over them?
Murmuring
And are they not more grieved for the want of such things, than thankful for
that the Lord has freed them from such troubles, which others have, or given
them sufficient to live upon? True it is, notwithstanding the greatness of this
peoples temptation, yet their sin was wicked in them, and great and heinous
in the sight of God, because that whereas they had often times manifold ways*
and after a wonderful manner felt and tasted of the goodness of the Lord, in
so much that the very vnthankfullest of them all, had been driven to confess
it: (for wonderful was their deliverance out of Egypt, so miraculous was their
preservation at the red sea, and infinite mercies more above hope and
expectation bestowed upon them) yet now forgetting all his former benefits,
would so gradge and murmur for the want of meat, that rather than they would
continue still, they would wish again to return to bondage. And indeed such
is the nature of murmuring, that it will Nature of murmuring.
cause a man not only to forget Gods benefits, but to forget that he is a man.
It prevailed so much with this people, that they wished themselves again in
Egypt, although they knew that there they were most miserably afflicted: and
that the Lord in carrying them thither at the first, did in justice punish them
for their sin. And this wish of theirs is as much as if they should have
said, would the Lord had at once cut us off and destroyed us, rather than left
us in this case. Thus they were contented to do, so that they might have their
bellies full, and rather than they would depart from their fleshpots and other
pleasures, which in Egypt they inioyed: Many are like minded to these people
nowadaies: for we see diverse upon their deathbeds very senseles and secure,
who can be contented with open Death.
mouth to record the goodness of God toward him in things concerning this
present life: but in the mean time, being without hope, sense or feeling of
the sweet joys to come, do die thus by their fleshpots. Othersome, if they
be brought to any misery, as poverty, sickness or such like, do bear it so
impatiently, that in their hearts, and oftentimes Impatience.
in open speeches they wish they never had been borne: showing thereby that
their flesh-pors do more like them, and their health does better please them,
than the goodness and loving countenance of the Lord. None of all these do ever
consider what they have received of the Lord, but their eyes are still upon
their wants; and the want of one thing that they do desire, though it be but
small, is more disquietnesse unto them, and makes them to murmr, more than
the enjoying of many benefits which they have, can Note.
quiet their hearts, in the trust of Gods providence, or make them thankful.
Now if any of us shall be brought to wish our death by the grief of any
affliction, let us shake it off, and put it far from us, the desire is evil:
for it is better (as Solomon says) to be a living dog, than a dead lion. For
be we never so miserable whilst we live, there is a time left for
repentance, but after death there is none: therefore in thy life time labor to
feel Gods mercy Favor of God how precious.
in Jesus Christ, and then no misery shall ever hurt thee, till thou be
gathered into his kingdom.

This shall thou learn to do if thou can receive the favor of God for it
self, though it come alone, yea though trouble do come therewith, knowing and
persuading thine own heart, that having it thou have all things; and if thou
want it, yet in greatest abundance thou have nothing. Again, if thou have it,
no manner of misery can make thee miserable: and if thou have it not, in
greatest felicity thou art most miserable. But the Israelites deat hereafter a
clean contrary manner: for the want of bread here in the wilderness, being
put for their bodies, did make them to despise their great and wonderful
deliverance out of Egypt, which was unto them a sign of their spiritual
deliu^rance. And this is the nature of all natural and worldly men, so basely
to estimate Gods graces, that they had rather forgo many richer spiritual
benefits and blessings, then one worldly and corporal commodity: for the want
of riches does vex and trouble them, more then the want of spiritual and
heavenly graces: and the having of riches does more rejoice Riches no argument
of Gods favor.
their hearts, than the burden of sin, which procures Gods wrath, does
work their grief. Such men know not that riches are no sure signs of Gods
favor, though he in the abundance of his mercy does let his Sun shine upon
the wicked and upon the good: so that the having of riches is no argument that
he loves us; nor the want o^ them is any argument of his displeasure toward
us. Who so therefore seeks God in these outward things only, and binds his
favor unto them, does neither with them, no^ without them, duly esteem of
the favor of God, but sets light thereby: which although in plain words he
speaks not, (for the children of Israel here did not flatly speak against
the Lord, but against his Ministers Moses and Aaron) yet whilst he is
careless of the word, prayer, and Sacraments, and despises and grudgeth
against Gods Ministers and servants, he manifestly declares what price it
bears in his heart. It stands every man in hand then, in his own^ hear^ to
feel his sin, and to be sorrowful for it; to know it is in him, and then to
leave it: least the god of this world whom he serves, do for a while give him
his desire, that in the world to come he may have him for his portion: and to
such as acknowledge this murmuring to be a sin, and be grieved for it, there
follows remedies to help out of it.

For as much as impatience and murmuring proceeds from infidelity, the
remedy Remedies against murmuring.
therefore must be fetched, first from faith in Gods mercies, and in the
benefits which Christ has by his death purchased unto us, and in the hope of
the Resurrection to everlasting life, and in Gods fatherly providence: which
things if we do believe, we must also believe that God in this life will
sufficiently minister unto all our wants: and unless we do believe Faith in
our Redemption, and Faith in Gods providence, go together.
them, we do not, neither can we believe with assurance that the Lord will
preserve us. But if we doubt whether the Lord will help us in earthly things,
we must needs much more doubt of his favor in spiritual benefits First
therefore the great and rich mercy of the Lord, and his favorable dealing
with us, being duly considered, shall be very profitable to work in us
patience: for if we see how the Lord forbeareth us, and rewards us, not
according to our sins: ^ay, if we see that when for the ripenes of our sins
he might Believe Gods providence and patience toward thee Romans 2. 3. 4.
confound us, yet ^e does not so much as punish us; and when he might justly
punish us, yet he deals mercifully with us, and bestows his mercies upon
us. If (I say) we can acknowledge this to be his ^rdinarie dealing, that by his
long suffering he does lead us to repentance, and by his manifold mercies he
does as it were weane us from our sins, this would much bridle our murmuring,
and instruct us to patience. And yet we see a further thing then this in this
people of Israel: for the Lord does not only bear with their sins, and
bestow many mercies upon them; but to help them, and to do them good, he does
use extraordinary means; as to bring down bread from heaven, to make water
gush out of the Rock: where he shows, that for the safety of his people,
even when all means do fail, and when to man's judgment there is no way to
find out help or deliverance; yet there will the Lord magnify his mercy
toward his servants, and will work wonders for their preservation. He does
not thus deal with the Israelites only, but he makes this his ordinary
dealing with his servants from time to time. As Moses applies this place, when
he says, The Lord has fed thee with this M^nna forty years* that thou may
know Deuteronomy. 8.
that man lives not by bread ^^ely: and CHRIST in our person, being tempted to
use unlawful means, over came the devil with this answer, Man lives not by
bread only. Teaching us, and leaving us an example to have the some answer in
readiness, in the like temptations: knowing and assu^ing our hearts, that the
Lord will by one means or other, do good unto his children, and dispose of
all things that shall befall them for the best: only let them take heed of
this, that they rest in his word, and go no further, but by faith wait on him
therein, and he will give that shall be sufficient for them, if not in earthly
benefits, yet in spiritual graces.

The second help which we must use to refrain our murmuring, is the lively
faith of The second help against murmuring, faith of our redemption. Romans 8.
our redemption wrought by Christ, which consists in the free forgiveness of
our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, and in the
sanctification which is by his holy spirit. First then, if we can steadfastly
believe, that God for Christ's sake has freely forgiven us all our sins, yea
that he has given us his only beloved son, that we might be beloved in
him, we shall without any great ado believe that the Lord will not suffer us
to want any thing, but with him will give us all things: for seeing sin,
which is the cause of all misery, is taken away from us, that so we might be
with Christ inheritors of the heavens, we may be sure that in the mean time no
misery shall hurt us.

Thus Abraham having received a promise for seed of his son Isaac, doubting
nothing but that the Lord would provide means to bring the same to pass, in
the assurance hereof sent his servants to his own people to provide a wife for
his son. And these children Genesis 24.
of Israel no doubt, if they had believed that the Lord had delivered them out
of Egypt, that he might bring them to the promised land, they would never have
doubted of his merciful preservation, neither here in the wilderness, nor
elsewhere, till they had come to the land of promise. And again, if we could
firmly believe that God the Father for Christ's sake does not only not impute
our sins unto us, but that he does also accept us in the righteousness of
his Son, imputing the same unto us, how should we doubt of meat or raiment,
or any such other thing? For by this means he is made our merciful and loving
father, which knows perfectly what things we stand in need of: and for his
power is able even in greatest extremities to help us, and for his love and
good will toward us will help us: and thus does he abide for ever, and is
never changed. For though a mother should forget her children, yet will the
Lord never forsake those that love him, and in faith call upon him. To this
free forgiveness of sins, and the imputation of Christ's 3 Believe thy
sanctification.
righteousness unto us, there must be added the sanctification of the spirit,
as the second part of our redemption: which i^ we be once thoroughly persuaded
of it, it shall be a special help unto us against all impatience and murmuring
against the Lord: for it is a greater thing to turn a sinner, than to work
wonders in nature. And therefore if in our hearts The conversion of a sinner how
great a thing it is.
we can believe that God has made us of sinful and wicked men, just and
righteous; of vile wretches, the vessels of righteousness; of the mansions of
the devil, fit temples of his holy spirit; if we do believe that he can make
of covetous men, liberal men; of whoremongers, chaste persons; of oppressors,
upright dealing men: yea, if we can believe that the Lord both is able, and
willing also to deliver us from any sin that is within us, be it never so
strong either by nature or by evil custom: and last of all, if we can believe
that Esaias. 11. The third help, faith of the resurrection: See the treatise of
the resurrection in the second part.
he is able to make the wolf and the lamb to lie together, the leopard and
the kid; shall we ever doubt that he will once fail us, or suffer us to want
the thing that is meet for us, seem it never so impossible to be attained
unto?

Thirdly, if we believe that with Christ we shall be raised up at the last day,
we shall as steadfastly believe that he will preserve us: for it is a greater
matter to raise up our bodies being dead and consumed to dust, than to preserve
them whilst they are alive: if he can do the greater, he can do also the
less. Moreover, if we be persuaded that our heavenly father has prepared a
kingdom for us in the heavens, we must needs believe that in this life he will
not leave us nor forsake us, but will mercifully provide for our necessities:
for The fourth, believe eternal life is thine.
if he will give us the greater benefits, he will also give us the less, if he
in wisdom see it fit for his glory, and profitable for us.

The fifth thing we must stay our selves upon, when murmuring does assail and
tempt us, is faith in Gods providence. This providence is general or
particular, in both which we The fifth stay against murmuring.
must be thoroughly grounded, if we will withstand all occasions of murmuring,
and not break out, in temptations, into impatience. The general providence of
God must be considered, first in creation of all things: secondly, in
preserving them. Do we then believe Providence.
^
that the Lord made all things of nothing, and shall we not believe that he
will preserve them* Now seeing they are made, do we believe that God made all
men, and shall we then stand in fear of men* When God created light, before
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars; and when he made grass to grow upon
the earth, before th^re was either rain or dew to water them, he did thereby
teach us: first, that we should not put too much trust in them whilst we have
them: and again, that rather then we should suffer hurt by the want of light,
grass, or other such things, the Lord both could and would provide for us
without them. Yet now if we should not have the Sun, we would think* that
light were taken from us; and if we wanted rain, we would soon think we
should neither have grass nor corn, nor any fruit of the earth: but the Lord
has ordained these means to serve his providence, not for himself, for
without them he can as easily help us, but for our weakness, which otherwise
could not easily be assured of his goodness. Secondly, 2
we must believe that God preserves all, as well as he created them: yea the
small sparrow does not fall upon the earth, without his providence, and he has
a great care over the very beasts of the field: does the Lord provide for
these, and will he not also provide for man? Has he care of beasts? yea
indeed he has, because they were made for man: and shall he not much rather
have care over man, for whom things were made? Men say they do believe all
this: but whilst there is such doubting of Gods providence, and such repining
against God, they do plainly show, they do not believe this first article of
their faith, neither in creation, nor in the universal government and
preservation of all things.

Hereunto we must join the particular providence of God, which if we can be
once 3 Particular providence.
thoroughly persuaded of, then shall we easily overcome the grief of all our
wants. Has the Lord made any thing in vain? has he not made all things for
his glory? Then if we believe that he has made our bodies, shall we not
also believe that he will provide for them, seeing the creation thereof is more
wonderful, than the preservation is? as appears, Psalm. 29. 139. Has he
care over the wicked to do them good, and will he not much more rejoice over
his children to do them good? If the Lord loved us when we were his Note.
enemies, will he not provide for us being redeemed by the blood of his son?
Did he good unto us when we sought him not, and will he not much more when we
seek him by prayer in the blood of his Son, as he has commanded? If he has
done us good when he might have punished us for our sins, will he not be much
more favorable unto us now, seeing he has by his holy spirit sanctified us? O
that men had hearts to believe this, they would then give glory unto God in
their distresses, putting their trust in him, and looking for help at his
hands in his convenient time. This providence of God must be confirmed Examples
of Gods providence.
unto us by the examples of Gods children in all ages, whose examples are set
down in the Scriptures, that we by them might learn patience. If the fathers
before the flood eating nothing but herbs, yet lived some 700. years, some
800. some 900. years, and some more; shall we not learn thereby, that man
lives not by these means? And again, See the treatise of the resurrection in
the 2. part.
if he nourished them 900. years, and that with hea^^es, we may be sure he
will feed us 90. years with flesh and fish, and other greater means. When he
fed the Israelites forty years with Manna from heaven, which after such a
sort was never seen before, whereof if they reserved any without the Lords
commandment, if straightway putrified and was corrupted: but when by the
commandment of God it was kept before the testimony, it was not corrupted.
The Lord left us a lesson that we must learn thereby, namely, that it is not
the means, but the blessing of God upon the means, that nourishes us: and
therefore if we have them, we must not put our trust in them: and if we want
them, we must not distrust in God. Did Moses and Eliah live forty days
without meat? and did the Israelites walkein the wilderness forty years in
the same apparel which waxed not old; whereas othersome having meat in
abundance, yet are hunger-starued, and being laden with clothes, yet quake for
cold: shall we not yet learn that the blessings of God are all in all, and
that the other are but means provided for our weakness? David proved by
experience, that the righteous seed of the righteous parents, were never
forsaken, nor begged Psalm. 37. A good observation.
their bread. If we no doubt could come to such measure of obedience as they
did then, and if we could be righteous as in his time men were, the Lord would
provide for us as well as he did for them, and we should have as good
experience hereof as ever had David. To this 1 Properties of a patient mind.
Phil 4. 11. Ierem. 45. 4. Genesis 28.
providence of God, we must bring a patient mind, which first must be
contented with whatsoever the Lord sends, and always acknowledge godliness to
be great riches. For we ought not to seek great matters, nor suffer our
desires to be carried after high things: for this did the Lord by his Prophet
Jeremy rebuke in Baruck* And CHRIST gives us another rule, when he teaches
us to pray for daily bread; which when we have, then must we be contented. This
mind was in our father Jacob, when he prayed for nothing else but meat and
clothing. And this does Paul generally command to be in all, saying, When we
have meat and clothing let us be contented. We must first therefore seek the
kingdom of God, 1. Tim. 6.
and the righteousness thereof: we must first labor for the forgiveness of our
sins in Christ, that so we may be in the favor of GOD* and enjoy the light
of his loving countenance; Psalm. 4.
which when we have, and feel, let us esteem it above all earthly treasure,
as David does: let us receive it though it come alone, yea, though it bring
troubles with it, and then for outward The feeling of forgiveness of sins,
brings co^tentation with it.
things, we shall possess our souls in patience. If the Lord give plenty of
them, we shall take it as an overplus of his favor: but if he give the less,
yet shall we be contented, because we bind not his favor to these outward
things: but if we cannot rest in the favor of God, though we want these
outward things, it is certain we never truly esteemed the favor of God,
neither did we ever feel the forgiveness of our sins, if we could not when
we felt it be therewith contented, and ready to forgo all other things.

The second property of a patient mind is, simply to give up it self unto
God, and The second property of patience.
commit itself into his hand, waiting at all times for help from him, who
only is the a^thor of all goodness, yet neither prescribing the means, nor
appoynting the time, nor in any case indenting with him: for the Lord will have
the disposition of his mercies free unto himself, to give and to bestow, when
and where, and how it pleases him, and as it may most make for his glory. We
must then evermore and with our whole hearts, desire and crave of the Lord,
that his blessed Name may be glorified, that his Kingdom may be enlarged, and
his holy will performed: but the means to bring these things to pass, we must
wholly leave unto him, who knows what is best: and in other things which
concern our outward estate, we ought always to rest in his good pleasure.
This, i^ we can once do, so mercifully does he use to deal with us, that
when we least desire them we shall have them: and when we freely give them up
to him, he will soonest give them us again. Solomon desired wisdom of the
Lord, but for outward things, his prayer was that he might have a mean
estate; then the Lord gave him wisdom, which his heart so much desired, Prou*
10.
and riches also which he did not once desire Oh happy man* if in his heart he
had desired to walk before the Lord in fear! Abraham gave unto the Lord
Isaac his son, which when the Lord did behold, he quickly gave him his son
again: even thus also must we think it stands now with us. The readiest way
to obtain life, is to be heartily well contented either to live or to die, and
to commit our selves unto the Lord, knowing that nothing ever perished that
was committed to his keeping: so is it also in all other outward things, the
ready way to obtain them, is to give them up wholly into his hands. But yet
we must not commit these things to the Lord with this condition, that he
should give them us again, for that were to mock the Lord: but without all
care to have them, we To receive earthly blessings from the Lord* we must be
void of distracting cares, Matthew. 6. and resign all our right into his hands
must give them to him, being (in respect of his glory, and because his good
pleasure is so) heartily well content to forgo them, and then if they be good
for us, we shall receive them again; if not, we shall receive some spiritual
grace, which better shall supply the want of them. Yea, the infinite wisdom
and mercy of God does wonderfully appear herein: for sometimes he keeps us
long without these things, because that if we had them, he sees we would
abuse them, and would prefer them before spiritual blessings. And sometime
the Lord seeing our small regard and account of spiritual things, will by the
want of these outward things, bring us to make greater account of them, that
when we can well want the one, and highly esteem the other, we may have both
together* Let us therefore reverence this great goodness and wisdom of the
LORD, and be content with the use of life which he in mercy grants us,
knowing that it is better to be a living dog then a dead Lion. For whilst we
live we have time to repent, and time to glorify God: but after death there is
no time left for repentance. Whosoever then does not account the use of life a
singular benefit, though he do even want things necessary for the same, he is
unworthy of life, or of any other the blessings of God therein. Conclusion.


The end of all then is this, that patience is wrought in us, and strengthened
by the assurance of Gods mercies, by faith in Christ, by hope of everlasting
life, and by trust in Gods providence: and therefore the carking care of these
things is left to the Gentiles, which are ignorant of the forgiveness of sins,
of Gods providence, and of everlasting life: so that if we be like them in
these greedy desires, it argues that either we know not these things, or if
in judgment we do conceive them, yet in heart we do not believe them. By
meditation therefore of these things we must learn patience, whereby we may
overcome our murmuring and grudging nature, whenever our flesh by any
occasion is provoked thereunto.

FINIS.
OF ZEAL. THE THIRD SERMON.
Revel. 3. 19. Be zealous therefore and amend.
AS Zeal can never be sufficiently commended, so much less may it effectually
be persuaded to many: howbeit, that we may shadow out some Anatomy thereof,
let us first see how God commends it, then how he rewards it, that so we
may the more freely with greater authority speak of the thing it self. What
is the use of the first four Commandments, but that we should with zeal
worship the Lord? The first precept charge all men charwith 1
the matter of God his worship, showing what it is. The second 2
geth us with the manner, prescribing how we must use it. The third imposes
on us 3
the right end of his worship, and teaches why we must do it. The fourth
commandment 4
points the time, and instructs us when we must solemnly profess and
exercise this worship of God. Concerning the large promise offered to pure
zeal, what is greater than that the Lord should bind himself to advance them
into the chair of honor before all the world, who will honor him? Again,
that he will defame 1. Sam. 2. 30*
them most surely with some notable mark of infamy that dishonor him: yea,
and he will vomit them up as a loathsome burden, to testify his utter
misliking of them. First now let us consider how true zeal begins in our
selves, and takes his proceedings Rules of true zeal.
to others. For never can that man be zealous to others, which never knew to be
zealous to himself. And as zealous men in their ascendent begin at themselves,
and go to others; so in their retrograde they come from others, and end in
themselves. If we consider the zeal of Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Daniel,
Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, we shall never see expressly in the word, that at any
time they were more zealous to others than to themselves. We see on the
contrary, how it has been a fearful note of hypocrites, and such as have
fallen from the living God, that they have waded very deeply into other men's
possessions, and gored very bloodily into the consciences of others, who never
once purged their own unclean sinkes at home, no^ drew one drop of blood out
of their Hypocritical z^ale.
own hearts. How zealous (as wosull and late experience still cries in our
ears) were some great reformers of the Church, who were ready to burst their
bowels with crying* Brownisme.
against disorders abroad, and yet never reformed their own consciences at
home, no^ found themselves any whit grieved for their own sins? These men
being so zealous to others, but only through some secret love of the world,
when they had that they sought for, made known their hollow and rotten zeal,
in that without any grief of conscience, they could rush into a profound
worldliness, and without all godly sorrow, could after they had satisfied
their greedy and fieshly zeal, not only more hardly ^eare up their own
consciences, but also be so changed that they sow up their lips, and ^pare
their words from speaking in the like manner again to others, and so are
neither zealous to themselves nor others. True zeal casts the first stone at
our selves, and plucketh the Matthew. 7.
beam out of our own eyes, that we may the better draw the more out of
another eye. And this is the condemnation of the world, that every man can
pr^e, and make a priu^e search into the wants of others but they account the
same wants no wants in themselves. The father says, thus the child does: so
the child says, in this duty does his father fail: the husband knows what
the wife should do; the wife sees the duties of her husband: we think in
this particular another should behave himself; but yet the father repents
not of the sins which he did being a child, the child repents not of his
sins being a father, we call not in our consciences for those things which we
dare challenge and one out for in others.

Here offers it self the second property of zeal, that it is sincere, and
in the truth, it urges our selves more than others, it makes us the most
severe censurers of our own souls it is strictest to our ^elues, and offers
liberty to others: and this simplicity appears either in inward corruption,
or in the liberrie of outward things: the first whereof does so humble us in
the wants present, and in those cor^uptions, which hang behind us, that we are
zealous of those secret ^uils which are not only unespied of others, but even
unknown also to our selves. Although the whole world cannot charge us with
want of duty, yet considering our privy corruptions, we daily declaime
against our selves, and say with the Apostle, though our consciences do not Or
though we know nothing by our selves.
oppress us, yet herein we are not justified. Yea such ought to be ou^
familiarity and acquaintance with secret infirmities in ourselves, so grievous
ought they to be in our eyes, in our ears, to our faces, that where we shall
see, hear, and behold the sins of others, they may be more tolerable, and
so learn by the sense of our own sores, to deal more mildly and m^ekely with
the 1 Cor. 4. 4. How to censure other men.
sores of others. Neither do I mean, that we should make other men's sins no
sins, and that we should have no kind of censure unto others, but that
there should be that holy mixture in us of the zeal of Gods glory, and sight
of human corruption, that for the one we may not spare to rebuke any sin;
and for the other we may moderate our rebukes with mildnes and meeknes Abraham
was so strict to himself, that he would not take of the King of Sodom so much
as a thread or a latchet, and yet he would not deny Aner, Echol and Mamre their
liberty. Job would not permit to himself, nor deny to his children their
liberty of feasting: so that it is rather a Pharisaicall pride than a
Christian zeal, to be too tetricall in urging of others so far, that
whosoever in every point is not pure and precise as we, we cast them off as
dogs and profane persons, and such as are unworthy of any account or
countenance.

This then must be our pedagogie in this point, that as for the glory of God
which is dear unto us, we are not to leave the least sin unespied, or the
least means unattempted to advance the glory of God. So for the grieuousnes of
sin, for the easines to fall into sin, for the vileness of corruption which we
have observed in our selves, for the knowledge of the wrath of God for sin in
us, we are loath, for love, to see our brother either so vilely infected, and so
perillously endangered, to go without our loving admonition, both Admonition.
to draw him out of his sin, and to rescue him from the wrath of God due to
his sin.

Further, this attribute of true zeal makes us as willing to be admonished,
as careful 2. Property.
to admonish: and that not only of our superiors, which is an easy thing,
because it is a thing whereto of necessity we must yield; but also of our
inferiors, whom we may seem to contemn. For all men will grant that a child
ought willingly to be admonished of his father, or a servant ought obediently
to be reprehe^ded of his master: but few will in practice give this, that a
father should listen to the advertisement of his son, or that the master
should receive an admonition of his servant. Howbeit, Job says, he True zeal
and humility go together, Job 31.
durst not contemn the judgment of his feruant or of his maid when they did
contend with him, because in a duty of piety he looks to them not as
servants, but as brethren; he looked not to the speaker only, which in respect
of his calling was his inferior, but unto the things spoken in the ordinance
of God, unto whom Job himself was an inferior, and before whom Job knew there
was no respect of persons. Howbeit, to correct the preposterous boldness of
some, we rather add this much, that inferiors must rather advise How
inferiors admonish superiors.
than admonish; advertise rather than reprehend their superiors, that so still
they may offer their pure zeal of the glory of God in unfeigned humility,
least through their corrupt zeal they do not only not profit their
superiors, but most justly exasperate them against them. For as Magistrates,
Ministers and masters by God his ordinance, are to admonish, rebuke and
reprehend: so subjects, inferiors and servants, by the same rule are to
advise, obey and advertise Thus zeal goes from respect of the person to the
truth of the cause.

Another property of zeal is to be constant, not to be hot by fits, cold in
the end, and 3. Property.
only so long as the world favors, it must not be earnest in the beginning
and secure in the ending, but keep a continual tenor and temperature. Jobs
wife seemed to go far so long as she could wash her paths with butter. Saul
and Pharaoh had some good motions by fits, and upon some occasion could play
fast and loose, being of a strange complexion, that they could be hot and cold
in a moment. This property of zeal teaches us To rejoice in the public
prosperity of the Church, when private crosses make us sad.
how to be affected, in the prosperity and afflictions of the Church, namely,
that the public prosperity of Sion should comfort us, and cause us to rejoice
when our private crosses might make us sad. As Paul being imprisoned was not so
grieved at his own bonds, as he rejoiced at the liberty of the Gospel of
Christ. Again, that the affliction of the Saints should move us to a godly
grief, even when in respect of our selves we might greatly rejoice. As Daniel
could not find comfort in his private prosperity, though he were in great
authority, and exempted from the common calamity, because he knew the Church
of God to be in misery.

But to go forward, pure zeal is not blinded with natural affection, but it
discerns 4. Property.
and condemns sin, though it be never so nearly resident in our kindred.
Many offend against this rule, who never will rebuke sin in their friends, even
until God revenge True zeal not blind in reproving sin in ^indred.
it from heaven, where they are far from true friendship: for whereas they
might by admonishing them of their faults in time, prevent the judgments of
God, they do through a false love and manifest hatred pull the judgments of
God upon them, whom they love most dearly. He loves most naturally, that has
learned to love spiritually; and he loves most sincerely that cannot abide
sin in the party loved, without some wholesome admonition. But do not many
now adays zealously mislike sin in strangers, who will not mislike the
selfsame sin if it come to kindred, if it be in our wife, in our children, o^
in our parents, as though the diversity of subjects could make the selfsame
thing sin in some, and not in other some. This blind zeal God has
punished, and does punish in his children. Isaac did carnally love his son
Esau, for meat and for a piece of venison. David was too much affected to
Absalom for his beauty, and to Adoniah for his comely stature, so as his zeal
was hindered in discerning sin aright in them. Now Jacob was not so dear to
Isaac, and Solomon was more hardly set to school and to take pains. But
behold God loving Jacob, and refusing Esau, howsoever Isaac loved Esau better
than Jacob* made Easu most troublesome, and Jacob more comfortable unto him.
Absalom and Adoniah brought up like cooknies, became corosiues to David's heart,
Solomon more restrained of God, le^le set by of David, was his joy, his crown,
his successor in his kingdom. This ^^sease is so hereditarie to many parents,
loving their children in the flesh rather than P^r^es ^olly.
the spirit, that the holy Ghost is fame to call upon them more vehem^^tly, to
teach, to instruct, and to correct, as knowing how easily nature would cool
zeal in this kind of duty. Indeed many will set by their wives, children and
kinsfolk, if they be thriftie, like to become good husbands, witty and
politic: or if they be such as for their gifts can bring* some revenue to
their stock, or afford some profit unto the^, how deep sinners soever they
be against God, that makes no matter, it little grieueth them: whereby they
bewray their great corruption, that they neither are zealous in truth or Gods
glory, nor lovers aright of their children, because they can be sharp enough
in reprehension, if they fail but a little in thriftines, and yet are cold
enough in admonition if they fail never so much in godliness. Well, let these
fleshly zealous men lay to their heart the blind affection of Hel^, who being
the dear child of God, was severely punished of the Lord, for that he was not
zealously affected to punish sin against God in his dear children: but
blessed are they that can forget their own cause, and even with ieopardie of
nature can defend the quarrel of God, henceforth laboring to know no man
after the flesh, but to endeavor spiritually by faith to see and know Christ
Jesus, so as no outward league do bleare and dazell our eyes, as that we
should not epsy sin in the nearest kindred to correct it: or that we should
not discern virtue in the greatest aliens to reverence it. Casting off then
this veil of fleshly love, we must labor to love most where the image of God
appears most, and there show our affections in less measure, where sin may
be as a mark whereby God restrains our love, even to them where nature may
soonest deceive us.

Now whereas many have great courage to rebuke such as either cannot gainsay
them, or gainsaying them, cannot prevail against them, here comes another
property of The ^. note of zeal.
zeal to be spoken of, and that is, that it fears not the face of the
mighty, neither is it dis^aied at the looks of the proud and the lofty. Such
a courage was in Job, who besides that he made the young men ashamed of their
liberty and afraid of his gravity, made even the Princes also to stay their
talk, and to lay their hands on their mouths. And yet here Ioh. 29. 8. 9.
we must beware of their hasty zeal, who will not stick to charge the
children of God to be without zeal, if presently and abruptly they rush not
into an open reprehension of men that are mighty in authority, as though no
regard of place, time and persons were to be had: which opinion many by weakness
of judgment defending, find neither fruit in Brownists.
others, nor comfort in their own consciences, when they do admonish in that
presumptuous manner: for that hunting after feruentnes without the spirit of
meeknes, and casting off all consideration of a godly opportunity, they rather
exasperate than humble the parties admonished, and they themselves rather
depart with confusion and shame, for such posting on without warrant of
wisdom, and not according to knowledge, than with comfort of heart for any
duty done. Neither am I here ignorant how great danger of trouble of mind
comes to many, in that they being so curious obseruers and waiters Admonition
little practiced.
of opportunity, do for some ease of the flesh, under the cloak of this
wisdom, altogether leave off that godly duty. Wherefore as we affirm that
wisdom and love mixed together, do deeply enter into the most prefract and
prodigious spirits: so we mislike their fearful delay of duty, who having a
mean occasion offered them from the Lord, do not earnestly pu^^ue the
quarrel of the Lord, and earnestly rebuke sin though in some higher
persona^^es.

Out of this may issue another fruit of right zeal, namely, when we are
zealous in their The 6. note zealous in defense of the poor.
behalf who can never recompense us again: for flesh and blood will easily
admit to rebuke the injuries, and revenge the oppressions used to men of credit
and ability, because it is a wary wisdom to patronage them in lesser
things, who can be our patrons again in greater things* Thus Job delivered the
poor that cried, the fatherless and him that had none to help him, he was
the eyes to the blind, the foot to the lame, at whose hands no hope of reward
was to be looked for.

But to draw to the last and most glorious property, this thing in zeal is
most commendable, The 7. note.
when we are humbled in our own souls for those sins which we epsy and
censure in others, even as though we our selves for want of instruction or
prayer, were in some sort guilty of their sins. If this rule were received
in judgment, and ^uerenced in practice of Ministers, Magistrates, and masters,
when they are to admonish their inferiors of sin, it is sure it would breed
in them great conscience and religion. Alas we see many who can mangle and
martyr a man for some offense, who never learned for cons^nce sake to mourn
for those infirmities which so bitterly he would i^ueigh against in others* Let
us consider this in ministers, how the Apostle says to the Corinthians: I
fear le^^t when I come, m^ God a^^ase me among you, and I shall be^aile many
of them which have ^^^ned 2. Cor. 12. 2^.
already, etc. Which no doubt he did as thinking that he did not duty enough,
but that there was even some cause of grief in himself. Did the Apostle who
had so little or no cause so to do, thus lament and suspect himself, as
though he had not used all good means, or with the means good affections;
and should the ministers of our time, whose gifts and pains are f^rre
inferior, nothing be moved for the sins of them for whom The sins of the
flock are the sins of the Pastor.
they ought to care and mourn? Well, I hope that even at this day there are
some that fear they have not in preaching publicly, opened all the mysteries
of God to them, they think they have failed in private admonition, they
suspect themselves of want of praying for them, they are ready to accuse
themselves, that they have not walked so wisely and warily in using their
liberty before them, or that their life has not yielded that example of
godliness to them, as they ought to have done. And so in the whole discourse
almost of the sins of the several Churches, the holy Ghost runs on in
this tenor, that whatsoever is spoken of the Church, is spoken to the Angels,
that is, to the ministers of the Church, who are said to have this or that
sin, which indeed was in the people.

In the Primitive Church when the credit of the Apostles was called into
question, they might seem to have been much troubled about the matter: but
they were much humbled by it, they examined them selves, they accused
themselves, and afterward they instituted a new ministry. But does not this
duty as deeply charge Ministers and Masters to mourn for the sins of their
people? Yes doubtless, and for good reason. For if they will confess that they
must rejoice in the good things that befall their children and families, they
must also lament the evils which betide them, so long as they are under their
tuition and government.

FINIS.
OF A GOOD NAME, THE FOVRTH SERMON
Proverbs 22. verse. 1. A good name is to be desired above great riches, and
loving favor above silver and gold.
ALl that is to be desired of a man is this, that he be virtuous, godly, and
truly religious. This, because it is in it self most excellent and most
contrary to our nature, therefore the Scripture uses many arguments and
reasons to persuade us thereunto: as in this place, where the Wise man would
stir us up to the love of virtue, by setting before our eyes two principal
effects and fruits which we may receive by it. The first of these is, a good
name: the second is, loving favor: both which as they do Two special fruits
of virtue, which ever increase one another.
proceed from virtue and godliness, so they do maintain and increase one
another. For as a man finds much favor with those that do speak and report
well of him: so those that will show a man loving favor, will, or at least
ought to show it in this, that they may willingly afford him a good report.
Now both these are preferred before great riches, both these are accounted
better than gold and much silver: and surely whosoever is truly wise will make
this account of them, whosoever does rightly know to discern what is good, he
will first and especially labor for them: for a good name does commend us to A
good name more precious tha^ gold.
God and to his holy Angels, in whose eyes those virtues whereof a good name
does arise, are most acceptable. But riches are not able to do this, no, the
abundance of silver and gold is often an occasion of sin, whereby we are
most out of the favor of God. Again, whereas riches, especially if they be
evil gotten, do cause men many times to hate us, this Effects of a good name,
most comfortable in all states and sorts of men.
good name and loving favor does win the hearts of many, yea it does sometimes
cause our enemies to be at peace with us. And this ever has been and ever will
be most certain and true, whether we look to prosperity or adversity,
whether we look to the common callings of this civil life, or the callings of
the Church. For such is the corruption of man's nature, that naturally they do
not love the Magistrates, that God has placed over them* but when the
Magistrate has gotten a good report by the due execution of justice, by his
Magistrates
pitiful dealing with the poor, and by his fatherly favor to all that be
good, then will his subjects love him, then will they embrace him, then will
they willingly commit their matters into his hands, and then will they with
faithful and friendly hearts clean and stick fast unto him. To be short,
that Lawyer has most clients, that Physician has most patients, Lawyers.
and that Merchant most customers, whose virtuous and godly dealings have
gotten them a good report.

In the callings of the Church this also is true: for if any preacher by the
faithful discharge Preachers.
of his duty, and by his godly life, have once gotten the favor and
friendship of men, how gladly will men hear him, how quietly will they be
ruled by him, in what simplicity will they make known their griefs unto him,
and how careful will they be to procure his good. The Schoolmaster also that
has the name of learning to teach, of discretion to Schoolemasters.
rule, of godliness to train up his scholars in the fear of God, he never
wants scholars, but the most and best men of all will flock unto him.
Contrariwise, if any of those be discredited through any evil name, if the
Magistrate be accounted an oppressor or a tyrant, the Lawyer be reported to
deal deceitfully, if the Minister be corrupted either in doctrine or life, if
the Schoolmaster be once known to be insufficient in learning, unwise in
government, profane and of no religion; then will all men be afraid to have
any dealing with them. Those things are often found true in peace and
prosperity: but in adversity, as in the time of war, in the time of
sickness, and in the time of want and poverty, they be found most true. Will
not all the poor comminaltie in the time of war, seek some aid at that
Magistrate, who in the time of peace did good unto them? Nay rather will they
not all with one consent come together, to help and defend them even with all
their might, and with life it self, seeing that he has used all good means
to save and ^efend their lives? Contrariwise, how many Kings, how many
Captains, how many Magistrates Captains.
have even in their greatest need been left and forsaken of their subjects and
soldiers, because they have too sharply and unmercifully ruled them? And which
is more than this, the subjects have even procured the death of their princes,
the soldiers have laid violent hands upon their captains, and the tenants
have been the first that have sought the death of their Landlords, because no
pity, no compassion, no friendship and loving favor has been showed unto
them. Again, if Magistrate, Minister, Master, or any other man by executing
the duties of love, have won the hearts of the people, and gotten a good name
among them; then in his sickness they will pray for him, they will visit him,
they will bear with him a part of his grief. Again, what can be more
comfortable to a man than this is, this will glad him at the heart, and this
will turn his b^d in all his sickness. Psalm. 40. 1. God will turn, etc.
In poverty also he is soonest and most helped which has the best name, and
has obtained through virtue most favor with men. For good men do consider
their own case in him, and therefore are most ready to help him: yea even
the evil and ungodly Godly poor*
men, although they bear him no great good will, yet they are forced to help
him, partly because his godly life does witness unto their souls, that he
does deserve to be helped, and partly because the Lord does turn their hearts
to favor him. The widow therefore that came to Eliah for help, used this
argument to persuade Eliah; O man of God (says she) my husband is dead, and
died in debt, yet he feared God; therefore help I pray thee, seeing the
creditors are come: and immediately Eliah helped her. On the other side, if a
man be evil reported of, if he be an adulterer, an Atheist, an Idolater, a
riotous person, or a man of hard dealing, and if such a one be once brought
into some low estate, if he once Poor.
fall into poverty and need, then the hearts of men are shut up against him,
no man will pity him, and all men will see and say, his own sin is brought
upon him. And thus has the testimony of the Prophets, who did often threaten
such kind of punishments to ungodly men, so that no man should say, Ah my
father, or ah my mother: but the whole city should be glad of their departure.
This did the heathen people see in some part, and therefore all of them did
greatly desire a good name: and as every one of them did excel in strength and
in courage, or in wit, or any kind of knowledge; so they did labor by that
thing to get some credit to themselves. And to conclude this point, though a
man have many good things in him, though a Magistrate do fear God greatly,
though a Minister be excellent in many points, though a Physician or Lawyer be
skilful in their profession, yet if they have not a good name, they can do
little good with their gifts. All this does teach us that indeed to be true
which Solomon here says, that a good name is to be chosen above great riches,
and loving favor above silver and gold. Now the instructions which we may
gather out of this place are chiefly two.

The first is, that we ought not to hurt our neighbors above all things in
their good 1 Not to hurt our neighbors good name.
name: and therefore the Lord in his law has ordained, that he which does such
a thing, should have the same punishment which he purposed to bring upon
another. Men would be loath to steal the goods of any man from him and yet the
name of a man is more worth than all things in the world: therefore if any man
by raising up false reports do impair his brothers credit, he does hurt him,
and sins more grossly and more grievously, than Susanna.
if he had taken away his lands or his living, his corn or his cattle, or any
other thing that he has. And though the thing be false which he reports, yet
he sins nevertheless: for after that time even good men will be more
suspicious, and the wicked will not let it go out of their minds: But if this
be against a Preacher, or professor of the Gospel, then the sin is the
greater, because God and his word becomes dishonored thereby.

The second instruction is, that we must be careful by all good means to get
and maintain 2 Care to get a good name.
our good name. For if it be a sin to discredit another man, then much more
is it a sin to discredit our selves: if we be charged to further the good
name of our brother, then are we straightly commanded to help forward our own
as much as we be able: then it cannot be without great sin, that a man should
cast off all care of his own credit. The very Heathen saw this to be a fault,
and they did commonly say, that whosoever regards not the reports of men, he
is dissolute indeed, and has in effect lost the nature of man. And therefore
we may well say, that he is without all hope of amendment, which is not brought
to some remorse and sorrow, which with a shameless face can face out sin,
having Care of a good name, keeps us in obedience.
adders cares and will not hear, charm the charmer never so wisely. As then a
shameless face opens a door to all ungodliness, so due care of credit
causes a man to be very careful of his ways: whosoever therefore will live
godly, he must safely provide for his good name. Seeing these things be so, it
shall be profitable to consider how this good name may be gotten and preserved:
and again, if we be discredited, what use and 1
profit we must make of it. For the first, it is certain that seeing fame and
honest report are good things, therefore they must needs arise and spring of
those things that are good, as of virtue, godliness and good religion. Now
whereas Turks and such ungodly men have great favor amongst the people, and
be well reported of, this indeed is no good name, because it arises not of
goodness, it is only a vain applause of the simple people: Infidels have no
good name
nay, it is even the great and fierce wrath of God upon them, though they
neither see nor perceive it, when they be well spoken of for their evil
deeds. For by this means they be hardened in their sin, by this means they
be hindered and holden from repentance* then the which there is not a greater
punishment under the Sun. Such a name then is not to be desired, nay we
ought rather to pray against such a name. And if we will purchase a good name
and be of good report, then let us take heed that we seek it by goodness and
virtue, and then it will be a good name indeed. But let us weigh these things
more particularly, The first step to a good name, a religious care against open
and outward sins great and small.
and let us know that the first step to a good name, is the careful and
continual auoidance of evil, both outward and inward. In outward and gross
evils we must first beware of all evil generally: which thing if we be not
careful to do, then will our good name be soon impaired. Secondly, we must
narrowly look unto some special sins, whereunto our nature is most
inclinable and subject: For as one dead fly corrupts a whole box of
ointment, though it be most precious; so some one sin does often crack the
credit of a man, though otherwise he have been very well reported of. And if it
behooves every man thus nearly to look to his ways, then much more is it
needful that every Simile.
Eccles* 10. 1.
child of God should so do. For the world, through the hatred it bears to
them, deals with them as it deals with witches and Physicians. The witch
though she fail in twenty things, yet if she do some one thing aright,
though it be but small, the world loves Simile.
and commends her for a good and wise woman. But the Physician, if he work
six Note.
hundredth cures, yet if through the waiwardnes of his patient, or for the
punishment of his patients sin he fail but in one, that one fail does more
turn to his discredit, than his manifold goodly and notable cures do get him
praise. In this manner does the world deal with men, if a worldly man have but
an outward gift of strength, of speech, or of comelines, he shall be greatly
praised and counted a goodly man, though he be an Idolater, or a profane
person, and though he swim and flow over in all manner of vices But let the
child of God be truly zealous in true religion, let him be honest and holy in
conversation, yet if there be but one infirmity in him, or if he have through
weakness fallen The judgment of the world of the godly.
once into some one sin, that one infirmity against which he strives, or
that one sin for which he is grieved, shall drown all the graces of God in
him be they never so great, and the world will account him a most wicked man.
Seeing then this is the enmity of the world against Gods people, how warily
ought they to walk in so crooked and froward a generation? And hereof they
must be so much the more careful, because the wicked by such slips and
infirmities, will not only take occasion to discredit them, but even to speak
of all their profession, yea and to blaspheme the glorious word of God and his
eternal truth. Then if we be careful of our own good name, nay if we have
any zeal of Gods glory, if we have any care of the word, if we have any love
of the Saints; then let us carefully shun all and every infirmity, whereby
Gods name is dishonored, his glorious Gospel blasphemed, his children
grieved, and we our selves discredited amongst the wicked And thus much for the
open and outward sin.

As open sin committed in the sight and view of men has always the
punishment of an evil name joined with it: so also secret sins which are
hidden as it were in the dark A religious care against secret sins, which
bring us out of credit with God.
corners of our hearts, do bring us out of favor and credit with God: and
when we be once out of credit with him, then does he make our sins further
known unto men. For nothing is so hidden that shall not be brought to light,
and nothing so secret that shall not be discovered in the sight of the world.
And that we may the better be persuaded of this, let us all know of a surety,
that the Lord has many means to bring such things to light* for he can make
the fields to have eyes to see our wickedness, he can make the woods to have
ears to hear our ungodly counsels: yea he can cause the walls of our
bedchambers to bear witness against us for the sins committed upon our
beds. If this will not serve, he can go further, and cause our friends to fall
out with us, and the men of our counsels to bewray our wickedness. And though
he has not any such purpose when we make him privy to our naughty devices,
yet in displeasure the Lord does cause him all at once Secret sins many ways
revealed, when the Lord will afflict us.
to lay open all our secrets. Yea rather than thou should bear no reproach
for thy secret faults, the Lord will cause thine own mouth to testify against
thee, and thine own words shall get thee discredit: for either unawares thou
shall bewray thy self, or in thy sleep by dreams thou shall make the thing
known, or in thy sickness thou shall rave of it, or in some frenzy thou
shall vomit it out, or else the torment of thine own conscience shall be so
sharp, that even to thine own shame thou shall confess thy fault. Last of
all, when thou think or deuisest evil against thy neighbor, though it be
never so secretly, yet besides all the former, the Lord has another means
whereby he will bring thee to discredit for it. And this is a very vehement
suspicion raised up in the heart of him, of whom thou deuisest this evil: for
as it oftentimes comes to pass, that good motions which arise secretly in thy
mind for the good of another, do cause the other man to think well of thee,
though he did never hear of them: so doubtless does it often come to pass in
evil motions. Thou deuisest evil against another, he in some strange manner
has a heartburning in jealousy over thee: thou think hardly of another man,
and he also is hardly persuaded of thee. Thus the Lord does cause thee to be
discredited in the hearts of others, as thou imaginest some evil against others
in thine heart. True it is, that the party may sin and do very ill if he
suspect without just cause, in as much as he does thus suspect through an
immoderate love of himself: yet the work of the Lord is here to be
considered, who seeing the cause to be so just, does stir up such suspicions
in his mind.

Then to return to our purpose, if we will avoid an evil name, we must
avoid all evil Evil surmises.
surmises and devises against others. And this the Scripture does also forbid
us: for the Wiseman from the mouth of God does forbid us to think evil of the
King in our bedchambers, Eccles. 7.
because birds and other dumb creatures shall disclose the thing, rather than
it shall be kept close. This then must make us afraid to do evil, or to imagine
ill in our beds, or to declare our deep counsels even to them that lie in
our bosoms. And this, as it is a good means to provide for a good name, so it
is a special rule of all godliness, not when we be afraid of open sins
alone, but of secret evils: not of acts alone, but even of the secret
cogitations and thoughts of our hearts. Thus we have heard the first step that
leads to a good name.

The second remains to be declared: and that is a godly jealousy over a man's
own The second step to a good name.
doings, that they may not breed suspicion of evil. For it does often come to
pass, that albeit a man do not that which is simply evil, he may justly be
suspected, and suffer some blemish in his good name. And for this cause does
the Apostle charge us to procure honest things in the sight of God and man. For
this cause he commands us, that if there be any thing honest or of good
report, that we must follow, and that we must embrace. It is not enough
therefore that men did say, I did think no evil, I did mean no harm: for if
through want of care or discretion thou have ventured upon the occasion, thou
have given great matter of evil speeches to thy great discredit. If then we
will avoid this evil name, Avoid occasions of evil.
as our proverb is, we must avoid all things that bring it. For when men
will care little to give occasion, then the Lord causes an evil name to be
raised upon them, that those which indeed are desperate may suffer just
discredit, and they that are otherwise may be reclaimed from the same. And
surely such is the crookednes of man's nature, that if the Lord should not take
this course, even his children would fall into many sins. Therefore it is
most requisite that men be mindful to avoid occasions, and so much the
rather, because it is commonly said, either God or the devil stands at
their elbow to work upon them. Let us see this in some example of our common
life. Thou art accustomed to Example.
walk abroad at inconvenient times, at that time some thing is stolen, and
thou art burdened and charged with it Again, thou use to deal too
familiarly and lightly with a maid, she is gotten with child, and the fault is
laid on thee. Hereof thou have given suspicion, because thou have been a night
goer, and such an one as has dealt want only with the maid, albeit thou be
free from the very act. Now if thou be the child of God, and if thou be guided
by his holy spirit, then will he teach thee to take profit by this false
report, and to say with thy self, Lord thou know that I am free from this
v^ry act: yet it was my sin to give any such occasion whereby men might
suspect me: this sin, O Lord, I am guilty of, and I know thou for this sin
have justly afflicted me. Yet dear father, I see thy mercy in this, that A
prayer.
whereas indeed I have committed many sins, thou have passed over them, and
taken this whereof I am not so much guilty: so that now (most merciful
father) I do rather suffer for righteousness, then for my transgression and
sin: yea dear Father, I do behold thy tender mercy in this toward me,
that by this evil report thou go about to stay me from that sin, and to
prevent me^ that I may never fall into the same. Wherefore, seeing it has been
thy good pleasure to deal thus with me, behold Lord I do repent me of my
former sins, and promise before thee even in thy fear, never to do this, or
the like sin ever hereafter.

See here I beseech you the good profit which a good child of God, through Gods
spirit, will take of this slanderous reproach, after he had received some godly
sorrow for giving the occasion of that report. But behold the contrary work of
Satan in the heart of unbelievers, for he will soon teach them this lesson,
and cause them to say thus: What? does the churl accuse me without a cause?
does he father such a villainous act upon me, who never deserved it at his
hands? surely he shall not say so for naught, I will make his sayings true, and
will do the thing indeed. Consider then this ye that fear the Lord, and see
in how fickle a state they do stand which have given occasion, and in what
great danger they be to be brought to commit the same or the like sin
afterward* Therefore if any will be sure to keep his good name, then must he
be sure to avoid all such occasions as might in any wise impair and hinder
it. And thus much for the second step, whereby we arise to a good name. Thus we
have heard of two degrees toward a good name, in the avoiding of evil, and the
occasions thereof. And these indeed have a great force to stay an evil name,
Note.
but sure they be not able to build up a good name and credit among men.

To these therefore there must be added a third thing, which has most special
force for The third step to a good name, is to be plentiful in good works.
this purpose, and that is, that we be plentiful in good works. This does
our Savior Christ charge us to be careful of, when he says, Let your light
so shine before m^n, that they may see your good works. Many repine at the
good report of another m^n, and they be greatly grieved, because they
themselves be not in the like or some better credit. But alas, they should
rather be grieved at themselves, because the fault is in themselves, for they
regard not to do good, they are careless of good works, and therefore the
Lord is as careless of them and their credit. Well, he that will be
commended, must do the things that be commendable, he must do good works,
yea, he must do good and pursue it. Yea, we must know that it is not one good
work, nor two, nor three, that can gain us a good name indeed: but it is
required at us, that we be rich in well doing, and continually given to every
good work. For as a precious ointment (whereto a good name is compared) is
Simile.
made of many and most excellent simples: so a good name cannot be gotten but
by many most excellent virtues. Now when we feel our selves affected to
goodness, then we are warily to see to two things: First, that all our works
be done with a simple and sincere 1 Two rules of good works.
affection: Secondly, that they be done with good discretion. For when a thing
is done indiscreetly and without advise, it loses the grace and beauty of the
deed: and therefore though the thing be good, yet no great praise does come of
it, because it was not done 2 Look well to thine affection, and to the end
thou have purposed in thine heart of every good work,
with good discretion. Likewise, when men do things with sinister affections,
and to some other end then to the glory of God, they do commonly lose the price
of their doings. And hereof it comes to pass, that many men which do good
works to merit by them, or to 1
win the favor of their superiors, or to be of good report among the people, or
to some such other end, when (I say) men do things to this end, the Lord
punishes them with the contrary, 2
and in stead of deserving glory, he powers confusion upon them; in stead of
honor, he 3
gives contempt; and in stead of riches, beggerie. And albeit men may pretend
the glory of God, and face out their wickedness with a fresh color, yet the
Lord will bring their wickedness to light. And truly it is marvelous to see how
the Lord lays folly upon such men: so that although in their wisdom they
think to bleare the eyes of all men, the simple soul does see their shifts to
their discredit. Therefore, when thou have done well, and yet art ill reported
of, do not straight way storm against him which has raised up this report
against thee; neither do thou over hastily clear thy self: but rather
before the Lord examine Good counsel against evil report.
thine own heart, and see with what affection thou have done it. And if we
find wickedness in our hearts, then let us be humble before the Lord, and know
that he has caused us thus to be spoken of: first to correct us, and secondly
to try us. For when the Lord does see us 1
like Scribes and Pharisees, seeking rewards, then he does punish us with the
loss of our labor, 2
and with shame amongst men, to see if thereby he can bring us to the sight of
our sins, which before we neither would nor could see. And again when we
have thus done, he does try us whether there be any goodness in our hearts,
which may move us to continue in well doing, notwithstanding we be evil
spoken of* Here then we may see what 1
fruit we must make of such reports: namely, they must first bring us to a
sight and feeling 2
of our sins: and secondly, they must cause us with greater vprightnes to
continue in well doing. True it is, a man may be accused to have this or that
purpose in his doings, although he have done the thing in the simplicity of
his heart. But when a man through examination does find his heart upright,
then he receives great comfort by it: then he may commend himself unto the
Lord, and his cause into his hands. For the Lord maintains good tongues and
hearts, but he will cut out the tongues of them that speak lies. He will
cause the righteousness of the righteous to shine as the noone day, and as the
Psalm. 37. 5. 6
Sun after a cloud: but the wicked shall be covered with their own
confusion as with a cloak. This shall the godly see and rejoice therein, but
the mouths of the wicked shall be stopped. Thus we have run through the
things whereby a good name may be gotten, and not only that, but also whereby a
man may be preserved in a good name and credit: and therefore surely the more
to be observed and regarded of us. For first of all, we see what force the
good continuance of the Churches beyond the Seas has to persuade men to
embrace the truth, and how soon some men will be moved to continue steadfast,
when they see the steadfast constancy of good men in all kind of godliness
Again, we know Offenses.
what great offenses are given to the weak, when whole Churches, or some
particular persons of some good place and credit, do not stand in that credit,
nor maintain by goodness their good name, which they had gotten by great
virtues? The very Heathen did see Non ^inor est virtus qua^ quaerere paris
tueri.
this, and therefore they said that it was as great a praise to keep praise,
as to get it: yea, and when they saw what great inconveniences would arise when
men did not satisfy the expectation of the people, they thought it much better
never to have any good report amongst men, than to lose it after it had been
gotten. Therefore to shut up this whole matter in one word, if any man, if any
household, if any town, if any country, be careful to have an honest report
amongst men, then must they eschew evil and do good, then must they seek
peace and pursue it: and if once having gotten a good name, they would gladly
keep it, then they must use the same means, so shall we have it both of God
and man.

Now because men do suffer very much discredit, and are very ill reported of
amongst men, it shall be good to consider what profit and use we may make of
such reproaches and evil reports. And this shall we do the better, if we
know upon what grounds those reproaches do arise. First therefore we must
learn, that men may be evil reported of, Evil report.
either for evil, or for well doing. When men therefore are ill spoken of,
they must first 1
try whether it be for evil or for good: and if it be for evil, then must
they go a degree 2
further, to find whether it be for some evil work which they have
committed, or for some occasion which they have given. When a man is evil
reported of for some evil dee^e which he has done, that evil deed of his is
either manifestly known, or else it is veknowne. And surely it is a thing most
common amongst men to suffer discredit for open and gross sins, yet very few
do rightly profit by it: for some are shameless and care not what men say of
them, and therefore indeed they are unfit to receive any profit by such
reproaches. Therefore after the most sharp and severe censure of the Church,
they must becon mitted to the hand of the Magistrate, to be punished in the
purse and in the body. And yet surely such are their whorish faces, that there
is small hope of their amendment: They are shameless men which regard not how
they be reported of. Worldly sorrow.
for it does often come to pass, that they which will not profit by the
Church, cannot receive profit by the Magistrate. Therefore after all this they
must be left unto the Lord, to work, if it be his will, by some extraordinary
means upon their hearts which are exceedingly hardened.

Othersome there be: who being put to open shame, are sorrowful indeed: but
this is because they have sustained open shame, rather than because they have
sinned against the Lord. These are in some degree better than the former, and
yet they go not so far as they ought to do: for the devil having bewitched
them, does persuade them it is no such matter as men would make them belee ^e
it is, and that as a wonder lasts but nine days, so this shall be of no long
continuance. Thus they are let, so that the shame cannot enter into their
hearts, there to work godly sorrow which may bring forth unfeigned repentance.
This is daily seen in whores and thieves, and such like male factors, who
although they make large promises of amendment, yet the punishment being
passed, they fall into the like filthiness again. Some think that they do
dissemble and deal deceitfully: but I think that they think as they speak,
and speak with sorrow and grief. For will a thief purpose to steal again
when he is ready to be hanged? Will a child purpose to play the wanton when
he is a beating? No doubtless, but in the one there is a childishnes to speak
without advise; in the other is a seruilnes to be moved with nothing but
present fear. I Hypocrisy. 1. gross. 2. close.
grant indeed there is hypocrisy in them, yet the gross hypocrisy whereby
men labor to deceive others, is not in them; but the close and most dangerous
hypocrisy whereby the devil has beguiled their own hearts through his
subtlety. This witcherie of the devil (I say) is the cause why many promising
amendment, do not perform the same. Thus we see how men do miss of that
profit which ought to be reaped of open shame: we therefore are to take a better
course, and to labor, that as our faces do blu^h before men, so our souls
may be confounded before the Lord, that being thoroughly humbled under his hand
by godly sorrow, it may please him in mercy to raise us up. Now if we doubt in
this case whether our sorrow be sound or no, let us try it by these two rules.
First, whether we 1
can with contented minds take the punishment as a correction from the Lord,
and yet mourn and be grieved for the sin: but in such a manner as giving
place to Gods justice 2
in punishing, we labor for mercy in the forgiveness of sins. Secondly,
whether when we could keep the sin close, we can yet with David freely
confess and say, Against thee O Lord have I sinned? This if we can do, it is
a sure argument that our sorrow is godly, and that we have well profited by
that reproach which our sin did bring upon us. As the sin is sometime so
evident that it cannot be covered, so indeed the sin may be committed,
Special rules when a secret sin is cause of evil report.
and yet either not known nor suspected at all, or else by probable
susp^tions. When the sin is in this case, the Lord may cause a man that has
so sinned, to be accused or evil spoken of for that sin. Here the party
offending must first learn to deal wisely and in such manner, as the sin
may be kept close still, if it may be done without another sin: 1
But if an oath of the Lord be required, then ought we to give God the glory,
though it be Joshua. 7.
with our own shame, and confess the fault. Secondly, for the profits which
may be made 2
by such reports, we must learn with thankful hearts to receive this
merciful chastisement of the Lord, and acknowledge it to his praise: for he
might have punished us for those sins which were manifest, yet he has passed
over them: he might have made these known, but he spared our name and our
credit. Therefore for a second fruit this mercy of the Lord must lead us to
repentance, and to an earnest sorrow for all our sins: for it were too too
gross that we should continue in sin, because we cannot be convicted of
sin: for if the Lord did not mislike thy sin, why should he raise such a
report of thee? Why should he save thy good name, if he were not minded to show
thee mercy? And if he would not have thee with all thy heart to repent thee
of thy sin, why does he whip thy naked conscience for sin? Therefore if by
this loving kindness we be not led unto repentance, verily it will be a
sin that shall not escape unpunished. Thus we have heard how an evil name
does arise of sin committed, and what profit must be taken hereof.

Now let us further consider how a man must profit by an evil name, not when
he ha^ How we ought to profit by evil reports.
by some sin deserved it, but when he has only failed in this, that he has
given occasion to be suspected of evil. This occasion is of two sorts. First,
when good duties are either altogether omitted, or done with a grudging mind,
or else as it were of constraint. This report must teach thee, that although
thou be not so evil as men would make thee, yet thou ^ Two occasions of evil
reports
art not so good as thou should be. Therefore by this thou must learn, as
to be more careful of doing good, so to do it with greater and better
courage: for the Lord Ioueth a cheerful giver.

The second occasion is inward, which although no man can find out, yet the
Lord for thy good does cause men to speak evil of thee for it. This inward
occasion is, when thy heart has either given some full consent to do evil,
or at the least has much wandered in thinking of it. Here the Lord does take
thee betime; and suffers men to report of thee that thou have done that,
which indeed thou have not done, yet in thy heart thou have taken pleasure in
it. Then the way to profit by this, is to confess the goodness of the An
evil thought resting in the mind how dangerous.
Lord, who will not have thee to fall into such sin, as might deserve
discredit. For such is the nature of man, that if any evil thought do long
tarry in the mind, it will hardly be restrained before it come to the outward
act. Again, by this report raised on us, we must take occasion to call back
our selves, if we have consented to evil, and with grief to be sorrowful for
it: or if we have not as yet consented, we must labor to repress the heat of
our affections, and quench them by the moisture of the word. And thus much
shall be sufficient for those reports which arise of some just ground and
occasion.

The last point to be handled in this whole case, is to see what use must be
made of those Use of false reports.
reports which be altogether false, and have neither ground nor good beginning.
For it may come to pass, when a man has avoided evil, and done good; when he
has shunned 1
the occasion of evil, and done all good with a cheerful heart, yet he may
be very ill reported of, and his good name hindered. Now if this does befall
any man, he must know that it is the Lords doing* and that the Lord does it
either to correct sin, or else to prevent it. The Lord (I say) does by this
means correct sin sometimes, either in the same kind, or in some other. In
the same kind he deals thus, he suffers thee to be counted an adulterer,
yet thou do now live chastely, and hate filthy sin: but then he sees
that thou have either been an adulterer, and have not repented at all: or if
thou have suddenly repented, yet now thou beginnest to fail, and to cool in
the hatred of that sin. Again, if after examination thou find thy self
clear in that sin, yet know that the Lord by that report does correct some
sin quite contrary unto it: as if thou should be accused because thou
love not thy wife, whereas indeed thou love her too well: or otherwise he
causes thee to be counted an adulterer, that thereby thou may be brought to
see thy covetous heart. And to say all in one word, we shall never make true
use of reports, until we have been brought to see and repent of some
particular sin, which either we saw not before, or else had not thoroughly
repented of. Furthermore, it may come to 2
pass, that we having done all good duties, avoided all evil, and examined
our repentance even for particular sins, yet shall we be evil spoken of
amongst men. Here we must know that the Lord by reports does forewarne us of
evil to come. We are reported of to be of the Family of love: hereby we are
forewarned to take heed that we fall not into that sin, and so forth of
other reports. When any such reports are carried about of us, we must be made
so much the more wary that we fall not into that sin. And according to the
Apostles rule, we must labor to finish the course of our salvation in fear:
which that we may do, the Lord grant for his Christ's sake, to whom be praise
for ever in the Church,

Amen.
FINIS.
OF HVMILITIE. THE FIFTH SERMON.
Proverbs 18. 12. Before destruction the heart of man is hautie: and before
glory goes lowliness.
THis Scripture agrees well with that of our Savior Christ, Whosoever Luke
14. 11. Iam 4. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
exalt^th himself shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted, as also with the testimony o^ the Apostles of Christ: God resists
the proud* but gives grace to the humble. Examples further to prove this are
ple^tifull in the word, whether we look to the godly or to the wicked. And
first we shall see how a hauty mind goes before destruction, by Adam and Eve
our first parents, who for that they could Genesis 3.
not content themselves of all creatures of the earth to be most excellent: but
through an hautie aspiring mind desired to be like God the Creator in heaven,
were cast down into a Examples of pride.
miserable estate, and did suffer both in themselves and their posterity the
shame of so horrible sin. When the mighty men of the earth willing to have
gotten the glory of all ages Genesis 11. 7.
to come, by some noble enterprise, had in the pride of their hearts purposed
to erect a tower to heaven, and so to have been accounted fathers of great
renown: The Lord meets with them, and where they looked for most glory,
there he recompenceth so arrogant atte^pts with most confusion. At what time
proud Pharaoh thirsted most for the destruction of the Israelites, (promising
unto himself the triumph of so great an overthrow) behold Exodus 14.
contrary to his hope, the triumph most gloriously was returned to Gods
people: but the terror and shame was rewarded to Pharaoh and all his company.
That hauty minded H^man Hester. 7.
accounting of nothing surer than the executing of Mordec^i and the death of
the Jews, through the just judgment of God was hanged shamefully upon the same
gallows which he had provided for another. Again, Nebuchadnezzar aduau^cing
himself as a Monarch Dan. 4.
and peerlesse prince in his glorious palace, not long after had the heart of a
beast given him, and for a time had his portion among the beasts of the field*
If we peruse the histories both of the Kings of Israel and the Princes of Judah,
we shall see how Am^ziah refusing Amos. ^.
to hear the Prophets, prospered not: but continuing in that contempt, and
suffering himself to be puffed up in his own pride, was brought to the gate of
destruction. As also how Acha^ growing in some disdain after his victorious
conquest, and nothing fearing 1. King. 20. 22 2. King. 23. Act. 12. 23.
the time that was to come, eue^ in his deepest policy received the foulest
foil. To shut up this matter, we know that when Herod seemed to have won the
garland, and by a solemn oration to have carried away the praise of God, and
not of man; because he challenged the whole glory to himself, and robbed God
of his honor, was most shamefully dishonored, and fearfully devoured with
l^ce consuming his bowels. Neither are we ^o observe this in the wicked alone,
who when they looked for greatest glory, had the greatest shame, but in the
godly also, as Abraham, Asa, Hezekiah David, who when they were most 2. Chro.
16. 10 1^.
humbled, were most exalted, and when they thought themselves to be most
ex^lted, were most humbled. Asa notwithstanding he had some season continued
constant in the reformation of religion, falling at the length to reprehend the
Prophet, and declining from his former humility, fell into sickness, and in his
sickness trusting to the help of man more than to the Lord, received the
sentence of death: and to save his soul by cutting off his days* it pleased
God to visit him in the flesh. Hezekiah obtaining his health, and having
received 2. King. 20. 2. Chro. 32. 37
a glorious deliverance from the host of Z^nacharib, in that he rendered not
the glory due to the Lord, received not long after heavy tidings, how both he
and his lineage should Unthankfulness punished.
descend captives into Babel. Josiah that holy pattern of godly princes, not
asking counsel at the mouth of the Lord when he should enter battle, was
mercifully punished in this life, that he might escape the fearful punishment
of the wi^ked in the life to come. David 2. Chro 35, David.
thinking in his prosperity to be builded upon an vnremouable rock, and to be
as a walled city, suspecting nothing and being out of the watch, he fell into
a grievous sin, whereby the latter part of his life was more reprochful than
glorious. The Apostle Peter after he Matthew. 16. 17.
was exalted to the dignity of a faithful pastor, and for the notable
profession of his faith, was pronounced blessed by the Lord Jesus Christ;
beginning to leave too much to his carnal reason and his strength, was called
Satan, and not knowing what corruption was in his heart, when he most magnified
his constant love to the Lord Jesus, he fell to deny him Matthew. 26.
thrice, and the last time to curse himself if he were the man. But to leave
ancient and former examples, and to turn the edge to our selves, woeful
experience, by diligent observation of their own hearts, has taught many,
that after some sweet and plentiful measure of Gods mercy received, they have
waxed less careful and jealous over their own ^ffections, and so for a time
have bin left of the Lord: whereby though not some fearful destruction, yet
some grievous fall has ensued upon the^. It is good therefore for us to k^epe a
careful wa^ch over our selves, and to see whether after we have been refreshed
with some special graces of God, in preaching, praying and admonishing, we
have not been less careful, and so the nearer to some fall, and unfitter to
receive some new benefit, until the Lord by humbling of us has prepared us
with some new desire. And hereupon comes it to pass^, that when we have been
some long time bathed, and as it were enbalmed, with some inward feelings and
outward fruits of the holy* Ghost, we have been corrected for that Privy
pride and the fruit of it.
self love, and ^uffeted with some privy pride dwelling in the flesh, by some
grievous deadnes and dulnes of the spirit, humbling us under the hands of God,
as it did the Apostle Paul. Now as we have by these examples of others, and
experience in our selves 2. Cor. 12.
proved, that an hautie mind goes before destruction: so on the contrary we
will prove, (using none other order but that before set down) that before
honor goes lowliness. Saul before he was exalted and advanced to the
scepter, hid himself in great humility, Saul.
as one that thought himself unworthy so great a dignity, and so afterward
was exalted. Ahab though a most wicked man, humbling himself at Elias rebuke,
was not punished Ahab.
in his own person, but in his posterity. Rehoboam being humbled with his
people, was Rehoboam.
exempted from that plague, which otherwise was like to have fallen upon him.
But this 1. Sam. 9. 12. 10. 22. 1 King 2^. 27. and 29. 1. King. 12. 24.
we may behold more lively in the godly, whether we respect those revelations
and apparitio^s of Angels, which in former times happened to the fathers being
humbled: or whether we consider other graces of God in like estate bestowed
upon them, Abraham was humbled, Isaac was humbled, Jacob was humbled; then came
the promise, then appeared Hum^tie in the godly.
Angels, then received they visions. Joseph though he had good graces of God,
yet least the violence of unbridled youth should carry him away, he was
humbled, the iron pierced Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Joseph. Moses. David* Pledges.
his soul, his feet were in the stocks, his place was among the imprisoned:
yet after some time of trial he was exalted, not meanly, but very highly.
Moses albeit he had some instinct of the Lord that he should be the governor
of the Lords people, besides his forty years in the court, had forty years
travail in the desert, and afterward was advanced. After that David had
received many pledges of Gods favor toward him, as being anointed king, and
in that he obtained great victories in ouermatching the Bear and the lion, in
over throwing the furious Philistine, after he had cured the raging spirit of a
mad man by his sweet music: yet as one not sufficiently prepared for the
work of the Lord, Ezekiah. Josiah. Asa.
he was preferred by humility. If we consider of all the Kings of Judah and
Jerusalem, as of Ezekiah, Josiah, Asa, and others, we shall see how Ezekiah
wept sore, confessed his sins, and was much humbled, before the health of his
body was restored unto him. Josiah before Esai. 38. 2. Chro. 34. 1^*
the Lord did use him in the reformation of his Church, had his heart broken.
Yea, before the Apostles received that great gift, the sending down of the
holy Ghost upon them, they were humbled with the Jews, they were shaken with a
great wind, and after so solemn a preparation, they were endued with sweet
graces of the spirit. And throughout the Ezechiel. Zachary. Elizabeth. Marie.
whole volume of the book of God it is manifest, that when the Lord would
appear by visions or Angels to his holy people, he humbled flesh and blood
before, as we see in I^cob, Ezechiel, Zachary, Elizabeth, and Marie the
blessed virgin.

Now to come to the reasons why the Lord in wisdom uses to deal with his on
this Wherefore the Lord hu^bleth his children before that he honoreth and
crowns them with his graces.
manner: we must know that therefore the Lord refuses the service of the proud,
because then we are unfit to glorify his name, we are unprofitable to do good
unto our brethren, we are unprepared by pride to receive any mercy at the
hands of God. And no m^rueile, 1
for how should we look that God should put honor upon us in using us and
our service, when we refuse to give the glory of his own graces to him
again? And why should not he dishonor us with the want of his graces, when we
so dishonor him with abusing his graces? Again, seeing usually such is our
weldoing to others, as is our affection and compassion to them that need our
help, and the pride of our own abundance benummeth us, and makes us
senseless in the wants of others; how can we find our hearts aright 2
to any good duty to our brethrens necessity, when for want of humility and
tender affection we have no regard of their wants, nor feeling of their
misery? Besides, if when 3
we are puffed up with a persuasion of perfection, and rest in the security of
our present safety, we are entangled and fettered, that we cannot humble our
selves in prayer before the Lord; how shall we think our selves to be capable
of any blessing from the Lord, whose due time of helping is in the day of want,
and who refuses to give to none but to such as in the pride of their hearts
refuse to do so much as to pray unto him? On the contra^ie part, when the Lord
shall see us good and faithful servants, in returning the gain and advantage
of all his gifts unto himself, and that we are content with his honor, that
^e are his stewards; when the sense of our own misery has taught us to show
mercy unto others, and the conscience of our own unworthiness has emptied us
of all opinion of our selves, and has driven us in our beggerlike necessities
to crave for every little supply of wants at the throne of mercy; then is God
most near at hand to put us in credit with his graces, then are we most
prepared to minister to the wants of others, and then are w^ fit to be filled
with the hid treasures of the Lord for our comfort. And hereupon it comes
Priderots and co^sumes many good gifts of God ^^ us.
to pass, that many having had a large measure of Gods graces, through pride
have suffered them to rot and consume away. Hereof it comes, that many have
labored much, spoken abundantly, and travailed in great eloquence, and yet
have neither gained glory to God, nor affoorded fruit to the hearers. Hereupon
it is, that some that have been as full as the vessel that has no vent, have
become as barren as the flint-stone is of water, because they have sought
glory but not by humility; they have shunned destruction, but not left their
pride. Contrariwise, we shall observe how many speaking in the singlenes of
their heart and humility of their spirit, have won many souls to the rich
enlarging of Gods honor and kingdom. Many using few words, with a pitiful
and sellow feeling affection, have comforted afflicted consciences, instructed
ignorant souls, thrown down proud spirits, confounded hautie hearts, and
profited abundantly them with whom they were to deal. Many being lowly in
their own eyes, have not so much gloried in, no^ received glory for their
great gifts which God has bestowed upon them, as they were comforted in their
own consciences, with a rich testimony of the sanctifying spirit, who wrought
in them some careful usage of the gifts received, to his glory that gave
them. The Lord refuses the service of wicked men, he will not use a proud
spirit in his work: and therefore if we shall see that God does not bless our
labors, let us suspect our selves to lie in some sin, let us fear our own
hearts that they be not humbled before the Lord. And here it is good that we
should be forewarned what lowliness it is the Lord requires of us, least we
deceive our own souls in a false and fantastical humility* Wherefore as
all men will grant humility to be void of murmuring and grudging: so
Aphantasticall humility.
we affirm, that that is not a mind rightly humbled under the hand of God,
which is still perplexed and affrighted with immoderate fear of the danger of
some evil to come. For as we condemn that hellish security which is void of
all fear: so we mislike that abject mind which is oppressed with too much
fear, still breathing out of such trembling voices: Oh what shall become of
me* I am afraid that some evil will befall me, I shall never be able to
bear it, I had rather dye then feel it. When we thus distrusting the Lord,
Impatiencie.
begin to teach him what he shall give to us, or what he shall take from us, we
are in the hie way to meet with the evil we feared, and nothing in the world
will sooner bring the danger upon us. We therefore commend and affirm that to
be true humility, which as it repineth not grudgingly against the Lord, so it
shrinketh not too distrustfully before the Lord: but as on the one side we are
ready to be thankful, if it be the good will of the Lord to deliver us; so
on the other side we are willing to lay our head to the block, and offer our
body to the striker, if the Lord in wisdom should make trial of us. This It
is best for us under the cross to be thus minded.
will teach us to possess our souls in meekness and patience; this will
strengthen us to say boldly, Lord if thou send this deliverance, thy name be
praised; if thou shall further try me Lord, thy holy will be blessed* Lord
here I am, spare me if thou will, try me if thou please.

This humility was in Abraham, Isaac, Moses, David, Daniel, Azariah, Sidrach,
Abedn^go, Genesis 22. 2. Sam. 15.
and others of the Saints and servants of God. Abraham when he was most ready
to offer up his son, even then the Lord gave him his son again. David when
he was prepared to surrender both life and living to the Lord, obtained both
life and kingdom for longer time. At what time Ezekiah had resigned himself
to dye at the will of the Lord, the Lord gave him his health again, and made
him as it were a lease of his life for fifteen years to come. And surely
there is no readier way to obtain life, than to offer our selves unto How to
avoid the cross, or to be freed, if it become.
death: no better mean to avoid sickness, poverty, reproach, or banishment,
than to have our wills wholly resigned to Gods will, as willing to bear the
cross as to be freed from it. For as the more we strive against the will of
God, the less we prevail: so the sooner we yield, we shall the sooner be
delivered. And yet I mean not that yielding which the Lord by his threatenings
or judgments, as by strong hand gets of us, which is no voluntary
submission, but a violent subjection, and constrains us rather than allureth
us to obey the will of the Lord: but I mean that willing humbling of our
selves before the face of God, which comes from an heart bleeding at the
conscience of his own unworthiness, and bruised with the sense of the Lords
undeserved goodness: and that more kindly, than if it were threatened with all
the judgments of the wicked, and were braied and broken with all the plagues
of hell.

The other extremity which agrees not with true humility, is blockish
senselessness, A Stoicall numneffe.
and that dead and devilish apoplexy of the mind, which runs without all
foresight, as neither caring for good nor bad, sweet nor sour, heaven nor
hell. They that labor of this disease, think it an high point of humility to
say, I am at a point, let God do what he will, I care not, if he save me, so
it is, if I be damned, what remedy? let men injury me as they will, come what
come will, I pass not. And these kind of men as past all feeling, and now more
brutish and blockish than any brute beast, in their life, neither tremble at
Gods judgments, nor rejoice in his promises; in death they fear not hell,
they desire not heaven, they are not grieved if they be damned, they are not
comforted to hear they shall be saved, they confess not their sins, they
profess not their faith, they show not their When sinners die a quiet death,
it is an evil sign.
hope, they live like stocks, and die like blocks. And yet the ignorant
people will still commend such fearful deaths, saying, he departed as meekely
as a lamb, he went away as a bird in a shell, when they might as well say,
(but for their fetherbed and their pillow) he died like a beast, and perished
like an ox in a ditch.

But to come to the use and fruit which we may gather out of this doctrine.
First let us consider that if we be come to have such a brawned and thick
skin over our consciences, A heart obdurate and hard in sin.
as neither by public preaching, nor private reading, as neither by the Law,
nor by the Gospel, as neither with threatenings nor promises, as neither by
praying nor meditating, we can find neither matter of comfort, nor humbling;
we are so far from humility, that we are as men rather dead than humbled,
and our case is most fearful. For in this Stoicall apathie and want of
feeling, we fear nothing; fearing nothing, we are easy to be deceived;
being easy to be deceived, we may soon be hardened, and so by security being
deprived of all heedfulnes, we are snared of the tempter ere we can be aware.

It remains to speak somewhat of these observations, which may fitly be
drawn out of the general speeches of the holy Ghost, either to our comfort or
humbling. Let this ^e our first lesson the^, not too greedily to desire
prosperity, nor being in some good case either Not too greedily to desire
prosperity.
of body or mind, to be too quiet in our selves, as resting securely in the
good thing possessed: but rather let us learn in most ease, to watch most over
our own hearts, in the greatest testimony of Gods grace and favor toward
us, to be most humbled in our selves, to be most jealous and suspicious over
our selves, least our hearts being by some privy pride stolen away, we give
not God that glory which is due unto him, whilst unthankfulness breeds
security, security brings privy pride, and privy pride prepares
Prosperity.
us for destruction. True it is, that prosperity in it self is the good gift
of God, and never hurts but when our own sin in immoderate desiring it, or
our corruption in vaingloriously possessing it, do abuse it to our hurt, and
so turn it to our harm. And surely besides that, in long prosperity we
contract and gather much dross of security, we shall find that the long want
of adversity, meeting with security, will flatter us and blindfold us with a
persuasion of impunitie, and so infatuate us, that we shall think how that
because we have long escaped, we shall never be punished. But seeing we learn
to judge no otherwise of sin, but by the punishment of it, we must mark
this strain, that God does no more punish presently every sin, than he
does reward presently every good deed: and by how much his long suffering
strives the more with us, and his mercy tarieth the longer for our
repentance; by so much when they fall, his judgments are more Gods judgments.
fearful and sudden, coming as the lightning out of the clouds. And so far
off it is that our long prosperity should either shadow us from the plaguing
hand that we should not be espied, or shelter us that we should be spared;
that rather as high Oaks amongst low shrubs, we lie more open to be seen, and
the more ready to be stricken when the Lord shall send forth his thunderbolts.
Hereupon it comes, that so many are either stricken suddenly dead in the
streets or in their houses, or else have their hearts hardened on their
deathbed. And here let all men beware in time of that secret and dangerous
corruption To accept the good means in time when God calls us to repentance.
of nature, that a man should be touched with the word, and his own conscience
tell him, that the power of God in his will revealed by Gods minister, has
surely stricken him: and yet (such is our pride) closely will not only at that
time hide all tokens of repentance, and bury all remorse of conscience; but
also under hope of having sorrow for sin at a beck, and when he lust, he
will refer it forsooth, because he will not be thought by his present
repentance, that the word came so near him; he is loath to give the minister
of Note.
God that honor that he should wound him; he is ashamed to shame himself, as
guilty of such a sin* Who so thus deferreth in the haughtines of his heart
(seeing repentance is not at our call) let him fear that his heart shall be
hardened for the contempt of the loving Romans 2. 4.
patience of the Lord, which day by day leads us to repentance.

In this first strain let us further learn especially to beware of pleasing
our selves too much in weldoing, because as all other sins are occupied in
vile and wicked matters, this creeps even into the best and most excellent
things. So that experience shall teach many corruptions, that the better they
have been occupied, the more subject men are to fall into it. Whereby there
grows not only an hautines of mind in rich men, men of authority, and such
as excel others in outward things: but more perilously there springs up a
spiritual pride in the excellency of wit, wisdom, knowledge, utterance,
Spiritual pride.
gracious speeches: and even herein are we often proud, In that we see our
pride more than others can do. And many of the dearest children of God often
find, that when God Note.
has most assisted them with the spirit of prayer, exhortation, admonition,
interpretation, Pray well before and after preaching.
or such like, which be all gifts of the sanctifying spirit, the more they have
been puffed up with this pride, either in the present action, or afterward. Which
thing no doubt proceeds from hence, that men please themselves too much in
the thing done, and do not return the whole glory to God. This is noted to
us as it were by examples in the word of God: Noah, whom an holy fear of
himself preserved from the corruptions of the old world; by want of fear, and
because of unthankfulness for his deliverance, was overtaken of drunkenness
after the stood. Lot, who suspecting himself being among the Sodomites, was
preserved from sin even in the sink of sin? afterward waxing remiss in
this godly jealousy, fell grievously into incell, even there where he desired
to go for his safety. David, so long as he was exercised and kept under the
hand of God with fighting the Lords battles, prevailed against many and
mighty sins: but when he received some breathing time of the Lord from his
former troubles, he was quickly over come of a woman, that could not be
ouermatched of many men. Especially then (that I omit the examples of Hezekiah,
Peter and Paul, of whom I spoke before) let us look to our hearts, after we
have received the best gifts, and let us consider the great wisdom of God
providing for our infirmity, in that prayer of our Savior Christ, where
immediately after that we have prayed to have our sins forgiven, we crave,
not to be lead into temptation. Which would seem strange to a man, that there
should be a commixtion of two such requests, were it not that through
corruption we were then most ready to be tempted, when we have tasted of the
greatest mercy. And surely as this was the first sin whereby Satan fastened
upon Adam: so it is the last sin which the most godly ^ail by. For when all
sins are as it were wounded, and all graces begin to abound? even out of the
ashes of those sins arises this monstrous sin of vainglory. And when
Satan can find courteous entertainment, now he will not doubt to prevail by
egging us to this one sin, that is, to be proud for ouercomming so many
sins, and excelling in so many graces. Surely if the devil mistrusted not
this weapon of proof, even in paradise, and that upon man, being in his
innocence; we must think that he hops as well now to get the victory in
this wicked world upon man so sinful, who now is as tender and as apt to
receive the least spark of vain-glorie, as the enemy is both strong and
subtle to strike it on us.

Yet further observe, that when our Lord Jesus Christ was most full of Gods
spirit, he was then led to be tempted in the wilderness; when he was most
furnished, he was most tried. On like manner, when we have received some great
gifts, we must look both that the Lord for his part will take some trial of
them, and that Satan also watching for the richest pray, and gaping for a man
when he hopes to have the best spoil, will for his part there use the most
force and cunning, where he finds the rarest and most notable servants of
God: partly because he most enuieth them, and partly for that by pride he
thinks soonest to inueigle them. Wherefore if Gods children shall truly
examine their own hearts in this sin, they shall have some testimony and
trial in themselves, whether they be thankful for Gods mercies in truth or
no, if having received much they fear much: and by how much the more they
increase in gifts, by so much they grow the more jealous over As graces
increase, so desire thy fear may increase.
their thoughts, words and deeds, and sit as it were in the watchtower of
their hearts, viewing to epsy even their least declinings. Which thing if we
could do in truth, he should not so have the graces of God and feeling of
the spirit by fits, but both in greater measure and longer continuance: the
want of which heed taking to our selves, constrains the Lord to punish us
(as I said) with dulnes and deadnes of spirit, thereby to preserve Wherefore
our feeling and joys are but by fits.
us from viler sins, which otherwise our pride and security would carry us
headlong into. And were it so that in reverence and fear we could attend more
on the Lord, we should not have his good spirit so rare a guest unto us, and
we should find the increase and return of greater consolations than we have.
Why do men then so much marvel at the dulnes of mind coming on them after
some rare feelings of the spirit, and when they have tasted joys glorious and
unspeakable, and think that now all the fruits of Gods grace are as clean
gone away in them, as if they never had tasted of the power of regeneration,
seeing unthankfulness is so ordinary and usual a sin with us? But admit we
have some good witness of conscience, and our heart tells us that we have
been thankful, then must we think that the Lord does try us, and will bring
us to acknowledge that the thing we had, was his only gift to give and take
away at his pleasure, and that it came Unthankfulness cause of dulnes.
not from our selves as a thing to command at our beck. Howbeit usually and
for the most part our unthankfulness is the cause of this dulnes. Now, albeit
this kind of buffeting be grievous unto us, yet we must not desire utterly to
be freed from it, because by it our pride is cured. For if that chosen vessel
and servant of the Lord, Paul, so abounding in graces of the spirit, so
frequent in fasting, so often in prayer, watchings and temptations, could not
prevail against this sin: seeing by all these former ways he could not
subdue this corruption in the flesh, we must not dream and delude our selves,
that we using nothing so many helps of mortification, should utterly be rid
from the same. When the Lord then shall exercise us with this prick in the
flesh, although it is the messenger of Satan to buffet us: yet we must take
hold on this to our comfort, that the Lord disposes and moderateth it: and
though we be often and long assaulted with it, yet still we must mislike it,
we must still be grieved for it, and pray in Christ against it; we must tremble
and Strange doubts in the godly of Gods wisdom* power, etc.
he humbled in our selves, that we should have such strange and doubting
thoughts of Gods wisdom, power, majesty, and providence, etc. and yet in
such manner and measure as knowing it to be Gods mercy, that by these means
the Lord would keep us from more vile and enormous crimes. Further and besides
this, the Lord gives us to see such monsters of the mind, to forewarne us,
and to make us more afraid of falling into the outward action of sin. Thus
we have often temptations of unbelief, to make us to fear Wherefore Gods
children are often exercised with evil thoughts
the falling from the faith; we have privy discourses of Popery, to show what
a dangerous thing it were to be given over unto Popery; we have often vile
thoughts of adultery, murder and theft, to drive us more earnestly to pray
that we never fall into th^^e sins in action. And for this cause they that
will not make some wholesome instruction of their inward temptations, nor
suspect their falling into the action of sin by the affection of sin, often
fall for their pride suddenly into adulteries, murders, thefts, heresies,
popery, and How the godly by not suspecting their affections, may fall to
gross actions.
such like. Thus the Lord comes by the messenger of Satan, the prick of the
flesh, to try us, whether we will stick to the word preached, or to such
suggestions ministered, to tri, our faith, to confirm us in the favor of God,
when we shall obtain the favor of God, who often assisteth his children
being humbled, even in most dangerous assaults, and leaves them being puffed up
in the least temptations, so as they fall, that thereby they may know what
help is of God and not of man. And howsoever flesh and blood counts this but
a paradoxe, yet sure it is, that our case is worse when the Lord cease by
such means to ^^ft and fan us, than when he holds us from some profitable
temptation for our exercise. For we shall see many, who desiring rather to ^e
freed from the cross, than to reap the fruit of it* although for the time,
wherein they endured their temptations at the first Security how dangerous.
they were clear and innocent: yet afterward have fallen most grievously,
because they would not profit by those temptations which the Lord sent, either
to punish some sin past, not thoroughly repented of, or to correct some sin
present not espied, or to forewarne us of sin to come not suspected of us
^ome have been tempted to heresy, some to pride, some to worldlines, who
disdainfully looking at such thoughts, as matters of no Note.
importance, though they were before unattained of these evils, yet now have
come to be heretics, proud persons, and worldlings. This ought to teach us
then most to suspect our selves, when we think our estate safest: And blessed
is the m^n that f^^reth al^^^es. This Pro. 28. 14.
numbnes of the soul, strives and strikes deeply even against the ordinance
of God for our salvation: (I mean the word, the Sacraments and prayer) so that
oftentimes our case stands thus, we thus say i^^ our selves; If I hear the
word, so it is, I feel no great want of it; in receiving the Sacraments I have
no pleasure; in not receiving them I have no grief. If the exercises of
religion private and public be used, there is no^ much good done; if Our
privy pride, not respecting the means had plentifully, how it is corrected.
they be omitted, there is no great hurt done; if I have spare time I can go
unto them, if I have never so little business I can keep me away from them
and be glad of such excuse. Surely this estate bewraieth a proud heart,
blessing it self with a fulness and cloyedenes of the means, and either
shows us to lie in some sin presently, or that we are like to fall into
some sin hereafter and that shortly. Howbeit being absent, i^ having these or
like affections we can mourn, beat our own hearts, and judge our selves,
enquiring of the things spoken at their hands, that have been at the
congregation; if being absent in body Abse^ce from the congregation.
with an humble sight of our want; we are as present in spirit; if even in
time of exercises we bestow the time in prayer, in reading, or in meditation,
the Lord will shield us from sin, and the shame of sin. Again, if we
shall find our selves subject to peeuishnes, concupiscence, or covetousness,
with less power to prevail against them that we have had; let us fear least
some pride has gone before: If we cannot recover our selves out of these
evils by prayer or mourning, let us suspect our own hearts, that some
security Note.
in the means has overtaken us, the Lord for a time has left us, the devil
has foiled us. It is a blessed thing to get the victory of our faults, before
they be joined with the offenses Victory over our faults before they get
strength and break forth.
of the world, with the grief of the godly, with the reproach of our
adversaries, with the trouble of our own consciences, with the hazard of Gods
glory. And therefore if it be so the good will of God, let us earnestly desire
him that our trials and temptations may be inward, that they may be stayed
and stenched when they begin, that they break not out abroad to the greater
dishonor of the Lord, and our further discomfort: which surely they will do,
if by cherishing them, and not checking them, we strive not for some safety
against them. Let us humbly therefore long before, fear this reproach to come,
and pray with the Prophet, Lord keep me from the reproach which I fear:
least otherwise the Lord seeing us make no conscience in these cases, be
avenged of us, who Psalm. 119.
surely will dishonor them that stick not to dishonor him. Cease then to
gaze at the work of God, and labor to gage the pride of your own hearts in
affection, which the Lord is contrained to shame us with, for the abuse of his
graces, for the discredit of his word, the contempt of his glory, and for the
neglect of our own salvation: which being before purposed, rather then it
should be unaccomplished, we shall have shameful Sergeants By what mes
sengers God awakens his children.
sent unto us; as fire on our houses, wars to spoil our goods, sickness to
weaken our bodies, and torment of mind to scourge our consciences, which will
draw us out by the ears from the heavy slumber of sin, wherein we snorted.
And thus fitly, though suddenly, we are slipped into the second point and
observation of this doctrine, which is, that we should not be too hie to enter
into the gates of adversity, nor being entered, to behave our selves
impatiently, as though it would undo us to sit in the house of mourning a
while: rather we must rejoice in it, and be thankful for it, saying with the
Prophet: It is good for me o Lord that thou have afflicted me, etc. because
the holy Ghost here tells us that Psalm. 11^.
lowliness goes before honor, and in the school of humility, we shall
learn the way to true glory and Nobility. Neither do I here mean, that
affliction in it self has of it self such virtue, as to humble us truly
under the hand of God: but when the spirit of God works with it, that then it
will breed in us the fruits of righteousness, repentance, faith, and
holiness; it will drive us to seek comfort in the world, to ask comfort by
prayer, to yield comfort by compassion on other men's evils. And therefore it is
necessary against the policy of Satan, who would discourage the Saints of
God in their profession, by dressing them with afflictions, to stay our selves
in this testimony of the holy Ghost, Use of the former doctrine.
that before glory goes affliction, and after lowliness comes honor,
either in this life, or in the life to come, or in both. This must further
teach us to profit by the threatenings of God publicly preached, not to
threaten them, or to murmr against them that lay the 1
judgments of God against us in the law: this must cause us to make much of
them, that by sharp censuring of us, will soonest draw us out of sin. This
must work in us a desire to 2
reap some fruit by private admonitions; yea, and to call on others to
admonish us that 3
we may still be kept in some good course of humility.

Further and besides this, it is profitable for us to frequent them that are
sick, ready to di^, perplexed in spirit, imprisoned in chains, and oppressed
with misery, that in them we To visit the sick.
may see our selves, as in a mirror: and so with Moses to choose rather to
suffer afflictions, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time. This
acquainting our selves with the judgments of Heb. 11. 25. 27.
God, will both rub off security, and stir us up to greater thankfulness
for our selves, and pity toward others. Wherefore, they are not in the way
of humility to obtain Hebr. 12. 2. 3.
glory, who are so tender sighted that they cannot abide to see the judgments
of God: they are too dainty eared, that cannot, or that will not hear the
threatenings of the Law: saying, oh I cannot abide to hear one in desperation,
I cannot away to hear such fearful speeches, to hear the devil speak in
one; I love not to see one lie gasping and panting in death; These things would
deprive me of all mirth, breed melancholy, and stir me up to m^^^es. Nay,
this delicatenes to fly from the Lord thus drawing near us, will hasten these
things upon us, which we will not profit by in others. Such eyes to see, such
ears to hear, such hearts to be humbled, it becomes Gods people to have,
that as they love nothing more than glory, so they labor for nothing more
than humility: as they shun nothing more than confusion, so they avoid nothing
more than pride of heart. Which that we may do, let us cast down our selves
before the throne of mercy, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christour
Savior.

O eternal God and our most loving father, behold us in thine own covenant,
etc.

FINIS.
OF THE GOOD EDVCATION OF CHILDREN. THE SIXTH SERMON.
Proverbs 17. 21. He that begets a fool, gets himself sorrow, and the
father of a fool can have no joy.
THE holy Ghost speaking in the Scripture of foolish sons, ( as that he that
be^etteth such a one, gets himself sorrow, and that the father of a fool
has no joy) means it not so much of natural idiots, and such as are
destitute of common reason (although it is true, that this is a lamentable
judgment of God, and a heaviness to the parents of such a child) as of wicked
children, such as are either ignorant in the word, not knowing how to order one
right step to the kingdom of God: or else having some knowledge of God,
ungodly abuse it, to maintain their carnal lust and appetite. For this
Foolish children.
cause as it would grieve parents to have natural fools to their children, or
such as either through some imperfection of nature are dismembered, or deformed,
and misfigured in the parts of the body: so much more should it grieve them to
have such children, as either for want of knowledge and heavenly wisdom,
cannot walk in the fear of God: or abusing the knowledge given them,
prostitute themselves to all sin and wickedness.

It is marvelous to see how greatly parents can bewail the want of one
natural gift proceeding of some imperfection, and how easily they can pass
over without any grief, the want of all spiritual graoes, springing from
corrupt education. In like manner, it is strange that men can take the matter
so heavily, when their children break into such offenses, as either have open
shame, or civil punishment following them, and yet can make no bones, but post
over such sins as are against the majesty of God, accompanied with
everlasting confusion and unspeakable torments: wherein what do most part of
men bewray, but their greathy pocrisie, in that neither their joy nor their
grief is sound to their children, and that they love themselves more in their
children, than either their salvation, or the glory of God? The tender love
and care whereof no doubt did increase the sorrow of David for the death of
his son Absolon, who was not so much grieved for the loss of a son, as for
that untimely end of his son. Let us learn therefore to correct our
affections to our children, and be grieved for our ignorance, impiety and
sins: whereof either our carnal compassion, the not lamenting of our own
natural corruption, the want For what causes the Lord afflicts parents in
their children.
of prayer for an holy seed, or profane education armed with the wrath of
God, may be a most just occasion. Can a man hope for a holy posterity? or do
we marvel if the Lord cross us in the children of our bodies, when we make
as bold and brutish an entrance into that holy ordinance of the Lord, as in the
meeting of the neighing horse with his mate, when being joined in that
honorable estate of matrimony, either as mere natural men without all
knowledge of God we beget our children: or as too carnal men without the
fear and reverence of the Lord, neither bewailing our corruption which we
received of our forefathers, nor praying against our infirmities which may
descend to our posterity, we abuse the marriage bed. Lastly, when having
received the fruit of the womb, we have no care by virtuous education to offer
it to the Lord, that our child by carnal generation may be the child of God
by spiritual regeneration? Surely no. And yet men without all looking up to
Gods providence and secret counsel, without all bethinking Education of
children.
themselves of their corrupt nature, from which their children are descended,
without all looking back into their wicked and godless bringing them up, will
fret against their sins, and fume against their children: yea often they will
correct them, and that to serve their own corruptions, not so much grieved for
that they have sinned against God, as that they have offended them. Christians
therefore must know, that when men and women raging with boiling lusts meet
together as bruit beasts, having none other respects than to satisfy their
carnal concupiscene, and to strengthen themselves in worldly desires, when
they make no conscience to sanctify the marriage bed with prayer, when they
have no care to increase the Church of Christ and the number of the elect, it
is the ^ust Marriage bed to be sanctified with prayer.
judgment of God to send them monsters, untimely births, or disfigured
children, or natural fools: or else such as having good gifts of the mind,
and well proportioned bodies, are most wicked, graceless, and profane
persons. Again on the contrary side, we shall find in the word of God noble
and notable men commended unto us for rare examples of virtue and godliness,
who were children asked and obtained of God by prayer. Our first parents Adam
and Eve being humbled after the birth of their wicked son Kaine, obtained a
righteous Abell, of whom, when by his bloody brother they Godly children Gods
special gift.
were ^ereft, they received that holy man Seth. Abraham begetting a child in
the flesh, had a cursed Ismael: but waiting by faith for the accomplishment of
Gods covenant, he obtained a blessed Isaac. Jacob not content with one wife,
according to the ordinance of God, was punished in his children: yet after
being humbled, he received a faithful Joseph. Elkanah and Anna praying and
being cast down, had a Prophet that did minister before the Lord. David and
Bethsheba lamenting their sins, obtained Solomon a man of excellent wisdom.
Zachary and Elizabeth fearing the Lord, received John the Baptist and
forerunner of Christ. Look what sins we have naturally, without Gods great
blessing, without prayer and humbling of our selves, we shall conueigh them to
posterity: and although the Lord do grant sometimes natural As beauty,
strength, wit, etc.
gifts unto the children of carnal and natural men, yet for the most part
they receive their natural If the child rese^ble his pa rent sin beauty,
strength, wit, for the most part naturally, he is infected with the sins which
accompanied those gifts in his parents, as pride, vainglory.
sins withal. But if the children of God by regeneration do see into
themselves, and lament their sins of generation, praying that their natural
corruptions may be prevented in their posterities, they shall see the great
mercy of God in some measure freeing their posterity from their sins.

Now when thou shall see such sins to be in thy children, enter into thine
own heart, examine thy self, whether they are not come from thee, consider
how justly the hand of God may be upon thee, and when thou would be angry
with thy child, have an holy anger with thy self, and use this or such like
meditation with thine own soul: Lord, shall I thus punish mine own sin,
and that in my child? Shall I thus prosecute the corruptions of my auncesters?
Nay I see, O Lord, and prove that thou art displeased with me, for the too
carnal desire of posterity. I lay then in some sin, I asked not this child
of thee by prayer; be merciful unto me O God, and in thy good time show some
pity upon A notable meditation in the correction of children.
my child. Thus thinking when thou go about to correct the corruption of
nature in thy child, which he could not help, arming thy self with prayer,
repenting with Jacob, thou shall be so affected, that as thou art desirous to
draw thy child out of sin, so yet to do it with the mildest means, and
with least rigor. And one thing is most wonderful, that 1
some will teach their children to speak corruptly, and do wickedly whilst
they are The folly of some parents.
young: and yet beat them for it when they are come to riper age. Again, some
will imbolden their children to practice iniquity toward others, which when
by the just judgment 2
of God, they afterward practice against their parents themselves, they are
corrected for it. And yet deal with these and such like men, for the evil
education of their children, and they will answer, do not we as much as is
of us required? We send our children to the Church to be instructed of the
pastor and to the school to be taught of the master; if they learn, it will
be the better for them; if not, they have the more to answer for another day,
what can we do more? But remember O man, consider O woman, whosoever thus
speak, that for thy sins sake, and thy want of prayer, there may be a
plague upon Parents must give their children a good example in their private
family.
the pastors pains, and a curse upon the teachers travail: If parents would
have their children blessed at Church and at school, let them beware they give
their children no corrupt examples at home, by any carelesnes, prophanenes, or
ungodliness; otherwise parents will do them more harm at home, than both
pastors and schoolemasters can do them good abroad. For the corrupt example
of the one, fights with the good instruction of the other, which is so much
the more dangerous, because that corrupt walking is armed with nature, and
therefore more forceably inclines the affections of children to that side. And
further, experience teaches us, that children like or mislike more by
countenance, When to begin to catechize children.
gesture and behavior, than by any rule, doctrine, precept, or instruction
whatsoever. Some there be also, that will not have their children taught,
until they be ten or twelve years old: because (as they say) before that
age, they have but an apish imitation. To whom I answer, that although indeed
they cannot then deeply discern, nor profoundly conceive things; yet how many
things before those years both will they receive and remember? And I demand,
if children being apish in imitating evil whilst they be young, which they
will have the habit of when they be old, why may they not much more better do
apishly good when they are young, which they may do carefully when they are
old? Besides, let them so go untaught, and they will grow so headstrong, that
they will sooner be broken than bended. And sure it is, that one stripe or two
words will do more good to a child in the beginning, than an hundred stripes
afterward. And here let parents be admonished of their indiscreet correction,
who do their children more harm in showing a merry countenance after their
discipline used, than they do good by their chastising, although in their
anger they be corrected. Neither do I purpose to take away natural We must
mourn and pray in the corrections of our children.
affections and a Christian kind of compassion in all our censures: for it is
my great complaint of the brutish unmercifulness of many parents herein; but I
would wish Christians to correct their indiscreet affections herein by
heavenly wisdom. Neither am I so Stoicall as to deny a more mild and
affable kind of speech, to be both lawfully and conveniently used to
children: but yet I wish it to be void of all unseemly leuitie, and without
all show of foolish, vain and unnecessary behavior. To be brief, how
needful Household government.
household government is toward our children, it may appear by the slender
thriuing and small profiting of religion and virtue, either in the Church or
Commonwealth. For complain men, and preach they never so much abroad,
unless they will begin to reform their own houses, and give religion a room
at home, especially in their own hearts, they shall travail much, and profit
little. And surely if men were careful to reform themselves first, and then
their own families, they should see Gods manifold blessings in our land upon
Church and Commonwealth. For of particular persons come families; of families
towns; of towns provinces; of provinces whole realms: so that conueighing
Gods holy truth in this sort from one to another, in time, and that shortly,
it would so spread into all parts of this kingdom. Well I say, let there be
never so good laws in cities, The want of household discipline cause of many
evils.
never so pure orders in Church, if there be no practice at home, if fathers of
families use not doctrine and discipline in their houses, and join their hands
to Magistrate and Minister, they may, but most unjustly (as many have done)
complain that their children are corrupted abroad, whereas indeed they were
before, and still are corrupted at home. Alas, if parents to whom the comfort
of their children well brought up, is a precious crown, will not inform and
reform their children in the fear of God, whom it does chiefly concern; how
should hope sustain these men, that others will perform this duty to them,
for whom the charge does far less appertain? Lastly let parents remember,
that therefore oftentimes they have disordered and disobedient children to
themselves, because they have been disobedient children to the Lord, and
disordered to their A note for parents.
parents when they were young; wherefore because they have not repented, the
Lord punishes their sins committed against others, with the like sin in
others against themselves.

Will thou know then O father, how thou may have that blessing, to be the
blessed father of a blessed seed? will thou know O mother, how to avoid that
curse, to be the cursed mother of a cursed seed? then bring thy children
within the covenant, endeavor to make thy son by nature, the son of God by
grace; and thy daughter by nature, the daughter of God by grace: and remember
that God which on his part protested to our father Abraham, that he was all
sufficient for the accomplishment of his promise, in giving him a blessed
seed, required also of our father Abraham for his part, that he should walk
before him and be upright.

Will thou then have the one part of this covenant, that is, that God should
bless thee in thy seed? then remember thou also the other part, that thou
walk before the Lord and be upright. Will thou have thy children as the
blessed seed of Abraham? teach them with Abraham the commandments of God,
pray for them with Abraham that they may live in the sight of the Lord; be
ready to offer them with Abraham, that they may be an holy sacrifice to the
Lord; It is thou O man, O woman, that may do thy child the greatest good and
the greatest harm: if thou praiest for him, and repentest for thy self, the
Lord will bless thy care, the pastors pains, and the teachers travail. But
if thou despisest these duties, the Lord will deny thee those blessings, and
the curse of God will be upon thy child at home in thy house, abroad in the
Church and in the school. And seeing that the Lord has promised that he will
be thy God, and bless thy seed, if thou be faithful: thou may both
hope, that thou art of the faithful, if thou have a blessed seed, and fear
that thou have not as yet the blessing of the covenant, when thy seed is
cursed.

But some will say, had not Jacob wicked children, and David godless sons?
And does Objection.
not daily experience teach us, that wicked men have godly children? Yes: for
besides the secret counsel of the Lord herein, we must know that neither the
promise of the Lord is so universal, that every particular child of a
faithful man should be within the covenant: for if of many there be but one
blessed, the promise is performed. Yea which more is, though that a faithful
man have never a good child, yet if unto the thousand generation there be but
one good, the covenant is not broken. Neither must we tie the Lords work so
much to man, that a good man may not have an evil son, seeing though the Lord
visit not his sins, yet he may visit the sins of some of the forefathers,
to the third and fourth generation going before.

To the second I say: that an evil father having a good child, though the Lord
show not mercy to that particular man therein, yet he may remember his promise
to some of the forefathers in the thousand generation going before. And though
that an evil man have no cursed child, yet the curse may be accomplished in
the third and fourth generation following. Wherefore not speaking of election
or reprobation, which we leave only to the Lord to make good or bad, according
to the good pleasure of his own will, I exhort parents to use the ordinary
means to bring up their children, so as they either by some good tokens may
see them the children of God, and heirs of the covenant: or at the least be
comforted in their own consciences, if the Lord refuse their children for some
cause unknown, in that to their ability they have used all good means to
bring them up well, and offered them to God. And if parents have cause to be
grieved, when thus travailing in good education, they cannot see good in their
children; how much more cause of grief may they have, when they have used no
labor at all to bring them up in the fear of the Lord? and yet many will be
grieved for the one, that will not be grieved for the other. Wherefore let us
learn (if we will conueigh Gods blessings to our posterities) to use all holy
duties thereunto: and on the contrary, if we will be loath to conueigh Gods
judgments to our children, let us carefully avoid all means that lead unto
them. And surely as it is a blessed thing in the hour of death with Sim^on to
depart in peace, leaving our wife, children and servants spouses to Christ,
children to God, and servants to the Lord: so in death no one thing will be
more grievous to a man, than, the Lords having given him the charge and
dignity of so many souls, to be furthered to salvation, that his own
tormented conscience shall press him, how, in as much as he could, he has
helped them forward to their damnation; and so, which is more fearful, he
shall have them spuing and That parents may have a good conscience in death.
foming out in his face continual curses, in hell accusing him for ever to be
the murderer of their souls. Howbeit, I do not exempt children from all
blame, so charging the parents, as though the children were free from all
guiltiness herein: for I am not ignorant, that as in the time of Ezekiel, so
in our days, youth is ready enough to take up this Proverb, The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. But I affirm,
that though the occasion be offered of such wicked parents, yet the cause of
destruction is still in the children themselves. And besides that, it is sure
that the soul which has sinned shall die the death. Seeing also there be some
young men, who notwithstanding the great prophanenes of the most, the manifold
corruptions offered abroad, the ungodly examples abounding at home, are so
mightily preserved by the seed of grace, that they escape safely in an holy
course of life, lamenting when they see the least occasion of evil, rejoicing
in the least occasion of good things: the rest who please themselves, and hope
to shelter their sins under their parents defaults, are plainly left without
excuse, and are justly guilty of the blood of their own souls. Labor
therefore ye young men to wipe away the tears of grief from your fathers eyes,
and stay the sorrowful spirits of your tender mothers, and consider with your
selves, if you have any good nature in you, and have not buried the use of
common reason, what a shame it is to be a shame unto your fathers, to whom ye
ought to be a glory: and think ye wanton wits, that have not cast off all
natural affections, what a contempt it is to be a contempt unto your mother,
to whom ye have offered as it were a despightfull violence, in that ye are as
it were a corrosiue unto her heart, when as ye should have bin a Crown unto
her head.

The end of all this briefly is thus much, that parents having children not
walking either in knowledge or in a good conscience, must make some use of so
just a cause of grief, examining themselves, and accusing their own souls
before the Lord; either for that their meeting was profane to so holy an
estate; or brutish, because they desired rather a seed like unto themselves in
flesh and blood, than such as might be like to Christ by grace and new birth;
or that they begat their of spring, as mere natural or very carnal men; or
because they either profanely neglected al educatio^, or monstrously misliked
that in their children which they liked in themselves, and punished in them
their own corrupt precepts; or for that they suffered injuriously their
children to do evil unto others, which they could not suffer them to do unto
themselves: or untaught that at home which was taught abroad; or in that they
do lie in some sin unrepented of; or else because they never made conscience
to bring their posterity within the covenant of salvation: but still loved
their flesh in their children, and not their souls. And children must here
also learn, that it is one special property of a liberal and ingenuous
nature, to be careful so to live, that in time they may be a glory to their
fathers, and a joy to their mothers: which the Lord grant to us all for his
glory, and our everlasting comfort: through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior.

FINIS.
OF REPENTANCE, AND TRVE SORROVV FOR SIN: THE SEVENTH SERMON.
Acts 2. verse. 37. 38. Now when they heard it, they were pricked in their
hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other Apostles, Men and brethren, what
shall we do?

Then Peter said unto them, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, etc.


IN this portion of the holy book of God is set down to us an effect, or
rather a fruit of Peter his sermon, which he made for the answering of the
slanderous reports of the Jews, at what time they saw the wonderful gifts of
God sent down upon the Apostles. In which Sermon, the Apostle had pricked
their consciences with showing them their sins, telling them of a surety,
that their iniquity was the cause of Christ his death: whereby a certain care
began to be wrought in them, in so much that being thus troubled, they
enquired and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Whereupon afterward
followed the second Sermon of Peter: where he exhorts them to continue in
their repentance, and teaches us that if our sorrow be good, we must go
forward therein. Further he shows them to this end, that they must believe,
that believing they may be baptized, that being baptized they might receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. Lastly it is manifest, how they hearing that
Sermon, first received the doctrine, and after perseuered in the practice of
the same. Briefly therefore three things are hereto be noted. First, the fruit
Three things to be noted in this text.
of the former Sermon of Peter contained in these words: Now when they heard
it, etc. Secondly, the sum of a new Sermon of Peter in these words: Then
Peter said unto them, Amend your lives, etc. Thirdly is set down the fruit of
their obedience. In the former part of this Chapter we may know the wonderful
works of God, that the Apostles, who were never brought up in schools, spoke
with diverse tongues: which when the multitude heard, some are said to marvel
and to be astonished: some mocked them and said, They are full of new wine. But
when Peter with great boldness of spirit had in this Sermon which he made, set
the truth of God against their false accusations, and had preached against
their sin, then they left off mocking, and were pricked in their hearts.
Where first we may note the power of Gods word, which only is able to touch
our consciences for sin. For The power of Gods word, in the conversion of
sinners
neither the diversity of tongues, nor other gifts of the holy Ghost could
prick their hearts, as being able only to cast them into an admiration. What
more forcible thing than that which causes a godly sorrow, and causes our
consciences to be pricked? What so able to prick our consciences as the word
of God? Indeed many feel sorrow, and are inwardly pricked: but because
therewith is not joined the power of Gods word, they be either senseless as
blocks, or in their feeling they be murmurers. This comes unto us by the
dignity of Gods word, in that no wonders from heaven, no miracles on earth can
touch our hearts, and work in us any good fruit without the same. For though
the Lord should show unto us all the wonders from heaven, which he showed on
the old world, and on Sodom, although he should lay all the plagues upon us,
which he laid on Pharaoh, and on the Egyptians, without the word of God, we
should be as unprofitable beholders, as ever were the Sodomites, and should
become as hard hearted as ever were Pharaoh, and the Egyptians: so that no
judgment from heaven, no trouble from earth can humble Three ways.
us, no blessing from above, no benefit from beneath can profit us, until the
word of God comes, which teaches the old way to forsake it, the new way to
enter into it, and the perfect way, to continue in it. And thus much for the
general scope of this doctrine.

Now more particularly we may observe in this first part three things. First,
the power Note.
of the word to prick our consciences. Secondly, that this prick must not
cause in us a more rebelling against the word and Ministers thereof: but rather
a greater reverence to them both. Thirdly, such pricks must prepare us to a
greater desire to profit. For the first The first entry to godliness, and
beginning of repentance is a godly sorrow for sin.
we must know, that this is the beginning of repentance, and this is the entry
to godliness, even to conceive a sorrow for our sins, and so be wounded
with a feeling of our evils. For as long as men are secure, it is not possible
that they should seriously apply their mind unto doctrine, neither without the
knowledge and feeling of our sins can we heartily long for Christ. To this
agree the Law, the Prophets, and the Apostles. The law, because in all their
sacrifices, wherein Christ was prefigured, was manifested also under dark
signs, the contrition of heart, and acknowledging their unworthiness. The
Prophet as David and Esaias. David in the fourth Psalm and fifth verse faith,
Tremble and sin not: where the Prophet shows, that this is an effectual
thing to true repentance, to quake and Psalm. 4. 5.
tremble for fear of Gods judgments. That we may then truly examine our
selves, we must fear and humble our selves, because before trouble, terror,
and quaking at the judgments of God, we will never be brought to offer our
selves to Christ alone. In Psalm 51. verse. 18. 19. the Prophet likewise
shows, that no sacrifice is acceptable to God without a contrite heart, that
is, neither prayer, neither almes-giuing, neither praise of thanksgiving, unless
we bringing an humble and contrite spirit with us, cast our selves down
before his judgment seat, and sue for mercy in Christ. And here mark that he
says, The sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit, etc. where he using the
plural number shows, that the sacrifices of repentance, which must not be
one, but many, are humblenes of the spirit, and contrition of heart. For the
affliction of the soul and contrition of the mind, do so cast us down,
wounded with our sins, and humbled with a feeling of Gods wrath, as that it
makes us to acknowledge that we are nothing of our selves, and to seek for
our salvation wholly at the mercy of God. No marvel then (seeing by this
means we being confounded and ashamed of our selves, and staying our selves on
the only promises of God, do come to confess our own nakedness and
wretchedness) if the Prophet should say, that the Lord is pleased, with his
sacrifice as with the sacrifice of sacrifices. The Prophet Esaias 40. 6. 7. 8.
says. All flesh is grass, and the beauty thereof as a flower of grass; the
grass withers, and the Esaias 40. 6. 7. 8.
flower falls, when the breath of the Lord falls upon it. Where the Prophet
painting out man in his proper colors, and driving him to seek out salvation
not in himself, but in Christ, describes the outward part of man to be as
grass: and by the flower of grass, he shows his gifts of mind being
unregenerate, as wisdom, memory, knowledge, and understanding. So that, when
Gods spirit does but breath on us, all our wisdom, all our knowledge, riches,
and authority fall before the presence of the Lord of hosts, neither can we
remain, but only by the word of God, whereby we are borne again. Wherefore
the considering and meditating of our transitory estate, drives us to a
contrition and humblenes of spirit. Besides, the Lord God, says Esaias, whom the
heavens cannot contain, nor the earth hold, Esaias 66 and 57. 14. 15.
will come and dwell with a lowly, poor, and troubled spirit, and which
stands in awe of his word* God does not accept our sacrifices, which are
offered without trembling at his word, no more than if we should kill a man,
and choke a dog, or offer swines flesh, which was counted an abominable
thing among the Jews, or praise the thing that is unright. Lastly, to this
accords the Gospel, and the Apostles. Our Savior Christ, Matthew. 9* 13.
says, I Matthew. 9. 13.
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; not every sinner,
but that sinner which condemns sin in himself, and is weary and laden
with his sins. Matthew. 11. 28. Matthew. 21. 32. our Savior Christ prefers the
harlots and Publicans before the Pharisees: for they being pricked for their
sins and convicted, did sorrow, and heard John preaching unto them. So then
Christ gives relief to those that want, righteousness to them that feel
themselves sinners, ease to them which are burdened, light to them which are
in darkness, life to them which are dead, and salvation to them which
condemn themselves. The Apostle delareth, 1. Corin. 14. how the Corinthians
were moved with strange tongues: but yet had not in admiration the word.
Besides, he shows by comparing the gift of tongues and prophesying together*
that if an Infidel or unlearned man should come, and hear them speak with
strange tongues, he would say, they were out of their The power of the plain
and simple preaching of the Gospel.
wits: but if he should hear them speak the word of God plainly, he would
be rebuked of all men and judged of all men, and so the secrets of his heart
should be made manifest, he would fall down on his face and worship God and
say plainly, when he feels his sins, they rifle mine heart, they show my
secret sins, doubtless this is Gods doing, God is in them, I will follow this
religion. Wherefore in this appears the power of the word, The power of the
word.
in that it cites and summoneth our consciences before the tribunal of God,
and wounds us with a lively feeling of Gods judgment, that he, who before
through security did despise sound doctrine, may now be constrained to give
the glory unto God. This appears more plainly, Hebr. 4. 12. where it is
said, that the word of God is lively, mighty in Heb. 4. 12.
operation, and sharper than any two edged sword, and it pierces through, and
searches the most secret chambers of the soul, and deuideth thought from
thought: and then all our holiness shall seem hypocrisy, all our
righteousness shall seem as a defiled cloth: we shall find with Paul, that
in us, that is, in our flesh, dwells no righteousness. For men's consciences
are The word must pierce us.
cold, neither are they touched and displeased with their evils, so long as
they be in ignorance: but when the word of God pierces into the uttermost
corners of their consciences, and tells them, that they have to do with the
Lord; they are thoroughly touched and begin to fear, and entering into
themselves, examining their conscience, they come to the knowledge of that,
which before they had forgotten. We can never be offered to God without his
spirit, John 16. verse. 8. For he reprooueth the world of sin, and awaketh
John 16. 8.
our consciences, that those sins, which before were hid, should be made
manifest. David did lie an whole year without this prick of conscience, and
thought that all was well, 2. Sam. 1. 2.
until Nathan came, neither did he find comfort of conscience, until he had
thus been pricked, Joseph's brethren was thirteen years, and never remembered
their sins, until after such time the Lord laid it before them. The Prophet
David, Psalm. 32. (which he entitled a Psalm of instruction concerning the
free remission of sins) teaches how we A false persuasion of the pardon of
sins in many.
shall find the same. For many persuaded themselves, that their sins are
forgiven, when they be not. He also shows, that until trouble of mind did
drive him to particularize and confess his special sins to God, he found no
comfort. Manasses did eat the bread of sorrow, and did drink the water of
grief, and until he had lamented and sorrowed for his sins he felt no
rest, nor peace. The woman of Samaria, John 4. was pleasant, and iested with
our Savior Christ, until her sins were opened, and then she began to
answer with more reverence. For until she was willed to call her husband,
she thought all was safe: but after he had told her, that she had played
the adulteress, she acknowledged him that he was a Prophet. Wherefore we
may see by this which has been spoken, that the word of God only pricketh our
consciences, as plainly may here appear by the Jews, who cared not for the
Apostles, nor made any conscience, until their hearts were pricked.

In the second place we must note, that they were rightly pricked. For many
oftentimes are pricked, which kick against the prick, and having their
consciences galled by the word, they murmr either against the preacher of the
word, or against the word it self. Signs of godly sorrow.
Here then is the difference between the godly and the wicked, the one is
pricked, and is made more careful in a godly conscience; the other more
hardened than before. But this is a godly sorrow, when we love the man that
rebukes us, and reverence the word the more being by it reproved in our
conscience. Do we love him then that rebukes us? then we hear profitably.
Let us examine our selves in this sort: I see God has wounded me by him, he is
the instrument whereby God does humble me, I will therefore love him. To be
often touched with out amendment, dangerous.
Contrarily, if we be often touched and amend not, we are in danger of Gods
wrath. Many indeed are pricked with poverty, many with sickness, and some with
other like afflictions, but few with their sins, which is the cause of their
poverty, sickness, and other afflictions. Let us then learn a willingness to
offer our selves to be taught and to be pricked for sin, as these men were.
The wicked also are pricked sometimes: but it is rather for fear of
punishment, than for conscience to displease God, as were Caine and Judas. Some
men are How foolishly many would put off their sorrows.
pricked, and to put away their sorrow, they will go sleep, they will go
play, they will go sport, they will get to merry company, and pass away the
time, and so, as they term it, they will purge and drive away the rage of
melancholy: they never go to any preacher, to ask of the Lord, or at the
mouth of his spirit: they never respect prayer, nor seek any comfort in the
word of God. But to put away sorrow on this sort is to call it a again, and to
feel it more freshly either in the hour of death, or in hell. Contrariwise,
if our sorrow does drive us to prayer, or to the word of God, it is good. As
for the wicked and profane worldlings, though (as the Wiseman says,
Ecclesiast. 11.) he spend all his days without any evil, yet his darkness
will be greater than his light, his sorrow greater than his pleasure, his loss
greater than his gain, his trouble greater than his vanity in hell. Let us not
then so carnally shake off this godly sorrow: for the word will send us often
an unquiet spirit, that we may seek to be quiet in Christ. To examine our
selves herein: Have we heard the word of God? were we pricked by it? then have
we profited: Have we not bin pricked thereby? then as yet are we not a
sacrifice for the Lord. For, as was said before, Christ comfort them that
are troubled, he helps them that doubt, he eases them which are in
distress, he sets their feet in the way of peace and gladness, that have
long been in darkness and sorrow. Have ye not been sorrowful, and will ye
learn a salve for this sore? be sorrowful, that ye were not sorrowful; be
pricked in your hearts, because you were not pricked. Have we heard the word?
let us examine our selves, if our knowledge A true examination of our selves.
be the better, if our affections be the holier. As having heard the exposition
of the law of God, do we fear God? do we know how to love God? do we pray
to God? do we worship God in our souls, and in our bodies more carefully, and
in greater conscience than we have done heretofore? Are we not now as profane
and careless still in giving the right worship to the true God, as before we
were too superstitious, in serving Angels, Saints, and other false gods;
neither sorrowing for our Idolatry, nor caring for true religion? Have we not
blasphemed, and profaned the name of God in vnreuerent hearing his word, in
unprofitable talking of his works, and abusing his own majesty with swearing
and cursing as much as ever we did before we heard his word? Have we kept
holy the Sabbath? or have we not profaned it, by open neglect of the word, by
playing, sporting, In our examination he teaches us to follow the order of
the commandments.
drinking, and other vanities? Do we not still send forth our servants to
dispatch our business on that day, as if it were the market day, when they may
do such things most lawfully? Are not parents, householders, and governors,
as slack in provoking obedience; and children, servants and subjects, as slow
in yielding obedience as ever they were) parents in the mean time, not seeing
that children therefore rebel against them, because they rebel against God;
nor householders perceive that servants do not their duties to them, because
they do not their duty to God? Are we less wrathful, and more merciful?
Are we less riotous, and filthy defilers of our flesh? and are we more
sober, chaste and holy? Are we less given to oppression, to hard dealing one
with another, and more just, righteous, and careful to maintain the good
estate of our brethren? Are we not backbiters, slanderers, or sowers of
discord, causers of contention among our neighbors? being far off from
maintaining love, unity, and the good name of our brethren? The cause why we
cannot see further into these things, is, because we flatter our selves, Note.
and because we compare our selves with our selves and with others, but not
with the rule of Gods word. Let us then learn to accuse our selves, and to
judge our own consciences. For if God see us condemn our selves, he will not
condemn us; if we accuse our selves, 1. Cor. 11. 30. 31.
God will not suffer Satan to accuse us; if we judge our selves, God will
acquit us from the fearful judgment to come; if we be displeased for our
sins, God will be pleased with us in Christ his righteousness. On the
contrary, whilst we lie in our sins, we lie in our own blood; if we judge
not our selves, God will both judge us, and be revenged of our sin; he will
set our house on fire, he will send enemies, he will send earthquakes, he will
send famines to consume our goods, he will make friends foes, he will send
sickness and soreness upon our bodies, and a troubled spirit into our souls,
he will send us an ill name: thus will he bring plague upon plague until we
repent, and come to a feeling of our sins. And why does God all this? because
we will not come to judge our selves. For this cause (says the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11. 30.) that is, because we judge not our selves, many are weak, and
sick among you, and many sleep. 31. For if we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged. 32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world. Likewise the Prophet, Psalm.
89. and 30, 31. 32. 33. But if his children for sake my law, and walk not in
my judgments, if they break my statutes and keep not my commandments: then
will I visit their transgression with the sword, and their iniquity with
strokes: yet my loving kindness will I not take from him, neither will I
falsify my truth. For as a father withdraws from his child sometimes his
love, and whippeth him with the rod of correction: so the Lord deals often
with his children, and scourges their naked conscience. Simile.
God does judge his here, but his enemies will he judge in the world to come:
if we be not punished here, the punishment will be as thunderbolts in the day
of judgment. Have thou been afflicted, and not profited? Will not a little
cross serve thee? a greater shall come to thee. Will not a few troubles turn
thee to God? then many shall come upon thee. If a man be not troubled for sin
here, it is the way to hell: if he be troubled here, it is the Sorrow for
sin, the way to heaven.
way to heaven. And as they which have not bin troubled having had a little
joy, shall have eternal pain: so they which here have had a little pain,
shall after have everlasting joy. They that are corrected and have profited by
it, are afflicted of the Lord in mercy: but they that be vexed and amend not,
receive a token of Gods further wrath. Luk 16.
Wherefore we must not look to feel comfort in the remission of sins,
unless we also True humiliation before sound comfort.
have sorrow for committing our sins. For never any of Gods children were
comforted thoroughly, but they were first humbled for their sins. To the
working of which humiliation, we must remember Gods judgments showed on
others. Has God destroyed the whole world for sin, and can he not, or will
he not destroy thee for sin? Has he overthrown whole nations, and will
he suffer thee to lie still in thy sins? See how full hell is already, and
yet daily we run headlong thither. Consider also how great thy sin was,
that could not be cleansed but by the blood of Jesus Christ: Oh how foul was
that sin, that nothing else could wash it, but Christ his heart blood? Oh how
great was our guiltiness, that was raunsomed by such a price? How great was
the sore that needs such a salve? how deep was the wound that needed such a
medicine? O loving kindness and unspeakable love toward us! Shall Christ Romans
6. 12. Zach. 12. 10. 11. Gal. 5. 24. 2^.
^ee slain for our sins, and we not labor to slay sin in our selves?
Shall Christ dye for our sins, and sin as yet is not dead in us? Shall
Christ be crucified for us, and will we not crucify sin in our selves?
Shall Christ have his heart pricked with a spear, and shall not we have our
hearts pricked with sorrow? This is the true use and meditation of Christ his
passion. We are wont to defy the Jews for accusing Christ, we spit at Judas
for betraying Christ, and we condemn Pilate for condemning Christ: but we
are much more to be at defiance with our sins, which accused him before the
judgment seat of God; we are to accuse our selves, who have and daily do
betray him; we must condemn ourselves, whose sins have condemned him. But
if neither the judgments of God, hell, nor the cross of Christ can move us,
then let us examine our selves how we can rejoice in Christ.

It follows to speak of the counsel of Peter, Repent: as if he should say,
I know your Not to content our selves with sorrow for sin, but to proceed to
repentance. 2. Cor. 7. 9* 10
hearts are pricked, howbeit I will show you, how it is the policy of the
devil, to make these good motions quickly to wax dry in you, he will stay
you from perseuering, you must therefore endeavor to continue in this godly
sorrow. The Apostle saw, that this sorrow, which, as Paul witnesses, is not to
be repented of, as well begun in them: but in continuing his Sermon still to
that effect, he shows that our sorrow must be also continual. Many sorrow,
as has been showed, but in a worldly sorrowing, which brings eternal death,
not in a godly grief which brings repentance never to be repented of.
Wherefore we are to note that repentance begins in us, continues and ends
with sorrow. Note.
Now, if it might be, it were expedient to show what repentance is. In one
word, repentance Repentance what it is.
is not a bare leaving of sin, but an utter condemning and misliking of that
sin which we have left. For though we have left it, yet it may make us to
sorrow for it many years after, yea even at the point of death. David had left
his sin, but it caused him to sorrow many years after. Joseph's brethren had
forsaken and almost forgotten their sin, yet it troubled them, and grieved
them thirteen years after. Our pricking of heart therefore Rom 6. 3 4. Phil.
3. 9. 10. 11.
must be continued and daily renewed. This repentance is figured in Baptism,
both in that we must dye to sin, and bury it, and also that we must rise
again to newnes of life* for a man cannot dye to sin but by the virtue of
Christ his death, neither can he rise to righteousness without power of his
resurrection. Now we must know, that as our sins are forgiven, so we must
also receive Gods spirit. If God promises mercy to our children, much more to
us, if we believe and receive his promises; if to them which are a far off,
much more to them that are near. And yet though we have been baptized an
hundred What is meant by the gift of the holy Ghost. Act. 2.
years, and have not received the holy Ghost, we may dye in our sins. Some
understand by the gift of the holy Ghost, the graces of God bestowed on the
Apostles: but in my judgment their opinion is not sound, because that was a
particular thing given only to them of that time, this promise is general and
respects all posterities. We are then to Sorrow for sin must be continued.
note, that repentance is a continual course of sorrow, and if we have this
in truth, then may we boldly seek for comfort out of Gods word, and from his
ministers, and look What comfort they give us on earth, the same shall be
sea^ed also in heaven. Wherefore as it is requisite continually to till the
group(...)f we will have fruit and daily Note.
to eat, if we will live: so in spiritual things, we must be humbled with
continual sorrow, that we may be refreshed with daily comfort in Christ, in
whose name let us pray. Our Father, etc.

FINIS.
THESE THREE SERMONS FOLLOVVING, viz. the 8. 9. and 10. concerning the heavenly
purchase, were preached upon the 13. Chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew,
verse. 44.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
Matthew. 13. verse. 44. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure
hid in the field, which when a man has found, he hides it, and for joy
thereof departs, and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.
THe whole scope, and drift of the holy Ghost in this place, is to show The
scope of the text.
that the word of God is to the children of God, more dear than heaven and
earth, and that the Word is the only treasure that God has left unto them,
the which indeed is a hidden treasure, unknown unto many, but known unto the
children of God, and the only treasure which they desire: for they which do
know it, and perceive the true The love of the Saints to the word.
use of it, do make such a reverent account thereof, as that they are ready
to leave all things, and to seek for it; and when they have found it, they are
ready likewise to loose all, and to depart from all things (that may hinder
it) which they have, and to do all things which serve as good means to keep
it, to the end that they may come to the full assurance and possession thereof.

Although I might make a division of this Text into two parts, as first, the
inestimable value of the word of God: and secondly, the precious account that
is to be made thereof, yet because every word has his weight, and the text
yields a sufficient method as it lies, I will omit the division, and come to
the words as they lie.

Again, the kingdom of heaven, etc. The kingdom of heaven is taken in two
diverse senses, 1
first, as all men do know, it is taken for that glorious estate which the
Saints and the The diverse acceptatio^ of these words, kingdom of heaven.
children of God shall enjoy, when they shall arise with Christ Jesus, and
reign after this life with God and his Angels, sin, hell, and death being
subdued; which because it is apparent unto all men, we will not stand to
approve. The kingdom of heaven is also taken for the entrance which Gods
children have into Gods kingdom, in this world, which is of two sorts, partly
of the means whereby God offers his kingdom unto them, and partly 2
of the graces of his spirit which he offers by the means: For proof that
it consists 1
of the graces offered by the means, we read that Jacob Genesis the 28. when
he saw the 2
vision of God and the Angels ascending, and descending, and had the
comfortable promise of salvation, and of Gods continual presence and
assistance made unto him, then he awaking, said, Verily this is none other
thing but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. And that it is of
the means, it appears by the 16. chapter of Matthew, where our Savior First
it is taken for the means.
Christ says unto Peter, And unto thee will I give the keys of the kingdom
of heauen-and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And this
means of entrance into the kingdom of heaven, as it was committed unto Peter,
so was it also unto the rest of the Apostles, as it ap peareth by John the 21.
whose sins (says Christ) ye remit are remitted, and whose sins yet
retain are retained. And as unto them, so unto all the true Ministers of the
word of God, succeeding them unto the end of the world, as it appears by
Matthew the 28. the 19. and 20. verses: Go therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo,
I am with you always, until the end of the world. The Apostles are gathered to
their fathers, but the ministry shall be for ever, it continues unto the end
of the world, and therefore unto the Ministers also are committed the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, The keys of the kingdom of heaven committed to all
Ministers of the Gospel.
and they are the porters of the kingdom of heaven, as the Apostles were. Now,
this is evident by Ephesians. 4. 11. etc. He gave some to be Apostles, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Doctors: And unto these he committed the
ministry of the word, until the time that all the elect Saints of God were
gathered together, and the body of Christ throug^ly builded up: which should
not be before the end of the world.

By this we see that the Ministers are the porters of heaven, and that they
have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, as the Apostles had. Of this kingdom
our Savior Christ speaks, Matthew. 23 13. where he reprooueth the Scribes and
Pharisees, saying: Woe be unto you Interpreters of the Law, for you have shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men, for ye your selves go not in neither
suffer ye them that would enter to come in. What these keys be, our Savior
Christ shows, Luke the 11. the 52. saying: Woe be unto you Interpreters of
the Law, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge, ye enter not in your
selves, and them that came in ye forbad. Of this kingdom our Savior also
speaks, Matthew. 9. verse. 35. And Jesus went about all cities and towns*
teaching in the Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom. And in
the 10. of Luke the 10. and 11. verses, our Savior Christ bids his
Disciples to go and preach: but if they will not receive you, go your ways
out of the streets of those cities and towns, and say, Even the dust that
eleaueth on us of your city, we wipe off against you: notwithstanding know
this that the kingdom of God was come near unto you. And in Luke 17. 21. when
the Pharisees asked Christ a question when the kingdom of Christ should come,
he answered them and said: The kingdom of God comes not by observation and
glorious signs, neither shall men say, lo here, and lo there, for the
kingdom of God behold Look to the translation. Luke. 17. 21.
it is among you. And here we must beware of these translations who have it
thus translated, the kingdom of God is within you: for we must not think that
the kingdom of God was in every one of the Scribes and Pharisees, but that it
was amongst them; so that every one is not the kingdom of God, as the Family
of love teaches. And in Matthew 21. verse. 43. Christ speaking unto the
unthankful Jews, says: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
shall be given unto a nation that shall bring forth fruit. Where we see that
the kingdom of God is taken for the ministry of the Word, and the
application of the kingdom of God unto us: and here we are to know that by
these means of the ministry of the Word, as Fasting, Prayer, etc. the
kingdom of God is offered unto us: but these are not the kingdom, but the
means to bring us thereunto, as is evident by Esaias 52. verse 14. the which
afterward is repeated and applied unto this end of the Apostle Paul, Romans the
15. and 21. verse: To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see him, and they
that heard not shall understand him: where it is apparent that the ministry
of the Word The Ministry of the word is the means to bring us to the
knowledge of Christ, and so to his kingdom.
is the means to bring us to the knowledge of Christ, and so to his kingdom.
The kingdom of God is wholly spiritual, as Romans the 14 and 17. verse. The
kingdom of God (says the Apostle) is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And that the kingdom of
God consists partly of all the graces of the spirit proceeding from this
means, it is evident by the 2. of Peter the 1. and 4. verse, etc. Therefore
give all diligence thereunto, join virtue with faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temporance, and with temperance patience, and
with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with
brotherly kindness love: for if these things be among you, and abound, they
will make you that you neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure, for if you do these things, you shall never fall:
for by these means an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. Thus then we
see that the kingdom of God consists in these things, as in Graces bestowed
on the^ which use the means well.
respect of the outward means which is the Word, and in respect of the fruit
of these means it consists in these graces, which fruit God bestows on
them which use the means.

Here then we learn that none shall make appearance in the kingdom of God
hereafter, Obseru. 1. He that will go to heaven, must make an entrance into it
on earth.
which makes not an entrance into it here. He which takes not possession of
it in this life, shall never possess it in the life to come, none shall rise
and reign with Christ, which does not with him here crucify himself and rise
from sin on earth: for who so will be made partaker of the kingdom of
heaven, must here wholly addict himself to seek the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore it behooves every man to make an especial account of these means,
seeing that by them we have already passed the second death, and entered into
the kingdom of God, which whosoever does not enjoy here, can never enjoy it in
the life to come: wherefore the kingdom of God is, and may well be called a
treasure. The righteousness of Christ Jesus, with the peace of conscience, joy
in the holy Ghost, virtue, faith, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, love, etc. these be sure gages, seals, and pledges unto
us, of our entrance into the kingdom of God, and therefore most excellent
treasures. For if that be a treasure, which if a man have, he needs nothing
else, and without which, if he have all things he has nothing, then may this
rightly be called a treasure; for all things without them are nothing, and
these without al other things are sufficient for our salvation. Therefore this
being so great and inestimable a treasure, is highly to be esteemed of us. Have
we this treasure? then we need not to esteem of all other things. In
judgment men do see that the only treasure of man is the salvation of the
soul: this is a granted rule, neither does this need so much to be proved
unto us, as that it is not only to be confessed of us in words, but also in
understanding to be conceived, in affection to be well liked of, and agreed
unto, and in life to be expressed. For blessed are they that can so think of,
and make use of this treasure. Now where a man's treasure is, there is his
heart, and where his heart is, thither are all How to know where a treasure is.
the powers both of soul and body carried headlong. For so soon as men give
themselves to like of and to love pleasures, riches, credit, honor, or
learning, wisdom, or glory, so soon they make these as it were, their Gods:
when men begin to be persuaded these things are a treasure, when their hearts
are once set on these things, then we see presently that all parts both of
soul and body bend that way, then goes mind, heart, and hand and affection,
and the whole delight to the attaining thereof. Therefore if this Word be a
treasure, then all the powers and faculties of body and mind, must be given
only unto it.

Wherefore every one must know this, that they only have this treasure, whose
hearts are set on the kingdom of God, they are the nearest unto salvation,
whose hearts are set on the Word and doctrine of salvation, who can say from
the bottom of their hearts with the man of God David, This one thing (O Lord)
have I desired, and that I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of
my God all the days of my life: But what to do? to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to see the light of his favorable countenance in Christ Jesus, and
to receive the gifts and graces of the spirit of God, which may be sure seals
and pledges of his salvation, yea (says he) I had rather be a doore-keeper in
the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of ungodly men. Neither must we
desire so much to be present in the house of the Lord in body only, but also
in spirit, that we may even behold his favorable countenance shining upon us
in Christ Jesus.

Wherefore we ought to make most precious account of the means, because they
bring much excellent graces: By them we are brought into Gods house to behold
his face, and to enjoy his mercies? Why then (will some say) is the preaching
of the Word the gates of Heaven? are the preachers of the Word the porters of
these gates? If this be such a treasure, why is not the Word more preached? why
is it not more esteemed? Are the graces of the spirit of heaven in earth? are
they our entranee into heaven? how then is it that they are not longed after?
Why do not men make more account of them? Surely our Savior Christ teaches
his children to meet with this objection, when he says it is hidden. This
treasure is not apparent, but secret, not of this world, nor known to them of
this world, Wherefore so few love the Gospel and means of salvation.
but hidden and unknown of them, and therefore not so much regarded and
esteemed of.

And this treasure is hidden, whether we consider the means, as things of no
glorious show, or the graces of the means, which are not of this world, but
rather contrary to this world. That the graces of the spirit are hidden from
them of this world, our Savior Christ shows us in Matthew 1^. and 25. verse,
saying: I give thee thanks O Father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou
have hidden these things from the wise and men of understanding, and have
opened them unto babes. That the means are hidden, Saint Paul witnesses in
the 1. to the Corinth. 2. and 7. verse: But we (says he) speak the wisdom
of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom which God has determined before
the world, unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world has
known, etc. And in the 2. of Corinth. 4. and 3. verse, he says: If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that be lost, whose minds the god of this
world has blinded. The Word is hidden in the base means of the Ministry, as
the Apostle says, 2* Corinth. 4* and 7. verse: We have the treasures in
earthly vessels, etc. And therefore it being in earthly vessels, is the less
esteemed of the world. Also this treasure is hidden under the creatures of
Water, Bread, and Wine. I do now speak ^afely of these according unto the
manner of men: Sacraments.
but I know how I do account of them: for unto God and the godly these means
are not base, but indeed in respect of the graces offered by these means,
they are very base; and who would think that in a mortal man like my self
should be hidden the treasure of heaven and earth? Who would think that by the
preaching of a silly poor man, Jesus Christ with all his treasure should be
offered unto us? Who would think that in the creatures of Bread and Wine and
Water, were hid the seals and pledges of the kingdom of heaven? These be
treasures indeed, but they are hidden.

As a treasure in the field. This treasure sure is such a hidden thing, as that
the eye of the quickest has not seen it, neither has his ear heard of it,
neither has it entered into his heart to conceive of it. Now as in a goodly
field adorned with Grass, Flowers, Trees, Herbs, and such like, perhaps there
lies hidden no treasure; whereas contrary in a barren Means of least show
may bring us greatest graces.
piece of ground, wherein no such things are, there may be and do commonly lie
hidden treasures very great: so there is an inequality of means, and the Lord
bestows his graces upon them, for the most part, which carry least show in
this world, and uses them as instruments, and means to set forth his glory:
and so likewise in the Sacraments and in the word of God, though they be less
esteemed of in the world, yet in them is the chiefest treasure of all hidden.
This must teach us, that it is no marvel though few of the Observation. Few
love the word.
world come to this treasure, because that it is so hidden, and therefore this
was prophesied of long before of the Prophet Esaias, in his 25 chap. 1. verse:
Lord (says he) who will believe our report? And, to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed?

The which prophecy is also repeated again of Christ, John the 12: and also
of S. Paul, Rom 10. 16. But answer may be made hereunto, even they, who are
transformed into the image of Christ. Seeing then it was the complaint of the
Prophets in old time, let not us be offended that so few seek this treasure,
and men do so little esteem of it: but let the wicked esteem never so ill of
it, and let it never be revealed unto the ungodly, yet the godly shall esteem
of it nevertheless, and unto them shall this good treasure be revealed, and
made most apparent. Let us therefore pray the Lord that he would raise up, and
send forth most plentiful and diligent laborers into his harvest, and that
he would send forth many of his porters, to awaken us out of sin, and to
stir us up to the receiving of the kingdom of God, that so they seeking may
find, and knocking it may be opened unto them.

It follows: which when a man has found, etc. To pursue every particular
far in a parable How to speak of a parable.
is not the safest way, except it agree with the analogy of the things; we
must here know that parables do not hold but in some things, and not in all,
and therefore in this sense the word does not agree with a treasure, which when
a man has found, he hides to Sense of the place.
this end, that none else should find it, and be partakers of it, but
himself* but in the Word it ought not to be so; but in this sense it agrees
with the analogy of our faith: A man which has found a great treasure, it is
so great joy unto him, as that he suspecteth himself whether it be so or no,
he is afeard least he has not found it and therefore he searches more
nearly into it again, least that his sudden joy should be soon deca^ed, or
else having found it, he lose it, and therefore he hides it: and even so it
is with the spiritual kingdom of God, for when it pleases God to work in
the heart of his people, by the ministry of his word, to feel their
salvation in Christ Jesus, by and by there arises a kind of fear in their
hearts, least they be missed by seeking the way to salvation, or having found
Doubts in our first conu^rsion.
the way, they are afraid least they should lose it again, they are full of
doubts that they continually strive to come to a greater assurance thereof. For
in the embracing of this treafure they find it to be so sweet, and the taste
thereof to be so precious, as that they labor thoroughly to seek after it, they
desire not to have a glimmering fight of our Savior Christ but even a full
taste of him, and all his benefits, And therefore there is never through peace
in the hearts of the children of God, so long as they reverence the word, til
they have hidden the word of God in their hearts, and grow more and more in the
assurance of their salvation in Christ Jesus. And therefore David in Psalm. 119
the second and third verse* says: I have hid thy commandments in my heart,
that I might not sin against thee. And in Proverbs the second and first
verse: My son, if thou will receive my word^, and hide my commandments
within thee, and cause thine ear to hearken unto wisdom, and incline t^^^e
heart to understanding; when wisdom enters thy heart, and knowledge
delights thy soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding
shall keep thee. Where we see that the holy Ghost gives this precept unto
the children of God, that they labor so for the word that The mind may be
deceived, the heart cannot so be, being truly possessed of the word.
it be hidden in their hearts, they must labor to have their hearts whol^e to
prossesse the word, for the mind of man it may be deceived, but the heart
cannot, if the heart be once thoroughly possessed of the word, it cannot easily
be deprived of it.

Now as a treasure is found before it be sought, so is the word of God Esai.
65. 1. Romans 10. 20. I was found of them that sought me not, and have been made
manifest to them that asked not after me. This shows that all goodness
comes of the free grace and mercy of God, but to this end does God manifest
himself to them that sought him not, that men when God How the word is found
before it be sought.
has once found them, should then seek after him, and when he has once
spoken unto them, then they should hearken unto him. And this no doubt the
children of God, who who when the Lord has found them, and they know that the
Lord has spoken, they have heard him. O then so glad would they hear him
again, and fearful they are least they should be deprived of hearing him in
his word: neither do they desire to have Christ transfigured in the mount, but
themselves to be transformed into new men, that they might grow up in
righteousness, from strength to strength, and from faith to faith. This I
speak unto the sons and daughters of God which languish in their sins, and
in the feeling of their infirmities, and hunger and thirst after the graces of
God; O how joyful are they in hearing the word, having felt comfort in it?
such feruencie of spirit is in them, to hear the preaching of the word, being
so precious unto them, they delight in the Sacraments, finding confirmation of
faith and strength by them: The company of Gods children is most delightful
unto them, as David says: All my delight (O Lord) is upon thy Saints on earth:
Their consciences are comforted, and they are full of alacrity and
cheerfulness.

These things may serve to stir us up, to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and the hearing of Gods word. For by experience I have known
and tried some, which in the beginning of their profession have been zealous,
have taken pleasure in the word of God, have felt some comfort in the word, and
for confirmation of their faith, both the word and the Saints of God were dear
unto them. They have distributed to the poor, and have had many other graces,
yet when they looked for the virtue and power and effect which the word should
have wrought in their hearts, it was not in them, alas these things are now
gone: but although the children of God have many several temptations, and that
often without any feeling of this, yet let them assure them of this, that be
they whosoever they are, at one time or other they shall feel this mighty
power of the spirit of God in them to quicken them up.

It is requisite therefore for them to know how this comes, and what the
remedy thereof is, that so they might find out the way to the attaining of
it. Truly the Lord was found of us, when we sought him not, he made himself
known unto us, when we were ignorant of him, he caused the light to shine on
us, when we sat in darkness and in the shadow of death. It pleased him in the
first shining of the Gospel to put the teate and the milk into our mouths,
even as a good mother deals with her young child, and to put the clothes
upon our backs, and to provide all things for us without asking: but after
that the Lord has thus nourished us, and regenerated us by his word and
spirit, and found us out even then when we thought not of him, and then we like
unto little children were ready to come unto him; behold here the great mercy
and loving kindness of our God toward us; but when as yet notwithstanding
these mercies are increased not in faith, in repentance and godly obedience
unto the laws of God* he still uses us as children, even as Christ used his
Apostles, giving us to know and to see that surely there is good, and that
there is comfort and salvation vntothe children of God; thus God by little and
little conueigheth his graces into us.

But now whether for remission of our sins, whether for omission of certain
duties, whether for our barrenness in spiritual graces, whether for our
humbling or trial of our faith, or neglecting of the inward means, or for the
setting forth of the glory of God, it God turns away his countenance from
his children for a time
has pleased him a little to frown upon us, and to withdraw his smiling
countenance from us: He which found us when we sought not him, even he does
now leave us to the intent that we might now learn to seek after him: God he
gave us those things which were profitable for us, before we knocked, to the
intent that receiving them at his hand we might hereafter learn to knock for
them: for we must know that our clothes must not always be put upon our
backs, the tears must not be always put into our mouths: we must not
always be fed with milk, and be young children; wherefore seeing that there
is an infancy and a nonage and a time of discretion, as it is in Hebr. 5 and
seeing the Lord has a long time fed us with milk as babes, we must not now
murmr if he feed us with stronger meat as men.

Fathers will nurture their children, and give them corrections when they abuse
their loving kindness, and will make their children to seek unto them, and
crave of them those things which they want: And shall the fathers of our flesh
do thus? shall they nurture their children, and by discipline correct their
sins and offenses; and shall not we suffer the father of our spirits to
deal thus with us? Seeing that we have offended the Lord, and not glorified
him as we should, seeing we have been barren in goodness* and have not brought
forth fruits of repentance worthy the Gospel* is it not now good for us,
that the Lord should deal somewhat sharply with us? is it not meet that now
the Lord should take his blessing from us, when we abuse them? is it not meet
that the Lord should with hold his goodness when we are not thankful for it,
and when the beholding of it does doevs much harm? If God shall now deal
somewhat more strictly with us, it is to the intent that we might the better
learn to do our duties: for surely now we are not in our nonage, God has a
different respect of young and old.
but even come to years of discretion, we must not therefore look still to
be dealt withal as young children: but we must fast, and we must pray, and use
those good means which God has appointed. We must knock and we shall find,
we must be important with the widow and we shall obtain; we must seek
earnestly, and then I dare be bold to say, that the graces of God which now
seem in some sort to be withdrawn from us, shall be restored unto us in as
great measure as ever they were before.

Wherefore seeing the Lord heretofore has bestowed his graces and blessings
upon us in more amplesort than ever we could have looked for, and that now he
seems as it were to be absent from us, let us bewail and mourn for his
absence, and then he will return: otherwise let us never look for his
presence again: wherefore let every man beware that he make precious account
of the word of God, and let every one consider and examine himself whether he
has in him a readiness to seek this treasure or no; yea let every one
provoke himself to this, for the kingdom of heaven from the time of John
Baptist unto Christ suffered violence, and must suffer violence until the end
of the world. And none ever did or shall enter into it, to have fruitio^
thereof, but those who with all feruencie, violence, and zeal have sought
after it. Wherefore if we have not cleerenesse in knowledge, pureness in
affections, if we find not in us joy in the holy Ghost, zeal, and boldness
in good things, love, meekness, patience, and such like fruits of the
spirit, we are to know Wherefore we want good things.
that this is for want of fasting, praying, knocking, seeking, and due
estimation of the Word and Sacraments. Wherefore if we find in our selves the
want of these things, we must have recourse to the use of the means.

It follows. And for joy thereof departs, etc. It is a thing incident to
treasures when they are found to work joy, and great is their joy which have
found pleasures, but greater Joy of salvation how great
is the joy of him that finds the treasure of salvation, then his joy is that
finds earthly treasures; Show us (says the Prophet, Psalm. the 4.) the light
of thy countenance, thy favor and thy grace, and thou shall make our hearts
more cheerful and joyful, than rich men are when their Corn, Oil, and Wine
increases. Great is the joy that arises of abundance of riches, but greater
is the joy which arises of the love and favorable countenance of God. The man
of God says in Psalm 1^9 the ninth part, and the 72. verse of the Psalm, The
law of thy mouth, O Lord, is better than thousands of gold or silver. That man
which loves gold, he takes great pleasure and delight therein: but yet says
the Prophet, Thy word is sweeter and better esteemed and liked of by me, than
thousands of gold and silver. And in the sixteenth part of the same Psalm,
verse the ^. I love thy commandments (says he) above gold, yea above most
fine gold. And in the 21. part of the same Psalm, and 2. verse of that part,
he says: I rejoice at thy word as one that finds a great spoil. Pleasures
breed joy, profits breed joy, honor and glory breed joy, by a good
harvest, with increase of Wine and Oil comes pleasure, by riches as gold and
silver arises profit, by victory conquest and spoil of the enemy, honor
and glory is gotten. Now all these things being laid jointly together, must
needs bring a great joy to a man; but the man of God prefers the joy which
proceeds from the Word before all these; and that not without good cause, for
greater is the joy of the kingdom of heaven, and of eternal salvation in
heaven, than the joy which arises of all these things. And what is the joy of
Wine and Oil to this, that men's hearts are refreshed with the refreshed Wine
and Oil of the countenance of God; is it not more than to possess much gold
and silver? What greater joy can be than to be persuaded of the love of God in
Christ Jesus? the eye has not seen, neither has the ear heard, neither can
the heart of man conceive of this unspeakable joy of the kingdom of heaven. To
live and remain for ever with God the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit
in eternal glory, is not this better than thousands of gold and silver? To
subdue Satan, sin, the world, the Devil, and the torments of hell, is not this
a great victory and a great joy? yea is it not greater than the triumph over
our bodily enemies? to remain eternally in the glory of God, of Christ Jesus,
the Spirit and the holy Angels; is not this an infinite and incomprehensible
joy? Wherefore men must leave off the false joys of this world, and the petty
joys of sin, and cleave unto this joy, and seek after it.

Now every one the greater treasure that he finds the more he does rejoice,
and so every one the nearer that he draws unto salvation, the more joyful
and glad he is. For the kingdom of God does not keep one, and the same tenor
in all men. This joy is not Gods proceedings with his children.
in all the children of God alike, God he does sometime hide his loving
countenance from them, some times he gives comfort, and sometimes again more
sorrow. And as we see that the Lord sends sometimes wet weather, and
sometimes again more fair weather, sometimes he sends storms, tempests,
and boisterous weather, and by and by most calm and still: even so deals he
with his children, sometime he hides his graces from them, which other
sometimes he makes apparrant unto them. And as after storms and tempests come
fair weather; so after sorrows and troubles, joys and pleasures do come
unto the children of God: after their anguish and pains are past, great
calmness and peace of mind and quietness in conscience arises unto them.
And as it is said^ in Psalm 30. 5. The anger of the Lord endures but a while,
but in his favor is life: Weeping To labor for the joy of our salvation Psalm.
51.
and sorrow may abide for an evening, but joy comes in the morning. Wherefore
every one is to examine himself whether he has this joy or not: for whosoever
has it not, certainly he has not his salvation. Yet it may be that he may
have some sight of it, but it was never hid deeply in his heart. And here we
are to know that there are two sorts of joys in receiving Two sorts of joys
in receiving the word.
the word: There is a joy in the wicked in hearing of Gods word, but it having
but a small crust of the earth to nourish it, it withers quickly away and
remains but for a time, as is showed in this chapter in the parable of the
seed, which fell in hard stony ground: There is another joy which endures
and continues unto the end, which although it have many intermissions, yet it
does not altogether cease, but will at the length have the victory against all
sorrow whatsoever. The one of these is the joy of the mind, the other is the
joy of the heart. The first is deceitful, the second is effectual, A man may
therefore be deceived in joy, and think that he has it before he has found
it, and that there is a joy when a man thinks that he has found a treasure,
when he has not, and another joy when he knows indeed he has found it:
even so is there a double joy in the kingdom of God: For there is a joy in the
hearing and knowing of this, that the kingdom and graces of God are offered
unto us: It is a joyful thing for a man to know his salvation, and to know
that God offers unto him eternal life and redemption; but if this joy do
but abide and swim as it were on the top of their brain, and go no further,
then is there but a crust of the earth as it were in these hearers, and their
stony and hard hearts are hardened with deceitfulness of sin, and there is
also another joy in this, when a man is assured and fully knows that he is
saved.

There is a joy of the mind, when a man does see the mystery of his
salvation, and there The joy of the mind and of the heart: note the difference.
is a joy of the heart, when a man has the experience thereof: the former of
these joys may be deceived, the other cannot. The former remains but for a
time, if a man do rest only in the knowledge of his salvation, a man can
minister no true comfort unto this man: For it is one thing to know there is
eternal life, and another thing to know that eternal life is ordained for
thee: For it is one thing to know that sins are pardonable, and another thing
to know that thy sins are pardoned: neither does it follow, that because thou
see the way to heaven, that therefore thou art there. Wherefore thou must know
that the seat of faith is not in the brain, but in the heart, and that the
head is not the place to Seat of faith.
keep the promises of God, but the heart is the chest to lay them up in.
Therefore as the mind must be convinced of sin so the heart must be
continually rebuked, feared, humbled, and terrified from sin, it must be the
closet wherein the word of God must be kept; With the heart (says the Apostle)
a man believes unto righteousness. The mind of man, if it be troubled, it is
nothing, but if his heart be troubled, the trouble thereof is great. Therefore
as the grief of the mind, is nothing to the grief and sorrow of the heart,
so the joy of the mind is nothing comparable to the joy of the heart. And then
it is indeed a true joy, when a man has in his heart an experience of the
mercies: If I can say now, not I but Christ Jesus which lives in me, O this is
the joy of the heart, which passes the reach of all understanding.

Many cannot distinguish between this joy of the mind and the joy of the
heart: But let such men know, that a temptation may change the mind, and
motion of the brain, but the heart and affection being root in goodness, it
can never change it. For although there be sorrow in thy heart in the evening
and for a season, yet joy again will come in the morning. The Lord he is
faithful who has called his, and he will always perfect his work in them:
first in raising up the body in the last day, and then in joining it together
with the soul, and making both partakers of that blessedness and glorious
happiness which is prepared for them in the kingdom of heaven.

THE NINTH SERMON, PREACHED ON PART OF the 44. verse of the 13. Chapter
according to Saint Matthew.
MATTHEW. 13. verse. 44. And for joy thereof departs and sells all that he
has, and buyeth that field.
IN the former Sermon we showed that the kingdom of God was taken in two
diverse senses, as namely: First, for the glorious estate of Gods children after
this life, when they shall live eternally with God, and enjoy the presence of
the holy Angels, triumphing over sin, hell, death, and condemnation: and
secondly, for the entrance which Gods children have into the kingdom of God in
this world. This kingdom is of two parts, one of the means whereby God
offers his kingdom unto them; the other of the graces of the Spirit, which
he offers by the mean^s. Here we are taught that none shall ever have
fruition of the joys of heaven, but those which take possession of them in
earth: none shall rise again with Christ to glory, which does not here arise
from sin: for who so will be made partaker of the kingdom of heaven, must
here wholly addict himself to seek the kingdom of heaven, every one
therefore is to make great account of the word of God, which is the means to
lead us to this kingdom, that so he may be assured that he has already
departed from death unto life, and so he may have the assurance of the kingdom
of heaven.

The word of God and the graces offered by it, are called a treasure, because
that without this all things else are nothing, and this of it self is
sufficient to our salvation. Many there are, which will confess that this is
the only treasure which a man ought to seek for, but few there are which do
agree thereunto in their lives, and labor to express the same in their
conversation. But blessed are they that can so think of it, and labor to have
a testimony in their consciences that they do thus seek after it: for where
every man's treasure is, there is his heart also. So that if the word of God and
the graces of the Spirit and eternal life be our treasure, then our hearts
must be set on them, and then must we wholly seek after them; but this
treasure is a hidden treasure, and therefore not so esteemed and reverenced:
for whether we do consider the means which have no outward power or show in
them, or whether we consider the graces of the Spirit offered by the means,
it is a treasure altogether hidden; but yet though it be hidden, yet it is not
any whit less esteemed of the godly.

This must teach us not to be offended with any, when we shall see them make
no account of receiving the truth: for it is no new thing, but has been a
thing prophesied of old: Lord (says the Prophet Esaias) who will believe our
report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We showed that treasures
are found before they be sought for, and so God he has offered unto us the
treasure of his word before we sought it, and therefore we must acknowledge
that this is only of the free mercy and favor of God, that we do enjoy the
treasure of his word.

Now, for as much as God has once vouchsafed to call us, we must obey, and
having once spoken unto us, we must hearken unto him: for it has pleased the
Lord to deal with us as parents deal with their young children, who when
their children be tender, they put the teate into their mouths, put on their
clothes upon their backs, and feed them with milk: but when they wax elder
and grow to some years of discretion, then if they offend they are rebuked and
scourged. And even so the Lord at the first beginning of our regeneration, he
offered his graces most plentifully unto us, he sent his watchmen to call us
unto him: but now whether for omission of duties, correction of our sins, or
trial of our patience, it pleases him to withdraw his merciful countenance
from us, and as it were to be gone from us, to the intent that now we might
seek him, now we must fast and mourn, or he will not return unto us again.

Every one must therefore examine his own heart, whether that he does there
find such power of the spirit of God working in him, as that he is willing to
seek unto the Lord, and a proceeding and holding on in grace, in virtue, and
in goodness. And if upon due trial and examination of our hearts, we find
them not in us, then we are to know that the reason why we have them not, is
this, we would still be babes, and still be fed as children, not seeking, not
knocking, nor looking after the Lord.

The man that finds a treasure, has a joy suddenly arising in his mind, but
by and by An apt ^imilie.
he doubts of himself whether he has found a treasure indeed or no: and
therefore he looks over it again to the intent he may be the better
certified thereof, least otherwise his sudden joy should soon vanish away. And
even so the children of God find by the word of God the treasure of their
salvation to be in Christ Jesus, and being thoroughly touched in heart to
seek after the same, yet oftentimes they do make many doubts, they seek
again and again, and are desirous not only to have a smacke and a glimmering
taste of Christ, but a lively eating and feeding upon the Lord Jesus, and
therefore they hide the word with the Prophet David in their hearts.

A man having found a treasure rejoices. Joy and sorrow, hope and fear
working on men's hearts, do make known unto men how far off, or how near
our hearts are unto God: for the nearer a man is unto salvation, the more
joyful and gladder he is* Great is A good trial of some joy.
the joy of harvest unto them which have harvest at hand; great is the joy of
silver and gold, unto them which have abundance thereof, but greater is the joy
of a good conscience: great is the joy of spoils, of victory and glory,
gotten by victory and spoils, but greater is the joy of a true Christian in
the mercies of the Lord. And therefore David speaking in the person of a
regenerate man, says in Psalm the 119. the last part save one^ I rejoice at
thy word, as one that finds a great spoil. Those then which have no joy in
the word, in the spirit of God, and in the graces of Gods spirit, they never
tasted of the good spirit of God, neither shall they taste of the joys of the
world to come. There is a joy of the mind, and a joy of the heart: a joy when
a man knows that a treasure is to be found, but a greater joy, when in
experience the heart is fully settled in the finding of it. The joy of a man
which comes in this, that he knows that there is salvation, this joy may
vanish away; but that joy which is settled in the heart in the full assurance of
salvation, this joy, though it may sometimes be darkened, yet can it never be
utterly extinguished, heaviness may abide for a night, but joy comes in the
morning.

It follows: He withdraws himself, or he departs. The natural
signification of the word, is not only to depart and go away, but to withdraw
and separate himself as it were from other business. And this we see aptly
and fully to be resembled of us in the finding of a treasure: for when a man
has found a treasure, he goes about to buy the field: or when one is about
to undertake any other thing of great weight or importance, then he gives
himself wholly over unto it, he goes aside to consider of it, what it is,
whether he be not deceived in it, what his own ability is, what good it may
do him, what it must cost him, what it may be worth unto him, and whether it
will counteruaile all those things he lays out for it: and even so in the
doctrine of salvation it is requisite that men should consider it, when God
offers such a worthy treasure unto them, then they are to search into their
hearts thoroughly and diligently to cast before hand, what lets, impediments and
hindrances there may be, what that is which they seek for, what cost and
labor they are to bestow upon it, and again, what may be the profit,
commodity and joy thereof, which may redound unto them thereby, when they have
it, and how they may keep themselves in sure possession of it, having once
obtained it. This preconsideration our Savior Christ confirms unto us in two
Parables in Luke the 14 the one is of building, the other of war. For the
first, he says, Which of you minding to build a tower, sits not down first
and counts the cost whether he has sufficient to perform it, least after
that he has laid the foundation, and is not able to perform it, all that
behold it begin to mock him, saying: This man began to build, and was not able
to make an end. For the second, he says: What King going to war against
another King, sits not down first and takes counsel whether he be able
with ten thousand to meet him which comes against him with twenty
thousand, least afterward to his great shame (for so it may be gathered by the
circumstances) he may be constrai^ed to send an ^mbassege unto him and to
desire conditions of peace. So ought every one which comes to hear the Word,
to make this premeditation and preparation with The fight of a Christian.
himself, whether he be able and can endure the cost which he must be at in
coming unto the Lord, whether he can endure that fight which he is to take in
hand before he come unto the Lord; whether he can sustain the loss of his
father, mother, wife, and children, brethren, and sisters, yea and his own
life also, and all that he has; whether he be able to fight against Powers,
Principalities, the Devil, the World, and the flesh, his own reason and
affections, least that otherwise he break off his course, and show himself
not to be the man he seemed first to be. This premeditation and
preconsideration must be made, before we can enjoy that treasure and buy the
field wherein it lies.

There is no similitude in the Scriptures used more often than the similitude
of building, which often is englished by this word Edifying. Of this building
mention is made 1* Cor. 3. where the people of God are called the Building of
God, and the Apostles the Builders: so likewise in Ephesians. chap. 2. verse. 20.
21. 22. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles Similitude of
building.
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone, in whom all
the building coupled together grows into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom
ye are also built together to be the habitation of God by the spirit. And in
Esphes. 4 and 12. verse, it is said by the Apostle, That Christ gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers, for
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ. And in verse the 16. By whom all the
body being coupled and knit together, by every joint for the furniture thereof
(according to the effectual power which is in the measure of every part)
receives increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. And
Jude in his Epistle verse the 20. requires of us that we build our selves in
our most holy faith praying in the holy Ghost. Again, who knows not that
the similitude of warfare is Similitude of warfare.
often repeated also in the Scriptures; as in Job, The life of man is a
continual warfare. And in the 1 of Timoth. the 6* chapter and 12. verse: Fight
a good fight, says the Apostle. And 1. Peter. 2. and 11* verse. Abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. And Ephesians. 6. and 12. verse: We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, and
Every Christian a builder and a warrier.
against earthly governors, the princes of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses in heavenly things: So that we see that of
necessity every Christian must be a builder and a warrior.

This building and fighting was shadowed out in the rearing up of the material
walls of the temple of Jerusalem, which when the Jews did build, they wrought
with one hand, and held their weapons in the other hand to fight against their
enemies, as it is in Nehem. 4. and 17* verse. The profit and commodity of
building is a deed very great, the glory and honor of victory gotten in
war is great, but this we know that nothing is more troublesome and
dangerous, than both building and war: yet be thinking of the commodity and
glory which do arise of them, do counteruaile the pains and griefs. But
greater is the profit and more excellent is the glory which we shall attain
unto in building up of our selves temples of the holy Ghost. Therefore as none
can look to have commodity by his building, nor honor by fighting, without
travail and pains: so let no man deceive himself with a vain persuasion,
that he shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, Strive to enter in at ^^e ^^raite
gate.
when he labors not with might and maine to come there. For we shall never
be victors, except we fight valiantly, we cannot enjoy the building if we spare
the cost. And as we see some begin a building, which not being able to finish,
do leave off to their discredit: and as many do move and make war, who not
being able to finish it, and to go through withal, are feign to their shame
to seek truce, so alas many begin to build and make an entrance into
Christianity with a great and fair show at the first, but few continue to the
end.

And we find it most true in the Gospel, that nine lepers being cleansed, but
one of them returned back again to give him thanks for it. Wherefore this
forethinking and premeditation is most expedient and necessary: neither must
we think that religion is so slight a matter, as many do persuade themselves
that it is; which kind of men when death comes upon them, even then they are
deceived of their salvation, because they make no account thereof before hand,
they never thought that the profession of Christianity would be so costly unto
them, they never thought it would be so chargeable a matter. Whosoever
therefore will avoid a most dangerous and desperate estate at his death,
whosoever he or she be which will go on unto this building, must forecast and
premeditate Premeditations before men be resolved to follow Christ.
before hand, what it must cost him, he must deeply consider with himself what
his salvation and the kingdom of heaven will cost him; I tell you it is no
small thing, it must cost him the loss of all the pleasures and delights of
this world, it must cost thee the forgoing of all thy lusts, the loss of
riches, of liberty, and of banishment, the loss of thy wife, goods, lands,
friends, parents, children, yea and peradventure also it will cost thee the
loss of thine own heart blood: It is more chargeable than some think it is,
and that it is the cause why they make so little account of it.

Now there are some which care not what it costeth them, so that it may be had
with ease; but such must know that it is as laborious, as costly: For before
thou can attain unto it, thou must travail in heart and in soul, with
weeping, with sighing, with much fasting, with prayer, with watching, with
meditation of the word of God, and in practicing Christianity* a warfare.
of all the commandments of God. Thou must travail in compassion toward all
men, thou must take pains in doing thy duty toward thy superiors, and in
relieuing the needy, and such as are in distress. Finally, it is a most
painful way to pass, and many there be which deceive themselves, entering into
it without preconsideration either of cost or pains. I tell you in the hour
of death, in the day of judgment, in persecutions, in trials, in banishments,
many shall see and know that they have deceived themselves, for that they have
not duly thought of these said charges; neither is it only chargeable and
troublesome, but also there are in it many and great perils and dangers, many
battles must be fought, before thou can come unto the end thereof.

Now for a man not only to be greatly chargeable, but also to have great
troubles, many battles betwixt the flesh and the spirit, this is a sore and a
great temptation, thou must fight with all thy affections, with thine own
reason, thou must be prepared to fight with fleshly joy, Love, Fear, sorrow,
Anger, Meekness, Softness: neither is this conflict as the passion of anger,
which endures but for a moment, but this combat against affections is to be
taken in hand diverse and sundry times, and continues a long time, even during
the whole life. And though we receive many blows, and are sometimes (as it
were) drawn back, yet we must to it again. Those (I say) which mean to
inherit the kingdom of heaven, To renounce reason first, Anger.
must renounce their own reason, and fight against their own judgment. As
for example, in anger many will burst out to fighting; and why? because that
their own reason teaches them that they are abused, contemned, and despised,
and this is it which deceives many, because they do not strive and contend
with their own reason: but rather do thus think with themselves according to
the manner of men, what is the reason why we should do this? or why we should
do that? why we should lose our wives, children, goods, and lands? this reason
then of ours must be fought against and overcome.

But when a man has overcome his reason, and knows what things to be angry
for, and what things to be patient in, what to love, and what to hate, then
shall he the better walk rightly, but for as much as a man must fight both
with his reason and his affections, To fight with reason and affections a hard
battle.
this is a hard battle. For though a man have overcome his reason, yet his
affections may still ^e head strong in him, yea so strong as they shall carry
his reason and judgment headlong. Here then arises a greater fight than
before, before the affections can be overcome: but when reason and affections
join together and that a man has to deal with them both, then arises a most
deadly fight, insomuch that a man shall very hardly overcome them, and yet we
have more enemies to fight withal than these. We must fight on the right
hand, and on the left; on the right hand with fame and glory, and on the left
hand we are to fight with wealth and riches, and with credit, and all things in
the world. If God shall vouchsafe to give thee riches, take heed that thy
heart be not set upon them: wherefore when thou, whosoever thou art, art blessed
with a good report or with the riches of this world, take heed and beware of
pride, vain glory, and ambition, for if the child, of God do not forecast
these things, he may easily be overtaken, and we see many, who when they are
in lower estate behave themselves like honest men, and as becomes the
children of God, but when they come to any preferment, and promotion, then they
are altogether carried away with the vain glory of this world. Thou must not
only fight with fair and good reports, but thou must also fight with
reproaches, and this is no small combat: for having riches and glory thou
may escape pride, and ambition, but if indeed thou profess the truth, thou
can not escape reproaches. Wherefore if this be not foret^ ought and looked
unto betimes, if a man ^e not well armed against this, he cannot be able to
withstand it, but it will make him go back from the truth which he has
professed: alas (will he say) I labor to do good, I endeavor my self to
keep a good conference in all my dealings, yet lo how I am contemned, and how
I am accounted a Prec^sian, and an Hypocrite.

We must also fig^t with losses and want of living, and in this point we see
many to be To fight with penury and want.
overcome: when as therefore the Lord has brought us unto a low ^bbe, we must
take heed that we be ^o shifters* For when by a simple and godly living many
cannot thrive and prosper in this world, then fall they to unlawful means;
and now adays rather than a man will be in want, he will take two or three
livings: wherefore this temptation of want is very great, and therefore so much
the more to be looked unto. Likewise when a man must fight with banishment,
loss of friends, or such like, then the anguish which ari^eth thereof, it
draws from him many bitter sighs and deep groans, and through sorrow of
heart, he is brought unto strange thoughts: wherefore except a man do acquit
himself with these, and the rest, it will go hard but Satan will have the
victory, for it is a very hard matter to endure them. There is another thing
to be taken heed of, and that is this, when Satan shall behold the corruption
of a man, either which is within him, or Satan's practices in temptations.
which is outward (for whether it be inward or outward it will serve his turn)
as it is in Ephesians. the 6. He is spiritual wick^dnesses in heavenly things, he
is a spiritual enemy, and in this world he is Principalities and Powers.
Therefore (I say) when he beholds thy corruptions, he comes to work upon
thee, and stirs up thine own conscience, and thine own reason to accuse
thee, and to condemn thee: then like a spiritual enemy he comes to
intoxicate thine affections, and moves thee sometimes with losses, sometimes
with profit, sometimes with pleasures, sometimes with joy, sometimes with
sorrow; when I say he does thus bewitch thy reason and affections, and does
thus infatuate thy wits, and intoxicate thy brains, here is a very dangerous
fight. And herein may a man easily perceive, that Rebecca had not such a
conflict, when the two young babes were within her, as thou shall have when
Satan begins thus to work. And for this cause was it that the Church in
Baptism did appoint that every one should even then prepare himself to fight
with the Devil, with the world, his own affections, and all the lusts of the
flesh.

Now when a man has once entered into this fight, and for want of due
considerations is not able to go further, because he looks not unto the
charges thereof, then what will be said of him? Behold the foolish builder,
lo the unwise soldier; and is not this a great reproach? Satan shall laugh at
us herein. And this defect in fore casting and premeditation is the cause that
some men are carried away from the truth, by this means, and by that means,
but few continue steadfast in it unto the end* Hence it comes to pass, that
so many being grounded in the pleasure of this life, swell in ambition, and are
as it were choked with delights, in poverty some run to unlawful sl^fts,
many by reproaches and taunts fall away, some burst with anger, and some are
either carried away with grievous errors, or else with Idolatry, because they
do not consider that Satan is a spiritual wickedness in heavenly things:
Some come to drown and to hang themselves, and Wherefore many are ouertake^
with temptations.
all for want of consideration. Wherefore it behooves all men to be most
circumspect and wary in this, that they consider what that is which they be
to take in hand, before they enter rashly into it. But yet Satan has another
shift, when he cannot cause us to be careless and negligent in
premeditation, then he will make us to trust too much to our own strength, as
he did move Peter to do, who if Christ had not prayed for him, and if he had
not been grounded on the rock before, he had utterly ^^scaried, otherwise he
makes us to be over circumspect and wary in this behalf, as he did Ananias
and Saphira.

Again, if he see that thou make a conscience to offend the Lord, then he
will set before thee the weight of thy sins and the great dangers that thou
art in, that thereby he may move thee to despair: but if he perceive that
thou art careless in off^nding God, then will he set before thee the mercies
of God, that thereby thou may presume* O most perilous temptation, when on
every side Satan shall seek to entrap thee and bring the^ unto destruction!
Some again he makes thus to think; Alas, if I shall give my self to this
severe and strict examination of my self, then I shall be plunged into
extreme sorrow and grief and brought into melancholy, o^ I shall never be
mine own man, I cannot beg, I cannot abide (for the words sake) to lose my
country, my wife, children, and such like, and therefore I can never come to be
a Christian. Thus he causes thee only to see and look into the peril which
shall come unto thee in professing the word of God: but the price of thy
salvation and me joys of this life to come, he never tells them to come into
thy mind, and this is also a most perilous temptation Thus the devil by one
means or other goes about to deceive us, either he makes us to think that
the way is not dangerous, or else that it is so dangerous as we shall never
be abie to get through it: But notwithstanding these great and manifold
combats, as the hope of profit does move the builder to go on forward in his
building; so must we in our spiritual building, in hope of some especial
commodity not leave off but go on forward. And as in wary the hope of
victory does stir men up to continue to fight; so seeing o^^ v^ctorie is
already gotten by Christ, let no labor stay us, let no dangers hinder us, but
let us go on forwards both in our building and war.

Let us consider that we fight not in our own strength, but under Christ Jesus,
who has gotten the victory for us, and who fights for us, he has overcome
Satan in all his temptations, and accusations: so that he shall never be able
to overcome us, either in the sin Ephesians. ^. Philip. 4. 14. Romans 8.
of presumption or desperation.

We may not therefore be now driven back, the cost of our warfare must not
frav us, Christ Jesus will minister harness, strength, and weapons unto us and
he will get the victory for us. The great and heavy judgments of God against
sinners, let us set before our eyes, the comfortable sayings of the holy
Scriptures, as this: Esaias ^1. The wolf shall lie with the lamb, the Leopard
shall lie With the kid and the calfe, and the Lion and the fat beast together,
and a little child shall lead them. Whereby is meant the mighty power of
Christ in regenerating our corrupt nature, which is as fierce as a Lion, and as
savage as a wolf, or also if we rely upon Christ Jesus, he is able to turn
the hearts of the cruel^st to pity us. Thou must believe that Christ by his
mighty power has begotten the a^ew* and has delivered thee as it were out of
the mouth of the Lion, and therefore in no wise be dismayed, but comfort thy
self, and beware of fearful desperation.

When our Savior Christ says, that it is as possible for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God, as it is for a Cammell to go through the eye of a
needle: O this is a fearful saying: but again it is a great comfort, when
he says, that with man this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible. It seems to a covetous man to be a very hard thing to depart from
any thing, but when Christ Jesus shall be the mighty work of his spirit truly
touch the heart of Zacheus, he can make him willingly to give half of his
goods unto the poor, and if that he has imured any man, to restore the same
four fould.

That was a hard and fearful saying of Saint Paul 1. Corinthians. 6. and 9.
verse: Neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Idolaters, nor Wantons, nor
Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous men, nor Drunkards, nor Railers, nor
Extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. But that which follows was
most comfortable unto the Corinthians, and so it is most comfortable unto us:
And such (says he) were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. Lo here how Corinth was once a wild and brutish people,
but after their calling they became sound in faith, and were made the Church of
God. And in Titus 1. verse 12. Paul says, That the Cretians were always
liers, evil beasts, and slow bellies, and (says he) this witness is true,
wherefore rebuke them sharply: that they might become sound in the faith.
Whereby we The wicked by faith purged and made Gods children
see how these wicked people were by Faith purged and made the children of God:
Why therefore should thou lay before thee the difficulties of ouercomming
Satan, that thou should therefore despair in the mercies of God? Why
should any of us think that we are not able to overcome our own lusts when
Christ Jesus stands for us, and fights with us, when his Angels pitch their
tents round about us, and the spirit of God is powerful in us, and the word of
God makes for us.

Now seeing thou have the Word which is of power to save thy life, and seeing
thou have the seals of Gods mercies, Water, Bread, and Wine, which are more
sure seals of Gods favor, than the obligations and bonds of any Priaces;
seeing thou art so fenced in on every side, be not discouraged by the mighty
power of thine enemies, but abide the brunt a little, and desire the Lord to
increase thy faith, and no doubt thou shall be a conqueror, and triumph over
all thine enemies: Let us bethink us of our charges and costs, being certainly
persuaded by whom, in whom, and through whom, we shall be more than
conquerours, that so we run not away at the first: Let us believe, and it
shall be unto us according to our faith; and if we cannot believe, let us pray
with the man in the Gospel, Lord help our unbelief.

FINIS.
THE TENTH SERMON, PREACHED ON PART OF the 44. verse of the 13* Chapter
according to Saint Matthew.
MATTHEW. 13. verse. 44. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure
hid in the field, which when a man has found, he hides it, and for joy
thereof departs, and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.
Having spoken of this verse before, my purpose is not to use any long The
sum of the two former Sermons.
repetition of that which was deliuer^^. ^n effect this ^ath been before
showed, namely, that the price of our salvation here called the kingdom of God,
^s so excellent, that it is resembled unto a treasure, which howsoever it is
hid from the reprobate, and those that be of this world, yet it is manifest
and revealed unto the children of God, who find it, and when they have found
it, hide it fearing least they should lose it again; the finding whereof
breeds such joy in their hearts, that they will willingly part from all
things that they have, so that they may enjoy this treasure: and therefore it
is said, that the man having found this treasure, departs and withdraws
himself. Where we have showed that many for want of this withdrawing
themselves, or premeditation, not considering what the price of this treasure
is, nor what pains and labor he is to take which enjoys it, after they have
once begun and entered into this course which leads unto eternal life, not
being able to continue therein, do with the unskillful builder, not
forecasting what the building will cost, and with the unwise King, having begun
war, and not able to go through there with, leave off unto their great shame
and reproach.

And here we have showed that no man can sell all that he has to buy this
treasure, before he have thoroughly considered and deeply ^ayed what the thing
itself is, and what loss and peril he is to sustain before he can attain
thereunto. And here lea^^ that any should be discouraged from selling that
which he has to buy this treasure, I showed the remedies and helps which
further us therein. For howsoever this treasure is chargeable, yet the cost is
Christ's: and how laborious soever it is, yet Christ ha^h taken sufficient
pains in obtaining it, for all those that put their trust in him. And although
the perils and Sense.
dangers be great, yet in our Lord Jesus they are all overcome. After that a
man has premeditated the charges, pains, and perils, which he is to sustain
in buying this treasure, then he comes to a full resolution, and he sells
all that he has, and buyeth that field. In this word sells, there is much
matter contained, where we ought to give more diligent attention thereunto. The
things in general which are to be sold before this field be bought, are either
of their own nature evil, and in themselves simply sinful, or else such as
are sinful in respect of circumstances: those which of themselves are simply
sinful, are What must besold before w^^a^ possess Gods kingdom.
of two sorts, either gross outward sins, or else the inward corruption of our
corrupt nature. Concerning the former, to wit, gross outward, they must be
parted withal and sold, for this saying is true both in religion and in
manners, No man can serve two masters, etc. If Baal be God then we must follow
him, we must not be lukewarm, hot and cold, for such the Lord spueth out of
his mouth. Wherefore we cannot serve God and the world, for there is such a
contrariety and a fight between them, that until we reject and forsake the
world, we can neither serve God aright, nor yet attain to the fruition of this
treasure.

In these words, He sells all that he has, there are three things to be
considered. First, Consider three things.
that sins must be sold and not changed. Secondly, sins must be sold all
and not some. Thirdly, they must be sold for ever, and not for a season. As
touching the first, we see many 1
that do not so much sell their sins as make an exchange of them: for many
in the 2
time of Popery had in estimation the Pope and that religion of Antichrist,
which now 3
professing the Gospel do neglect and contemn it: heretofore the pains of
that fained Purgatory were feared of many, but now men are not afraid of the
torments of hell which are most sure: heretofore men prayed in an unknown
tongue, not understanding what they said, but now they will not pray in a
known tongue knowing what they say: before men prayed for the dead, now they
will not pray for them which are alive: before men used long and continual
prayer, now either they pray not at all, or they are so short, and soon
weary, as it seems they receive no grace thereby: before many Sacraments
which were no Sacraments, were much accounted of, now there are but two, and
those are true Sacraments, and yet they are neglected: heretofore men fasted
very often, and that very scrupulously, insomuch that they did rather offend in
fasting too much tha^ too little, but now a Christian fast publicly appointed
is rather oppugned than received, and a private fast is not known amongst
Christians. Before there were many and superstitious holy days received, now
the only Sabbath of the Lord is profaned, and the devil or at the least not
God that day is served: Before men confessed their sins unto every hedge
priest, now men have left confession of their sins unto their brethren,
choosing rather to murder themselves* than to acknowledge their faults one to
another, as the Apostle James James 5.
wills they should. Yea men are so far from this, that they will rather by
perjury and briberie clear and purge themselves, than make their sins
known, and so satisfy the congregation, and Church of God. And thus we might
go through all points of religion; for men before were altogether
superstitious, and now they are become wholly profane. Wherefore miserable was
their estate before, but now most miserable, dangerous and damnable (I say) is
the estate of our age, wherein those that serve God best, and walk most
carefully in their callings, are accounted mad and frantic, precise fools:
on the other side, they which are altogether dissolute, and secure in
discharging their duties, are taken for the wisest men, and this comes to
pass because men do not consider that saying of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians 5.
verse. Brethren, we beseech you that you know them which labor amongst you,
and are over you in the Lord, that you have them in singular love for their
works sake.

This changing of sin may also be seen in young men of the University, who
in their The change of on sin for another.
youth did live altogether dissolute in their behavior, but being stricke^ in
years they account gain to be godliness, and so far forth as religion may
serve to enrich them, so far are they professors thereof. These and such like
have not as yet made a sale of sin, but a change. Satan as yet goes
further, and moves some men to make a more dangerous exchange than this, and
brings them from one extremity unto another. For many being before given to
work wickedness, and that with greediness, and to commit most gross sins, now
forsaking that outward wicked course are so puffed up in the pride of their
spirit, that they are become such new men, as it were thinking too well of
themselves, they run on into the other extremity in seeking after those
things which are above their reach; by whose wickedness it comes to pass
that the good graces of God oftentimes fall to the ground, and the children of
God fare the worse for them: and thus we see that many do not so much fell as
change their sins.

But it must be otherwise with us, if we mean to obtain this treasure, we
must so part with corrupt religion, that we admit no false sects and heresies:
we must so give over wickedness and corrupt manners, that from hence forwards
we return not unto them, and we must, as the Scripture requires, forsake a
show of profession of religion, and come unto Secondly, all sin must be
forsaken.
a strict practice thereof. Secondly, all sin and not some must be forsaken,
and sold of him, who will enjoy this treasure, many can be content to
relinquish some sins, but not all. Herod heard John Baptist willingly, and
was content to give ear unto him preaching Herod.
repentance: for when John tol^ him, that it was not lawful for him to have
his brothers wife, then he would not hear him any longer, but cast him into
prison, and caused him to be beheaded. The young man in the Gospel had sold
many sins, and had many good thoughts in him, insomuch as it is said, Mark.
10. and 24. verse, that Jesus loved him: but when Christ told him, that if he
would follow him he must leave his riches, then he chused rather to depart from
Christ than from his riches. Ananias and Saphira, Acts. 5. had Ananias.
many good things in them, so that they sold their possessions and laid part of
the price thereof at the Apostles feet: but dissembling with the Apostles, and
distrusting the providence of God, they kept back some part of the price of
their possessions, wherefore through the ministry of Peter they both were
presently deprived of their lives. Judas also (no Judas.
doubt) had many good things in him, otherwise Christ would not have made him
an Apostle, neither could it be but that hearing Christ so long he should reap
some commodity thereby, but yet he did secretly inueigle the goods of the
Church, and did purchase unto himself not this field wherein the treasure was,
but (as it is said of him) a field of blood. And thus we see that there is a
partial and not a total forsaking of sins in men. But such men must know,
that they have not done enough to obtain this treasure, in leaving some faults
and holding some. For it is true which the Apostle James says, 2. and 10
verse, Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in one point, he is
guilty of all. This the Apostle proves by an example, as if a man have
respect of persons, then he is unmerciful toward him whom he regards not.
Now unmercifulness is referred unto murder, and he that said, Thou shall not
commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill; now though thou do not
commit adultery, yet if thou killest thou art a transgressor of the law. They
therefore which make an outward show of Religion, but still keep sin in their
hearts, such must know that if they keep sin in part, they shall leese grace
in whole: wherefore our sins must be left, not some but all, not partially,
but totally. Thirdly, men 3
must sell sin at once, and for ever, and not for a moment, or a short time.
And herein we Sale of sia for ever.
may easily see that many men have rather left sin for a season, than
thoroughly repented them thereof; and therefore it comes to pass with them
that they do return with the dog unto the vomit, and with the sow which was
washed unto the wallowing in the mire. Now if any man ask what the reason is,
that some men after that they have escaped the filthiness of the world, are
yet again entangled therein: I answer, because such men never came unto a
sound grief for their sins. And hence it is, that many being renewed and
endued with some gifts of grace, yet being defiled with inward pride and lust
of the heart, and not laboring with might and maine to be delivered thereof,
become much worse than they were before.

The repentance of many who have been Papists, Atheists, and whose lives have
been stained with fornication, hurts of their brethren, or some other gross
faults, is only that they have left those sins, but such men never attaining
unto true remorse for their sins, fall therefore into them again, or into
worse if it be possible: to whom the Apostle James chapt. 4. says, Cleanse your
hands you sinners, and purge your hearts, you wavering minded, suffer
afflictions, and sorrow and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning,
and your joy into heaviness. Where the Apostle shows, that it is not enough
for man having offended (with the Not sufficient to leave sin, but me^ must
mourn for it, until they come to sound grief.
harlots having done amiss) to wipe their mouths, and to come unto the
Church, but they having displeased the Lord must weep, and mourn, until they
come to sound grief, and such as is answerable to the measure of their sins.
For grievous sins must be repented of with great grief, even as sore
diseases must be cured with sharp medicines. And as it is in Zachary the
twelfth, Men must mourn for their sins as one mourns for his only son,
and be sorry for them as one is sorry for the death of his first borne. There
must be in them a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddon for the death of the good King Josias: Even so must men mourn
because they have pierced Christ through with their sins, and wounded him
with their abominations. And men must know that a few dry tears, when they
have offended, are not sufficient repentance, or sacrifice to God, but they
must rent their hearts and be heartily sorry and turn unto the Lord: Now many
are so stricken with the sense and feeling of their sins, that thereby they
are moved to confess and lay open their wickedness in such sort, as a man
would think them to be such as for ever afterward would stand in fear to
offend the Lord any more: but these How many de^eiue themselves, when they know
their sins are pardonable: not laboring any further for an assurance that
they are pardoned.
after that they have received some comfort by the word, of their sins, and
have seen that their sins are pardonable, not distinguishing between these
two, that it is one thing to have their sins remissible, and another thing to
assure themselves that they are remitted: After (I say) this comfort received
by the preaching of the word, they laboring no further to be renewed and
thoroughly reformed, although they had some sorrow for a season, yet because
they did not search themselves more narrowly, and endeavor to purge themselves
as well from inward sin, as from outward, and to be wholly transfigured and
transformed into a new holy, and righteous life* therefore it comes to
pass, that the love of righteousness departs from them, and they return
again to their old by as, and are become prays for Jesuits, and massing
Priests, such is their profaneness. And this is because they rested only in
the universal promises of God, which although they be all most true and
comfortable, yet they can minister no true comfort and consolation unto man's
soul, except he make a particular application thereof unto himself.

Lastly, some there be who would feign seem to the appearance of the Church to
have forsaken and sold their sins, and to have made a full and perfect
reformation of their To harbor some secret sins in our breast.
former lives euilly spent, which notwithstanding harbor and nourish sins in
their hearts, which afterward will break forth, and discover their
hypocrisy: and this they do because they were but a little enlightened with
the flash of the holy Ghost, and were not thoroughly reformed inwardly, which is
evident in this, that they covet to approve themselves more before men than
before God, nourishing in their hearts secret self-love, as in showing
themselves zealous until they come to preferment, or to this end that many
perceiving their zeal may flock after them, to hear them, and so they may
procure themselves fame: whom so soon as Satan begins a little to buffet
them, they fall away and show that they had sold sin but for a season. This
is contrary unto that course which the true ministers of God, and those which
fear him aright ought to take, for it is their duty to seek the praise of
God and not of themselves, to covet the profit of the people of God, and not
their own private lucre, knowing this that they serve not men, but God, and
that they must profess religion religiously, setting before their eyes the
praise of God, the crown of immortal glory, the salvation of souls, and the
acceptance of their labor before God. And all men must desire rather to be
religious than to seem so, giving themselves To be religious, rather than so
to seem to be.
to the exercises of private prayer, reading, fasting, to private admonition,
conference, and other private duties, at such time, and in such place, when and
where they need not to boast of any thing done, seeing it is done in secret,
which who so does, let him assure himself that there is nothing so secret, but
it shall be revealed, whether it be good or evil.

If we do this, then shall we not be in the number of those which beginning in
the spirit, end in the flesh; or of those which serve God for a season, and in
the end fall away from him, and his service. Doublesse it is a strange thing to
see some who have bin themselves a light unto others, so now to shrink from
Gods truth, as that they should become Papists, or of the Family of love, or
of some other heresy. The cause of this is, because their inward stuff was
corrupt, and not fully cured by effectual repentance. And thus much of gross
sins. Now of the infirmities of nature which remain ever in the best, this
inward Of infirmities.
corruption must be sold also: for it is not enough to leave outward and gross
sins, except also we beat down the inward corruption of our own nature:
and although Inward corruptions.
we cannot altogether blot out this our natural corruption, yet the
righteousness of Christ may be so resident and dwell in us, that it shall not
only keep us from gross outward outrages and offenses, but also will hold
down and keep short our natural corruptions, neither must we think it
enough to sell the fruits of our corrupt nature, but we must also sell the
corruption it self: for as we see, so long as the tree remains, there will
always spring forth some buds; even so of the children of God, so long as the
corruption of the nature reigns in them, so long do they burst out into some
offenses or other: but most men make either little or no conscience at all of
these little faults; but it must be otherwise with us, or else we cannot but
displease God greatly. For as a river dries up unto the fountain, yet if we
do rest from all emptying of it, it will increase again: So except the
children of God do keep down their natural corruption, although they offend
not To master natural corruptions.
as the reprobate and wicked, in monstrous sins against God, yet they cannot
but have great downfals. Wherefore we must not with the woman, whereof the Poet
speaks, see, and behold good and lawful things, and follow that which is
evil; neither must we be as Video meliora proboque de ^^riora sequor
the Philosophers, whose reason fights with their appetite, but we must fight
both with reason and appetite, we must be as new creatures borne again, and we
must be more willing to endure all shame and reproaches, than to fall and offend
to the dishonor of God. Being grieved that we see our selves ready to
displease the Lord. The Apostle Paul, Romans 7. says of himself. I see another
Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive
unto the Law of sin which is in my members. Here the Apostle shows his
captivity unto sin, by reason of his inward corruption, now when men are in
imprisonment or captivity, then they are fed with the bread of adversity and
affliction, and therefore the Apostle viewing the misery wherein he was by
nature, in the type of a true regenerate man says, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Note.
Here he cries out against himself from the truth of his heart, as he finds
himself corrupt within, even so must the children of God do, and they must
make a conscience to keep down their corruption, or else that filthy
fountain will grow up still, and they shall see that it will so work with
them, that even (if Satan were away and should do nothing) it would pull and
draw them from God, except they do suppress it, and continually meditate upon
it.

This is painful unto the wicked, but very joyful and pleasant unto the
children of God, when they shall sell all their sins for ever, for the more
of them they sell, the more sweet and comfortable it will be unto them. Besides
this, we have an adversary within us, even the prick of the flesh, the
messenger of Satan, for so the Apostle witnesses of himself. The messenger
of Satan within us.
2. Cor. 12. 7. Least I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance
of our revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan, to buffet me, because I should not be exalted out of
measure. Who or what man was more in taking pains than the Apostle Paul? Who
went through more perils for the testimony of Christ's truth? Who was more
zealous in advancing the Gospel of Christ Jesus? Could not all the Apostles
watchings, all his fastings, his dangers, his continual prayers: finally could
not all his gifts and graces which were in him abundantly beat down and
cure this pride and arrogancy of the spirit in him? Who therefore, or what are
we that think we can get so easily a victory of sin, seeing the Apostle,
who was carried up to the third heaven cannot do it. When all other sins are
ended in a man, and when he thinks himself safe from sin, then comes
pride, for it arises of well doing, and Pride.
therefore the Apostle said that the prick of the flesh did buffet and box
him. Where he shows that this sin was so grievous unto his soul, that he
fought against sin and Satan, even as Christ did fight against him, when
after he was baptized he was tempted of him: Even so it comes to pass with
the children of God, when they are delivered as it were wholly from sin, and
think themselves most far off from offending God, then Satan comes like
an Angel of light, seeking by this means to deceive them, that in well doing
they should please themselves overmuch, and so displease God; wherefore the
virtue of God must appear in our infirmities. For as the Apostle says, How to
carri-ourselues in a temptation.
Gods power is made perfect through weakness: and therefore when any
temptation shall happen unto us, we are to beware that we neither make a light
account of them, neither be too much afraid of them, for as it is with the
bodily enemy, so is it likewise with the spiritual: if thou be careless,
then thine adversary sets upon thee at unawares; if too C^rnall security
and fear dangerous.
fearful, then he over comes thee at the first assault: even so is it with
Satan, if thou be secure and pass not for him, then he suddenly takes thee
napping, if thou be over fearful; then likewise he seeks thy destruction.
Wherefore take good heed unto Satan, and see that thou make not too light
account of his temptations, but still consider with thy self, that the devil
is ever knocking at the door, ready if thou have but one evil thought to
enter into thee. Wherefore beware least by reason of thy security the devil
do enter into thee, be humble in thy soul, as it becomes the child of God;
on the other side fear him not too much, but know that God, Christ Jesus, the
holy Ghost, and the Angels in heaven, and all the Saints of God in earth will
take thy part against him.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON, PREACHED BY MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM, as follows.
EPHESIANS. 6. verse. 10. 11. 12. 10 Finally, my b^^th^^^, be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might. 11 Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may
be able to stand against the assaults of the devil. 22 For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, and
against the worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses, which are in the hie places.
AFfter the Apostle had used general doctrine, and in forced thereupon
particular exhortations, he returns from his specials to general
exhortation^ again, as we may see in these verses, wherein ^ee exhorts them
to stand strongly, and therefore puts them in m^^^e of armor, without the
which they must needs lie o^^n to their adversaries. The peril whereof is so
much the greater, by how much their adversaries were the sorer, and for that
cause the Apostle falls into the description of them, with whom they must
encounter. Afterward the several pieces and parts of our defense are set
down, etc. More plainly these things are worthy to be noted* The exhortation
it self in these words, Be strong in the Lord. Secondly, the way how to
stand, by putting on the armor of God. Thirdly, the reason, which is, For we
wrestle not with flesh and blood alone, etc. Lastly, a description of the
weapons and armor it self. Finally, that is to conclude, or what remains,
or, take this the conclusion and corollarie of al, that you must not think it
a small thing to profess Christ his Gospel, as some do; neither yet on the
other side must ^e be discouraged at the difficulties of the professio, but as
on the one side you must still think of a battle, and not dream of peace; so
you must know, that the Lord will harness you even with his own coat armor
thereunto. Thus he notes with two extremities incident to Christians, that is,
that either they forget that they are in a warfare by security and
presumption, and think it to be less than it is, or else they are too much
dismayed at the first view of it, and so desperately yield ere they fight. But
do any here marvel, that Paul should speak thus to Gods children and well
approved Christians? To them I answer, that besides other miserable experience
of latter times and present time which does declare it too openly, David a
dear child of God, and Peter a professed and an approved Christian, will
sufficiently teach them in this point. One would little think David had had an
adulterous heart or bloody hand: if one should have told Peter, that he would
have ^orsworne his sovereign Savior, it had been a matter of quarrel. But
seeing David in the conflict shrunk, and Peter in the trial failed, let us
beware we be not daring David's, nor proud Peter's, speaking further then we try
our hearts. No doubt of it Peter spoke simply and as he thought, yet he saw not
what he thought, he knew not his own heart. It is another thing, as Gods
children can well tell us, to have a general knowledge of our strength, and
another thing to have a particular feeling of it: let us thereupon still
remember that heavenly apophthegme, Who so will follow Christ, must for sake
himself. Now if Satan find us wisely and warily catechized in this point,
then he turns another leaf, and works ou^ desperation. Then he shows the
difficulties of godliness, our weakness, and the number of our hindrances, to
bring us to be discouraged; but this is the more rare evil. Thus Satan finding
another corruption, uses another course with us, if he cannot make us easy
Christians, he will make us heavy Christians. To raise up such faint hearts
the Apostle cries, Be strong; and least any man should reply of his own want
of strength, Paul shows what and whose strength he means, namely Gods
strength, and in the power of his strength this strength is required, when we
see it is not good fighting with Satan in his own armor, he is a sophister,
dispute not with him in his own logique; he is an orator, beware of his
eloquence; he is a Prince, take heed of his power. As Satan in his own cause
must use his own strength, so we in the Lords cause are to trust to the Lords
strength. This doctrine requires rather meditation than declaration, conscience
than knowledge to be made of it.

Now to show how we must be strong, it is added, Put on the whole armor of
God, etc. It is a pleasant and profitable comparison here used, to show the
estate of Christians. As silly soldiers going into the camp cannot hope for
any good issue if they be naked and unarmed; so we, if in our daily conflicts
we remain unfenced, cannot think of any better end than to be ouerco^med. But
three things here offer themselves First, it must be God his armor. Secondly,
it must be a whole armor. Thirdly it must be put on. There are some in the
pride of their wit, and opinion of their learning and policy, that marvel
that silly souls lie so weakly under Satan's hand. But alas if one temptation
shake them, if one wound of conscience bruise them, they see no learning but
learning from heaven, no wisdom, but the wisdom of the spirit can help
them; Satan will overcome them in his own armor, and Gods cause is defended
with his own strength. Now that we must put on all it is plain; for as he
were worthy to be counted a fool, that with one piece, or with a few would
venture into the battle, seeing the enemy strikes rather at one part not
fenced than at all the other covered; so what were it to have one grace of God,
what to leave one sin, what to see one want, what to hate one corruption, and
yet to lie open in a great many? Lastly, we must put on our harness. Admit a
man had his armorie never so well stored, and his weapons never so tried, if
either he cannot put on his armor, or being armed, wants skill to use it, what
does it profit when the enemy knocks at his gate^so if I have never so good
things, if either in temptation I know not how to use them, or to deal in
them, how shall I stand at Satan's assaults? This courage must be neither mean
nor in our selves, but in God, and in the power of God, and in the might of his
power. And to add to the former examples more, consider how Noah presuming
proved weak; how Ezekiah after many distresses not suspecting himself did
fall, for the Lord leaving him he was vaineglorious even before Gods enemies. So
far have even Gods servants been deceived in an opinion of their strength, not
that they were gross hypocrites, but that they saw not the corruption of their
own hearts, and therefore when they came to handy strokes, they were foiled.
No doubt Peter, as we said, and the other Apostles were not purposed to deceive
men's eyes, yet they fell. Who then are we having no such strength, if the Lord
let us see our weakness by withdrawing his spirit from us? why should we think
well of our selves? Late and lamentable memory shows, that many old
Gospel^ers are now cold professors, some being heretics, some Epicures, some
worldlings. No little charge, nor slender burden is Christianity then, for
many seek the straight way, and cannot get in, many either in practice or
otherwise being plainly Atheists. And surely hereof it must teach us, that
Gods Saints in tentation and acculation are so fair to seek for wisdom and
strength, as we are to learn wisdom by other ine^s harms, least in trouble
we be such as falter in affliction. Here our Savior Christ his admonition
comes in speed, that if we will come to him, we must go out of our selves,
and think no wi^, wisdom, reason, or strength to stand on temptation if the
Lord keep us not. We are as in building, so in battle. for the building we
must provide stuff enough; for the battle we must provide sufficient
furniture, we are to cast our costs before, we must reckon our revenues, and
take account of our armory, and consult of our ability, because of
Christianity be building and warring together, we must provide both trowell
and sword together, least finding hard tempests we retire and reco^le with
shame. And what makes us so secure, but that we think that Christian
profession is but a slight? And to go further, why comes it to pas^e, that
often disputing Preachers in conflicts are confounded, and most courageous ch^me
subtle* o^^ the vile^t dastards, but from hence, that they trust in
themselves? But o mali^ of the ^n, o corruption of natur^^ if thou, Satan,
can not make us ^o presume, thou will ^xtremit^ to despair; o vile nature,
thy preiuming is the way to despairing. And to soeake of this latter
extremity, which is the less curable evil, if Satan meet with us as having
a ^ight of our weakness, sure he will bring us to despair. It is a sure
temptation to hindere^ ^h^e^^ (which ^eli^f^ ^n perfection is as hard as to
fulfill the law) and it is Satan's practice, ^he once see us down, he will
keep us down, and answer all our wants. If we say we have no wisdom, he
will confirm it, ^^y he will make us to despair not only of our wisdom, but
of Gods wisdom in us. But remember that that which is not in us, is in
Christ. Remember Gods strength must be seen in our weakness N^cessarie then
was this reduplication of Paul concerning the strength and might of God. In
tentation we say, we are strongly tempted; Paul says, the Lord will strong^^
help us. But here note a difference between the exhortations legal and
evangelical. The exhortations of the law kill, the exhortations of the Gospel
quicken. For he that thinks he should do good as he should do it, and leave
sin as he ought to do, shall find corruption in every thing. Hereof it
comes to pass, that many say, I see nothing in prayer and in all g^od things
but hypocrisy. It is well, thou thoughtest thy self living, but thou art
dead. But to ^^^^^ to the difference spoken of, the exhortations of the l^w do
bind us on pain of death, the exhortatios of the Gospel commands that which
Christ is ready to give us, and it charge us not so much to do it, but to
believe that Christ by his blessed spirit will work every good thing in us.
For the Gospel being the Ministry of ^^fe gives life, and strength from
above, when we are dead and weak. The not discerning of this difference makes
many good precepts fall to the ground. The law indeed reueales sin, but the
Gospel cures sin, the law wounds, and so must it do; but the Gospel
heals us, which the law can never do.

Hitherto we have heard thus much, first we must provide that we fight in
Gods harness, not with Satan's weapons, whether they be wit, reason, policy,
education or such like. We fight against a Prince and principality, who wants
not wit, knowledge, civil gifts, or any such things, which things have been
given even unto the heathen, for they were wise and learned men, yet many of
them lay in great sins, in idolatry, some fearfully ended their lives. Let
not Christians then say, have I not wit, reason, and education beseeming a man?
Well, so did the Philosophers and Poets, and yet behold their fruits, behold
their ends: but let us deny reason, and withstand wit, for it will surely fa^le
in the hour of death, and in the hour of temptation. No gift of nature, no
gift of bringing up can withstand Satan or sin, unless from heaven God
change us Neither is this the sin only of the unregenerate, but in the
regenerate, who still sliding to reason or ouerweying of God his power are
foiled; and therefore we see many overcome, who purpose to withstand, yet
striving in their own wisdom they are spoiled, be their purpose never so
great. Many will say, why this is a monstrous temptation, I will never yield
to this, yet they fall. This we shall see both in temptations and accusations,
when ^^en strive and dispute with reason with so subtle a sophister: so the
more they strive, the more they are entangled, for they want strength to fight
with the strong man, who will not be subdued unless we put on the armor of
the stronger man, which is Christ Jesus; which armor is afterward set down.
Neither is it enough to have a piece of harness, but we must have all the
whole armor, for what is it to cover the head if the breast be bare? what if
the arms be armed when the back is vnharnesse^? we cannot avoid the darts
which come against every place. So we must not have one grace and want another;
for then Satan comes in the open place, who observes whether we want a
head-peece, ^ gauntlet, a breast plate, or whatsoever: wherefore we must think
that Satan as a politic soldier looks not so much to the armed part, as to
the naked part. If he sees us afraid of him, the^^ will he tempt us to
despair; if we will not be pierced with uncleanness, then he will shake(...)s
with covetousness. If he sees us pettish and unarmed with love, then Satan will
tempt v(...)o anger. Alas it is our weak nature to reserve one sin or other,
and it gives Satan advantage; we ^e Heroa^an courtiers and Christians, we are
half persuaded with Agrippa to be Christians, but we must thoroughly be
harnessed, least as a dead fly corrupts much good oyn(...)h one sin we
defile many graces. Every one has his familiar sin, which(...)ur to epsy as
an adversary, and to fight against as an enemy, whether it be pl(...)r,
covetousness, or such like. Whereas then thou see some graces, yet be
hu(...)hose, which especially are wanting to thee; and wherein thou art most
unarmed, then pray, and labor for more help by grace in Christ Jesus. But
what if we have good armor and all armor? yet without use of it we may be
strangled in our armor. What if we(...)good graces, and all graces? yet
without experience and use of them our souls may(...)urthered in the midst of
them. Many may come to the assemblies and hear, ye(...)ey either fail in
knowledge, or in practice of it. And sure such is a man as he is in temptation.
What is it to have many precepts against anger, and yet be overcome of anger*
What is it to have rules against covetousness, and to see the issue of it, and
yet to be a covetous man? Let us know, that it is one thing to learn to fight
against Satan, and another to fight against men. In material co^flicts there
is some time of truce, but with Satan there is no truce with us but for his
advantage; for him we must be armed as well in the night as in the day: in
outward battles winters make war to cease, we have no quietness neither in
summer nor in winter.

That ye may be able to withstand. The Apostle describes our enemies. If we
had to deal but with our selves, or with men like to our selves, or with the
world, we had need of God his power; but seeing beside all these we are to
deal with all the hellish army, much more we need this: we are not only to
fight against the flesh and the world, but against the devils: neither must we
think that Paul denies in this place that we should fight with our own
corruption, but he shows we fight not only with ourselves and with the world,
but with Satan too, and so that we need more armor. By two things he
describes our enemies, by their might, and subtlety. For their might he calls
them principalities and powers. This title is given to the devils, Romans 8.
Colloss. 1. Indeed these names are given to the good Angels, as Ephesians. 1.
Hebr. 1. so that look what titles are given to the good Angels, are given to
the wicked spirits, which, except sanctification, are equal in gifts to the
good Angels; for though these spirits have lost their goodness, yet have they
not lost their strength and wisdom. They be worldly governors. God be
blessed their government reaches not to heaven, but to the world, yea of the
darkness of the world. Thus he distinguishes of the world as it is by creation,
and so God is the prince of it, and as it is now by corruption, and so the
Devil is the god of the world. This teaches us, when Satan shall prevail,
even over men living in ignorance and ungodliness. The world was made good by
creation, but degenerated to evil by corruption. Well we see the devil is
called the prince of the world, and he says of himself that all is his. It is
not so by creation, but be the righteous judgment of God all is in his hands
to punish our sins, or try our faith.

It follows to speak of his subtlety in these words, Against ambushments,
etc. Even as ambushments are used privily to undermine the enemy, so by wiles
Satan goes about to trap us. But this is larger said, against spiritual
wickednesses. If one could see the enemy, he might be prevented, but we
cannot see the operations of the devil, because he is spiritual, and
therefore we neither can by sense nor by reason discern him; so that he is
not only a layer of ambushments, but of spiritual ambushment. Yet note, though
they be spiritual, yet not in goodness but in wickedness. In heavenly things.
Though Satan be the prince of the air, yet here it is meant that he fights
against men in heavenly knowledge. By creation they had much good knowledge,
their goodness they have lost, their knowledge is retained. Again Paul says,
there is a mystery of iniquity, showing, that as there is a mystery of
godliness, so there is a mystery of wickedness; and therefore Satan is said to
change himself into an Angel of light; which is, because he will come in good
things, in knowledge, in spiritual exercises, and falsely and wickedly gloss
on them by that great practice and experience, which from their first fall they
have learned. Thus Satan comes even in good things. Worldly wise men
distinguishing, whether the enemy by strength or by subtlety does most ^^rt,
conclude, that the subtle enemy is most dangerous. Alas, we are in evil case
then, h^^ing to do with enemies not only strong, but subtle: it were enough
to deal with an enemy having but one of these qualities, but we fight with
the^ that have both, that is, both strength and subtilty; so that we know not
whether they are more strong, or more subtle. ^wo uses there are of this
doctrine. One is, we must not make it a slight matter of the e^^^ie. The other
is, that we be not too much afraid. Both these are dangerous extremitie^* Some
vile heretics deny there is a God, or a devil, or that the devil is so
strong and sub^^l as he is. Indeed men will not speak thus, but they show it
by their peace in themselves in their lives, which shows, that men do not
believe there is a battle. For we see we are now at peace, and why? because
there are no enemies. But were it so that the enemies were in the field, would
we not fear? Did we believe that Satan could sit in our consciences, deluding
judgment and understanding, and casting a mist on reason, would we ^^^t be
more jealous of reason? would we not be more fearful of our selves? yes
surely. Let us then consider, that besides our selves which were enough, Satan
adds both corruption to judgment and affection. And herein specially Satan
shows himself a subtle Apostata, in that he cares not whether we be sound
in judgment and corrupt in life, or careful in life, and corrupted in
Religion, so we may be one. Hereof it comes, that heretics are precise in
life, and good Christians are so careless in conversation: so either he
gathers false conclusions on good principles, or else glorious sequeles of
rotten premises. To go back to the plain sense of these men, the meaning is
not, that we fight not with flesh and blood at all, but we chiefly or only
fight not with flesh and blood. The like speech is in the word, as, Thy name
shall not be Jacob, but Israel, that is, Jacob only. Again, in the Epistle it
is said, The word is not in word, but in power, that is, the Gospel is not
chiefly in word, or only in the word. Again, Romans 7. and Galat. 5. it is
plain, we fight with flesh and blood. And John 15. we fight against the
world. Wherefore seeing we fight not against our selves only, but against such
adversaries as whet up our selves against our selves; and therefore we stand in
need of all the armor that may be, which we shall see to be more requisite,
if we consider that it were enough to fight with an adversary either strong
or wise; but seeing we conflict with them, who for strength and subtlety too
are equal with the good Angels. For their power these adversaries are called
Powers, as Coloss. 2. Rom 8. So are the good Angels Powers, as Ephesians. 2. Heb.
1. Herein the evil spirits differ from the heavenly spirits, in that these are
from heaven, and for the good of the Church: those are governors of the world,
that is, of the corrupt estate of the world; so that their whole power is
against the children of the world. Satan may strike the children of the best,
but slay them he can not. CHRIST calls Satan the Prince of the world, and
Paul calls him the god of the world; Christ calls him a strong armed
soldier or giant: yet God be blessed all his strength is in the world. Well
then, be he more fearful to us then Goliath to the army of Israel; be it that
he be as a roaring Lion, at whose voice all the silly beasts stand trembling;
be it that he so astonish and terrify our conscience, that we know not what
to think or to speak: yet all is to the terror of the wicked. But behold,
besides his strength, Satan is spiritual, invisible, not to be discerned, and
therefore more dangerous, in that we can not prevent him nor his temptations,
being above nature and above reason, cannot be descried, unless above nature
and reason we be either very well taught of the Devil, or of God. To this
unsearchable nature he is occupied in heavenly things, but as a spiritual
wickedness, not goodness. To show how he is spiritual, we see in this, in that
he is an Angel of light, he tempted Christ with scripture, he set the Pharisees
in devilish wisdom against Christ, he subornes false heretics; yea, his
subtilties shall be such, by Christ his own testimony, that even the elect, if
it were possible, should be deceived. And Paul speaking but of the child of
Satan the Antichrist, reports, that he shall be mighty in power, in miracles,
etc. Only this is our comfort, that this wisdom is but wickedness, which is
the only thing wherein they be distinguished from the good Angels, with whom
in wisdom and strength Satan is equal. Here ought we to blush, in that we
desire rather learning, wisdom, and power, wherein Satan and wicked men have
not only been equal to us, but above us, and we less desire goodness, wherein
we are like to God, to good Angels, and the children of God. For this may be a
special mark that we belong to God, when we rather desire goodness than
those other qualities wherein we are equal but to the Devil. Be we never so
learned, he is more learned, be we never so strong, he is stronger. For is not
he mighty in power that can so trouble the air, as he did to Job, and as often
as he does in that boisterous manner, that no natural Philosopher can give a
reason of it? In Exodus we know that the Lord used evil Angels to trouble the
Seas. Psalm. 78. the Lord is said to send evil Angels to trouble the^. And as
godliness is a mystery, so there is a mystery of iniquity, and the Lord sending
an effectual illusion, (2 Thessalonians. 1.) on the^ that received not the word in
love, is said to do it by the operation of Satan; so that though the Lord be
the supreme worker, yet Satan is the instrument. What shall we say of the rage
of sin in these days? what shall we say how Satan daily bewitcheth us in
Paganism, Atheism, Macheuillisme, Anabaptisme, etc? Is not all this
sufficient to prove, that Satan taking up the wisest men of the world to his
service is a spiritual wickedness? Whereof comes it that suddenly a poor man
becomes a cunning Artist? or that an ignorant man presently should speak with
diverse tongues? or that silly souls should be subtle disputers? What is it
that sin is now adays so subtly, so closely, so wittily dispatched? Why
do men to maintain Papisme forgo all their goods, suffer their bodies to be
whipped? Do not all these prove, that Satan is a spiritual wickedness? Again,
if we look to the height and shamelesnes of sin, to see how men prostitute
themselves to sin, we must say Satan has been mighty, powerful in deluding
men's minds, in hardening men's hearts, so that no word can pierce them:
therefore it is, that Paul says men are blinded in their minds; therefore Paul
would have us to tolerate and suffer such as Satan does hold in chains, 2.
Tim. 2. Here let us see a difference of the sins of the godly and ungodly.
The wicked rage and devise platformes; the godly for a time may be under Satan.
2. Timoth 2. but they sin of infirmity, not of wilful selling themselves to
sin. So great a cause of thankfulness we have, that we are not raging in
hellish sins, in that we are simple, and bunger like sinners. Besides, the
godly are silly, the wicked subtle in sin. So great a cause of thankefulnes
we have, that Christ the stronger man has ouercommed. The Devil has power,
but by derination, he has a strength, but by limitation, he has force, but in
darkness. So great a cause of thankfulness we have, seeing Christ has wisdom
enough in God to overcome the wisdom of Satan in evil. Though then Satan be
strong, yet none is greater then the Father, none mightier then Christ, who
has captiuated Satan under his feet. So great a cause have we to be thankful,
that Christ will not only in his presence himself, but in us by his power also
he overcomes. A further use of this is to try when our temptations come of
the natural corruption, or of Satan's malice. To this we answer, that as our
enemies are described by power and policy; so when temptations come so
strongly and s^ily, that it is above reason, then the adversary abuses our
weakness, our own temptations come more remissely and easily: but when these
temptations hale us more violently, then we fight not with flesh alone, but
with spiritual adversaries. In the book of Exodus mention is made of a spirit of
jealozie, which is more then natural jealozie. In the book of Judges, an evil
spirit was between Abimelech, and the Sechemites, which was more then frailty
of the flesh. In the Gospel mention is made of an unclean spirit returning
with 7. spirits more; so that the pulling of our affection is of Satan, as
Christ said of Satan's operation to Peter, that Satan sought to sift him and to
deal with him: and indeed Satan did so daunt and circumuent him, that he
spoke he knew not what; so that this fell not only on the wicked, but on the
godly: as Satan so bewitched David in understanding, that he made him to
number his people. Hereof it is that we pray not to be led into temptation,
because though I am well purposed, yet so many vain reasons rage in us, and
forcibly draw us another way, that we may see somewhat more than nature.
Likewise when we shall without any object be carried away with some affection
so strongly, that though our life lay on it, we cannot contain our selves.
When Paul, Ephesians 5 bids us be angry without sin, he shows, that there
is a natural affection without sin: but because our affections are without
rule and mixed with sin, he says, i^ so doing we give place to the devil.
So that there is a great difference between a natural anger, and a carnal
sinful anger, which besides the instinct of nature is wrought by Satan. And
therefore as it is good to stop the first breaches in banks for fear of
further danger; so it is good to murder the first motions of sin by the
word, prayer, fasting, and admoni^ion, least giving the sway to our affections
they ouerrunne and ouerflow us thoroughly, and so we are carried to strange and
furious sins. Wherefore first we are to be thankful, that we may know how to
prevent sin (for we may soon let in a guest which we cannot well let out
again) and we must labor to repress such raging evils.

Yet another use of this doctrine is, that we must think, how often we deal
with more than with men, when we deal with heretics, or with angry bloody
men, who often are stirred up by Satan, so that they spoil themselves and
others. The ignorance of this doctrine breeds ielousies, repinings, and
malice, that when we think to revenge others we revenge our selves This is
now without cause: now if we have a just cause, yet for want of love, wisdom
and humility, we spoil our good cause, harden our adversaries, and hurt our
selves. We must not resist policy with policy, nor requite evil with evil,
but in wisdom be long suffering, pardoning man, as we would be pardoned of
God. For this cause fight. He bids us not to make truce with our enemy, though
our enemy be strong and subtle, yet fighting under Christ we are to stand
fast; Christ has subdued for us, and he will subdue for us Still we must
remember to resist with Gods harness, which as surely exceed Satan's harness,
as heaven excels earth or hell. For want of this armor we see wise and civil
honest men fall into horrible sins. For want of this armor come such
disputes with Satan, which simple souls use, not being able to discern which
is the true armor. For want of this armor green Christians, and troubled
consciences looking for their own armor rather than the armor of God, inwrap
themselves in most dangerous labyrinths. Now our armor must be complete: some
have a good heart but not a good life; some have a good life but not ^uch; some
faith in part: this comes of want of knowledge, if they know the word, they
pray not; some pray, but not with continuance.

To come to the armor, mark, it was said, Put on; now it is said, Take the
armor. We see that here is no truce with us and Satan, as in civil wars,
but we must continually say as Iehu to I^sabel, What peace my soul with Satan?
We must not be secure Laish, or careless Babylonians, least that we be
prevented of the enemy. It is good to see sin rather by experience
particular in our selves, than for general knowledge in others. Ask our
judgment for a sin in another man, and we can point out every part of it;
lay this sin to our selves, and we can say nothing. So that we see it is
easy to know sin, but it is hard to feel the practice against it. Let us
not then let the harness hang on the wall, but let us put it on. Here mark one
thing, that it is a policy of the devil to persuade us there is no devil, as
it is the policy of wizards to persuade us that there are no witches. And so
as he comes at the first as a silly Serpent, whilst he would creep in, but
after he proves a roaring Lion, when he is once entered: yet let us beware we
fear not too much, for that emboldeneth the enemy. For as man fears man
keeping courage, and is pursued without courage, nay as brute beasts are
bolder by seeing one which fears them; so the devil is the bolder, if he
sees us afraid of them. And besides that fear dries up the blood and
weakeneth nature, it does also deprive us of faith in God his providence, which
does assure us that Satan's power is all by de^iuation and limitation; it cannot
touch the body without permission, much less the soul: which is manifest,
for that witches though they prevail in petty and little things, yet when
they come to great points, they can do nothing. So singular a presaruatiue to
the godly is the providence of God, as the Vn^cornes horn to the inferior
beasts. But we will herein strengthen our faith, that the cross of Christ has
triumphed against Satan for the godly, Coloss* 2. and therefore if he now
a^sault us, he does cure rather than slay us. For as an enemy often by Gods
goodness thrusts his sword into an ulcer, rather to purge that which would
have bred death, than to kill: so often God purposes to cure us of the
impostumation of pride even by the malice of Satan, so wonderfully can he
draw good out of evil. The devil brings unrighteousness, we allege
righteousness; he brings terror of conscience, we meet him with peace; he
offers vanity, we refuse it with truth; he comes roaring, we avoid it by
praying. Wherefore that proclamation must be made here, that was in the
Israelities army, that is, that those that are fearful, return home, and
beware how they come into this conflict. And let us oppose to the strength of
Satan the strength of Christ, who being our head shepherd will not suffer us to
miscarrie, though we seem to be in the wolves mouth, and that in the deep
valley of death. But what of all this harness? It must be put on We shall see
often none so weak in affection, as they that have much knowledge. Who will
better declaime against anger generally than the angry man? Who is more severe
against wantonness in education than a most shameless harlot? Why do men
think others blessed being troubled in mind, and count themselves cursed
being in it? All this is because we have harness, but use it not.

In the evil day. The day of temptation is called an evil day, because the
temptation is evil. James calls it a good day, and that we must rejoice in
it; and it is so in respect of God his wisdom turning it to good. So that
this may be a good day and evil day in diverse respects.

Having finished all. Luke 4. After Christ was tempted, the devil went away
for a season, though that temptation ceased, yet he pursued him with
afflictions. And though as children of the marriage the dint and edge of
temptation be blunted to us, yet the enemy still enuieth us. And therefore we
had above all need of perseverance, no danger like to that which is in the
end. When thou have overcome the popish devil, the worldly devil comes. Have
thou overcome the swearing devil, then the lying devil comes? Have thou
overcome the filthy devil, the worldly devil comes? Have thou overcome all
these devils, the proud devils come?

That thou may stand. This is a promise, and we shall not fail of this
armor of proof, nor of the profit of it. And so as we are exhorted to put on
the armor, so we shall have the fruit of it by standing, so we still pray,
Da Domine, quod iubes, and iube, quod vis. Thus Christians by faith and
standing fast in the evil day, must change the other evil nature of affliction
into a good quality, still being mindful to comfort themselves in this, that
the Evangelical exhortations give by promise through the holy Spirit a
certain strength to do the thing commanded, the Law leaving us in our
weakness. Again to the armor.

Stand. We must always be in a readiness, and at the first call, what time of
year, month, day, or night soever the adversary prouokes us. He begins with
the girdle, because in former ages as there were diverse manners of eating,
sitting, or warring, so Paul here speaks of such things as were used the^. The
girdle is not now, which was the^ used, as we have some armor familiar to us,
unknown to them, as gunnes, etc. The use of the girlde was to gird fast the
nether parts, this is Truth, which is not taken for the whole word, as Ioh. 17.
but for a sincere and upright heart, or for faithfulness. And as we take faith
either for our faithfulness to God, or Gods faithfulness to us; so truth means
sometime upright dealing either from God ^o us, or from us to God. Truth is
counted then for a true performance, as Roman. 2. The judgments of God are
with truth, that is faithfulness. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth,
that is, a performance of his mercy. Well, here it is not spoken of that
truth, which is the word, but of vprightnes of heart and sincerity. Again,
the truth of the word is after spoken of, and here can be no vain repetition.
Well, as the girdle knits all together on the body; so the vprightnes of heart
is the band of all virtues, and hypocrisy is as a wide or loose sack, wherein
nothing can tarry. This vprightnes of mind is in diverse places, as Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man, who with comfort in his remission of sins without guile
labors for a godly life. The same commendation is Psalm. 15. and 24 and 119.
This is a thing accompanied with blessedness by Christ his own words, Matthew.
5. The Author of the Hebrews wills him that comes to God, to come with a pure
heart, the want of which integrity is reprehended in the Jews, Iam. 4. But
what of all these porches to such an house? Surely because a true heart ^urseth
all graces to the end, and the false heart dissipateth all gifts, and
disgraceth such hypocrites. Psalm. 125. vprightnes of heart is such a thing,
that the Prophet specially prays for such as have it, and leaves them in God
his judgment that want it. Psalm. 119. Then shall I not be confounded, when my
heart is upright, Portion 10. verse. 80. We see true hearts shall be justified
in the end, and hypocrisy shall blush in the issue. Thus we see the reward of
a good heart, the revenge of an evil heart, when we know not how to do our
duties simply. The honest heart still is struggling out of sin, and comes; the
hollow heart makes a show of mortification, etc. but God takes away his vizard
in time. For some men's sins go before to judgment, and some follow after:
some men's good deeds are cleared in this life, to show, that all weldoing shall
be glorified. Iniquity may be colored, but not ever covered; truth may be
blamed, but not shamed. For exemplifying the Lord himself gives testimony to
his vprightnes. David was an upright hearted man, Saul an hypocrite; Nathaniel
had a good heart, Judas was an hypocrite; Josiah, Ezekiah prepared their hearts
to the worship of God, 2. Chron. 25. Amaziah did good, but not with a right
heart. The people (2. Chron. 20.) are said not to prepare their hearts to seek
the Lord their God: 2. Chron. 30. Ezekiah craves mercy for them that came
with an upright heart, and God heard him: so acceptable is an upright heart.
But how shall we discern our hearts to be upright? It is not by nature, Genesis
6. Job says, a cleanething cannot proceed from an unclean sin. David
confesses original hypocrisy, which is showed Proverb. 12. and 20. We then
(Act. 13.) must see that our hearts are made clean by faith. Of it self,
above all, the heart of man is unsearchable, Ierem. 17. But how comes this?
because there is a labyrinth of hypocrisy in it, there is a gulf, and depth,
and privy discourse in it, that no man can gage but the Lord, who is said,
Proverb. 16. to be the searcher of the raines, howsoever our heart is hollow.
This secret searching is by the Spirit of God, 2. Cor. 2. and by the word
wrought upon by the Spirit, 1. Cor. 14. Heb. 4. 12. The Spirit rebukes us of
sin, Ioh. 13. but by the word searching the very hidden intents of the heart.
Therefore as it is to no end to hide any thing from the Lord, so it boots us
not to look for an hiding of thoughts. For be they in love of good, good; or
for hate of sin, or sinful things, then God is pleased for it. If we do good
for reward, or avoid evil for shame, etc. all is woeful in the fight of the
Lord, seem men's goodness never to be so good in a man's eye.

FINIS.
A GODLY EXPOSITION OF THE XVI. PSALM.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
PSAS. 16. verse. 1. Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I trust.
THis Psalm contains the acknowledging of the Prophet his unworthiness, and
shows how all things are of God: it witnesses the man of God his love to the
Saints, his hatred of false religion, the assurance of God his providence, and
his undoubted hope of life everlasting. All which things containing so many
points of heavenly doctrine, ought much to provoke in us the love of the
Psalm, and loving it to frequent the use of it. The Psalm seems to be
general, and may be used at all seasons, and of all estates, as not being
bound to any peculiar condition of men, or tied to any several circumstance,
as are many other Psalms, containing particular matter: and therefore is it to
be used as a notable meditation, which may be showed by this word Mitchtam. The
first verse is the proposition of the whole, and the residue of the Psalm
prosecuteth the same matter. Now to the words of the text.

Preserve me, O God. Here David desires not deliverance from any special
trouble, but generally prays to be fenced and defended continually by the
providence of God: wishing that the Lord would continue his mercy toward him
unto the end, and in the end: whereby he foresaw that it was as needful for
him to be safegarded by God his protection in the end, as at the time present;
as also how he made no less account of it in his prosperity, than in
adversity. So that the man of God still feared his infirmity, and therefore
acknowledges himself ever to stand in need of God his help. And here is a
sure and undoubted mark of the child of God, when a man shall have as great a
care to continue and grow in well doing, as to begin: and this praying for the
gift of final perseverance, is a special note of the child of God. This holy
ielouzie of the man of God made him so to desire to be preserved at all times,
in all estates, both in soul and body. Every man will say, true it is, if God
should not preserve us, how could we continue? But few there be who rightly and
carefully use the means, as this man of God did, whereby they may attain this
grace. And therefore howsoever they pretend a good affection, and well liking
generally of the thing, yet they have no true faith, as the Prophet had: for
faith would drive them carefully to use the means: how beit this general
knowledge is left in many to take from them all excuse: but in the faithful it
works an holy fear, and fear ingendreth a conscience to use the means. I
appeal to the conscience of a natural man: If a man being sick would cry,
Lord help me, Lord restore me to my health, and yet in the mean time wilfully
refuses the prescribed means for his recovery, tempted he not God? which if
it be so, how much more dangerous is this in things concerning the soul, when
a man either for want of hearing and reading the word feels not the diseases
of the mind; or feeling them effectually* pineth and languisheth away under
the burden of them, neglecting prayer, confessing of his sins, repentance,
and such like means of his salvation? True it is that, man lives not by bread
only: and therefore the wicked are but stalled up and made fat against the day
of slaughter. And the children of God know and acknowledge, that without the
blessing and favor of God their meat may bring their bane: and therefore they
crave that by the word and prayer the means may be sanctified unto them; much
more in things concerning our salvation we must both carefully use the means,
and in the using of them not to trust in the outward work wrought, but to
crave the inward ministry of God his holy spirit, which works by them, not
being ordained for God but for us.

For in thee do I trust. Here the Prophet sets down the cause why he
prays to God: whereby he declares, that none can truly call upon God unless
they believe: Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? In regard whereof as he prays to God to be his Savior, so he is
fully assured that God will be his Savior. If then without faith we cannot
truly call upon God, the men of this world rather prate like Parats, than pray
like Christians, at what time they utter these words. For yt they trust not in
God, they declare both by neglecting the lawful means, and also in using
unlawful means. Some we see trust in friends: some shoulder out (as they
think) the cross with their goods: some fence themselves with authority:
others bathe and ^aste themselves in pleasures to put the evil day far from
them: others make flesh their arm: and others make the ^edge of gold their
confidence: and these men when they seek for help at the Lord, mean in their
hearts to find it in their friends, good authority and pleasure, howsoever
for fear they dare not say this outwardly. Again, here we are to observe
under what shelter we may harbor our selves in the showers of adversity, even
under the protection of the Almighty. And why? Who so dwells in the secret
of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty. And here in
effect is showed, that whosoever puts his trust in God shall be preserved:
otherwise the Prophet his reason here had not been good. Besides, we see he
pleads not by merit, but sueth by faith, teaching us, that if we come with
like faith, we may obtain the like deliverance.

It follows in the Psalm, verse. 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord,
Thou art my Lord: my weldoing extends not to thee. In this conference with
his soul, David sets down the reason more at large, why he trusts in
God, that he will preserve him: first, he acknowledges his own unworthiness:
secondly, he gives himself to the Saints, Thou have said unto the Lord. Here
he confesses that whatsoever good thing he had, he received it of the Lord.
And this he does not barely or barrenly with his lips from the teeth outward,
but unfeignedly in his soul, also from the heart inward: and in that he passes
from the conference with his soul to speak unto the Lord, he shows that God
knows how his soul lies not: and that he did behold the sincerity and
simplicity of his heart herein. So that he deals not before men alone, or
with his lips, but with God also, and trauaileth with his own soul: wherein
he cleereth himself of hypocrisy, and by his own practice conuinceth and
condemns those kind of men, who say one thing with their lips, and mean
another thing in their hearts. Wherefore we are to learn, that in our prayers
we deal not with men, but with God. We must not so much labor for a set order
of words as for a well ordered heart; and we must not use these words as before
men alone with our lips, but in our souls and in the presence of God; to wit,
Lord thou have redeemed me, Lord thou have saved me: and I say to my soul,
that it should acknowledge thee to be my Lord, my Redeemer, and my Savior, and
therefore should use all things to thy glory. Thou art my Lord, my soul, O
Lord, has tasted of thy goodness, and by good proof I find that thou do
govern me. My weldoing extends not to thee: oh what shall I render unto
thee, my God, for all thy benefits toward me? what shall I repay? alas I can
do thee no good, for mine imperfect goodness cannot pleasure thee, who art
most perfect and goodness it self: my weldoing can do thee no good, my
wickedness can do thee no harm: I receive all good from thee, but no good
can I return to thee: wherefore I acknowledge thee to be most rich, and my
self to be most beggarly in weldoing: so far off is it that thou stand in
any need of me. Wherefore I will join my self to thy people, that whatsoever
I have, they may profit by it, and whatsoever they have I may profit by it,
seeing the things that I have received must be put out to loan, to gain some
comfort to others: whatsoever others have, they have not for their private use,
but that by them as by pipes and conduites they liberally should be conveyed
unto me also. Wherefore in this strain we are taught, that if we be the
children of God, we must join our selves in a holy league to his people, and
by mutual participation of the gifts of God we must testify each to other,
that we be of the number and communion of Saints: and this is an undoubted
badge and cognizance of him that loves God, if he also loves them that are
begotten of God. Wherefore if we do profess our selves to be of God, and to
worship him, then must we join our selves to the Church of God, which with us
does worship God. And this must we do of necessity, for it is a branch of our
belief, that there is a communion of Saints in the Church: and if we believe
that there is a God, we must also believe that there is a remnant of people,
unto whom God reuealeth himself, and communicates his mercies, in whom we
must have al our delight, with whom we must communicate, according to the
measure of grace given unto every one of us.

But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent: all my delight
is in them. The Papists could abide no Saints, but them which are in heaven;
which argues that they live in a kingdom of darkness, and err not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God: for if they were but meanly conversant in the
Scriptures, in the holy Epistles, they should find almost in every Epistle
mention made of the Saints, who are thereunto called in Jesus Christ, through
whom they are sanctified by the holy Ghost. And mark, he calls them
excellent. Some think rich men to be excellent, some think learned men to be
excellent, some count men in authority so to be: but here we are taught that
those men are excellent, which are sanctified with God his graces. True it is,
that learning, wisdom, authority, honor, gold and credit, are the excellent
gifts of God in their kind, and yet have they not true excellency in
themselves: for they make not the possessors of themselves excellent, because
the wicked may have them as well as the good: and these things we see for the
most part are as they are that have them. For if the good man have them, he
uses them reuerentely, moderatly and thankfully, he applies them ^o good
uses, and so makes them serve to the furtherance of good purposes. Again, if
an evil man have them, he irreverently usurps them, immoderatly uses them,
and unthankfully is puffed up with them, he turns them to evil uses, and by
them promoteth ill causes. Wherefore this excellency, which is the fruit of
God his spirit, is in it self only good: and this indeed makes men truly
excellent. Some say the Prophet means, that seeing he cannot do good to God,
he will deserve well of his Saints: but this is but one part of his meaning: so
that he means this and somewhat more, that is, that he will delight in them
and that not only to do them good, but also to receive good from them, as may
appear by his terming of them excellent ones, such as are fit as well to do
good, as to receive good from others. Wherefore the Apostle says, Romans 1. 12.
that he desired to receive mutual comfort by the^. Secondly, this appears by
the opposition of the verse following, which is of the worship of God: and
therefore it cannot be restrained to outward things. Again, in that verse he
makes mention of false worshippers, as here he names excellent ones: meaning
that he would use the benefit of them, to waine himself from false
worshippers; as men will frequent the company of the learned that desire
learning; and they that will have their lips schooled by the law of grace, will
often resort to the grave speeches of the wise. And surely it is a special help
to further our selves in the pure worship of God, if we divorce our selves from
the crew of false worshippers, and wholly espouse our selves to the fellowship
of them that worship in spirit and in truth. This reason also may appear to be
general, because it follows in the order of our confession of our faith,
that we believe the holy and universal congregation, the communion of Saints:
and this communion is in receiving as well as in giving: and therefore being
understood of such a mutual participation of gifts from one to another, it
must follow as a particular part thereof, that we be ready to do good. And
where he says, All my delight is in them, that is in the Saints: we must not
think that he meant to take away civil duty from them that were in
authority, for that must be given to them in outward things, yet in our hearts
and in our affections the graces of God his children must be most esteemed. In
respect whereof when James says, Iam. 1. 2. that the Jews had their faith in
respect of persons, when they were wont to say to the rich, Sit thou here in a
good place; and to the poor, Stand there, his meaning was to rebuke them, for
that they so highly despised the one and so vily esteemed the other. Wherefore
we must learn always to give unto Caesar that which belongs to Caesar, but
God his children must always be nearest our heart. And this was it that our
Savior Christ says, that they which heard the word and did the same, were his
mother, his brother, and his sister: not that he lightly regarded his mother,
for he was a pattern of obedience to all children, yet he loved her more as
she was the daughter of God, than as she was his mother. Likewise we read,
that he answered the woman that cried unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps that gave thee suck. His mother no doubt had as singular
blessings, as ever were given to woman, in outward things, in that she brought
forth the Savior of all mankind: howbeit herein she was chiefly blessed, in
that she believed in him to be her Redeemer.

That are in the earth. See he makes mention of the Saints here on earth, and
speaks no of the Saints which are in heaven, from whom as we are severed in
body, so are we also in the soul* and we have no dealing with them, either in
soul or body. Wherefore it is ^^^d of the Prophet, Abraham knows not us.
True it is, that the Lord makes his Angels ministers unto us, and therefore
sending them to do any thing, he makes it known unto them. Howbeit we read
no such thing of the Saints that are dead, who as they know nothing of us or
our estate, which only is known to the Lord, and are not used as ministers of
the Lord; so they cannot hear or help us, as some foolishly have imagined.
The Saints which are dead may be in some respect remembered, but in no case
worshipped: remembered, I say, not for their power to be prayed unto, but for
their virtues to be imitated. Wherefore in Heb. 11 the holy Ghost sets
down a register and catalogue of the Saints, that seeing we are compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, we must cast away every thing that
presses down, and sin that hangs so fast on, that we may run with
patience the race that is set before us. Here we see these are set before,
that we might so far follow them, as they follow Christ, and in this
respect they are called witnesses: but to honor them as God, or to appoint
holy days unto them, or for them, it is not lawful. But behold when it was
painful to the belly gods of Rome to remember the good life of the Saints to
follow them, than which nothing is more grievous to them, the devil to draw
them from this, invented a more easy way for flesh and blood, and taught them
an easier lesson, by appointing in the stead of this holy and painful
imitation, a carnal and voluptuous rabble of holidaies unto the Saints, and
that (as they said) for the better remembrance of them: and thus that
transformed Angel of light knows how to transform pure religion. In like
manner, when it was an hard thing to preach Christ crucified, because it would
call them to a sight, feeling and forsaking of their sins, and so they were
made more unquiet; the devil found out an easier way, and for sooth would have
Christ painted upon the cross in their Church windows: which was a thing more
easy to behold, being pleasant to the eye, than it was to hear that sin
should be crucified in them, if ever they would hope for the fruit of Christ
his death. Again, when they could not away with bearing the cross, of loss
of name, of friends, goods and life, for Christ's sake, they thought it was good
to profess it by wearing some cross about them, or by erecting in every place
a cross of wood, stone, or such like thing. But let us learn to be provoked
by the graces of God in his Saints to follow them in goodness, and labor to
have Christ crucified in our hearts, by the ministry of the word, ever
preparing our selves in truth to bear the cross of Christ, by preferring the
pure profession of his Gospel, before any thing in the whole world dear unto
us. Besides we are here to learn, that if our delight be in God his Saints on
the earth, we must be far from using them maliciously, or speaking of them
cruelly. This delight then must be to receive some profit and benefit by these
graces which they have, also to use to the comfort of the children of God
whatsoever good we have received. For as well the servant which puts not out
his talent with gain was punished, as those that contemned the talent. Neither
in truth have we any right use of the gifts which we have received of God,
unless we put them out by imparting them to our brethren in love, and so the
gain may return by holy revenues to the Lord himself; neither have we truly
learned any thing, unless we have in some measure communicated it with
others; for whatsoever is ours by gift, it is the interest of others by
necessity: whatsoever is proper to us by possession, is common to the Church
by use and participation; and whatsoever we have, we have it for
dispensation, as the stewards of God his gifts, and disposers of his graces.
And therefore as at the audites and days of accounts such stewards are
culpable and unworthy of their places, who having large sums of money for
the liberal maintenance of the family, have appropriated all to themselves; so
likewise in that great day of reckoning and audite of Angels, those stewards
will be found damnable, and judged unworthy to have had access to the Lord
his treasury, who having received of God singular graces, and plentiful gifts
for the building up of his Church, and distributing things necessary to the
Saints in due season, have notwithstanding enriched themselves alone, and
impouerished their fellow servants, unto whose use, and for whose good such
rich revenues of God his graces and gifts were committed to their fidelity.

It follows in the Psalm, The sorrows of them that offer to another God
shall be multiplied: their offering of blood I will not offer, neither make
mention of their names with my lips. Here the man of God declares himself to
be no lukewarm professor, and therefore as in the third verse he shows the
profession of his faith concerning the communion of Saints, so in the fourth
verse be protests his hatred to the false worshippers, and he teaches that
none can truly love the Saints, but he must also hate the wicked. God cannot
abide to be worshipped in part, or by mixture of religion, as though the Arc
and Dagon, God and Mammon, Christ and Belial should be joined in worship
together. Many are not so fully contented with the Saints, as that they are
thoroughly discontented with the wicked, who so long as they see matters of
civil authority and good order have success, can love the word to serve time
and season, whose liking of it is so small, that when other religion comes,
they find not themselves much discontented. But we must learn so to believe in
the true religion, as our faith may draw out of us an unchangeable love, and
this true love must be free from all appearance of idolatry, and contrary
religion whatsoever. If ever this doctrine was necessary, it is now most
needful, since true religion so decays, false religion so abounds,
heathenish prophanenes so grows; all which no doubt arise o^ so little
esteeming, and small liking of the truth. For whereof first did spring
heathenishnesse? Even from hence, men were contented that every nation should
worship as they listed and liked whereupon they did grow to have both their
country gods, and household gods; for we read that the Senate of the Romans
would receive Christ as their God, yet so, as they would also maintain their
own gods. Not much unlike is our family of love, and common sort of
Protestants, both which can easily tolerate any kind of religion, come what
profession come will. Wherefore we may see how this Psalm fitly may be used,
when we will accuse our selves of want of love to the Saints, or when we will
accuse our selves of want of hatred to idolaters, seeing the spirit of the man
of God so earnest, and our selves so cold herein.

In that he says, he will not make mention of their names with his lips, he
declares his through hatred unto them, which the more evidently appears, in
that he would not only not communicate with them in his goods, but also that
he would not meddle with their ceremonies. Neither must we think that this
was any peculiar thing unto David, but that it was common also to all the
Israelites, as we may see Exodus 23. 13 ye shall make no mention of the name of
other gods, neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth, and not to them alone,
but to all Christians in like manner, as appears Zechar. 13. 2. And in that
day, faith the Lord of hosts, I will cut off the names of the idols out of the
land, yea and they shall be no m^re remembered. Besides, the law commands
all avoiding of occasions of idolatry, Deuteronomy. 7 25. where are set down two
reasons; the one, that we should not be snared with such occasions; the
other, because it is an abomination to the Lord, wherein although somewhat be
political, yet because whatsoever is impure is abominable to the Lord, and our
nature is prone unto, and hardly kept from corrupt religion, we hating the
impuritie of the doctrine, must also hate the impuritie of the ceremonies. To
the Law agrees also the Prophet, as Esaias 30. 22. where the Lord not only
commands them to avoid all idolatry, but even the appertinances thereof,
Ye shall pollute the covering of the Images of silver, and the rich ornaments
of the Images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou shall
say unto it get thee hence. This seems precisenes and puritanisme to the
world, which can be content to use things for form and fashion; but if we urge
upon purity, we are counted precisians. Well if it be so, then David was a
precisian. The holy ghost also exhorts us also to abstain from all appearance
of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5 22. 1. John 5. 21. Babes keep your selves from idols.
And the Apostle Jude verse 23. wills us even to hate the garment spotted by
the flesh. True it is, that one may have a private use of the meat prepared
for Images; but as it is an appertinance of idolatry, it is to be avoided.
Wherefore we are to pray that we may so have our hearts rectified by the spirit
of God, as not only the substance of false religion may be avoided, but also
the appertinances thereof, whereby we may the better provide both for God his
glory, and our own peace. Whereas he says, the sorrows of them that offer to
another God shall be multiplied, he shows, how besides the comforts which
he had in the Saints, he so much the more hated the idolaters, because he saw
the more they inwrapped themselves, the more their spirits were troubled in
them, and then they could find least rest when they had most trouble. So that
as the man of God commends true religion by this effect, that it yields
peace of mind, and comfort of conscience in trouble; so he discommendeth false
religion by the contrary: because howsoever in prosperity it brings
aswelling joy, yet in adversity it makes men cry to the rocks to cover them,
and to the mountains to fall upon them. This must cause us more narrowly to
search our hearts whether we have this love of true religion or no, against the
which neither the gates of hell, nor terrors of Satan, nor troubles of
conscience can prevail; for this religion is no less comfortable than true,
when we feel our selves assured thereby of our justification by Christ, of
the ministry of God his Angels watching over us, and that we offering our
selves to be governed by him, he will work in us heavenly things: and
howsoever we are evil by nature or custom, yet by grace we are kept safe in
him. This is that which helps in trouble of conscience, this comfort in
banishment, this relieueth us in poverty, this is the fruit of true religion.
In false religion there appears not like effects, not being able to deliver
us, much less to comfort us in time of trial, but it leaves us in a mazed
spirit, and troubled mind. Wherefore in respect of the issues of both these
compared together, we see how dear true religion ought to be to us, and how
we must abhor the contrary. The very heathen men by the instinct of nature
did most labor for those things which would in death bring peace of mind, and
assuage their inward troubles, who never had this remedy: how much more then
ought we to embrace this pure religion, having such effects; and hate the
contrary, which then yields a swelling and plausible joy, when no heaviness
is at hand, but is void of all substance of perfect consolation to ease a
perplexed mind? Wherein it may well be compared to those water brooks, which in
time of winter, when water in every place abounds, flow over; but in summer,
when droughts bring the necessary use of water, are for the most part dried up.

It follows now in the fifth verse, The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall maintain my lot. He prosecuteth the
same matter which he handled before, showing a reason why he linked himself so
to the Saints, and abhorred the wicked, to wit, because as the Lord defended
his holy ones, so he defended him; as he was their inheritance, so he was his;
as he was a portion unto them, so also he was a sufficient portion unto him:
for so was he tied to the Lord, and to the love of his truth, that no corrupt
religion could move him from it. And why? he saw in the word, that God
provided on every side for him, both spiritually for his soul, and corporally
for his body. Wherefore his meaning may thus briefly be gathered. I need not
to seek for help in any false religion, although mine enemies would
constrain me, because I am persuaded sufficiently that God is my portion, he
is mine inheritance, God fills full my cup; and as his mercy has chosen me,
so his power maintains me, the sure persuasion whereof makes me grow in the
love of true religion, and in the hatred of false. Out of the scope then of the
Prophet, we may draw thus much, that whosoever is grounded on pure knowledge,
and a sure faith, shall never wander after idolatry, because the word of God
will show them now all sufficiency both for their souls and bodies is in the
Lord, who freely has taken the whole charge thereof into his own hands. On
the contrary it is apparent, how that from hence comes such slipping into
idolatry, because we want true faith in the true religion, and true love of
those things which we believe. This place then commends unto us a continual
care, which we must labor for, whereby such assurance of God his favor and
providence watching over us may be in us, as we contenting our selves with him,
our portion and inheritance should covet nothing else. Some refer this saying
of the Prophet, thou art the portion of mine inheritance to the soul, but it
is to be thought that he rather means how he only rests and stays
himself concerning his whole felicity of body and soul on the Lord alone,
and in that the Lord did not only begin, but did continue in him his grace he
assures himself as well of final perseverance, as of his gracious entrance,
which undoubtedly is no small comfort. For many have inheritances, who hardly
keep the assurance of them from all assaults of crafty men, who craftily
undermine the estate and hold off their possessions, by falsifying their
evidences. Wherefore he adds in the latter end of the verse, thou shall
maintain my lot. For although nothing be more casual then the life both of
body and soul, and in manner of a lot is most uncertain, yet the issue of
them both being in the hands of the Lord, he dare safely commend himself unto
him. Thus then must we be persuaded of our inheritance, as for love of it, we
had rather with Naboth have our blood spilt, then suffer our selves to be
deprived of it; which we see already to be performed of the Martyrs. But here
we are to note how all our assurance hereof is in the word, and not elsewhere
to be found, as the man of God himself shows, Psalm. 119. 57. O Lord thou art
my portion, I have determined to keep thy words: and 111. Thy testimontes have
I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the joy of mine heart. it is both
easy and usual for all to say, God is my portion, God is mine inheritance,
God is he that prepares a table before me, God fills my cup: The gayest
hypocrites will brag of this, and the most wretched worldlings will avouch as
much; but here in they be wray themselves in reuerencing so smally the means
hereof, and accounting so little of the word, which is the only assurance
whereby they hold their inheritance. Does he seek by his portion or
inheritance bequeathed unto him by testament or otherwise, who makes none
account of his evidence and ancient coppies, whereby he holds his assurance?
Can men then think that God is their inheritance, when they esteem so smally
of his promises which ratifieth their hold, and keeps in record their
assurance? Can a man assure himself, that God is his portion when he has no
delight in his sacraments, wherein it is sealed and surrendered into his hands?
This then is a true trial, whether we may in truth subscribe to the Prophet
his protestation, when we delight in the means, that is, in the word, in
prayer, in the sacraments, and in discipline: which thing if we have not,
pretend we what we will, all is but hypocrisy. If God be our portion, we must
be as charie and wary of the word, as of some Will, wherein some great thing
is given unto us; we must be as much afraid and grieved to lose our faith in
God his promises, as we are to lose the evidence of our lands; we must be as
careful to use the sacraments, as to keep whole and unviolated the seals of
our evidences; we must be as careful to perform to God that which his will
requires of us, as to receive of him that which in his testament is bequeathed
us, otherwise we have nothing to do with God, and God has nothing to do with
us in mercy, God is none of our inheritance, neither are we his inheritance.
Such then as will come a^ their leisure, and when they list, or when the world
will afford no further profit, nor the flesh further delight, as they did most
unthankfully in the Gospel, who preferred their marriage, bargaining, and
toyling in the earth to the heavenly banquet, are not in any assurance, that
God is their portion; for where our portion is, there is our delight; and where
we look for inheritance, there we provide for assurance; and where we look
for treasure, thither we go with joy: wherefore until we set the word aloft
in our consciences, we can find no assurance that God is our portion, or that
we are his. The equity hereof appears, Deuteronomy. 9. 29. where the people are
called the inheritance of the Lord: and Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords portion is his
people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. For as possessions in times past
were chosen out by lines, so the Lord is said to divide to the Nations their
inheritance, and to separate Jacob as a part for himself. Neither must we
shuffle off this from our selves, seeing the Apostle (1. Pet. 2. 6) calls us
a spiritual house, and an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices:
and the holy Ghost (Revel. 1. 6.) says, We are made Kings and Priests unto
God through Christ. Wherefore seeing the Lord deals so favorably with us,
that when hell was our portion by our birthright, he has measured out heaven
for us by the promulgation of his Gospel; when we were guilty of damnation,
has made us inheritours of salvation; and when Satan made claim to us, he
has rescued the title of us to himself: what an hellish pride were it, not to
set God aloft? what presumption were it, not to make him our chief delight,
seeing he before freely has made us his chief delight? If then we desire that
God should be our inheritance, we must be his; if we be his, he must take up
wholly our souls and bodies in his word; which if we despise, undoubtedly we
shall be despised of God. Mark then in the latter end of this verse, he says,
I hou shall maintain my lot. As if the man of God should say: Howsoever the
world judges, that my estate comes of other men, I know it comes of thee:
and, Prou. 16. 4. Thou Lord have made all things for thy own sake, although
other think things to be fortunate, and subject to luck; and when as others
think it strange, that the son of Ishai should come to the government of the
Commonwealth, yet thou alone have done it. Neither are we thus alone
maintained of God in our outward estate, but also in spiritual things, we are
kept by his power, as 1. Pet. 1, 5. We are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation. And howsoever the world marueileth that we live, yet we
(says the Apostle) are kept by the secret finger of God, and that unto
salvation. This happy assurance caused Paul to say, 2 Timo. 1. 12. I know i^
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which is
committed to him against that day. In which doctrine is ^^ small comfort, in
that we have not our salvation in our own custody, neither has the Lord left
us to our selves in the co^ lucting of our bodies and souls, but has given
the whole and happy government to his Son Jesus Christ: in which dignity we
far excel Adam in the estate of innocence. For albeit we are by him and in
him fallen from it (so weak was our estate, and so brittle was our hold
whilst man possessed it) yet having it restored, the credit and custody of it
rests not on our weakness, but on the mighty power of Christ, from whom it
cannot be taken. Such is the merciful wisdom of our good God. Wherefore our
Savior Christ, Ioh. 6 ^aith, that he is the shepherd, and that we are in his
custody. For whereas like sheep of our selves we are ready to go astray and
wander, the Lord with his shepherds crook will fetch us again to the fold;
and when we are lost in the wilderness and dark places, he will find us ou^;
when we see no issues of our matter, he will be faithful unto us, if we commit
our selves unto him. We see now the blessed security of God his children is
herein, that their lot is not in their own hands. This doctrine also is full
of comfort to us in these times: For in such a multitude of heresies, where
with profaneness of life has joined it self, if it were possible, the very
elect should be deceived, were it not that they were governed by the Lord
himself.

It is added in the next verse, The li(...)e fallen unto me in pleasant places:
yea I have a fair heritage. The former matter is amplified, wherein he
shows, that he so liked his choice of the word: that in hope to change he
chused it not. So his meaning is in effect all one with the verse going before,
and may thus shortly be couched together O Lord thou have dealt with me
favorably, which pleases me so fully, that I require no other happiness. For
notwithstanding my crosses and temptations be many, yet because in all I feel
thy gracious help, I desire not to change for any other felicity. In which
stream we must learn this one point, that we never feel effectually the
fruit of our salvation, until we can triumph over the world, the flesh, and
the devil: and when our heritage so pleases us, that we repent not: beware of
repenting, beware of repenting when ye have once given your names unto Christ:
for ye are become backsliders, and are fallen partly to heresy, partly to
atheism, partly to profanenes, because they made not a sure and unchangeable
choice of their profession at the first. This verse is especially to be
understood of the favor of God, which he felt; and therefore being assured
that the kingdom of God was his, that the providence of God watches over him,
and his Angels ministered unto him, he was so stayed, that if other outward
things did come, he counted them cast upon him, as the overplus of God his
mercy; if no other things came, he was satisfied If we think our lines to be
fallen pleasantly, we must by proportion by so much the more seek spiritual
than carnal things, by how much the soul is better than the body. How then is
God their portion, their lot and inheritance? how does their heritage assigned
of God please them, who are so careful in earthly things to provide for back
and belly, and so careless in heavenly things to provide for their souls and
consciences? For if we were persuaded, whatsoever we have, we have it of God,
we would use it with prayer, receive it with thanksgiving, we should not rest
in outward things, as in lands, possessions or preferments, as in our portion,
but in the Lord who giuer^ these things. Thus when we are delighted with our
heritage, we endeavor not to get things by ill means; having gotten them, we
set not our hearts on them, we pray for the holy use of them, we return them
to God his glory, and the comfort of his Saints; when we cannot keep them
with a good conscience, we will willingly leave them, always making the Lord
our chief inherirance, as we a^e his; and on this manner being weaned from
earthly things, we must look for our outward estate to be ordered in full
measure and scarcity by God, that we may say with Paul, Philip 4. 11. I have
learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. 12. And I can be
abased, and I can abound: every where in all things I am instructed, both to be
full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want. If we have much, it
is well, and wisdom is a goodly thing with inheritance: if we have not
outward things, the word is able to save our souls: and blessed are they that
in time of trial can say, my lines are fallen unto me in fair places. Every
man is to try himself, how in his particular calling he can stay himself on
the word of God. Jacob desired nothing but cloth and meat for food and
raiment; and Paul 1. Tim. 68 says, When we have food and raiment, let us
therewith be content. And surely great rest should we find in our consciences,
if we could command our souls not to look for greater things than the Lord
has placed us in: for nothing does more be^ray out want of faith than our
restles minds which are not contented with those places allotted to us of God.
But who in the time of the gospel cannot say, that his lines are fallen to him
in fair places? Wherefore we must be so quiet in our proper stations, as if we
were Kings or Emperors, knowing that when our places are not fit for God his
glory, and his church, the Lord will fleet us. In the mean season let our
consciences rest on the Lord his will, how base and inferior so ever our
calling is, and he assured, that by so much the more our walking therein is an
acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, by how much our gifts being the greater they
do submit and humble themselves under the ordinance and appointed calling of
the Lord the more. And let us stay at the Lord his commandment and pleasure
to be put in his time to some other use; neither let us put the fault of our
trouble in our places, as commonly we do, but in our restless mind, which as
a rolling stone is carried from one place to another.

It follows in the next verse. I will praise the Lord, who has given me
counsel: my rein^^ also teach me in the nights. That is, I acknowledge that it
is thy free benefit, that I have discerned to make this choice. For how should
I think thee to be my portion of mine in heritance, and to maintain my lot,
but because thou have renewed me by thy spirit, and advised me in that, wherein
flesh and blood could not counsel me? The due consideration hereof made our
Savior Christ say on this manner: I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and
earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them to little ones: for so it is thy good will and pleasure. As if he
should say, I would marvel these silly souls should so profit more in
heavenly wisdom, than the wise of the world: but, Lord, I see it is thy will,
and the wisdom of the wise can nothing further thee, nor the simplicity of
the other can any thing hinder them for thy kingdom: but thou workest al in all
according to thy pleasure. Again, among so many opinions of the Jews, of the
Scribes, Pharisees, of Sadduces, Herodians, and Essens, it was the only power
of God whereby Peter was taught among the rest of the Disciples, and in the
name of all rightly to confess Christ to be the true Messiah, and to be both
true God and true man. Wherefore our Savior Christ hearing this his
confession, says, Peter, flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee, but
my Father which is in heaven: that is, thou never attainedst to this by thy
mother wit, or by the light of nature; thou have not been fenced by thine own
reason from hunting after me, and opposing thy self against me, with the
Scribes and Pharisees, but my Father has both guided and guarded thee. And
what shall we think of our selves? Is it not the Lord his mighty and secret
working in us, that among such swarms of heresies, such boldness of Papists,
such a multitude of Anabaptists, Arrians and Family of love, we are preserved,
to discern the right, and to cleave to the truth? If we look to our wits,
others which are fallen away are as wise as we: If we look to our natural
dispositions, we are as full of natural corruption as they: if we look to
our education and helps in learning, have not others been as much thereby
furthered as we? We are made all of one mould, we were all borne under one
climate, we are not sanctified by nature more then others; are not we then
highly to praise God, in that we maintain not our own lot; but whilst round
about us some are become Papists, some Atheists, some Arrians, some Familists,
we are both guided of God to make our choice of the truth, and are continued in
the well liking of our choice being made? What a benefit is it that in such
store of politiques, we should not only understand the letter, but also
conceive the mystery of the truth? What a grace is it, that we should be so
taught of God, that if we abound we can be thankful, if we be in trouble we
can be patient, if we suffer the cross we are content? But do not the
Papists and Familists commend the Saints? does not every man say, God is his
portion? how is this then any particular thing in the godly? True it is they
do so: but we stay on God his will revealed in the word, which we account our
portion. Talk with a blasphemer, talk with a drunkard, an whoremaster or a
worldling; talk with a skillful man of law, or an expert Physician, and every
one will as proudly and as boldly profess God to be his portion as another:
but come to them in a matter of salvation, or in a case of faith, and they can
say nothing: how much now are we to be persuaded of, and being so persuaded, to
be thankful for the free mercy, and undeserved good will of God in directing
us, in choosing, and nourishing our choice?

My reins teach me in the night. This place has in it some difficulty, and
diverse interpreters write diversely of it. But it is certain, that often in the
Scriptures the heart and the reins are mentioned together: as Psalm. 26. Prove
me, O Lord, and try me: examine my reins and my heart. By the heart (I
think) is meant the more inward and secret thoughts: by the reins are
understood the more outward and sensual affections, as Psalm. 51. 6. Behold
thou love truth in the inward affections: therefore have thou taught me
wisdom in the secret of mine heart. And Psalm. 139. 23* Try me, O Lord, and
know mine heart, prove me and know my thoughts.

In the night. Of his holy exercises in the night the man of God speaks,
Psalm. 119 55.

I have remembered thy name in the night, O Lord, and have kept thy law. And
Psalm. 62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy
righteous judgments. And verse. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches to
meditate in thy law. The Physicians affirm, that our dreams in the night
season are agreeable to our musings in the day time: and that our affections in
our sleep do much follow the complexions, the repletio^ or euacuation of the
body: according to these they say also are the dispositions of the mind
naturally, without some violent alteration or extraordinary operation. And
surely a man by diligent observation may epsy his inclination of mind as well
by his dreams sleeping, as by his cogitations waking: or rather the better by
how much the night is more free from those troubles which work great
perturbations and violent distractions of the mind in the day: So that the
agitations of the mind are by so much the more strong and effectual, by how
much it is more free and natural; which experience may teach both in them that
are renewed, and such as are unregenerate. The Philosophers not much
disagreeing, say, that the civil virtuous man is much affected in the night,
according to his actions in the day, and that the virtuous and the vicious man
concerning half their lives, that is, the night season or sleeping times, do
nothing differ, sane that the dreams of the virtuous are good, the dreams of
the vicious are evil; which if it be so, then much more shall they, whose
hearts are thoroughly sanctified with the spirit of God, either find comfort in
good things, or sorrow for their sins even in the night season. Such is the
mercy of our God, that he cease not to continue our knowledge, and to teach
us by his spirit and meditation, even in the night season; and if at any time
they break forth into more sensual liberty proceeding from their natural
appetite, they make this profit of it by judging that the Lord corrects
these wandering thoughts in the day, by confused dreams in the night, and their
impure cogitations waking, by unchaste imaginations in sleeping. By the reins I
gather, is signified not the spiritual parts of the mind, but the more gross
and sensible parts of the body separated far from the heart, and that part
which conceaueth and seems to be the Prophet his sense, Psalm. 51. 6. verse:
which before we alleged; that the Lord will not to that part which is most
sensual, have liberty given, and that he has charged the reformation of the
soul to stretch it self to the most natural parts, and which are common with
us to brute beasts, that even in them also we should be sanctified. Thus we see
there is no part of us whereof the Lord in mercy has not care, even in the
night, in which one blessing the Lord will discern and distinguish us from
brute beasts, and more confirm us in godliness. For it is no small benefit if
we rightly consider it, that the spirit of God should so moderate with a
continual regiment our affections, that if our imaginations burst forth, we
should receive the check, and be controuled in the night, and by comparing one
thing with another, long ago forgotten, that the Lord should bring things
again to our remembrance. Thus when we know we lie on the Lord his bed, and
that in dark we must behold him present, and feel our affections rectified,
our reins sanctified, and our bed undefiled, we may be assured of some further
sincerity of our hearts, wrought by his holy spirit: and doubtless as we said
before, there is no small trial of our hearts, even in our dreams; when all
things being more quiet then in the day, greater opportunity is offered of
entering into our selves, and furnishing our selves with serious devises,
whether it be in good or evil. Wherefore God his children are not so lightly
to pass over their night-thoughts, but that they observe in them either the
merciful corrections of God of some sins past, or his gracious admonition of
some sins to come, or else his favorable instructions concerning some sin
present, which not being repented of, will as well break forth openly in the
day, as secretly in the night. Nights. To conclude, we see in David a mind
thoroughly sanctified, where the spirit of God keeping a continual residence,
wrought a continual progress and growing in spiritual knowledge, as well by
nights as by days.

It follows in the next verse, I have set the Lord always before me, for
he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide. Having showed before his
delight in the Saints, his hatred of Idolaters, his stayed and full contented
mind in God as his portion and inheritance, who as well continued in him as he
did begin his grace, and that not only more openly in the day, but also more
secretly in the nights; the Prophet now declares how by all this he was
moved to think that God was at all times, in all places present with him,
both as a Lord to suruay his ways, least he should slip grossly, and as a
father to comfort him when he slipped of infirmity. His meaning and intent then
is thus much, that having severed himself from Idolaters, and joined in league
with the Saints, wholly resting himself on the Lord and his word, he desired
nothing more, then as the Lord had set a continual watch over him both by day
and by night; so he might have his heart in continual awe to be prepared for
the Lord his presence. The self same obedience the Lord requires of Abraham,
Genes. 17. 1. saying, I am God all sufficient, walk before me, and be upright,
that is, seeing I am able by mine Almighty power to bring to pass whatsoever
by covenant in mercy I have promised to thee, make me the arbiter of thy
thoughts, the suruayer of thy words, and the viewer of thy works, commit thy
ways unto me in all things. Neither must we think this to be enjoined to
Abraham alone, and that others be exempted from this obedience, but that every
true Israelite, every good Christian, and true believer, who looks with
Abraham for God his power in accomplishing his promises, must be assured hereof
like as he was. For where we look for like mercy, we must perform like
duty; and where we hope for the like grace; we must have the like faith,
albeit not in so great proportion, yet in some acceptable measure following
him, whose example, Romans 4. we must not think so much to be person all, as
real, and for imitation.

How we should thus walk before the Lord we are taught of the holy Ghost,
Micah. 6. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before
the hi^ God? shall I com^ before him with burnt offerings i^ he has showed
thee o man what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to walk with thy God, that
is, that thou should set him i^ thy sight, believing that he does guide and
govern thee. Besides the Apostle teaches us, ^. Cor. 3. 18. that we all
behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed
into the same image. For when we behold the Lord in his promises of
reconciliation, that he is at peace with us; of sanctification, that he will
renew us; of safeguard and providence, that for our good he will watch over us,
and that he is at our right hand with his Angels, and on the other hand with
his creatures; then we behold him as our redeemer, as our teacher, as our
provident father, and as judge of heaven and earth, so we shall with Steven see
Christ: and thus beholding God in his word and works, we may be said to walk
before the Lord. Whereupon we may easily conjecture, how requisite a thing it
is often to hear, read, and meditate of the word of God, to be frequent in
prayer, whereby we may attain to a cleerer sight of God his promises, which
are all yea and Amen in Jesus Christ. Whosoever then sets God before him,
first as a God of glorious majesty, who will not justify the obstinate
sinner; then as a father of gracious mercy, who comfort the repenting
sinner, and in every particular thing is persuaded that God sees him as a
judge and a Lord of the spirits, and God of glory and power; it can not be but
this will shake from him all drowsy security, and chase away all vain
imaginations, as the bright Sun beams break the dark and mistie clouds.
And because there is no dealing betwixt God and man, but by a Mediator, we
must set God before us in Christ, and Christ in God, that we may behold his
justice under his mercy, and his mercy under his justice. And being thus
persuaded, that we are beloved of God in his beloved, we shall do all in his
name, which is the end of all happiness. This one lesson of Divinity will
teach us the use of many, and will stand in steed of a thousand, both to comfort
and instruct us: to comfort us with pacifying our consciences with a godly
security in things most open and apparent; to instruct us by charging our
consciences to avoid carnal security in things most inward and secret.
Until we are brought to walk before the Lord in this obedience, all the
wisdom of the learned is vanity. Having learned this one ru^e, and made in
truth this pedagogie of our actions, the simplest soul shall come forth
himself in the conscience of unfeigned holiness.

For he is at my right hand. This phrase of speech is borrowed from them, who
when they take upon them the patronage, defense or tuition of any, will set
them on their right hand, as in place of most safeguard. Experience confirms
this in children, who in any imminent danger shrowde and shelter themselves
under their fathers arms or hands, as under a sufficient buckler. Such was the
estate of the man of God, as here appears, who was hemmed and hedged in with
the power of God, both against present evils and dangers to come. Neither does
the Lord hatch David alone under the hand* but al other that put their trust in
him: as Psalm. 91. 1. Who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall
abide in the shadow of the Almighty, etc. Wherein we see this assurance of God
his protection to be common generally to all, which fly for succor wholly to
him in time of temptation. Again, Psalm 121. 4. it is said, Behold he that
keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. Verse. 5. ^he Lord is thy
keeper, the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand, etc. Where we see he speaks
of the whole body, and no^ of any particular number of the Church. We are then
to learn thus much out of this strain, that when we have a care to set the
Lord continually in our sight, he has a care continually to watch over our
estate. This glorious rejoicing of faith is also in other places of the book
of God. Psalm. 23. throughout the whole Psalm, the man of God shows that he
had so richly and so sweetly tasted of the promises of God, that in trouble he
never wanted help. The Apostle likewise to the Romans 8* shows the happy
estate of all the regenerate, although in a more excellent pattern of his own
faith, saying, verse. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against us* 33. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God his chosen? It is God that justifies.
34. who shall condemn? etc. And afterward verse. 38 I am persuaded that neither
death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come. 35. nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Howbeit, we must not think that the man of God was not removed at all. For he
counts himself a stranger upon earth, and he had many pushes and diverse
assaults: yet so as he was not finally moved, and utterly overthrown. He had
many battles, but got the victory; many men rose against him, but the Lord was
on his side, and still he was unremovable as Mount Sion; and though he was
shaken for a time, yet in the end he was safe. Now to the verse following.

Wherefore mine heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices; my flesh also does rest
in hope. Here are two pestilent opinions of the Papists overthrown. The one,
that we should not boldly rejoice in the undoubted assurance of our salvation.
The other, that we should dou^t and be in a mammering of our final
perseverance. In our confession of the faith immediately after the article of
the remission of our sins, follows the acknowledging of an happy
resurrection, and glorious immortality: wherein we are assured, that even as
in this life our sins are pardoned, so we shall not miscarrie to the very
resurrection, and our very flesh shall rise again to most blessed
immortality. Shall I doubt, that God watches over me as a father in love, as
almighty in power, as a provident preserver in governing heaven and earth?
Shall I doubt that Christ, true God and true Man died for my sins, rose for
my justification, ascended to take possession of that glory, which he will
give unto me at his coming? Shall I doubt that the spirit of God has sealed
me and sanctified me, preserving me unblameable in Christ until the day of
redemption? Shall I doubt, that I am of the number of the Saints, which are
ordained to that glory, which is freely given of God the Father, dearly
purchased of God the Son, and assuredly warranted by the ministry of the
word, and working of God the holy Ghost? No. Why then should I doubt that my
sins are freely pardoned? Can a man by reason conceive the mystery of the
Trinity in unity; the distinction of natures in one person Christ Jesus, the
secret working of the holy Ghost in them that are called, the rising again to
life, the dead body consumed to earth? No, we walk not by reason, we live by
faith, and we believe against reason, even because the spirit of God by the
preaching of the word, has sealed and bears record of of these things to our
spirits. Wherefore seeing we have no warrant of any thing concerning faith, but
by the word and by the spirit, and the same word and spirit assure us as well
of one parcel of faith as of another; what blockishnes is it to believe all
other points that doctrine, and to doubt and call in question one concerning
the forgiveness of sins? and seeing we believe as great things, what
peeuishnes is it to doubt either of the comfortable assurance of our salvation
present, or to despair of final perseuera^ce in time to come? Against these
we see the man of God opposes his glorious rejoicing: wherefore the holy Ghost
speaks, Romans 5 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. And 1. Pet. 1. 8. You believe in Christ, and rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious. In which point we are taught, that this
rejoicing of the heart, praising of God with our tongue, and holy security of
the whole man is the spirit of faith; and this is our true joy, even our
assurance, that we are righteous in Christ, that God is our portion, our
inheritance, our guider, governor, and preserver of us to life everlasting,
yea and this fruit of faith is a sure token of faith, though it be not always
and in all men in like measure. Howbeit, where the want thereof is felt, we
must remember both to mourn and groan in our spirits for the want of it, and
also wait on God in the mean time, and use all means possible to recover the
same. This certainty of our salvation spoken of by Paul, rehearsed of Peter,
and mentioned of David, Psalm. 4 7. is that special fruit then of faith, which
breeds that spiritual joy, and inward peace, which passes all
understanding. True it is all God his children have it not. One thing is the
tree, and another thing is the fruit of the tree: one thing is faith, and
another thing is the fruit of faith. And that remnant of God his elect which
feel the want of this fruit, have notwithstanding faith, which manifests it
self in them by groaning and sighing for it, and by the complaining of the
absence of it. For albeit indeed there is no greater argument, that a man is
alive, than his lively, quick and cheerful spirits, his fresh memory,
nimblenes and agi^itie of body: yet it is some token also of life, when a man
not having in himself this alacrity of mind and acrimonie of weldoing, can
complain of his lumpish, earthly and dead spirits, dull memory, and
heaviness of body, as one that fears and suspecteth these things to be
forerunners of some fainting, languishing, or dangerous sickness, which is
toward him. And surely God his children, who has been made drunken as it were
with this spiritual gladness, are often wained from it, either for their
trial, how highly they esteem it, or to punish them for some sin past, or
else to forewarne them of some sin to come. Wherefore when any such morse of
our spirits and extraordinary deadnes does come upon us* let us thus commune
with our own hearts; Surely all is not well, I must look out, I have not
heard the word cheerfully, I cannot rejoice with his Saints, I am subject to
some trouble, and must preprare my heart for some cross, I must rouse up my
self and raise up God his spirit in me, that I may recover that life which is
in Christ, without the which I am thus dull, or rather dead. The Prophet Dauia
(as we know, Psalm. 119.) finding in himself this untowardness to good
exercises, the want of this delight, the loss of God his countenance, counts
himself as dead; and having these things he thought himself alive. It is a
wonderful thing to see, it is a wonderful thing, I say, to see how natural a
thing it is to all men to seek a quiet mind, and glad heart; how unnatural
it is to wish for sorrow of mind, and grief of heart; and on the other side,
to behold the security of men in neglecting the means of true joy, and their
indiscreet plunging of themselves in endless and easelesse sorrows, in
pulling upon themselves sorrow after sorrow, and that with fantastical
delights; all which kind of pleasures have either their present pain, or pain
to come accompanying them; and therefore worthily are they compared to the
cracking thorns under the pot, which make a sudden blaze, and are quickly
out. So the pleasures of fools vanish away without any issue, yea they are so
far from bringing any joy in the hour of death, that even then most will
they sting and accuse us for dishonouring of God. On the contrary when we
feel the glory of God to be our chiefest joy, and the peace of the Church
with the feeling of our salvation to be the peace of our minds, we have that
gladness and calmenes of a good conscience, which God reserueth in store as a
treasure and precious jewel, whose virtue is to comfort us in time of greatest
trouble, whose operation is to draw joy out of the bottomless pit of sorrow,
when the world does hate us, to show how God does love us, and when our minds
are deiect, to bring a pawn from God his spirit to our spirit to assure us
that our troubles shall have an issue to God his glory, and our salvation.
This solace only cleaves unto us in death, and in sickness, and in time of
trouble; and therefore the more carefully must we use the means whereby we may
buy and purchase the same: when we want it let us complain and mislike our
selves, accusing our selves of some sin past, or enarming our selves for some
evils to come. Undoubtedly the iealozie of God his children over the security
of these times makes them to suspect that men may bear out themselves in good
things for a time to serve persons, time and place; and that for lack of this
true joy and delight in them they will fall away and deceive, especially when
men come to their liberty, and are without controulement of person, awe of any
place, or regard of any time. Men for a time be hearers of the Gospel, men may
for orders sake pray, sing, receive the sacraments; but if it be without joy
will not that hypocrisy in time break out? will they not begin to be weary?
nay will they not be as ready to hear any other doctrine? Good things cannot
long find entertainment in our corruptions, unless the holy ghost has
changed us from our old delights to conceive pleasure in these things. Where
love is, there is no lack, in pleasure there is no pain, and when we find the
pearl of price which passes all understanding, we will sell all our former
delights, and depart from our vain pleasures to purchase this. It is a
continual joy that works a conscience to use the means of any thing: it is
an abounding delight, that auoydeth and fenceth off all wearisomnes in good
things: wherefore the holy Ghost says, Be ye filled with the Spirit: and in
another place, Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously. In which place we
are to gather that there is in us sometime an emptiness of the Spirit, and a
scantnesse of the power of the holy ghost; the spirit of God is not so mighty
in operation, grace is not so plentiful, the word is not so powerful in us;
and from hence comes our momentarie joy, and transitory gladness.

And my tongue rejoices. That which in truth is inward, will in time show it
self outward, as we may see in these holy affections of the man of God. The
Prophet himself confirms this in another place, Psalm. 116. 10. I believed
therefore did I speak: which the Apostle repeateth in the person of the whole
Church, 2. Cor. 4. 13. because we have the same spirit of faith, according as
it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; We also believe, and
therefore we speak. And Romans 10. 10. it is said, With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the tongue man confesses to salvation: and sure
it is, that of the abundance of the joy of the heart the mouth rejoices: as
contrariwise of the abundance of the grief of the heart, although there may be
for a while an inward devouring, binding and suppressing of sorrow, yet it will
in time break forth, and we shall even rore for disquietnes of mind, and
cannot hold long, until we have eased our hearts with some outward complaint.
For we see if a man have a through grief how it consumes him, unless he
utter it. Again, if a man has conceived a true joy, how he longs, how he
is ravished, how he trauaileth, until he has brought it forth. If then in
any good measure we feel the joy of the spirit, the tongue will be at
commandment to utter it. Wherefore we are to try our selves and examine our
hearts, whether we hear, read, pray, or sing with this grace in our hearts,
with this joy in our spirits, with this comfort of conscience: let us lament,
considering how singing and spiritual rejoicing is decayed, how great a
stranger the word is with us, what little delight and alacrity we have in holy
and religious exercises; and let us accuse our selves, that therefore our
tongues cleave to the rough roof of our mouth, because our hearts are locked up
in security; which undoubtedly is so open to all men, that there is no man but
bewaileth his want of inward joy. Many indeed, as hypocrites, can blow and
bellow outwardly, who make no melody in their hearts, who sing not in grace,
who have not the sweet and natural voice, which comes from a well affected
and right ordered mind, either joyfully showing a godly digested mirth, or
dolefully breathing out into the passions of an exercised mind.

My flesh also does rest in hope. See, his godly joy made him have a security
in his flesh. It is our naturally infirmity that we have a trembling of the
flesh which hinders in us many good actions, as may be seen in our thoughts,
suspecting of dangers, scarefull imaginations, and wandering conceits,
forecasting this evil and that evil* to the great disturbing and disordering
of the peace of our minds, all the which excessive fears were in this man of
God wisely corrected, though not utterly removed, but suppressed in him by
faith. Whereof comes then our carnal and immoderate fears in dangers but of
want of faith? This our Savior Christ teaches his disciples, at what time
they were with him being asleep in a tempest on the seas, when they through
unbelief feared his divinity to have slept with his humanity, where he says
unto them, O ye little faith, why do you not believe? Here we see he
rebukes their excessive fear, which thing he also does almost in the same
manner. When they carnally feared him to have been a spirit as he walked on the
seas, they were not thoroughly persuaded that God was their portion, their
inheritance, and watched over them; for if they had, they would have corrected
these fleshly and immoderate fea^^s, that they should not have hindered their
holy meditations of God his powerful providence, nor their prayers for his
gracious assistance, nor any other good exercises of their minds. Thus we see
how the sure persuasion of God to be his inheritance, his mainteiner both in
soul and body, his reacher both by day and by night, both by his word and his
spirit made the man of God secure both in soul and body. And what caused this?
partly that which we spoke of before, partly that which follows, for thou will ^ot leave my soul in the grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy one
to see corruption: so that the promises already tasted of, and the sure
expectation to have the good work begun to be finished in him, made him
rest in hope, and having God his cause in hand, he saw how the Lord would not
only watch over him for his present estate, but also would guide him to
immortality. Behold how his inward assurance wrought an outward safety,
whereby we plainly see, that where there is a want of this comfort and faith
in the soul, there is a want of peace and security in the body. It is our
unbelief then that hatcheth and nourishes wandering thoughts, and fills our
brain with suspicious fantasies, and fruitless illusions, dreaming of
dangers where there are none, and imagining mountains where scarsely are
molehils. Let us then strengthen our faith, and certify our souls, that our
flesh shall stand before God, which will so work in us, that neither flesh and
blood shall weigh us down with security in time of prosperity, nor ouerlode
us with desperate terrors in time of adversity. Neither as we said, must we
think David to be a senseless Stoic, as feeling no troubles, but that by the
power of God he was in trouble a triumphant conqueror, and in all these
dangers through faith more than a victorer. For as God reserueth his
unspeakable joys for his children in intolerable agonies; so he never armeth
them strongly, but he prepares them a field wherethey must fight stoutly. Oh
that this heavenly joy were in us more abundantly, and of more men more
frequented, then should not the small remnant that now always use it, be
counted and called precisians, then should we give more lively testimonies of
our effectual faith to our own consciences, then should we offer to others a
larger cause of magnifying the name of God, who hearing us use such spiritual
gladness, might be provoked to an holy emulation and say: surely this is the
power of the holy Ghost, this is undeceivable joy, happy are they that can
thus rejoice in the Lord. Oh that the Lord would give us of the spirit, and
fill our hearts with such gladness: thus others undoubtedly would plentifully
be ravished by our godly examples. Though some would laugh at us, as they did
at the Apostles when they had received the holy Ghost, yet others would
reverently marvel at it, and willingly follow it. Wherefore when with the
man of God we shall be persuaded of our immortality both of body and soul,
when we having God his cause in hand shall use it in a good conscience as he
did, we shall surely and sincerely with him rejoice. And what I pray you in
the night season, in thundering and lightning, in earthquakes, blazing stars,
and fiery stars, in extraordinary working of the heavens makes us so
dismayed and at our wits end? want of faith. What makes us at the death of our
friends to mourn, and that we will not be comforted? Paul 1. Thessal. 4. 13.
tells us want of hope.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS ON THESE VERSES FOLLOVVING, Being part of the 42. Chapter of
Genesis.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
9 Ye are spies, and are come to see the weakness of the land. 12 Nay but ye
are come to see the weakness of the land. 14 This is it that I spoke unto you,
saying, Ye are spies. 15 Hereby shall ye be proved: by the life of Pharaoh, ye
shall not go hence, etc. 21 We have verily sinned against our brother, etc.
Joseph a good man, and yet lies: so was Lot a good man, and yet loath to part
from Sodom. These were great offenses. Whence come they? from custom no doubt.
Joseph being amongst profane men had some smell of their words. And Lot,
though their wickedness and Sodomitry vexed his righteous soul, yet through
custom, he could have found in his heart to have lived still amongst the^. So
first we must here be taught to eschew ill custom and company. The second
note hence to be observed, may answer a piece of a doubt in the former two
examples of Joseph and Lot. For some man may say, Joseph and Lot both good men
dwelt and kept company with the wicked, therefore we may do so. But it may
be answered, that examples prove nothing without the warrant of the word. And
as for Joseph, God had sent him extraordinarily to provide for his fathers
family: but Lot chose to dwell in Sodo^ for his lucre (as ye may read in the
thirteenth chapter of this book, the tenth verse) and therefore this greedy
desire was altogether unlawful: and though the Lord in mercy deferd the
punishment thereof, he punished that yet at length in his wife, who was turned
into a pillar of salt; in himself and his own daughters, with whom he
committed abominable incest. Therefore we see, that it follows not, because
they dwelt among the wicked, therefore we may.

It was not sufficient for Joseph to have had a misliking of lying, but he
should have abstained from it, and detested it in heart. No doubt he being a
godly man, otherwise had a misliking of it: but because he did not even abhor
it, we see how in time he was brought unto it, and as it were, to make no
conscience of it. So it is not sufficient for us to have a misliking of
unlawful apparel, plays, sport, naughty and ungodly talk, but we must in
heart detest it, much more in practice: otherwise by evil company we may
easily be drawn to follow them. The Physicians means is to be used in time
of sickness, and the plague to be avoided in flying from it: so we must use
means to avoid sin by the word and prayer, and as much as we may, the place
where it abounds, least we be infected. And if it so be, that we cannot
avoid (for it may be the Lord will sometimes try us with the company of
foolish, vain, and profane worldlings, to see how we will cleave to him) if
then we cannot avoid but our eyes shall behold vanity, our ears shall be
filled with ungracious and graceless graces in lying, swearing, and
blaspheming the name of our God, then show your selves to the world, that you
are not of the world, assure your own souls that you are called and chosen of
the Lord, not only by a cold kind of misliking of these things, but by an
utter abhorting and detesting them from the heart: otherwise we may be by
Joseph's example, drawn not only to approve them, but also to commit the like,
and to forget our selves, and to heap up the wrath of God against us: so that
when their destruction comes, except the Lord show mercy (but if we tempt
him, he will show no mercy) we shall be pat takers of all their plagues, and
the vengeance which the just and most righteous God has threatened to throw
down upon them.

Verse. 14. Again Joseph said unto them, This is it that I spoke unto you,
saying, Ye are spies. Joseph makes another lie. So we see that use is a sore
matter, which had brought him to this, that he stuck not at a lie: and yet, we
know that the lier even kills his own soul. Nay but see, he left not here,
he went further yet. In the fifteenth verse: Hereby ye shall be proved: By
the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go hence. Joseph smells by this use of
Idolatry: he forsakes the Lord, and swears by him which is no God.
Besides, another fault, he comes near for swearing and perjury, because his
oath comes very near a lie, and we know that untruth and an oath iumping
together makes perjury: and it cannot be, but those that swear readily,
must sometimes be for sworn.

Joseph was a Magistrate, Magistrates may go far in examining and searching
and sifting suspected persons when they appear before them, that they might
come to the truth of the matter: but to affirm flatly and falsely, is against
Gods commandment, and therefore a grievous offense.

Verse. 17. So he put them inward three days. Now he did not imprison them of
any corrupt affection or desire of revenge, but there may be great reasons to
show, that he used great wisdom in his doing First, if Joseph should not have
done thus, but should at the first have made himself known unto the^, they for
shame would never have gone back again to their father. Secondly, this dealing
thus with them was a means to humble them. Thirdly, he might do thus, that he
might be more fully certified of the state of his father. And lastly, the short
time of his imprisoning them was a token of his love toward them.

Verse 18. Then Joseph said* This do and li^e: for I fear God. As though he
should say: Do not you fear: for I fear God, I am true and just Therefore
you shall have no harm, unless you be wicked and ungodly men.

I am a m^n that fear God] Here is a rule of Christian life, especially for
Magistrates. We must all fear God. All that are in place and authority must
know that they are under God* Joseph considered hereof not now only, but also
in the last chapter of Genesis, when his brethren were afraid of him. Read
from the 14. verse of that chapter, to the 19. where Joseph says, Fear not:
for I am not under God? And I pray you mark what this consideration wrought in
him in the 20. and 21. verses: When ye thought evil against me, God disposed
it to good, etc.

Now if we fear God, we must pray unto him for our Magistrates, that he will
maintain his fear among them. For it falls out that we are often times
punished by them, even especially because we never pray for them.

Here be rules in this fear of God for religion, for praying unto God, and
praising God: for true keeping of the Sabbath, and for conversation of life.
First, when as to the hindrance of the fear of God any laws shall come forth
contrary to Gods word, we must remember that we forget not to fear God, and
to stand in aw of his rods, if we swerve from his word. Secondly, if we do
not on the Sabbath day more than man commands, we show that we fear man
more than God. And lastly, in all our doings and dealings, either with the
Lord, or with men, let us remember to fear God: for if we fear not God, what
wickedness is there which we fear to commit? Abraham when he came to
Abimelechs Court, he feared adultery; he had no other reason but this, Because
the fear of God was not in that place. Hence even from the want of the fear
of God comes drunkenness, and selling of wares without conscience, and
oppressing of the poor, and heaping up riches to another end, than he that
gave them, or rather lent them, has appointed: against all which, since man
cannot make sufficient laws, it were to be wished that every man could say
truly, and from his heart, I am a man that fears God.

Verse. 21. And they said one to another, We have verily sinned against our
brother, in that we saw the arguish of his soul, when he besought us, and
we would not hear him, therefore i^t is trouble come upon us. Every word
contains doctrine upon doctrine. first we see how necessary afflictions are
to make us call upon God. By this reason, by afflictions we feel our sin:
now without we feel our sins we call not upon God. For till we feel the
burden of our sins lying upon our conscience, as it were a weight to press
us down into hell, we forget God: we foolishly persuade our selves we have no
need, for we can see none. Therefore afflictions are very necessary for us,
to remember God, to call upon him, and to bring us to some assurance also
thereby, that we are the children of God. That affliction is so necessary to
feel our sins, both daily experience does teach us, and examples and
testimonies of the children of God do confirm the same unto us. Joseph's
brethren all the time of their prosperity, forget what they had done to
Joseph; but now when they were in some distress, they came to themselves, and
began to call to account, and to lay before them their hard dealing with their
brother. And David says in the 119 Psalm, Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, the ninth part of that Psalm: but (says he) now I keep thy word. So
then we may boldly conclude, that affliction is a necessary thing to bring us
to God. And here we may note the great love and care that the Lord God has
over us, and his infinite goodness toward us in using al means for our
salvation. First the Lord sets down his law unto us. and he has added
also threatening and curses to as many as shall neglect or disobey it. But now
if neither the law preached, nor yet those threatenings are able to strike a
terror into our hearts, the^ he uses yet another means, he takes his rods
and fatherly corrects us, by that means to move us to cry to him, and
himself by our cry to pity us, and have mercy upon us. The preaching of the
law is necessary, and the threatenings for transgression of the law must often
times be used. Joseph's brethren after they were sore threatened, they then
began to be humbled, and to acknowledge their fault. The Lord said unto
Abimelech: Thou art but a ^ead man, if thou restore not to Abraham his wife
again. So that we may here see the end of threatenings, e^her they bring a man
to know his sin, and so to prevent the punishment due for sin; or else
they hasten and heap greater punishment unto us, if otherwise we do no^
repent. After Iosep^s brethren were threatened they were humbled, and so God
repented him of the plague he was minded to bring upon them. Abimelech after
he was threatened he restored Abraham his wife again, and so the Lord stayed
from destroying him.

Now there are two sorts of people which would have Gods promises preached unto
them, and not the law of God. The first are they which would continue in sin.
As for these they are like to the Horse and to the Mule, whose mouths mus^ be
holden with bit and bridle. Another sort there is which would not have the law,
nor the threatenings thereof preached unto them; and these are they which feel
themselves moved with the promises of God. But we cannot be moved lively with
the promises of Christ, except we first by the law, and the threatenings of
John, see the full measure of punishment, that our sins have deserved.
Therefore it is very requisite we first have the law preached unto us, that we
may have a lively feeling of our sins.

As those which would not have the law preached, were said to be of two sorts;
so those that feel their sins are also of two sorts: for either they see
sin in general, or else they are humbled more specially. Those which feel
their sins, and have a taste thereof, and see them in general, and not
specially; these must be cut on both sides, they must see sin on both sides,
they must enter into the secrets of the heart, for they have not yet learned to
discern of thoughts, they must eue^ have their very hearts and thoughts laid
open unto them. In the third to the Hebr. we are bidden not to harden our
hearts at the word of God. Not to harden our hearts, that is, not only to hear
the law preached unto our ears, and to go no further (for so it never
profits us, nay it is the power of death unto death unto us) but we must
suffer it to soke into us, to have his proper working, to pearce and to enter
even to the very secret cogitations of our hearts, that not only our wicked
deeds, our vnfauorie words, but also the fountain of al these, even our
corrupt nature, our unbridled and untamed affections, our heart, which is
wonderful faulty, may be made known unto us, that we may come to make
conscience of our very thoughts, because the thoughts are grievous breaches of
the law of God, who being a Spirit, has made a law for our heart, for our
thoughts, for our soul and conscience: and thus being very loath in the sight
of God to offend by thoughts vain and ungodly, to strive with our flesh, and
to have our affections subdued to the spirit, that so our heart being reformed,
all our members may be conformable in every respect to the will and
commandment of Almighty God. And thus far must we be humbled, if we will be
truly humbled before the Lord. And truly if we be not rightly humbled before
the Lord, we can hardly have any assurance, that we are the children of God.
For without this humbling of us, having had some taste of the promises of God,
we for the most part resemble the corn that our Savior speaks of sown in
the stony ground, which for a time flourished, that is, made a fair face, as
many hypocrites can do now; But having no root, nor nothing at all in truth,
they show themselves how unable they are to stand, because they have no deepnes
of ground, the seed of the word never begun nor rooted in their hearts. So
that we must be truly humbled before the Lord, and the word must be permitted
to rip and lay open unto us the very secrets and thoughts of the heart.

Now those which see and feel their sins, and are already humbled more
especially, are humbled either by preaching of the law unto them, or else by
affliction.

Affliction is either of the body or of the mind; of these the Lord sometime
to humble us does send the one, sometime the other, sometime both, and all to
humble us before his Majesty: when as he sees by reason of the corruption of
our nature, that the preaching of the law is not sufficient to humble us, and
to strike that terror into our hearts which might make us duly prepared to
receive into our hearts the sweet and comfortable promises made to us in
Christ, that it might be so rooted, that it might still grow up even to the
full ripe and perfitage of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; because I say our
loving father sees that the law will not suffice us, therefore it pleases him
in mercy, who will leave no way unassayed for the salvation of his children,
to prepare us by afflicting us, which can not by the hearing of his law be
truly prepared.

Now if affliction be such a notable thing, and the Lord works even eternal
life thereby oftentimes to those whom he has elected and called to be his,
how lovingly ought they to embrace it to whom the Lord so fatherly does offer
it? and how patiently and chearefully ought they to bear it, in as much as they
thereby may assure themselves that God has severed them from the world, and
from those on whom he means to show no mercy in the day of his wrath?

And as for those whom the Lord as yet has laid no scourge upon them, let them
not long for it, but let them lay the law of God and the threatenings thereof
unto their hearts to humble them thereby. It is better to be humbled thereby
than by affliction, and yet better by affliction than not at all. To commend
affliction and to mislike of preaching of the law, is as though one should
commend a sore and dangerous purgation, and mislike a good diet. A good diet is
able, and it is the ordinary means appointed of God to procure and conserve
health, which as many of us as are not unwise, will observe. Now if for want of
discretion, or for greedy desire we neglect this, and so by gathering together
of ill and noisome humors within us we endanger our life, yet to save our life
we will suffer the working of the most strong purgation, that the Physician
shall prescribe us: so the law that is, the ordinary means to make us apt to
hear the word of peace and salvation, and ought of us to be observed and
applied unto us, that we may thereby be preserved rather than by affliction;
yet if our merciful Lord and only Physician of our soul shall with tender
compassion look upon our sores, and shall see the malady of our soul to be
incurable without the strong purgation of affliction, then ought we even with
good courage to take it, except we will suffer and see our endless vexation.
So purgation is good, but it is more wisdom to observe diet: and affliction
is profitable; but if the law might take place effectually that were
needelesse. Let us take heed therefore we deceive not ourselves in thinking
that affliction is the only means to bring us to God, and so neglect the due
preparing by the law till time of affliction. We see that is the means rather
than this: and affliction indeed is the curse of God. Now the curse of God is
the verifying of his law: and though it please God to bless it; as he does
always to his children, for all things turn to the best to them that love
him, yet ought it not to be the means to humble us rather than the other. The
end of affliction and of threatening both is to humble us; and therefore it were
better to be humbled by threatening than by experience of punishment; for the
threats of the law may do this as well as affliction, if we be not unwise.

In our selves we may have some testimony of our true humbling in time of
affliction, yet is it hard to say for others whether one which now feels the
hand of God upon him, and never felt any token of Gods displeasure before, be
either truly humbled for his sins, for which he is afflicted; or seems to
be humbled because of the pain that he abides. Therefore even he that is
afflicted ought to examine his own soul whether he be truly humbled, and feel
within himself even a grief that he has so diversely provoked God to plague
him, acknowledging Gods unspeakable mercy and long suffering, that he long
ere this did not clean consumne him: least otherwise the devil deceive him, as
he has done diverse, who for a time seemed to be humbled, because of the heat
of their grief: but afterward when the Lord has stayed his hand, they show
what their humbling was, they turn again to sin as a dog to his vomit,
and as a sow that is washing to her wallowing in the mire. But as for him that
feels the weight and burden of his sins, and Gods displeasure for sin,
and even groneth as it were under the burden of sin, he may find a heavenly
comfort, and assurance of the favor of God: for if thou see a man truly
humbled, him will I consider says the Lord. To him will I look that is of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words.

Those that are afflicted, are either such as are instructed before, both
whence their affliction comes, and to what end they are sent, or else they
are such as are ignorant, and know nothing hereof. They that are ignorant when
they see themselves so punished, they are driven into great streights, they
look only upon the curse of God, they never consider the appertinances
thereof, and that the cause thereof is the transgression of Gods law, and that
it is sin for which God is angry, and that which he punishes in them: upon
which their blindness they attribute the cause of their pain either to Witches,
or to natural causes, or fortune, or some such thing; and hereupon to be
released of their grief they go and run and ride to wise men as they call
them, to Witches, yea oftentimes to the Devil himself, and use all unlawful
means that they can devise. But for these what remedy is there? surely even
first to consider that their afflictions are sent from God. Secondly, to
enquire at his word the cause that moved the Lord to lay them upon them. The
Lord no doubt will answer them out of his word, that it was sin. Thirdly the
end which the Lord has set down, which is to humble us. Now if we consider
that the Lord has sent it, that sin was the cause thereof, and we be truly
humbled because of our sins, then may we be bold to seek to the waters of
comfort, and drink freely of the water of life, which our Savior has
promised to all that come unto him to be refreshed. They which are instructed
both whence affliction comes, and wherefore, and to what end, they commonly
are very sorry, and do earnestly repent them; and although they are something
troubled, because before they were never sufficiently humbled, yet are they not
dismayed, they have the stay in themselves: they hold it as most certain, that
their God as he is all wisdom, and therefore knows all things that are
best, so he is infinite in mercy, and puts upon him the affection of a
father to those that fear him, and gives nothing to his children but those
things which may be best for them; and therefore they know he scourges as a
father, or beats as a schoolmaster; and no tender father or wise
schoolmaster will correct the child with beating when words may serve: so that
they know the Lord was even to take his rod in hand before he could renew
them, and hereby he means to fine them, that they may come out of
afflictions as fined gold, whom the Lord will make vessels to eternal glory.

That which is set down here of the afflictions of Joseph's brethren, we may
term more rightly by the name of scaring, than of punishment and affliction;
for they were but put in fear only, and though they were put in ward; it was
but for a very small time: and we read of no correction that was laid upon
them; no, it appears by Joseph's affection to them, who could not abstain,
but was feign often to burst forth into tears when he had gone from them, that
he so tendered them as his brethren; when by the wisdom of the spirit of God
he made a show as though he would deal very hardly with them, yet this
fearing and searing of them it humbled them, and drove them to confess, and to
say one to another, we have utterly sinned against our brother, in that we saw
the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him:
therefore is this trouble come upon us. And here we see how they confessed
their fault when they were scared, before they ^eit any punishment upon them;
which may be an argument, that it was a true humbling from the heart, with a
grief not of the punishment, for there was yet none laid upon them, but of
their sins, which then they brought into their remembrance, and it lay as a
burden upon their conscience, that they even saw Gods judgments ready to
give sentence of condemnation against them, except they prevented him by
speedy repentance. Whereas if it had been done, and had been in time of
affliction that they had been so humbled, it had been hard to say, whether it
had been done truly or dissemblingly, with a feeling of their sins, or the
greatness of their grief which they sustained, as is said before.

Thus we may learn, that the Lord God does not only, to humble us before his
Majesty, set forth the law unto us, and preach unto us the threatenings
thereof, and then if they take no place amongst us, he lays his rods and
scourges upon our backs; but commonly of his infinite wisdom and mercy,
before he afflicts, between the preaching of the law and affliction, he
scareth us, he shakes the rod of correction over us; and before he punishes,
he shows tokens of displeasure, and that we have provoked him to anger:
wherefore we have experience of his great mercy in this land amongst us at
this day. We have had the law preached unto us, lo these twenty years; but
where is any humbling, any confessing of sins before the Lord? nay, we
neglect the word, and have it in contempt amongst us, we even loath the bread
of the Lord, which is of power to work salvation to all that by faith shall
feed thereon; we prefer our pleasures before the keeping of the Lords
Sabbaths; we esteem of the Lord himself (who has made us of nothing, bought
us with a price, even his own blood, and who one day will call all before him
to judgment) as nothing: we come to pray to him with less reverence than to
miserable men; our lips say some prayers unto God, but our hearts have some
other Gods, namely, our belly or our goods, wherein we wholly delight, and in
whom we only trust. And indeed it is lamentable, that prayers are said of a
number to keep a custom, and a fashion, even mocking of God and deceiving our
own souls. Will the Lord suffer this? Is the sacrifice acceptable that comes
not from an humbled and prepared heart? no, he will not accept it. All these
abominations are in the land, and may not the Lord have good cause to visit
amongst us? nay, to come even in judgment against us? And yet see the
unspeakable mercy, and the long suffering, and the exceeding love of God
toward us, who has for borne his rods thus long, and yet destroieth us not,
but before his beesome of destruction shall come to sweep us away, he shows
us foretokens of his displeasure; he now begins to scare us, to see if yet
by this means he may humble us, and so preserve us from those plagues and
judgments which he is presently purposed to bring upon all the ungodly of the
earth. But how does the Lord scare us, and what whips be they wherewith he
means to scourge? They are many, and we cannot see them all, but there are
three especial plagues which the Lord is ready to power upon us, and three
manner of ways there be, whereby the Lord scareth us, which are very plain
and manifest, and almost every child may perceive. He scareth us by fear of
dear^^ and famine, whereof this unseasonable weather, these immoderate waters
which we have had, cannot but be fearful tokens. He scareth us by tokens of
a pestilence to come amongst us, which is already laid upon the necks of many
of our brethren in this land, not only far off, as at Yarmouth, at Norwich,
and diverse other places which we know not, but also in this shire at Ely, we
know not how night it is our own doors. A third way there is, whereby he
scareth us, and that is more fearful than all these, and that is by the
secret devices of our enemies, whom the Lord has stirred up even to threaten a
separating of us from his Majesty, and from his word, and the continuance of
his government by his word amongst us, and a captivity, a subduing of us to
false gods, and an ignorance of all the laws and commandments of our good
God, whom only to serve is perfect felicity. And this is a sore scaring: the
other are sore for the time; but this punishment, if it comes, it shall end
at no time. We may partly see it, I would to God we could as well consider of
it, and even yet at the length before we feel the rod, as did the brethren of
Joseph, acknowledge our sins before the Lord, whom we have provoked to wrath,
humble our selves before him, and call for mercy, and even by prayer stand in
the gap, and prevent the punishment prepared for us.

Now let us herein learn one point of wisdom more, which is, if God sometime
shall threaten us by scaring, and shall sit him down again a little, and it
falls not out presently that we be punished, let us not thereby get occasion
to flatter and deceive our selves, as though Gods rods were then clean
ouerpast, as a storm carried away with a clowd; but let us carefully consider
what were the causes that moved him to threaten us, and no doubt we shall
find that even they were causes sufficient to provoke him to plague us: and if
we will not call them to mind, and confess them while we have respit given
us, they will never lin yelling and crying in the cares of the just and
righteous judge for whole vessels full of vengeance to consume us utterly.

Now as for the godly, and those that fear the Lord, and have their hearts
upright before him, they are as it were forewarned and fully prepared
whatsoever plagues come, they know that nothing shall come nigh them to hurt
them, and they can see a glimmering of the thing a great way off, and the Lord
tells them before hand what he is minded to do: he told Noah before hand of
the great judgment of waters when the whole world was drowned for sin: he
told Lot how he was minded to burn and boil up the filth of Sodom: he told
Moses before how he would destroy the Egyptians: yea and the Prophet David
speaks truly, The Lord reuealeth his secrets to them that fear him; and yet
notwithstanding the dear children of God, when as nothing will serve, they
must then needs look for affliction. And if it be so that affliction must
needs come, let us yet pray to God rather to lay any plague upon us than the
famine of his word, and the subjection to the enemies of his grace; yea let us
heartily confess our sins before God as David did at the threatening of the
Lord by his Prophet: and if the Lord might put us in choice (if it seemed good
unto his Majesty) whether we would fly before our enemies, or whether we
would wish, or chose rather a dearth in the land, or a pestilence; let us from
our hearts beseech the Lord God that we may rather fall into the hands of the
Lord, than into the hands of cruel and persecuting men.

The sum of all is.
1 Precepts to fly ill company, which is the plague of our soul. Not only to
mislike, but also to detest from the heart a wicked custom, least we give
consent and reach ou^ hands unto sin, as Joseph and Lot did. 2 To beware of
swearing by false gods, which is idolatry. 3 To beware of often swearing, for
fear of perjury. 4 How the Lord has two means of humbling us, the law, and
affliction.
FINIS.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
Hebr. 13. verse. 17. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for
you.
Whenever it pleases the Lord God by his providence to call me to preach his
word unto his people (as he has at this present called me unto you (reverend
Fathers and brethren beloved in our Lord Jesus) my desire is to entreat of
such a parcel of his most holy word, as may minister matter both to stir up
and rouse them out of the den of ignorance which have not known Jesus
Christ, nor the sweetness of Note.
his grace, and also to prick forward them which have received some measure of
the Spirit of God, assuring them of salvation purchased by A greater study and
care for the increasing of this inestimable treasure.
Jesus Christ, to a greater study and care for to increase this inestimable
treasure. The Lord of his great mercy therefore has presented unto me, such a
place for my desired purpose, as I hope by the assistance of his holy Spirit
shall be profitable both to you and to my self. The words are written in the
thirteenth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and in the seventeenth verse:
Obey them that have the oversight of you, etc. The spirit of God does most
plainly set forth unto us in this place:

1 First, what duties the Ministers of God do owe unto his people, declared in
these words, They watch for your souls.

2 Secondly, what duty the people owe unto them again, expressed herein: Obey
them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves.

3 Thirdly, the fruits that come of weldoing of these duties to both parts,
that is, both to the Minister and to the people.

4 Fourthly, what danger it is not to do them well.

We must first speak of the duties of Ministers. But before we enter into it,
it is very necessary, that we consider whether it be requisite to have a
Minister or no, and also to what The necessity of Ministers.
use and end we should have him. For if it were not needful to have a Pastor,
it were in vain to speak of the duty of a Minister. Whereas the holy Ghost
says. Obey them that have the oversight over you etc. It is meant of the
Pastors of the Church, of the dispensers of the holy word of God. For there
were placed over the Church of God, both Pastors, Doctors Pastors, Docters and
Elders in the Church of God.
and Elders, which were certain grave wise men appointed to look to the
manners of the children of God, and not to be alders and helpers of the
Ministers of God in the furtherance of his office: and whereas they saw any
disorder among the children of God, they were to admonish them of it; which if
it would not serve, together with the whole congregation would use admonitions:
but if they would not be obedient thereunto, such was the authority of the
Church, that they might excommunicate them, and so rend them off from the
Saints fellowship, and deliver them to the devil, that thereby they might be
driven to true repentance for their sins, and have their souls saved. To
these overseers does the Apostle will them to be obedient, and does not mean
generally all kind of superiors and civil Magistrates, as in diverse other
places of the Scripture. In Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. and Titus 3. 1. also 1. Pet. 2.
13. we must take it in this place according to the Scriptures: in the first
Epistle to the Theslasonians, and fist chapter, S. Paul writes in this sort:
Now we 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13.
beseech you, brethren, that ye acknowledge them, which labor among you, and
are over you in the This is not meant of civil Magistrates, but of the
governors of the Church. Matthew 9. 36. Mark. 6. 34.
Lord, and admonish you, that ye have them in singular love for their works
sake. Be at peace among your selves. Here the Apostle also speaks of them
that rule over men's consciences by the ministry of Gods word, and not of
civil Magistrates. We see therefore that it is meant that there should be a
governor over every congregation, which we call in our English tongue a
Pastor. Only this remains among us, that we have Pastors, Doctors, or
Teachers and Ministers. How necessary they are, our Savior Christ testifies
in the ninth chapter of his Gospel after S. Matthew: But when he saw the
multitude, he had compassion upon them, because they were dispersed, and
scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. This people by whom our
Savior Christ spoke, had the Scribes and Pharisees, great learned The people
of God without a shepherd for all the great learning of the Doctors. Matthew. 9.
38.
Clerks, Doctors of the Law, and yet he says, that they wanted shepherds:
and therefore he willed his Disciples to pray to the Lord of the harvest, that
he would send forth laborers into his harvest. Whereby he notes, that those
only be true Pastors which be laborers. He likeneth true Ministers to
faithful shepherds, and the people of God to a flock of sheep, taking the
occasion of this similie, according to that country where were many
mountains, deserts and wildernesses, so that their sheep without a shepherd
were scattered abroad very dangerously, in that so many wolves and savage
beasts laid wait in every corner to devour the silly sheep. In like case are
they that have not a Pastor, that labors Who be only true Ministers.
faithfully in preaching the word of God, which is the instrument which God
has appointed to pull his people into the sheepfold of Jesus Christ, where
they are without danger of destruction: when as all they that are without a
Pastor, are wandering abroad to their The misery of the people without a
Pastor. Matthew. 23. 37. Luke 13. 34.
own destruction: such horrible disorder is there, where Gods word is not
truly preached. In another place he says: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not. This people dwelt all together,
they were not scattered here one and there another, but abode whole in that
goodly city of Jerusalem: yet because they were not in the unity of the
spirit of the household of God, they were scattered abroad in most miserable
disorder. For the Church of Jesus Christ is not in one place only, but
dispersed and scattered in diverse places throughout the whole world, and yet
are they all of one household, all of one sheepfold, and are united together in
one spirit: and though we be here, yet are we of the same number and flock
with them in Germany, so long as we are of the true faith of Jesus Christ, for
their faith and ours is all one, their spirit and our spirit all one, according
to the words of the Apostle: There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are
called in one hope of your Ephe 4. 4. 5. 6.
vocation. There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of
all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all. We must therefore
take this as the Scripture teaches, that The ministry of the word the most
necessary thing in the world. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
the ministry of his word is the necessariest thing in the world, which
cannot be done without faithful Pastors and distributers of the same. For when
the Lord will beget your souls, which he does not by mortal seed, but by the
immortal seed of his word, he will appoint you a spiritual father also. He
never establishes any kingdom, but he appoints a King, and when he has any
scholar, he provides him a schoolmaster to instruct and teach him his most
holy will. For this is most certain, where a Commonweal is without
government, the case is very miserable, one man shall not live by another.
Again, if there be such governors, as use tyranny, oppression, and seek to
enrich themselves, gathering and scraping all into their hands; what miserable
slavery shall the poor people be brought into? So it is in the church of God,
if such be placed over it, as be blind, unable to feed the flock, such as
seek their own pleasure, to fill their bellies, to cloathe their backs, to
enrich their coffers, and to live as they list, the people of God shall be in
miserable case, as blind men groping out of the way, and be devoured of their
adversary 1. Pet. 5. 8.
the devil (who as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour)
because they know not how to resist him by a steadfast faith, and so be led away
captive unto hell. Great danger of not having a godly Pastor.
This comes of not having a Pastor, or having such a one as regards not the
souls of his people.

For the end why the Lord places faithful and laboring pastors of his
Church, is, that The use where unto God has appointed ministers. Romans 10. 6. 7.
8.
they may teach his children out of his word the way to heaven sincerely and
purely: and such governors must we obey and be ruled by them according to
the word of God. Neither must we say in heart, Who shall ascend into heaven?
(that is to bring Christ from above) or who shall descend into the deep? (that
is to bring Christ again from the dead) but the word of God is near thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thine heart. We must therefore obey the true
Ministers and faithful laborers in the Lords Vineyard, and learn by that
wholesome doctrine which they bring unto us, how to attain unto salvation: for
there is no other means in the world to come unto Christ than by the preaching
of the word, according to that saying of S. Paul* faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God: and as he Romans 10. 17.
speaks a little before, how shall they hear without a Preacher? We may
therefore draw a very strong argument to prove that faithful Ministers are
appointed of God to this end, only to bring home his children into the
sheepfold of Jesus Christ. True faith makes us only heirs of the kingdom of
heaven; faith cannot be attained without hearing of Gods Preaching the only
means to work faith in us.
word preached; the word of it self cannot be preached without a Preacher:
therefore Preachers are the only means appointed of God to work faith in his
children by the preaching of Gods word, and the secret working of the holy
Ghost, whereby they are made partakers of the promises. Whosoever therefore is
not content with this ordinance of God, but would have some further revelation
from heaven, shall never be partakers of the benefits of Jesus Christ. He
himself declares in the parable of the rich glutron, that Luke 16* 31.
whosoever would not believe the messengers of God which are the Preachers of
the word, they would not believe though one should rise from the dead to
instruct them. For in the word of God is set forth most clecrely and manifestly
the true and certain rule to live by, and the means whereby to attain unto
salvation. Therefore it is too too much ungodliness to desire any other means
to be instructed by, than by the word of God, which is the very gate of
heaven, and the keys thereof are given to the true Ministers of Matthew. 16. 19.
Gods word, with such power, that whatsoever they bind on the earth, shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever they loose upon earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. So wonderful is The Lord in his mercy will have his children certain
of salvation in this life, to their vnspeak able comfort.
the mercy of God toward his children herein, that they may have assurance of
salvation in this life; vea so certain may they be of it, as if they had it
already in possession, and that not by preaching of Angels, but even by our
own brethren, mortal men as we are, subject to sin and all infirmities, at
whose hands we may daily be taught, and with whom we may talk familiarly, and
at their hands through the word of God we may have as good assurance hereof,
as if the Lord should speak himself from heaven. If God should speak, we
were not able to abide the hearing of his voice, but be even swallowed up of
fear. How were the children of Israel terrified with the voice of the Lord?
when he spoke unto them they fled away, and stood a far off, and cried to
Moses, Talk thou with us Exodus 20. 18. 19. If the Preaching of the word work
not faith in us we could not believe though God spoke to us himself, nor if
one should come from the dead. John 10. 24 25. 26. 27. 28.
and we will hear: but let not God talk with us, least we die. What a vain
and ungodly thing were it to persuade our selves that we could believe if we
heard God himself speak, or if one came from the dead, to tell us what we
should believe, when as the very earth will quake at the voice of God? And our
Savior Christ tells us plainly, that if we believe not the true Preachers
of his word, we could not believe though a damned soul should come from hell
to preach unto us: the reason is, because the ordinance of God, which is
unchangeable has appointed our brethren to teach us the way unto salvation.
And truly it is a notable place where our Savior Christ does separate his
from the reprobate: Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him,
How long do thou make us doubt? If thou be that Christ, tell us plainly.
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believe not: the works which I do in
my Fathers name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not: for ye are not
of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. We see then it is a
great argument of reprobation, when our hearts be so hard, that we cannot
believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for this is an infallible Note. Romans ^. ^^.
truth, that those which are the Lords, in his time he calls, and they shall
abide and never fall away; but those that are not his shall fall away, although
they have been passing cunning hypocrites in outward holiness. The children of
God will acknowledge this Though their holiness be never so great in the outward
appearance, they shall not stand in the end.
means, and praise the wisdom of God, which has thereby quite transfourmed
them, and changed their whole man, in sanctifying them by his holy spirit, and
giving of them assurance of salvation, which they confess could never have
come to pass without the preaching of the word. This authority is given to
the Ministers to pronounce the terrible judgments of God against sin, and
whosoever he be that does not repent and turn from the same, shall be as
sure of everlasting damnation, as if he were already in hell.

Again, to the penitent, whose consciences are burdened with grief for their
sins, he may pronounce the sweet promises of the Gospel, how Jesus Christ
has died for them, Certain condemnation of the wicked. The assured comfort of
Gods children in Christ. John. 20. 23.
and has discharged them before the judgment seat of GOD, and they shall be
as sure of salvation, as if our Savior Christ should speak from heaven
himself, (who is Truth and cannot lie) and say: Whosoeuers sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them: and whosoevers sins ye retain, they are
retained. This is a wonderful thing, and this shall Gods children confess an
unspeakable goodness of the Lord God, in sending our brethren with such
power. Since then this is so necessary, they which will not confess this to be
the ordinance and mean appointed of the Lord God, to bring his children home
unto his heavenly Kingdom, either never heard of Jesus Christ, or else in
miserable hypocrisy have heard and professed the Gospel, which shall be a
testimony to their consciences, even to their utter condemnation.

Now we have heard the necessity of a Pastor, and the use whereunto he is
appointed it is requisite that we consider what duty the Pastor owes unto his
^^ocke: for as the Lord, The duty of Ministers.
when he establishes a Kingdom, will choose a King, so will he also give him,
first a Kings heart, before he sets him in his seat; so when he prepares
a spiritual father to beget souls unto himself, he gives him gifts and
power to do the same, as Saint Paul testifies, writing to the Ephesians: But
unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gifts of
Christ: Wherefore he says, when he ascends up on high, he led captivity
captive, Ephesians. 47. 8.
and gave gifts unto men: so that first the Lord gives gifts, and secondly
men. This must be the duty of the Minister (as the holy Ghost tells us) to
watch over the souls of his people, to be so careful over them, as that he
will not suffer one through his negligence to perish, but by his earnest
laboring in preaching the word of God, to build them up into a stronger faith,
which are already begotten unto the Lord, and also to win others to Christ,
and so increase the mystical body of Christ, so much as his diligence by the
blessing of God shall be able.

1. First, therefore, it is requisite in the Ministers office, that he study
the word of God, that he do diligently read the same, and also give himself
unto prayer.

2. Secondly, after that he has studied the word of God, he must come out of
his study to teach and instruct his flock, to deliver forth unto them
wholesome doctrine, for the nourishment of their souls.

3. Thirdly, he must live a godly life, showing himself an example and
pattern of godliness for his people to imitate, that the mouths which are
ready to slander the Gospel, may be stopped, and he must watch over his
flock, that they be not deceived with false doctrine.

4. Last of all, he must not refuse to give his life for them.

Concerning the first, that Ministers must give themselves diligently to
reading, as it Attendance in reading.
is manifest in the fourth chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy, where he
exhorts Timotheus, with these words: Till I come, give attendance to reading,
to exhortation, and to doctrine. 1. Tim. 4. 13. 1. He must read and study the
word of God diligently.
If that reading the word of God were not very needful, yea, and the first
point of the Ministers of God, this faithful servant of God Saint Paul, would
never have willed Timotheus to use* such diligence therein, who never moved
any to do those things which were not profitable, and himself for the example
of others, used the same: therefore it is certain that Saint Paul using great
diligence therein, found such commodity as moved him to exhort Timotheus, and
in him all other Ministers thereunto. But if Saint Paul, who was more than a
Minister, even an Apostle, called thereunto extraordinarily, by the mouth of
Jesus Christ himself from heaven; if he I say, which was placed in so high an
office, and called with so worthy a calling, gave himself diligently to
reading and studying the word of God: how much more ought the Ministers, which
have not so excellent a calling Malach. 2. 7.
as he had? The Prophet Malachie shows a reason hereof: The Priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his mouth,
for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: if the people must learn the
will of God at the Ministers mouth, it is requisite that he himself study and
read the w^rd of God diligently, where his holy will is revealed, that he may
be able to declare the same unto the people, to the which end the Lord has
placed them over his people. So that he must be as it were the storehouse of
the Lord, and the children of God must come to learn, and he must minister
necessary doctrine unto them, as occasion shall be offered, that all several
heresies may be rooted out of the peoples hearts, and so be brought unto God,
to serve him in true holiness according to perfect religion; and hereby we may
know, that whosoever does not thus, is not the servant of the Lord. The reading
and meditating in Gods word is so necessary, that the Lord commanded Joshua
being a civil Magistrate, That the book of his law should never Josh. 1. 8.
To meditate in the word day and night.
depart out of his mouth, but that he should meditate therein day and night:
Noting thereby how hard and impossible a thing it is for Magistrates to govern
the Commonwealth aright and orderly, without continual study of Gods word,
which is the perfect and absolute rule, whereby as well Magistrates as all other
sorts of people must measure their affairs and order of life: for this cause
also must not the civil Magistrate be ignorant of the law of God, that their
civil law might be established according to the law moral, and therefore they
ought continually to read and meditate therein: but if this be the duty of
civil Magistrates to be always conversant in the word of God, how much more
is it the duty of spiritual Pastors, whose office consists in the
ministry thereof? The Prophet David in the first Psalm, when he would
describe who are they that are blessed, includes Psalm. 1. 2. To meditate in
the word daily.
them in this number, They that delight in the law of the Lord, and meditate
therein day and night: so that every private man if he will be blessed, must
continually meditate in the word of God, and have his whole delight and
pleasure therein.

The Minister therefore of necessity must teach the people, he must learn
first; for it is 2. He must teach the word.
not possible for him to teach another that which he himself has not learned:
which is a strong argument to prove the first part concerning his study, and
reading of the word: which as we have proved to be the first point in his
office, so will we, God willing, make manifest in this point of his duty, that
he ought also to teach the same, and must not keep continually in his study
filling himself with knowledge, till he become as full as a tun that will
not sound when one knocks upon it: but he must come out of his closet and
preach the word of God and deliver forth wholesome doctrine, and so declare by
feeding of the flock of Christ that they love their master Christ, whose
servants they profess themselves to be. Let these deep learned Clerks, which
brag and vaunt of such deep knowledge and abundance of learning, come forth
and show the same, that we may bear record that it is so: for if they be the
servants of the Lord, they must not have knowledge buried in themselves, but in
their lips, that Gods children may be taught thereby to attain unto
salvation: for the Lord has ordained the preaching of his word to be the only
means, whereby he calls together his elect; and to that end has he given
gifts to men, that by their labor the body of Jesus Christ might be perfited.
He The strait account of the Minister.
gave them not a talent to hide in the ground, but to occupy and increase the
same: let them be assured therefore when our King shall come to call us to
account, they shall as hardly be handled, for not occupying and increasing it to
his glory, as they should, if they co^temptuously throw the same away. The
Minister therefore of Gods word must not only be learned but must teach also:
for how can he be a minister of doctrine, but in this respect that he teaches,
executing yt office of his ministry? And this teaching is none other thing, but
to preach the word of God sincerely, and purely with a care of the glory of
God, and a desire of the salvation of our brethren: and secondly a reverent
administration of the sacraments, according to the order and institution of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Whosoever therefore shall not thus labor, is not the
minister of the Lord, but a robber and spoiler of the people of God, which
thrust themselves into the ministry, to fill their belly only with the sweat
of other men's brows.

Now as it is necessary that the Minister over and besides reading and studying
the word, The order of his teaching is to build upon the true foundation* Jesus
Christ.
must also ^each the same; So he must take heed that he obseru^ the right
order of teaching, and must not deu^^e doctrine of his own head. But if he
will be a good builder, his foundation must be Jesus Christ, for another
foundation can no man lay, and upon the same he must not build timber, hay, or
stubble; whereby is meant all curious and unprofitable questions, and vain
ostentation, but he must build gold, silver, and precious stone* by which
precious substance is noted the most excellent and pure doctrine of the
Gospel. And hereby shall you know his argument, if he beat down the
st^^fenecked and obstinate How to know on^ that preaches with the power of the
word. He that ^uildeth not upon that foundation, is an Antichrist* Acts 20. 27.
sinners, by threatening the rigor of the law, and the terrible judgments of
God against the violaters thereof: and on the contrary, by healing the bruised
and wounded consciences with sin, with the sweet promises of the Gospel. If
any man therefore shall labor to lay any other foundation, and use any other
order of doctrine than this, he is an Antichrist, that is to say, against
Christ, and no Christian.

He must teach them all the counsel of God, and keep nothing back, but
whatsoever concerns the salvation of his flock, that must he teach them:
yea, so absolute must his doctrine be, that there must be no point of the will
of God, pertaining to the salvation of his children, but the Minister must be
both able and diligent to declare. Therefore it is requsite and needful, that
a rare gift of God be added, who only opens their understanding, that they
might understand the scriptures, wherein the most holy will of God is
revealed, He must teach all the counsel of God. Luke 24 45.
and nothing that is needful for our salvation omitted: so that whosoever
knows not the scriptures must needs err and be deceived: but the Minister
who must declare all the counsel of God unto his children, must be very
perfect therein.

Moreover, he must improve, rebuke, exhort, and stir up, first, himself to a
great care of doing his duty faithfully; then must he also by all means spur
forward the godly, gently 2. Tim 4. 2.
and lovingly, exhorting to hold fast the profession of their hope, in the
assurance of faith, making their election more surely known unto themselves,
by their godly life: and the Matthew. 22. 29.
rather to bring them forward herein with willingness and great readiness, he
ought to set before them the wonderful mercy of the Lord God, showed toward
them, in that he has out of all the world elected them to be heirs of his
kingdom, where they shall ^aigne for He must p^icke forward the godly to
increase in godliness* beat down the obstinate, with the judgments of God,
comfort the penitent with the promises of the Gospel.
ever, in such unspeakable joys, as neither eye has see^e, ear has heard,
neither has at any time entered into the heart of man. He must not be ashamed
to rebuke and reprove such as will not be obedient to the Gospel, but remain
still wallowing in their sin: and if that wholesome admonitions will not
serve, he must not spare to thunder out the just judgments of God against
them, until he has beaten them down to hell with the terrors thereof, and
after true repentance, to raise them up even to the heavens, and daily
strengthen them more and more: so that to the impenitent he must pronounce
damnation because he is still under the law, and under the curse of the law,
and that he shall be sure to be tormented everlastingly, if he do not repent:
but the penitent that labor with a burdened conscience for sin, and are
wounded with grief for the same, he shall comfort with blessed promises of the
Gospel, declaring unto him, that he is not under the law, but under grace,
and so build him into a lively faith in Jesus Christ.

This must the Minister do both openly and privately: for it is not sufficient
that he preach the word of God openly in the pulpet, but he must go to every
man's house, and To apply comfort to the penitent sinner. The minister ought to
go t^ the houses of his charge.
there diligently instruct both him and his house in the fear of God: and not
as the manner of some is, to go to folks houses to tell them a tale, and
flatter them with fair words and glozing speeches, to the end they might fill
their belly sat another man's table, or get some other benefit which he
hunteth after. These be hirelings and time-seruers* which thrust themselves
into the Ministry for lucres sake, and because they would live idly, and
take no pains for their living, but contrary to the commandment of God to
live of other men's labors, these are not true Ministers, but such as the
Prophet Malachy speaks of in the first chapter of his Prophecy. The true
Pastor must not have any such purpose: Genesis 3. 19.
but as it is his duty to labor to win the souls of his people unto Jesus
Christ, so must he use all means both publicly, and privately, which may
further his ministry and make Private means as well as public must be used
by the Minister. Luke 10. 38. 39 and 19. 9. Acts. 20. 20.
it profitable. We might prove out of diverse places of the word of God this his
duty, both by the example of our Savior Christ, the perfect pattern for all
me^ to follow, who did not only preach openly in the Synagogue, but privately
in men's houses. The Apostles did so likewise, and S. Paul witnesses the same
in the 20* chapter of the Acts with these words: I kept back nothing that was
profitable, but have showed you, and taught you openly and throughout every
house. This is the duty of a good Pastor. The reason hereof is very good,
because that which is spoken generally to all, is regarded of very few or none:
so wonderfully has Satan stopped men's ears and blinded their understanding*
that either they will not hearken That which is spoken to all is regarded of
none or of few.
at all, or else hearing, will never apply the same to their consciences: and
therefore to prevent this, the Minister shall not stick to instruct them
privately, when as they shall have no such occasion to apply that to other me^
that is spoken particularly to themselves. By this means, if the Lord has
appointed so, they may be brought home, or else have the testimony of his word
in their consciences, even to make them inexcusable at the To admonish privately
is to take all excuses away.
latter day.

Furthermore, this must he not seldom, now and then once in a month, or every
quarter ^^^* he cannot so discharge his conscience before the Lord, who has
appointed him to feed his flock continually: but this cannot live and
continue without food, no more He must teach continually both in season, and
out of season.
can the soul live, unless it be continually fed and nourished with the milk
of Gods word. He must therefore feed them continually, as we read that
careful shepherd S. Paul did, when he took his leave to depart from Ephesus,
after he had committed the keeping of Gods flock unto the Elders of the
Church, and given them warning of false teachers which would be busy with them
after his departure, and therefore exhorted them to watch. Remember (says he)
that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one, Acts. 20.
31. Paul warned them with tears both night and day. 2. Timoth* 4. 1. 2.
both night and day with tears. This diligence must be in Ministers to be
evermore teaching, that if the Lord do not bless at one time, yet he may at
another, they know not the time wherein the Lord will call any of his flock,
he must therefore use the means diligently at all times, both in season and
out of season, as S. Paul writes to Timothy: I charge thee therefore before
God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the
dead at that his appearing, and in his kingdom. Preach the word: be instant,
in season and out of season, etc. It is no small matter to have such a charge
laid upon him, as is here set down, and is given to all Ministers as well as
to Timotheus, that even as they will answer before the judgment seat of God,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, so they will preach the word
instantly, purely and continually, both in season and out of season, omitting
no occasion that may be profitable. It is the manner of men to count it out of
season, if it be not Note.
the Lords day, and therefore they will not let a little business of other
days to hear the word of God preached, which tends to their welfare. The
Ministers must labor for their sakes both out of season and in season: but if
they be more mindful of their worldly pleasures or business, than of the
salvation of their souls, their blood shall be upon their own head.

But when the Minister has thus studied the word diligently, preached the word
purely, He must pray both for himself and his people as well privately as
openly. 1. Cor. 3. 6.
declaring the counsel of God, exhorted both gently and sharply, labored to
win men's souls both openly and privately, and that very carefully as well out
of season as in season, to what end will all this come? Paul may plant, Apollo
also water, but it is God that must give the increase. Though the Minister
labors never so earnestly, doing his duty absolutely, yet if God does not
bless and increase the same, all is in vain. As therefore the Minister is the
mouth of God to speak unto the people, so must he be the peoples mouth, His
office is to bless the people in the Lords name. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. Number. 6. 23.
Psalm. 118. 26. John. 17.
and pray unto the Lord both for himself and for them, that the Lord will
bless him and them, and grant that the ministry of his word may be
profitable both to himself and to them, and that the glory of God may be
increased by the same. Thus we read our Savior did, who being very God as
well as man, and had power of himself to sanctify the ears and hearts of
them which heard him, and to make his preaching profitable in such measure as
himself listed, yet for an example to all other which should come after, he
prayed to his father both for himself and us. S. Paul also in all his Epistles
testifies how continually Romans 1. 9. 2. Tim. 1. 3.
he makes mention of them in his prayers. The Ministers therefore must pray,
and that without ceasing, as well privately by himself, as openly in the
congregation: and this promise has our Savior made, that whatsoever we shall
ask the father in his name shall be granted unto us.

In administering the Sacraments he must also be very circumspect, and although
children He must be circumspect in administering the Sacraments. The minister
ought to take account of their faith. The sacrament pertai^^^^ to ^one ^^^^ the
faith^^^^ only.
are to be received into the Church by Baptism, and not to be denied, because
the promises do as well pertain unto them, as unto the aged; yet are they to
be baptized in the faith of the parents; for there is no promise made to the
infidels. The Minister therefore must require an account of this faith of such
as bring children to be baptized, least otherwise he seal to a blancke, and so
profane the Sacrament, which appertains to none but to the faithful.
Furthermore he must not admit all men that come rashly to eat the flesh and
drink the blood of Christ, for it is no small matter: but first they must eat
it by faith out of the word of God, and when he has so done, the Minister
shall administer to him the outward seals of bread and wine, to confirm and
strengthen his faith.

The third point of the Ministers is; He must live a godly life, showing
himself an example to all his flock, least the word of God be slandered
through his evil behavior: for although he preach never so good doctrine, yet
if his life be wicked, and contrary to his doctrine, such is the sabtiltie of
Satan, who thereby will bring the Gospel into contempt, and be counted a
vain thing of men, because the Minister teaches one thing, and does another:
this were a grievous and intolerable matter, that the Minister should open He
must live a godly life to the example of others, and also to stop their mouths
which will be ready to speak evil of the Gospel, if the Minister live
contrary to his doctrine. Titus 2. 7. 8.
the mouths of the wicked to blaspheme the Lord God and his most holy word,
which is the power of God unto salvation. Therefore S. Paul together with pure
doctrine gives it in charge to Titus, in all things show thy self an
ensample of good works with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and
with the wholesome word which cannot be condemned, that he which withstandeth,
may be ashamed, having nothing of you to speak evil of. The Apostle law no
small occasion to use so weighty an admonition, that above all other things
join to pure doctrine a godly life, yea such an ensample of gravity,
integrity, and all other good works agreeable to the most wholesome word which
no man is able in any respect to reprove, that the contemptuous and despitefull
adversary against the truth may be ashamed to open their mouths, when as they
are not able to accuse the Minister of any ungodliness; for the word it self is
so perfect and absolute in all respects, that no man can find fault thereat:
but if the Minister contrary to the word does live wickedly and ungodly, he
does not only purchase evil report unto himself, but also gives occasion
unto the enemies and despisers of the truth most wickedly to sl^nder the most
precious Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Minister must therefore live a godly and
unblameable life, even for an example of well doing to all his flock.

Again the spirit of God in that he says, they must watch over men's souls,
declares a He must watch over the souls of his flock, therefore it is
requisite that he is able to keep his own 1. Cor. 6. 9. 2. Pet. 1. 10.
wonderful care, that the Minister ought to have over his own soul: for if he
be bound to watch over other men's souls to the end he may be saved and not
perish, if in the mean time he lets his own perish, what shall he get?
truly it will no whit profit him though all his flock be saved, if he himself
be condemned. It is manifest in the first Epistle to the Corinths and 6.
Chapter, that no unrighteous person shell inherit the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore the Minister must of necessity (according to the admonition of S.
Peter) give diligence to make his calling and election sure by his godly life
and good works as well as other, if he will approve himself the child of God,
and heir of everlasting life. It were a vain thing to flatter himself in
sin, because of his office, and think that God will deal the more
mercifully with him therefore; when as it is most certain, that as the
salvation of mankind comes by the merits of one which is Jesus Christ, so is
there but one mean for man to attain thereunto, that is, by a true and lively
faith in Jesus Christ; and whosoever cannot assure himself in this life by the
trial of his faith, that he is the child of God, although he can persuade
and flatter himself never so much with other vain hope, all is to no purpose:
for he may be assured whatsoever he be either Minister or other, that he
shall never taste of the joys laid up for the children of God. In the 20. of
the Acts, where S. Paul giving charge of the Church and flock of Gods people
unto the overseers thereof, gives this charge first: Take heed therefore unto
your selves, and to all the flock, Acts 20. 28.
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased He that is not a careful watchman over his own
soul, is not fit to watch over other men's.
with that his own blood. The Minister must watch over the souls of his
flock, but first, over his own, for he that cannot keep his own soul, can
much less keep the souls of others: he that cannot govern himself, cannot
rule another. The Minister must watch over the souls of his flock, so
carefully and warily feeding them with wholesome and necessary doctrine, and so
hungring after the salvation of all, that he must not suffer one through his
default to perish: therefore above all it is requisite that he keep his own
very sure.

Then when he preaches damnation unto the obstinate, and such as remain in
their When he preaches damnation to others, he must be sure that it belongs
not to him, etc.
sins, thundering out the judgments of God against them because they will
not repent, by that means to beat them down, and bring them to a sight of
their misery, he must be assured that the same belongs not to himself.
Again, when he preaches of election and remission of sins, by the merits
of Jesus Christ, he must have an assured and infallible testimony to his own
conscience, that he is an elect vessel of the Lord, that he is redeemed by the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and that he shall enjoy all the promises of the
Gospel, as all other children of God: if he be not assured hereof, his case
is worse then all other men's; for in preaching condemnation to others, he
condemns himself, and in offering the kingdom of heaven to others, he quite
excludes himself: so that he which helps other out of an hole, falls
himself so deep into the same, that it is not possible for any man to help
him out.

Last of all, the Minister must not only read and study the word of God,
preach the 4
same purely, by exhorting, and all other means that may be profitable, using
them both He ought to preach and teach as well privately, as publicly.
openly and privately, continually in season, and out of season, praying also
for his flock, that his Ministry may be profitable unto them, and setting
himself an ensample of all godliness unto them, carefully watching over their
souls; but he must also love them so dearly, that his own life must not be
dear unto him for their sake. Which tender and loving affection was in that
good child of God Saint Paul, as it is manifest in his Epistle to the
Thessalonians, where he writes in this sort. Neither sought we praise of me^,
neither of you, nor of others, when we might have been chargeable, as the
Apostles of Christ: but we were 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 7. 8.
gentle among you, even as a Nourse that cherishes her children. Thus being
affectioned toward you, our good will was to have dealt unto you, not the
Gospel of God only, but also your own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. So singular love had he toward them, that they were dearer unto him then
his life; this affection did he not bear to them only, but to all the elect
children of God, and suffered all things for the elects sake, that they might
also attain 2. Tim. 2. 10.
the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. The reason
thereof is, because wheresoever the Gospel is sincerely and purely taught,
there be always adversaries seeking the overthrow thereof, by persecuting
such as profess the same, to the great dismaying of the children of God, who
so soon as they take upon them the profession of Jesus Christ in truth with a
good conscience, are straightway resisted with great combats of affliction,
which were able to make them forsake the faith of Jesus Christ, and the
profession of the Gospel, if the Lord should not hold them upright in this
distress. The Apostle therefore whom the holy Ghost has filled with all
wisdom, knowing that the cross was the greatest hinderance of the Gospel
that could be, and also that where the Gospel was truly professed, there the
cross would not be absent, because by it the Lord brings his children into
glory, of a great desire that he had to the edification of the Church of
Jesus Christ: willingly suffered all kind of afflictions, thereby to confirm
and strengthen Coloss. 1. 24.
the faith of Gods children, and did rejoice in that he suffered for the
Churches sake, for their commodity, in that by his example the Lord did not
only work in them a greater credence and belief in the Gospel, but such an
earnest zeal also, that they were ready and willing to suffer all manner of
afflictions for the same, and that with great joy. Whereas (if the Apostle, who
preached unto them this glad tidings,) should have shrunk from the testimony
of his doctrine, when any afflictions were laid upon him for the same, the
people which were guided by him, the spirit of God so providing, would have
fallen away from the truth, and even have hardened their hearts against it. But
this child of God was so ready to confirm the faith of Gods people by these
means, when it was told him of a Prophet called Agabus, that he should be
bound at Jerusalem, and delivered into the hands of Gentiles, he being
entreated of the brethren that he would not go up, who even with tears
besought the same. Then Paul answered and said, what do ye weeping and Act.
21. 10. 11. 12. 13.
breaking mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. This affection must be in every good
Minister toward their flock, that for their souls sake he shall be ready to
suffer all things, yea even to give his life for the confirmation of his
doctrine, the strengthening of their faith, and the glory of God. Our Savior
Christ also that good shepherd refused not to give his life for his sheep:
and truly in that place of Saint John he does notably declare the difference
between the good shepherd and the hireling. I am (says he) that good
shepherd: the Ioh. 12. 11. 12. 13.
good shepherd gives his life for his sheep: but an hireling, and he which
is not the shepherd, neither his sheep are his own, sees the wolf coming,
and he leaves his sheep, and flees, and the wolf catches them and
scatters them. So the hireling flies, because he is an hireling and cares
not for the sheep. This place teaches us plainly that the Ministers of Gods
word, must not be hirelings, such as have no care of their flock, but respect
their own profit only: and in time of danger, they will forsake them,
howsoever before they have fed their flock: but the true Ministers must not be
such; they must not measure their duty and affection toward their flock
according to their profit, but he must know that he is placed over them to
watch over their souls, to defend them from the devil that ravening wolf, by
the wholesome word of God: and not to watch for his own gain. And hereby
shall he be known, if in time of danger he stand by his flock and will not
forsake them: nay rather than that they should perish, he will give his life
for their sake: for if this affection be not in them, the case is very
manifest, that they are not good shepherds, but hirelings. For the true
understanding of this point we will, consider when the Ministers may fly; for
if we should deny that they might not fly at any How a Minister may fly.
Matthew. 10. 23. Ioh. 8. 59.
time, we should not say truth: for our Savior Christ has bidden that when we
are persecuted in one city, we should fly into another. It is manifest also
that our Savior Christ himself fled, as when the Jews took up stones to
cast at him, he hid himself and went out of the temple: and he passed through
the midst of them all, and so went his way. And in the tenth chapter of John
we read, that when they went about to take him, he Ioh. 10. 39. 40.
escaped out of their hands, and went his way beyond Jordan: yet afterward when
the time appointed, wherein he should suffer, was come, he fled not. Saint Paul
also and Barnabas, Act. 14. 5. 6.
as it appears in the fourteenth of the Acts, being at Iconium, when there
was an assault made both of the Gentiles and of the Jews with their rulers, to
do them violence and to stone them, they being aware of it fled unto Lystra,
and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia. Yet as I declared before out of the one and
twenty of the Acts, at another time Paul went willingly up to Jerusalem to lay
down his life for the glory of God. So that if we should deny, that we might
not fly at any time, we should deny the words of Christ, who bids us fly
in time of persecution: and again if we should plainly say that they might
fly, we should put no difference between the true Minister and the hireling.
This therefore must we note, if so be that the people over whom he is placed,
shall be in danger to be seduced by false teachers from that most true and
wholesome doctrine of Jesus Christ, How small a cast soever we have received of
the truth, we must not give over striving, though it cost us our lives.
having received as yet but a taste as it were thereof and are not grounded; he
must not in any case fly and give place, no though it cost him his life: for
it were a dangerous case to fly then, because that his constancy in sealing
his doctrine with his blood, may wonderfully confirm the faith of his flock
and draw them forward by his example, rather to die for the profession of Jesus
Christ, than to deny him: whereas on the contrary, if he should fly, they
could not but fall from the truth, being not grounded therein, when as they see
their pastor to hide himself. But when this affection and love is in the
Minister to consider that he is betrothed to Jesus Christ to defend his spouse
and Church from his adversaries, and to bring them as it were by the hand unto
the bridegoome, of which he has so singular a care that he will never forsake
the^, although by earnest study he should even shorten his life, and all his
Physicians in the world should tell him plainly that it will end his days if
he does not give over the same: yet (I say) when he has such a love and
affection to his people, whose souls he labors to feed and nourish with
the word of God, that he will resign his life into the hands of God, and give
over himself unto his providence, and rather to end his days with laboring
and studying for his flocks sake, than by withdrawing and saving his own life
to suffer them to want: then no doubt the Lord by his holy spirit shall teach
him, when he may without danger to his flock, even The faithful minister
flies not from his flock but by this means.
with all their consents depart and save his life from the hands of his
adversaries. As we see by the examples of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who
sometimes fled and saved their lives: and otherwhile abode by it and suffered
all things patiently. So will he teach his true and faithful Ministers, when
it is good to fly, and when not. We have known many godly Ministers which
have spent their time in studying and teaching their flocks, and have rather
desired their salvation than their own lives. All these things observed, the
Minister shall yield a joyful account unto the Lord, and stir up his people
to be thankful unto the Lord, which has showed them such mercy, as to place
over them so loving and careful a Minister, which so hungreth and thirsts
after their salvation, that he esteems his own life less than it.

The second part concerning the duty of the people to their Minister.
NOw we have declared the duty of Ministers, it follows that we show next
the duty of the people unto their Ministers, which is the second part of our
division: and truly this declaration of the Ministers duty does very
manifestly show the other: for if the Minister be bound to apply his study,
and to exercise himself diligently in reading; and when he has studied, to
come forth and teach the people all things necessary for their salvation; and
moreover must set himself a lively pattern of godly conversation for them to
follow, letting no means unassayed, whereby he may beget their souls unto
God, neither in life nor doctrine; but must so carefully watch over their
souls, that rather than they should perish he must give his life for them:
what shall the people then do unto him for his entire love and affection? The
holy Ghost tells us in these words: Obey them, and submit your selves. So
that obedience is the duty of the people to their Minister. The reason hereof
is very good, seeing the case so stands that the Minister must labor to
bring the^ home to Jesus Christ by the Gospel, which is the power of God unto
salvation: if the people notwithstanding his pains will remain obstinate, to
what end will his labor come? all will be in vain, the people shall not
profit by it, and himself shall be grieved and molested with sorrow to see
their disobedience. The people therefore must be obedient unto their Ministers
which labor for their profit, which is a great grace of God who works all
this in all creatures, when he has given the people obedient hearts to be
governed by his word, for which end he has appointed the Ministers thereof.
And as it is a grievous and the most dangerous thing to be obedient to such
superiors as shall lead us out of the way into destruction, whom our Savior
Christ calls blind guides, which together with the people fall into the pit:
so it is on the contrary the greatest virtue to become obedient to the true
Pastors and Ministers of the word of God. It has been evermore the charge that
the Apostles laid upon the children of God, of which thing S. Paul in his
Epistle to the Philippians, as in diverse other places requires, after that he
has declared the great humility of Jesus Christ, in that he became obedient
unto the death of the cross, thereupon takes occasion of his exhortation:
Wherefore (my beloved) as ye have always Philip. 2. 12.
obeyed me, not as in my presence only, but now much more in mine absence, so
make an end of your salvation with fear and trembling. It appears by his
words, that the Philippians to whom he wrote had bin very obedient unto his
ministry from that time, wherein it pleased God to touch their heart with a
care of their salvation by his preaching; yea so obedient were they, that not
only in his presence among them, they used great submission unto his doctrine,
but much more in his absence they declared their dutifulnes, in that with great
eat they labored to make it profitable by practicing the same in their life
and conversation: whereby it may seem that the Apostle needed not to have
exhorted them unto this duty of obedience, being already so forward and prone
thereunto: but we may hereby learn how needful a thing it is that the people
be obedient, and that in no small measure, but so far forth as they shall be
able to frame their lives according to the word of God in all points, which he
preaches unto them sincerely and purely to the feeding of their souls unto
eternal life, which they can never obtain unless they become obedient to be
taught and instructed at the Ministers hand by the most pure word of God, which
with the operation of the holy Ghost works faith in the children of God,
whereby they apprehend the merits of Jesus Christ, and have his righteousness,
obedience, and holiness imputed unto them of the free grace and mercy of God,
as surely as if in their own persons they had wrought it, and so made heirs
of the kingdom which Christ by his blood has purschased for them. It is
necessary that so many as desire to be saved, be obedient unto the Minister,
whom God has placed over them as his instrument to bring them to his heavenly
kingdom, as before I have declared unto you. And the rather to stir them up
unto a continual obedience he adds this: Make an end of your own salvation
with fear and trembling: As if he should say, Beloved brethren, as you have
hitherto submitted your selves to be reformed by the most glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and have obeyed us in the Lord to the increasing of your faith,
and the assurance of your salvation: so I beseech you to continue, and even
with fear and trembling make an end of your salvation: for if you should wax
obstinate in the end, and become disobedient to those that labor in the Lord
for your behoof, I tell you truly all your former obedience shall no whit
profit you, nay your end shall be worse; be lowly therefore and reverence your
Teachers in the Lord that you may with great humility, as it becomes the
children of God, receive To disobey the Minister of God, is to disobey God
himself and to despise his word. Philip. 2. 12.
the promises. And least the adversaries should persuade, that this your
obedience and willing following of the Gospel has come unto you of your own
nature, that by that means he may draw you to disobey the Ministers of God,
whom you cannot disobey but you must also despise the word and him that sent
them, and so fall from all grace: I tell you therefore plainly, that it never
came of your selves, for it is God that works in you both the will and the
deed; and that not of your desert, but of his own good pleasure. We see then
that the people must obey their Minister, and give diligent heed to be taught
by them the whole counsel of the Lord concerning the salvation of their
souls: which thing also Ioh. 10. 27.
our Savior Christ does manifest in the tenth of John: My sheep (says he)
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, etc. Our Savior Christ
gives us a notable token here to know the children of God by, and that is, If
they hear his voice and follow him: for they that will not be obedient unto
him are none of his, neither yet partakers of those benefits which he has
purchased for his. But peradventure some will say: It is true, that if a man
will not obey the voice of Jesus Christ he is not for him: but where is Jesus
Christ that we may hear him and obey him? O brother take heed how thou seek
such cauillations to maintain thine obstinacy, for thou can not so shake of
thy duty to thy Minister* but if thou confess it thy duty to be obedient
unto Jesus Christ, I tell thee plainly thou ought no less to obey the
Minister in that he brings the message of Christ, t^a^ if himself were
present. For he being the very Truth it self has said plainly on the
Ministers behalf: He that hears you hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises me. Luke 101. 6.
despises him that sent me. What an heinous thing were it to refuse the
Minister and to be disobedient unto them, when the case stands so that the
disobeying of them is not only a contempt of Christ, but also of God the
Father, who is a severe judge to be revenged of all his enemies? But they that
be of the sheepfold of Jesus Christ will be obedient to their shepherd, even
as willingly as the sheep are. The reason hereof is drawn from the nature of
sheep, which is the simplest of all creatures to shift for it self, and yet
more profitable than any other cattle, when one of them is straied out of the
way, it is caught in the brambles and briers ready to be lost in every pit or
hole, yea subject to a thousand dangers, and cannot help itself in the least
of them: and when the shepherd has fetched her home, how obedient is she,
and glad to be guided by him for fear of falling into the like danger: so is
it required of the children of God, that they be obedient as sheep; yea If he
were the wisest in the world he must become as simple as a sheep.
if he were the wisest or mightiest in the world, he must not take scorn to
become as simple as a sheep, if he will enter into the kingdom of heaven:
for before such time as the Lord by his instrument the Minister does bring them
home into the sheepfolde of Jesus Christ, they wander in innumerable dangers,
and are no more able to deliver themselves out of them, then the silly sheep
is to save her self from the wolf: but when they are brought home, then they
see their infirmity, and what great need they have of a shepherd to preserve
and help them out of so many perils, which tend to the destruction both of
body and soul, then they gladly obey him which is careful to guide them in
the way of salvation, with the most holy word of God, and to refresh their
hungry souls with that heavenly food and milk. The holy Ghost says, that
they must be borne again, and that not of mortal 1. Pet. 1. 33. How we be
borne anew.
seed, but of the immortal seed of the word of God, who lives and endures
for ever. And therefore it is necessary that they be obedient unto their
spiritual father which has begotten them with the word of God, that he may
joyfully extend a fatherly affection toward them: which thing the Apostle S.
Peter exhorts them unto: As new borne babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that you may grow thereby. The Apostle here shows a familiar 1. Pet.
2. 2.
reason why they should be obedient, they be as newborn babes. We see that
little children are not able to guide themselves, no not to feed themselves at
the first, but must be guided and nourished by the help of their parents,
until they be able to shift for themselves: So must the children of God be
guided and nourished by the word of God, that they may grow from strength to
strength, from faith to faith, till they come to a perfect We must grow from
strength to strength.
age in Christ. Therefore it is necessary that the people be obedient unto the
Minister, to whom the Lord has given his word to distribute unto his
children, and to increase and strengthen their faith in Jesus Christ.

But some will say, is this given to the Ministers only? what if they teach
their own devises, and not the pure word of God, and make us believe we are
in an happy case, when we are in most misery, and yet desire to be directed
in the true pathway unto salvation? I answer, that you must therefore try the
doctrine which he brings by the touchstone of Gods word, and see that it
accord therewith: for in that the Lord gives the understanding and interpreting
of the scriptures unto the ministers, it is not without great cause that he
does it, when as he appoints them by the power of his word, as the means
without which they can do nothing, to bring together his children, yea, by the
sharp sword of the word to pearce their souls and consciences to the utter
slaying of sin, and with the excellent virtue of the same word to heal them
again: which thing if the Ministers for their part shall not faithfully
execute in such order as before I entreated of, speaking of the duty of
Ministers, even that gift the Lord will so straightly call to account, that
he shall bear the danger of every soul that has perished through his
default. Yet shall not the people be hereby discharged: for they must try his
doctrine (as I said before) and take heed that they be not seduced; for if
they be, they shall dye in their own sins. If any will say that he is
ignorant, truly I say, he is in a dangerous case; but if God has showed him
such mercy as to make him desirous to be instructed in the right way to
salvation, let him crave knowledge at the Lords hand, never cease, but be
importunate upon the Lord in craving his holy spirit, to work in him all
spiritual grace, to work in him Crave knowledge of God without ceasing.
true Faith: and to assure him of his salvation, all other worldly respects set
aside: and let him use great diligence in harkening to the word of God, and be
obedient unto the same. Moreover, let him withdraw himself from all evil
company, and frequent the company of the godly, and no doubt but the Lord will
strengthen him to work his will, whereby he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God or not, according to the rule which our Savior Christ
gives us to know it by, He that speaks of himself seeks his own
glory: but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, the same is true:
and such must we Ihon 7. 17. 18.
obey in the Lord. Now we see as it is our duty to obey the true Minister, and
such as carefully watch over our souls, with the most wholesome word of God: so
must we beware that we suffer not our selves to be seduced by false teachers;
and therefore we must prove their doctrine by the word of God. But last of
all, if any shall preach Jesus Christ sincerely and purely, having some
infirmity, we must not therefore reject him, but obey him for the truth sake;
and consider that we are all subject to infirmities, and that to some one more
than another: and therefore it is our duty christian like to admonish him
thereof; and no doubt, if he be the servant of God he will give him more
strength against the same.

Besides this obedience, the duty of the people toward their Minister must
extend further, and they must also reverence him, and give him honor, else it
is most certain that obedience cannot take place: which we may see by the
example of the woman of Samaria, John. 4.
who notwithstanding the great courtesy of our Savior Christ in telling her
what he was, and what he could do for her, yet would she not obey him at the
first, but tell to taunting and ouerthwarting of him too irreverently; but when
he had touched her conscience and laid open her wickedness, so that she saw
plainly he was another manner of man than she took him for, then she began to
reverence him, and said, O sir, I see that thou art a Prophet, and then she
obeyed him, and desired to learn of him: so, before she obeyed, she conceived
a reverence of him, and accounted of him as a Prophet. It is also manifest in
the 2. of the Acts, when as the wonderful miracle could not bring the people
to obey the Apostles, Acts. 2.
yet afterward when Peter with his sharp sermon had touched their hearts in
such sort that they felt the power that God had given them, they began to
reverence them, and where as before they were not ashamed to say that they were
drunken with new wine, now they cried out, Men and brethren what shall we do?
which words do plainly declare what a reverent opinion they have conceived of
them, and after that they became obedient unto them. Common experience shows
us the same, for which of you will commit your matter to any Lawyer, except you
have a reverent opinion of him, that he can pleasure you, and a sure trust that
he will do the best he can for the furtherance of your cause? Likewise in
Physic there is no man that will commit his life into the Physicians hand,
unless he be first persuaded that he can by the help of God ease his grief,
and that he is willing also to do what lies in him: except (I say) a man be
thus persuaded of the Physician he will not commit himself into his hands, nor
yet obey those orders that he shall prescribe: so is it in this, the people
must be obedient to the Minister, therefore they must reverence him, or else it
is not possible that they should obey him. The Apostle S Paul does notably
amplify the honor due to the true and faithful Ministers. The Elders 1. Tim.
5. 17. The office of the Elders.
that rule well (says he) let them be had in double honor, specially they
which labor in the word and doctrine, as if he should say, let those Elders
which are appointed to watch and look to the manners and behauior of the
children of God, if they execute this charge faithfully, be had in double
honor: but above all, let the faithful Ministers, such as labor in the word,
be honored: for why? the other are overseers of your outward behauior, but
these have an other manner of office, they watch over your souls, which
tends to the salvation both of body and soul.

Moreover, it is requisite that they also fear the Minister, or else can they
in no ease reverence and honor him: for where fear is not, all honor is
absent, and so consequently all duty extinguished. And this fear must not be
a fained and counterfeited fear: but when he shall come before the Minister to
ask him any question, he must consider that he comes to talk with the
messenger of the Lord, whom he ought to hear as well as if the Lord himself
were present. For this is most certain, where a faithful Minister is that does
Note.
sincerely and purely preach the word, it is all one as if the Lord himself
dwelt personally among us: and his own self has verified the same, saying:
He that hears you, hears Luke 10. 16.
me. And therefore it behooves us to give a proof of our fear, love and
obedience toward the Lord, by receiving his word with such fear and reverence
as beseems his subjects, although the same proceed out of a mortal man's
mouth. It is a common thing among us, the Ambassador of a Prince is received
with great honor and reverence, yea his message is to be received as
undoubtedly, as if the King were present himself, yea they that shall despise
his authority shall be as hainously accounted of, as if they resisted and
rebelled An example of receiving an earthly Ambassador.
against the Kings own person: And shall the Ambassadors of the living God,
who is King of all Kings, be received less worthily than the other, whose
authority is both greater and the message waightier? Truly whosoever shall
take scorn to yield this duty of fear and reverence unto the Minister, let
him be assured that he scorneth not him, but the Lord that sent him. But some
will object: what shall we make a God of our Minister, and is he so to be
feared as you say? I answer thee, that I mean nothing less, nay I hold him
accursed that shall challenge such dignity unto himself. But this fear must ye
yield not to the person, but to his office which is by the word of God, to
remit your sins, and to give you assurance that they are washed away by the
blood of Christ, if you be truly penitent for them; and that you are made
heirs of the kingdom of heaven, whereof you need not to doubt. On the
contrary, if you be not penitent, by his office he has authority to bind
sins here on earth justly to everlasting condemnation, which the unpenitent
may be as sure to suffer as they see the light of the day: fear him therefore
(I say) not as he is a man, but as the Minister of God. With what a reverend
fear did the Galathians receive Paul? Galath. 4. 14.
his own self does report, that they received him as an Angel of God, yea
more than so, they received him as Jesus Christ himself. And that was not for
the excellency of his person, which he testifies was simple, base, vile: and
to all the world contemptible, yea and subject to all infirmities: but they
received him with such fear and reverence for that excellent message which he
brought unto them, for those glad tidings which he published among them, and
for that he was a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the power
of God to save all the believers. Thus reverently must all Gods children fear
their Minister, even for the worthiness of his office and ministry: for if they
should not fear him, they could not in any case obey the word, when he does
sharply reprove them for their sins: but even as a light wife so long as her
husband pleases her, so long and no longer will she be obedient unto him; for
if he show a sharp countenance of very love to drive her from some lewd
conditions, then will she begin to scorn, The people ought to fear the
authority given by God.
to fret and chafe, and in stead of obeying him, she will deadly hate him and
despise him: so is it with the people, if they stand not in fear of the
authority which God has given him, they will obey him no longer than he
preaches pleasant things: for when he shall touch their consciences with
threatening the judgments of God against their sin, then can they not abide
him, but harden their hearts not against him, but against the Lord which has
sent him, and so fall away to their utter destruction: the children of God must
therefore fear their Minister, and be obedient to the word of truth which he
brings unto them.

When the people are come thus far, that they will willingly obey the
Minister, and that with fear and reverence submit themselves to be guided by
the pure word of God, they must show further their dutifulnes toward him, and
must also be ready to do for him whatsoever lies in their power: which
thing S. Paul earnestly desires of the Thessalonians: We beseech you
brethren, that ye acknowledge them which labor among you, and are 1 Thessalonians.
5. 12. 13.
over you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you have them in singular love
for their works sake. Where the holy Ghost shows a reason why they should
acknowledge their Ministers which carefully and faithfully do execute their
office, which is for their works sake; and his exhortation is in effect thus
much: Brethren, this one thing do I heartily crave at your hands, that you be
not so obliuious as to forget those which labor among you in the Lord, and are
by his appointment even of great mercy toward you, placed over you to the end
they may admonish you of your sins, and to stir you up by the word of God
to a more zeal of the glory of God, and to walk more circumspectly before
him: I beseech you (I say) be not forgetful of them, but have them in a
singular love; yea let nothing be dearer unto you than such, for this work
sake which they have taken in hand; for I tell you truly there is no labor
under the Sun so profitable unto you as this, which A thousand worlds not
comparable to the treasure of the faithful.
brings not store of corruptible silver and gold, not large kingdoms and
empires of this world which shall perish and come to an end: but this profit
comes of their labor, even the salvation of your souls, such a treasure as
all the world, no not a thousand worlds are comparable unto it: for this cause
love them.

Besides this, it is their duty also to provide for him all things necessary,
for that he may have to supply his want at their hands, as we may by diverse
places of the Scripture prove: Galath. 6. 6.
In the 6. to the Galathians the Apostle gives this commandment: Let him that
is taught in the word make him that has taught him partaker of all his goods.
The reason is very good: if the schoolmaster takes pains in teaching, the
scholars owe to him other necessaries. Such is the subtlety of Satan, which
rages and stormeth at the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the reaching whereof he
sees is the decaying of his kingdom, when as by no other means he can
overthrow the same, yet does he mightily heave at it by drawing the peoples
hearts from nourishing and maintaining the Preachers thereof, that they being
oppressed with penury, might be constrained to forsake their ministry. So
that it is no marvel though the Apostle gives so straight a charge thereof,
seeing so great danger might ensue. If they sow unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if they reap of you carnal things? If the Ministers 1. Cor.
9. 11.
give unto the people gold, is it much for them to give chafe again? yet
there is a greater difference between that, that the Minister distributeth
among the people, and that which he receives of them, than is between gold
and chafe. For he gives unto them by the preaching of the word the kingdom
of heaven: what treasure may be compared unto it? and will not they give him of
their worldly commodities to maintain his living? Truly it were a token of too
too much infidelity, and a manifest argument that we are not Christians, but
very Heathen, if we should refuse to nourish the Minister that labors for
our profit. It is manifest in the law that the Priests which waited on the
Altar, lived of the Deuteronomy. 18.
Altar: Even so has the Lord appointed that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. Natural reason teaches us this, and yet is it
written in the Scripture also, that no man goes on warfare at any time of his
own cost, for the soldier receives his stipend. 1. Cor. 9. 14. Ves 7.
Neither does any manplant a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof,
for to that end does he plant it, because he would enjoy the fruit. And
again, No man keeps a flock and eats not of the milk thereof. But if the
case stands so in earthly matters, that every man enjoys the fruit of his
labor, and is maintained by the same; how much more ought the Ministers and
Pastors live of their flock, to whom they are so profitable, and for whose
sake they take such pains? If therefore you will have such an one placed over
you, that shall refuse no pains in studying night and day, in preaching the
word in season and out of season, in exhorting and trying all means to do you
good; and that shall love you so tenderly that his own life shall not be dear
unto him for your sake: you must know it is your duty to provide all things
necessary for him, for you must not make him your slave, but you must so
minister unto him, that he may give himself wholly unto the faithful doing of
his duty, that he may not be drawn away with other cares from the same. If
the Lord has commanded not to mousell the mouth of the ox that treads out
the corxe, much Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Matthew. 10. 10.
less to withhold the Minister from things necessary to preserve his life.
The labourer is worthy of his wages. How wonderfully forward were the
Galathians in fulfilling of this duty, when as they would not have refused to
pull out their eyes, if it had been possible, Galath. 4. 15.
and have given them to the Apostle? Which words although they be of
supererogation, yet do they express such love and readiness in administering of
their worldly commodities, that they would have plucked out their own eyes and
given them unto him also, if by that means they might have pleasured him.
Truly there is good cause why they should thus love and provide for their
Minister which labors faithfully: for if the child cannot recompense the
pains and kindness of his parents in bringing him into this world, and
providing things necessary for his education; neither the scholar the pains
of his master, which has garnished his breast with wisdom and knowledge:
much less can the child of God recompense his spiritual father who has
begotten him unto the Lord. Refuse not them to bestow part of thy worldly
commodities upon him, that has brought Without this heavenly treasure we are
more miserable than brute beasts.
thee such heavenly treasure, without the which thy estate were more miserable
than the condition of brute beasts. But because it may seem very much to the
worldly minded man, who respects nothing but temporal things, to think that
he must be so liberal toward his Minister, as to provide him all things that
he has need of (although the children of God which are already called, and
have tasted how sweet the Lord has been to them by the Ministers means,
whom the Lord has used as an instrument to bring them home, will not think it
much to do their duty, and that very liberally in providing for their Pastor)
you shall understand in what sort you ought to provide for him. First, you must
see that he has sufficient for to find himself and his family necessary
food and apparel for their bodies. Secondly, you must give him wherewith to
keep hospitality, that he may be able honestly and decently to entertain
strangers which come unto him to ask his counsel in matters of conscience
concerning their faith and salvation. Thirdly, you must provide him books for
his study, and all such as may enrich his knowledge, whereby he may the better
he able to answer and help all their doubts which come to him. Thus must you
provide for him that he may not be troubled with any cares that may with draw
him or hinder him in doing of his duty. And whereas the Apostle says, make
him partaker of all your goods, it is nothing less meant than that your goods
should be at his pleasure, or that you should make him abound in superfluity,
wherewith he should be filled until he burst as they say, there is no such
thing, but to provide for him for those causes aforesaid.

Here may they ask a question, whether they ought to pay tithe unto such
Ministers as bewicked livers, because we have spoken only of the duty which
they owe unto the true Ministers and faithful laborers in the Lords business.
You shall therefore understand, though he be a wicked liver, if he teach true
doctrine, hold nothing back from him, but let him have his duty, that if it
shall please the Lord to convert him from his wickedness, he may love you the
more dearly, and have the more care over you: but if he teach false doctrine,
not the word of God purely, but his own brains, yet because you have a
conscience of disturbing the common weal, and seek rather peace than trouble,
let him have his duty, that your diligence in doing your duty may move him to
a more care of his; or else if the Lord does not give him that grace, yet
thereby shall you leave a testimony in his conscience to his condemnation.
Moreover where any such Ministers be placed over Note.
the people, as the wicked livers, false teachers, or domb dogs, it is most
certain that the Lord has set them even to plague the people for their sins.

Last of all, the people must pray continually both for themselves and for
their Minister, The people must pray continually for themselves and their
Minister. Coloss. 4. 3. 4.
that the Lord may bestow upon him the perfect gifts of prophesying, and upon
us obedient hearts to the word, that the Lord may be glorified in our life and
conversation, which thing S. Paul desires in his Epistles, as in the 4.
Chapter to the Colossians, Continue (says he) i^ prayer, and watch in the same
with thanksgiving. Pray also for us, that God may open unto us the door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, that I may utter it as becomes
me to speak. The like thing does he require in the 6. to the Ephesians. In
both which places the Apostle notes how needful a thing it is for the people
to pray not only for themselves, but for their Minister also, for that the
Lord God gives his gifts to none but The Lord gives his gifts to none but
they which call faithfully on him. 2. These. 3. 1, 2.
them which faithfully call upon him, and continually crave the same at his
hand. It behooves the people therefore to pray for their Minister, that the
Lord will power upon him the abundance of his spirit, which may open unto him
the mysteries of his most holy word, that he may be able to teach them all the
counsel of the Lord. In the second Epistle to the Thessalonians and 3. Chapter
he uses these words, Furthermore brethren, pray for us, that the word of the
Lord may have free passage, and be glorified even as it is with you, and that
we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men, for all men have not
faith. Here does Few men have true faith.
the Apostle give charge also that the congregation do pray for the flourishing
of the Gospel, and the faithful Ministers thereof, that the word might so much
be preached, and the Church of Christ thereby increased, he wills them to
pray for the quiet estate of the Ministers, that the Lord would deliver them
out of the hands of their adversaries, which seek not so much the destruction
of the Ministers, but the overthrow of the Gospel, because they have not faith
to become partakers of the promises thereof, which is only the gift of All men
can not be saved, and therefore all cannot have faith.
God unto his children which shall be saved: for if that all men should be
saved, all should have faith, but because all cannot be saved, all cannot have
faith. Then we see a notable mean to attain those things which are
profitable for us, even by prayer. If therefore you desire such a Pastor as
shall love you, and you him again, pray unto the Lord for such a one. If you
would have him able to teach you, and your selves made obedient to his
doctrine, pray heartily. If you would have him long, pray unto the Lord to
continue him among you, and to give him favor in the eyes of the Magistrates,
and to defend him from all wicked adversaries, that ye may live peaceably
together, and be builded up into a strong faith by the word of God without any
perturbation. Now as it is the duty of the Of a strong faith.
whole congregation generally to pray together with one consent both for
themselves, their Minister, Prince, Magistrates, and all other people: so it is
every man's duty particularly at home at his own house to pray for them, and
that not once or twice, now and then, very seldom, but daily, yea continually.
Thus shall both the Minister and the people do their duty to their wonderful
comfort, and glory.

The third part concerning the fruits that come of the well doing of these
duties, both to the Minister and the people.
THese duties thus performed bring wonderful commodity: And first of all, if
the Minister do his duty in preaching, exhorting, living, praying, and
watching over his flock with that care of the glory of God, and that desire
of the salvation of his people that he ought, this profit shall he have; The
Lord will bless his labor, and he shall make an acceptable and joyful
account, and this which far passes all the rest, he shall save his own
soul, and because he has been a faithful servant over a little, the Lord
will make him his governor over a great deal even in his kingdom of
blessedness. Luke 19. 17.


If the people do their duty unto the Minister in obeying, reuerencing him,
fearing him, loving and providing all things for him, and last of all in
praying faithfully for him, they shall make him a glad man, and stir him up
with great joy to do for them all that be can, and even in great afflictions
the remembrance of their dutifulnes and constant faith shall minister abundance
of consolation, that he shall be forced to say with the Apostle Paul, What 1 Thessalonians. 3. 9.
thanks can we recompense to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we
rejoice before the Lord for your sake? Thus shall they fill him with joy, and
so win his heart, that he had a thousand lives, he would gladly give them
for their sakes to do them good; and moreover, the Lord will bless him in
great measure for their sake, with knowledge, that he may be the more
profitable unto them, and in the end their souls shall be saved, which is an
unspeakable treasure far passing all other things.

Moreover, though the people do not their duty, but become obstinate, and
storm and rage against the faithful Minister which has a care over them, so
that they do grieve his heart through their disobedience, yet if he do his
duty in reading, preaching, and other points which I have already declared,
he shall notwitstanding save his own soul, and also if the will of God be so,
he shall by his diligence win them; if not, he must be contented to submit
himself and his doing to the will of the Lord, and know the word of God shall
have his effect even to make them inexcusable at the dreadful day, whereby the
Lord shall be as greatly glorified as if they were saved.

Again, if the people do their duty faithfully in the Lord toward their
Minister being The duty of the people that has a wicked Minister.
either a wicked liver, or not so zealous and true a teacher as he ought to
be, either the Lord will remove him and place over them a faithful shepherd,
or convert him, and bring him to do his duty more carefully, or else stir up
other helps for them. So their souls shall be saved and he shall perish.

The fourth part of the danger for not doing these duties faithfully.
NOw we have seen the great fruits that come of well doing these duties both
to the Minister and the people, we may thereby see what danger insueth of the
contrary, The blessing of a faithful Minister.
that is, not of doing them. For whereas if the Ministers do their duty
faithfully, the Lord will bless their labors, so that their account may be
acceptable, and their souls, saved: so on the contrary, if they do not their
duty truly, as they ought, and seek the glory of God by their doings, the
Lord has pronounced by the mouth of his Prophet Malachy, Mala. 2
that he will bring a curse upon them, and will curse their blessings, he will
corrupt their seed, and cast dung in their faces. Thus will the Lord deal
with such unfaithful servants, that nothing shall prosper, but even their very
seed shall be corrupt, and he shall be called to a straight account, and he
shall bear the burden not only of his own sins, but of all the sins of
the people, and every soul that has perished thorough his negligence shall be
laid to his charge, and so shall he become a notable Devil in hell there to be
tormented with everlasting and intolerable pain. Finally, if the people do
not their duty unto the Minister, they shall make him full of grief and
sorrow maruellously troubled in spirit, nothing joyful The careless Pastor
shall become a notable devil in hell.
in his calling, but always mourning: and moreover the Lord will harden the
peoples heart, that the word shall not be profitable unto them, but even as S.
Paul testifies a ^auor of death unto death, and in the end they shall be
rewarded in hell fire which shall never be quenched, nor the worm shall never
die, but there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Thus have we learned first how necessary a thing it is to have Ministers in
the Church of God, because without them the people should be as sheep without
a shepherd, ready to be devoured of their adversary the devil: secondly, that
the Lord has appointed them to this use, by them to call together the number
of them that shall be saved by the preaching of the word, wherewith he has
given them power to open heaven to all believers, and to give as good assurance
of their salvation by the word, as if Jesus Christ himself were present to
certify the same; and on the contrary to shut out all the unpenitent from They
that cannot believe the preacher, shall not believe though one should come from
heaven, or from the dead, etc.
the kingdom of heaven, and to bind them over to everlasting woe, which they
shall be so sure of as they see the light that shines in the day. And therefore
it behooves all such as desire to be saved to learn the way to salvation of
them, and to harken unto them, for because the Lord has appointed no other
means in the world for to attain to the knowledge thereof, and has said
plainly, that whosoever will not believe the truth at their hands shall not
believe though one should come from heaven to tell them who shall be saved, and
another from hell to tell them who are damned.

We have also heard that when the Lord determines to beget souls, he
appoints spiritual fathers fit and able for that purpose, by reason that he
gives them gifts for the accomplishing of that business: and herewithall we
have learned what is the duty of these spiritual fathers or Ministers, which
we find to consist in four principal points. 1. He must read and study the
word of God diligently, that he may be able to teach and instruct his people.
2. When he has studied he must come forth and deliver wholesome doctrine, that
their souls may be refreshed; for therefore must he study to have knowledge
for them, and sing to himself and his muses, not filling himself so full of
knowledge, till he become as a tun that will give no sound, but he must keep
knowledge not Some learned men be like tons, that are so full they can give
no sound.
only in his heart, but also in his lips; for the Minister must be the mouth of
the Lord, from whence Gods people must know the will and counsel of God: also
he must observe the true order of teaching, that is, to build upon the true
foundation Jesus Christ: for he that builds upon any other foundation is an
Antichrist, and not the Minister of God, but the messenger of Satan. Moreover,
he must by all means prick forward the godly to increase in godliness, beat
down the obstinate and hardharted with the terrible judgments of God, and
after to raise up the penitent with the sweet promises of the Gospel: the
which he must do not only openly in the pulpit among the congregation, but
privately also in every house, because that general doctrine does not drive
the people to such a consideration of their estate, as when they are
particularly admonished of their sins, and exhorted to repent for them. Thus
must the Minister labor to make his doctrine profitable, and that continually,
supposing it not sufficient to be done now and then, but he must do it in
season and out of season, omitting no opportunity wherein the Lord may call
home some into the Church of Christ: and that God may the rather vouchsafe to
bless his ministry, he must pray continually for himself and his people both
openly and privately, and be very circumspect in administering the Sacraments.
3. He must live a godly life, aad set himself as example for his flock to
follow: and so much the rather ought he to look more nearly to all his ways,
because the adversaries, if any thing be otherwise than well with the
Ministers, will straightway with open mouth blaspheme the Gospel, which is
most pure and unreprovable: whereas if they have nothing whereof to accuse the
Minister, neither can they blame the word which they only heave at to
overthrow it if it were possible, taking occasion by the Minister to blame the
word. For an other cause also must he live unreprovable, and that is, because
he must watch over the souls of other, which charge he cannot perform,
except he be able to watch over his own. Thirdly in this respect, that his
election may be surely known unto himself, least in preaching of A man may
preach to other, and be a reprobate himself.
the election unto other he be a reprobate himself. So that when he threatens
the judgments of God against other, he shall condemn himself, and when he
raises up the penitent with the promises, he himself shall fall into the hole
of his own condemnation, and no man shall be able to comfort him, 4. Last of
all, he must ^^^^e his flock so dearly that he must give his life for them.
But because it were contrary to the words of our Savior Christ to say he
might not fly at any time; and on the other side if we say he may fly, we
should put no difference between the true Ministers and the hirelings; we
have heard that the Lord will teach his faithful Ministers by his holy spirit,
when it is good to fly, and when not. Thus much have we learned concerning the
duty of Ministers.

In the second part we have heard the duty of the people toward their
Ministers, which 2
we have learned to consist, first in obedience, because it were altogether in
vain, and an unprofitable labor for the Minister to teach the people if they
should not be obedient unto his doctrine; and also because it is impossible
for any to be saved that will not be obedient unto the word of God, besides
which the Lord has appointed no means for man to attain unto the knowledge
of salvation, and therefore has he given it unto his Ministers to be preached
sincerely and purely unto his people. And here we learn by the way that the
people must beware that they be not seduced with false doctrine and man's
invention: therefore they must prove the doctrine to accord with the word of
God, and then be obedient unto it. Secondly, besides obedience we have learned
that they must also reverence him, because they cannot obey his doctrine,
except they have a reverent opinion of him, as we see by the woman of Samaria,
and the people that S. Peter converted. Thirdly, it is requisite that they
fear him, for where fear is not, there honor and reverence must needs be
absent. And thus have we heard that they ought to fear him, not in respect of
his person, but for his office sake; not as he is a man, but in that he is the
messenger and Minister of God. Fourthly, they must love him and that unfeignedly
with all their heart, being ready to help him in all distresses Fifthly, they
must provide for him that he may have to maintain himself and his family, to
entertain strangers and buy him books, that he may not with any worldly care
be drawn from doing of his duty. Sixthly, they must pray for him continually,
and for themselves also, that he may be able to teach, and they to receive the
word profitably.

3 These duties being well performed brings this commodity: The Ministers
labor 3
shall be profitable, his account acceptable, and his soul saved. The people
shall make their minister joyful and loving unto them, willing to labor for
their profit, and in the end they shall reign together in the kingdom of
heaven. Also if the Minister does his duty faithfully, though the people do
not their, yet he shall save his soul. Likewise if the people do their
duty, and not the Minister, the Lord will so provide that they shall enjoy
eternal felicity.

4 Last of all, if these duties be not performed, we have learned how great
dangers they 4
are in that neglect the same, if the Minister his labor shall be cursed, he
shall be called to a straight account, and shall answer for every soul that
has perished, and so become a devil in hell for ever. If the people do not
their duty, they shall grieve their Pastor, make him unprofitable, and in the
end be tormented in utter darkness for ever.

The Lord of all power deal mercifully with us for his dear Son Jesus
Christ's sake, and grant such grace both unto the Ministers of his word, that
they may carefully do their duties with that fear of his name, that reverence
of his Majesty, that zeal of his glory, and that desire of the salvation of
his people that they ought: and that the people may so obediently and willingly
receive thy word and Ministers thereof, as shall be most for thy glory and
the profit of their souls: that after this life ended, we may dwell together
in thy kingdom of glory with thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one true and most wise
God, be al honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
OF THE CONFESSION OF SINS.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
Proverbs 28. verse. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.
THere are two parts of this verse: Hiding of sins with punishments, and
Confessing with mercy.

It is not my manner to restrain a precept general, but according to
circumstances to speak of general things generally.

Here both the sin of hiding sins is taught to be avoided, and the virtue
of confessing sins to be practiced.

A matter not observed: for error has been much spoken against, but truth not
so thoroughly taught, which is the cause of the small proceeding of the Gospel.

Example in Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, where
the true manner of Christ's presence is not known, because it has not been
taught as it should.

Example in superstitious holidaies, the breaknecke of the Lords Sabbaths, me^
now not sparing to work on the Lords day also, because they have not been
taught to sanctify it.

Example of Lent fast, wherein the abuse of fasting having been checked, and
the manner of right fasting so little opened, it is come to pass that men
know not how truly to fast.

Example of the butcherly discipline once entered, the truth of discipline not
being spoken of, it makes men think that now to speak of it, is to make
every one a Pope in his own parish.

So likewise of Ear confession, the gross abuses whereof having been
reproved, but the right use of confession passed over untaught, men care not
to confess either to God or men: and if they do either, it is rather upon the
commandments of men, than upon the consideration of judgment and mercies.
Whereby also all conference and examination is taken from the Minister, to whom
examination is not to be denied, though al things be not to be disclosed. And
again, acknowledging of sins and private and public reconciliation have
utterly ceased.

My brethren, teach the truth, teach the truth: for by want hereof it is come
to pass, that This Sermon was preached in the assemble of many learned Divines.
first the peace of men's consciences is not provided for: secondly, our
winnings are not so great as our losings: thirdly, God is not glorified.

The peace of conscience is not looked unto: for when thou know what thou
should not do, thy conscience straight accuses thee for doing the evil
thou should not: but because thou art not taught the good thou should
do, thou can not pursue after it with comfort.

Our losses have been greater tha^ our winnings, because the good of men has
not been provided for by building the^ up. For though they hear sins spoken
against, yet seeing godliness and religion to decay, the Lords day not being
celebrated with reverence, men not prepared for the receiving of the holy
Sacrament, never fasting, never confessing, etc. yet the weak are not stayed
or drawn on, but fall away: the adversaries mouth is not stopped, but set wide
open, because truth is not enough spoken of and practiced.

God is not glorified: for they who are won, are not so truly won, but
become hypocrites: and many are not won at all, because the truth is not
fully delivered: for hearing some things spoken against, they are led to
contrary heresies, by reason they were not grounded in the truth, which
teaches it self and errors also, as good shows evil and it self also.

We must then teach, love, and practice good things: as we must reprove, hate,
and not do that which is evil. Which manner of teaching, because it has not
been in use, we cannot now get credit to, peoples minds being inured with
other kind of teaching.

Confession is either private, or public: Private first unto the Lord,
secondly unto men: first, for our own sins: secondly, for the sins of
others. Public, first unto God with men, and before men: secondly, unto God
and unto men.

That which cannot be done publicly must be done privately. And if ever
public exercise be done with fruit, the private must prepare thee for it, as
reading, fasting, prayer, conference, admonishing and rebuking thy self. And
without confession privately, we will never confess publicly.

Confession to God is never to be omitted, nor to men, when the occasion is
necessary.

Though carnal men of all sorts think it is an easy thing to confess to
God: yet if we consider how hardly we are drawn to confess to men, we may
thereby know how loath we are truly to confess unto God: which appears both
in the unregenerate and the regenerate.

As Adam for example, who was ashamed of the nakedness of his body: but when
he looked at his soul he pleaded not guilty, but went about to derive his
sin to the woman, and the woman to the Serpent. Every one will say he is a
sinner; but who will speak wherein he has sinned, or acknowledge it when he
is charged withal? yea a miserable sort of excuses will be pleaded; for all
are graven out of Adam.

The regenerate also are willing to confess, for all are borne again but in
measure as infants for a great while more carnal than spiritual: so much as
we are failing from Gods image, so much ready are we to be deceived and to
cover sins.

So Abraham and David being patterns of Gods mercy, are also patterns of our
weakness. Abraham in denying Sarah to be his wife both to Pharaoh and to
Abimel^ch: David's confession not found at the first: the sin was left of him,
yet he had not repented; sin was past, but grace not come: his heart was
hard until the Prophet had been with him, as Psalm. 32. which is a Psalm of
forgiveness of sins, notwithstanding he there shows the hypocrisy of their
heart: for being in great affliction, as a bladder dried up, he could not come
then to confess his sin. This is general: Job. 33. 9. I am clean, I am
innocent.

And marvel not that men are unwilling to confess, for confession
presupposes accusation: and who will accuse himself by name, except he be
moved by grace, or be frantic? Yea being accused, whose natures will yield,
seeing what grief, what sorrow, what shame, what humility must needs follow?
For sin is grievous, God is glorious, the law is holy. It is hard to be
covered, punishment is fearful, a precious price is rejected; and who will
see the judgments of God, by condemning themselves, and will not be ready to
despair? Naturally therefore confess we cannot.

Thou having done sin, would not now do it: but where is grace to love God?
how hard a thing then to confess where God gives not grace?

We must begin with our selves. I have marueiled at many who could weep
bitterly for other men's sins, but could not shed a tear for their own: but
when thou have felt the smart of sin in thy self, then can thou rightly
acknowledge the sins of others: then art thou come to some good measure of
this grace: And being escaped, with the Prophet Ezech. 9. thou may fall
down upon thy face and cry and say: Ah Lord, will thou destroy all the
residue of Israel, in pouring out thy wrath upon Jerusalem?

Having confessed mine own sin, then must I look unto others; and to Gods
judgments against others, and so upon mercies showed to others, that I may
learn to prevent and remove judgments, and to obtain and continue mercy by
confession.

And though we have no Nehemiahs to confess publicly, Nehem. 9. yet let some
stand in the gap privately to pray for the people, that the people also may
pray for us; and every one must so much more lament as his calling requires.
Whose sins thou have not acknowledged, thou art partaker of them; and if thou
admonish not, and do what thou can with thy kinsfolks and friends to recover
them, thou can not clear thy self of being guilty of their iniquity: but
if thou be grieved, and confessest and prayest privately for the sins of thy
brother, then may thou avoid vaineglory in the public.

True it is we may use private means and yet neglect the public, but we
must read humbly with the Eunuch, and pray with feeling, that the prayers of
others in public may be profitable; and feeling wants in the private means,
we must desire the help of the public.

Public confession unto God with men and before men is, when generally
general sins are confessed, or some particular sins as before the
Sacraments.

Thankefulnes can never be received except confession of unworthiness go
before: and therefore prayers usually begin with confession of sins and
judgments; yet many abstain and care not to come to the confession of their
sins: but they must know that the Ministers mouth is to confess their sins.

When the Church has offended against God, then all must confess, Leuit. 18.
Dan. 9. Esra. 9.

No one thing is more pleasant to God than confession, nothing more displeasing
than hiding: nothing more public, the more acceptable.

But herein is required judgment and affection, for they do not only offend
who confess not, but also such as will confess general sins and not
particular, in seeing wherein and after what manner they have sinned: therefore
a beadroll of the number and greatness of their sins would be made, and so
fashion and hypocrisy would be avoided. Labor then to see thy sin in time
of confession, and say, Lord move the heart of the Minister and people to
confess my sin when I look into it.

Fault is not only in judgment, but in affection also: for if a man come to
confess unto the Minister he will hang down his head, though but two or three
be present: but care not how publicly thou do it.

We must be touched otherwise then when we sing Psalms, there must be
reverence in bowing of the knees, for thou must give thy body and thy heart
also. The Publican needs not to be taught to cast down his eyes, for the
humble heart will bring down thy look. Again, we must give good example in
our outward gesture to provoke others to come reverently before the Lord. If
confession be thus acceptable, then when we are to receive more grace, we must
be more humbled in acknowledging our sins; and that we may do it as we
ought, we must labor for a deeper sight of our unworthiness by our sins.

The way to obtain mercy is, as soon as we see our sins to acknowledge
them. I acknowledged my sin, and then thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin, not my sin only. The debtor loves much that has much forgiven him,
because he sorrowed much. The prodigal son returning after much sorrow and
humble confession, found much kindness. Though we have been unkind children, is
there more love in a natural man than in the Lord? In natural fathers and
masters when their servants and children confess, anger cease; is not this
from the Lord; and will not he show favor unto us? Does God give thee this
charge, that if thy brother repent seauentie times seven times, thou should
forgive him? does he persuade him truly confessing that he will forgive him?
and shall not then the Lord be merciful unto thee if thou confess; in giving
thee remission of thy sins, and sanctification from thy sins? Yea God is
more merciful than man, when man truly confesses.

We are to pray that the ministry may be recovered, that the Ministers being
humbled the people may also join with them.

Another kind is to confess to men and not only unto God, otherwise it is
hypocrisy; as it is, though we confess to men and not to God.

We must confess to men when we owe some duty, or when we are to receive a
benefit by them. We owe them duty when we are admonished: secondly, when we
have offended them.

They that use good means, and come by authority, we must confess unto the^,
Mat. 18. Where there must be a yielding or a proceeding with farther process,
Luke 17. It is required that a man should acknowledge or he cannot have
forgiveness.

Where men offending are admonished; I will confess, say they, unto God, not
unto you: when as the Lord requires that it should first be done unto men:
First reconcile thy self to thy brother, then unto God.

We offend our brethren when we injury them: secondly, when we are authors or
counselors of them unto evil: or thirdly, when we give them evil example.

Whether we have injured them in their bodies, goods, or good name. Leuit. 6.
4. the same day the sacrifice was to be offered, the same day must satisfaction
be made. And where judgment is threatened, men refusing to satisfy the
parties, God will not forgive, who is also offended: for God requires
confession, and man satisfaction.

Many have charged others to do evil, and have wrought evil with others, the
one being humbled, the other will not be persuaded it is so: but having hurt
them in their souls, though by confession we cannot recover them, yet we must
shame our selves unto them, that they may have the cause of sin upon
themselves. If thinking of these things in our studies, yet if we practice them
not, our prayers will not be acceptable.

We are to receive benefit when we would have advise from them, or would be
comforted of them: and we would have advise when we are tempted unto sin, or
accused in our consciences for sin.

Though men cannot accuse us, yet there are many times special sins that we
cannot get peace with God for, or power to overcome them: these must be
confessed to men, that we may get strength in wisdom, Iam. 5.

Where I take acknowledging to be more than confession: for a man cannot
acknowledge a thing but he must needs confess it; but he may confess, and
yet not acknowledge. And there the Apostle speaks of recovering one from
sin when they are tempted, as the whole scope of the place shows.

In accusation the Devil will lay sin to our charge, and the conscience is
feared both in reason and affection: then there must be recourse to our friends.

Experience woeful enough will witness this, some for light matters have hanged
themselves, who if they had opened their griefs might have been recovered, as
some have been, whose throats have been ripped, and others who have been
found lying in the waters.

God has appointed a communion of Saints, and if we will not partake of their
couns^ile we may be brought down for not disclosing as others have been.

There is another higher sight of divinity and better faith of godliness, when
there is grief for sin; or for temptation to a sin; or thirdly, for lying
in sin and not getting out of it, and also for being provoked to gross
sins.

Many men lying in a sin when neither by praying, nor fasting, nor hearing,
nor otherwise they can get out of it, they must seek for strength at others,
and desire their prayers.

The Papists will have us bound to the Ministers: S. James more large.

To come out of sin is the best way to shame our selves and acknowledge it;
and this means used plainly will drive Satan away for coming near us.

The temptations are many times strange thoughts, to blaspheme God, and injury
highly whom most we love, and many such like things.

The family of love had these temptations, and many others who have been given
over grosely, because fighting with an evil conscience, they did not use the
means of getting out. And these are laid upon men for corrections for things
past, for remedies for things to come to pass, and for prouocations unto
prayer.

No remedy is so great as to disclose them to thy friend who loves thee, and
will pray with thee.

Choice must be used of those in whom we will disclose, especially of a
spiritual father must our choice be, spiritual for discerning well of the
temptation, and for wisdom in prescribing a remedy.

Not those who say it is fond, lessening the sin which should be waighed as
it is, that the just proportion of Gods judgment may be seen, neither to
those that shall aggrauate it, least they terrify thee too much.

When sin fights, then learning will not so much prevail, Satan is such a
subtle Sophister.

A father he must be, a brother, a sister, a righteous man, as S. James says,
who must have the affection of a father for compassion, taciturnitie, and not
vpbrayding: Compassion, that the heart may bleed as of a tender father and
mother, that though the sin be not ours, yet we may have a fellow feeling; for
the merciful is blessed which follows the poor in spirit: Taciturnitie,
that the sin being close, it may never go further tha^ the cause is.

Vpbrayding is such a thing as it fears many, because it is the property of
worldly men to keep men under by that means, but these fathers may not do it.

Though it be true that many meeting such a father, they will not use him as a
father; which appalleth the spirit of a good father, who if in wisdom he
shall but touch any thing that may be thought to be disclosed, he is thought to
do it to upbraid them.

FINIS.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
Galath. 6. verse. 14. 15. Be it far from me that I should rejoice, but in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; whereby the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor vncircumsion, but a new creature.
Having finished in a late Treatise the doctrine of the true observation of the
Sabbath, as a furtherance to nourish religion in them that are already called,
we now have purposed considering the small proceeding in Christian profession,
which ought to be found in this ripenes of the Gospel more glorious and
abundant, to entreat of such matter, as being most agreeable to them that as
yet have not tasted how sweet Christ is and his Gospel, and very profitable
for our senseles* age wherein Christ is almost utterly forsaken, may breed
some love of religion, and begin at the least some care of our profession in
us. And to deliver you from further suspense of mind and musing with your
selves what this thing should be, it is the comfortable doctrine of Christ
crucified, and joyful tidings of the passion of Christ: whereof, because I
know none that have gone with a through stitch in this matter, but either, if
they wrote soundly, they did it more sparingly than so excellent an argument
does deserve; or if any have labored more largely, they have done it more
corruptly, than the history of the Gospel will permit them: by the grace of
God I have purposed, and by the blessing of God I shall perform, to write of
this matter more at large. Now for a preface or preparation hereunto, we have
made choice of that holy protestation of Paul, Galath, 6. 14. But be it far
from me that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, 15. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be
upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. The Apostle having written
against such corrupt teachers and false Prophets, as, after he had preached the
liberty of the Gospel, labored to bring in again the politic government
of the Jewish ceremonies, and to intermingle the beggarly rudiments of the law
with the glorious profession of the Gospel; and having declared already, that
the firm faith of Christians needs not the painted pomp of ceremonies,
shows in the two verses immediately going before these, that these false
Apostles and bold Doctors of circumcision kept no good course, both for that
they sought to avoid trouble and persecution, because being a menstruous
people and monstrous company of Christians and Jews, they might be safe on
both sides and hurt of neither part; as also for that they carnally sought
their own glory, credit and estimation, by boasting themselves of the solemn
troop and notable number of disciples, whom they schooled and trained after
them in their profession. Now in this place Paul opposing his sincere
ministry to their carnal gospelling, and the pure faith of Christians to the
impure relics of the Jews, says with a bold emphasis and godly
protestation: But be it far from me, that I should rejoice, but in the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. As if he should say, God forbid that I should
rejoice in any thing saving in this, that I know by the cross of Christ the
forgiveness of my sins, that his righteousness is imputed unto me, that mine
iniquities are nailed on his cross, and buried in his death, so that I am not
henceforth so much tempted to the things of this world, neither make I any
great matter, how basely soever the world accounts of me. For why, I know it
is not material, whether we be circumcised or uncircumcised, for that I
neither find benefit in being circumcised, neither any hurt in being
uncircumcised: but herein I have comfort and matter of rejoicing, in that I am
become a new creature in Christ, and am freed from all other shows of Jewish
pomp. And this I dare boldly affirm, that this cause of rejoicing is not to
me alone, but to all other faithful Ministers teaching, and all other godly
people willingly and diligently embracing this doctrine of the cross of
Christ. Briefly then we see in these principals, first that the cross of
Christ being never so obscure is more to be ioyed in, than al shows of
ceremonies be they never so glorious, because it works in us these excellent
effects, which the other can never do, it crucifieth us to this world, and
makes us to become new creatures. Lastly, it is showed that this is no
variable or particular doctrine but general, no private passion of Paul, but a
common joy to all Ministers, and not to Ministers alone, but to all the whole
Israel and company of professors, that have their joy either in soundly
teaching, or in sincerely learning of Christ crucified, so that all shall have
the joy which Paul enjoyed, if they will keep the rule which Paul observed: by
which duties both of Pastors and people is insinuated, that whosoever shall
wilfully forsake or spitefully reject this doctrine, he is neither of the number
of true Ministers, nor any member of the true Israelites. And if we shall more
deeply consider, how many and how great the crosses of Christ were for us, and
therewithal shall mark how unfaithfully they be though of the most part of
professors^, if we shall see the little meditation of them, the slender
thankfulness for them, the small fruits of mortification in being crucified to
the world, the few tokens of sanctification in becoming new creatures, which
comeby them, we shall easily grant the necessity of this doctrine to be
taught, and comfort of it to be learned, especially seeing in the old age of
the Gospel we have so few true reioicers in Christ crucified, so many enemies
of the cross of Christ both among them that be teachers, and them that are
taught. As for the enemies of Christ his cross, they be either professed
enemies, or not hearty friends: the professed enemies are either such, as be
without all religion, or such as are seduced by a false religion: they without
religion are Atheists, Epicures, and worldlings, unto whom Christ crucified is
a laughing stock, and a matter of scoffing, in that Christ is ridiculous in
their eyes, and absurd in their judgment: those that are corruptly seduced
(that I omit Turks, and Jews) are either superstitious Papists, or erroneous
Heretics. The superstitious Papists, notwithstanding their wooden cross and
painted banners, and for all their Passion Sundaies, and good Fridaies, are the
greatest enemies to the passion and cross of Christ. For woeful experience
has taught, that these foolish devices of me^ having but once crept over the
threshold into the doors of the Church, did thrust out with the lorhsomnes of
their presence the holy ordinances of God, in that when men could not brook
the crosses and afflictions which are incident to true Christians, they would
invent for a further ease a cross of wood; and when they were weary of
hearing their filthy sins laid open to bring them to Christ, they provided
for that: and in stead of preaching they had Mass singing. Wherefore it may
truly be said of superstitious ceremonies and Christian religion, as the
Heathen man reports of the Hedgehog and the Satyr, who entertaining the
Hedgehog which he had found for his guest, was so pricked with his thornie
brissels, as he was constrained to go out of his house. A very ill guest
displacing his host, a perilous tenant dispossessing his landlord. Howbeit we
know, that these superstitious worshippers pretended a very great devotion to
Christ on their Passion Sunday in a solemn making of sepulchers, in chaunting
diverse songs sometime in Pilates tune, sometime in Herod's tune, sometime in the
Pharisees tune, and sometime in the Disciples tune: in all which the devil
bereaved them of the pure use and due consideration of Christ crucified. And
yet some of these would hate a Jew, some would spit at a Jew, some would weep
to hear the name of Christ, and would pity his death. I am the longer in
these things to make the judgments of God in them profitable instructions to
us, by provoking men to thankfulness for their deliverance, if in truth they be
delivered, that is, if they be not now as profane, as ever they were
superstitious, not forsaking but changing the sin.

As for the erroneous heretics, not to speak of all, let us add somewhat of
the most pestilent family of love, who shoot as much too short at this prick,
as the other shoot too far. For in speaking of the birth, death, and
resurrection of Christ, these men as fools flying one extremity, run
post-hast into the contrary extremity: and therefore these wretches imagining
to themselves a spiritual Christ, are as much to be maliced, as the Papists
are to be pitied. For after Popery yet some cause was given of rejoicing, in
that the truth of the history was left unto us; but these fellows under a
color of not being ceremonial, but altogether desiring to be spiritual, take
away all from us, and yet most deceitfully will seem to grant all. If ye
demand any thing of Christ his birth, they will grant it; if ye ask whether
he was borne of the seed of David, and of the Virgin Mary, they will confess
it, but as understanding it after this allegory, for that Mary, as they say,
signifies doctrine, David the beloved service: so that this is their judgment
of Christ his birth, that he was borne of the doctrine of the service of love.
In like manner they will grant the resurrection of Christ his death and his
burial, but in this sense, that Christ suffers in our suffocated nature, and
is crucified, when sin dies in us, and when they suffer for the doctrine of
love, and that after they have suffered and begin to be illuminated, then
Christ rises again in them, and lastly, when the light of nature gets some
clearer light of judgment, then Christ is ready to come to judgment. Thus a
number having refused the Antichristian Pope, are fallen into the hands of
Antichristian Atheists, and having eschued the dregs of popery, they have
wallowed most filthily in the mire of here sie. And thus much of the professed
enemies. Now of the not hearted friends, whereof the one sort is not well
advised, the other are not very faithful friends. The unadvised friends under
a pretense of knowing nothing but Christ, condemn all humane learning, arts,
and sciences, all manual professions: and these men, though as yet they are
not plunged in heresy, yet without the special grace of God preventing them,
are in the high way as ready to be trained up to heresy, and thus being over
wise and over just they cannot in truth rejoice in the cross of Christ. The
unfaithful friends being both protestants and professors, though they be no
plain atheists* but give some countenance to the Gospel, do neither chiefly
rejoice in Christ, nor truly sorrow for their sins, which notwithstanding are
so great, as neither the virtue of Christ his death, nor the power of his
resurrection appears in their lives, or in their deaths: and these men be
either by degrees tending to profane atheism, or they are brought up to be
superstitious Papists, and gross heretics. Contrary to all these professed
enemies and not hearty friends are they, who so truly meditate on Christ his
birth, death, and resurrection, as they chiefly mourning for their sins,
think this the greatest knowledge to know Christ crucified, and count this
their highest joy to rejoice in the cross of Christ: by which knowledge not of
any spiritual and imagined Christ, by which joy not in ceremony or
superstition they labor to crucify the world, not to forsake or utterly to
neglect the necessary things of this life, they endeavor to restrain, not to
destroy their flesh, and finally to become new creatures, and yet not here to
live lik^ Angels. Thus we see how requisite this treatise will be, both that we
may be delivered from the Papists superstitions, from the monstrous conceits of
Heretics, from the sinister meditation of unadvised persons, and the carnal
consideration of worldly professors, as also by it to come to some sound fruit
of Christ his death, and from the fruit feeling to engender faith, that from
true faith may spring true love, and from our love may grow true practice.

Now to come to the words of our Apostle: Be it far from me. He here shows
how his choice came of a settled purpose, and that in respect of this whereof he
had made a sound and special choice above the rest, he abhorred and vily
esteemed all other things. And this vehement phrase of speech is used of the
Apostle in things which rather are to be detested, than to be disputed against,
as Romans 3. 4. when Paul abhors the blasphemy against the grace of God, in
that the unbelief of a few should disanull the belief of many, he cries out,
God forbid. And when he would show his hearty hatred to the accusers of the
righteousness of God, Romans 3. he says, God forbid. As also in the end of the
same chapter, the Apostle more vehemently meeting with the objection of the^
who say, in that justification came of faith, would live as they listed, and
would make the law of God of no purpose, says, Be it far from me. Likewise
Romans 2. abhorring them that would willingly divorce holiness of life from
justification, and remain in sin, that Christ his grace may abound, he
breaks out, God forbid. Thus then the holy Ghost uses this phrase, when
either he shows some thing thoroughly to be hated, or speaks of some thing
principally to be chosen and preferred. And the Apostles meaning in choosing
above all to rejoice in Christ crucified, and in mourning for nothing more than
for that which hinders the cross of Christ, is nothing else but to declare,
that whosoever does rejoice in any thing more than in Christ crucified, he
freeth himself from all the things that are in Christ, and as yet he cannot
assure himself to belong to Christ, as also he shows what a necessary
rejoicing this is, in that there is no comfort in salvation, no mark of Gods
child in him, who either rejoices not in this, or at the least longs for it.

That I should rejoice. Mark, he says not, Be it far from me, that I should
use, think, speak, or do any thing but the cross of Christ: but he wishes,
that his affection should not principally be tied to any thing, but to Christ.
Neither must we from hence unfitly gather, that we should not eat, drink,
apparel ourselves, marry, or walk in some honest trade of life; but this we
must learn, that we set not our hearts on these things, so as our joy in them
should become either greater or equal with the rejoicing in the cross of
Christ: but rather, that having wives we be as though we had none, and buying
as though we possessed not, and using this world, as though we used it not. For
otherwise the things of this world vanish away, and therefore they are no such
things, as we should desire to stay our affections in them. 1. Cor. 2. 2. the
Apostle speaking of the like thing, says, I esteemed not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, purposes not to show that he
knew not any thing else, or that he would deny unto men the knowledge of
tongues, learning or handicrafts: for we know that he was a Pharisie, brought
up in good learning at the feet of Gamaliel, and how he reports of himself,
to speak as much in the tongues as any of the other Apostles, and that he was
a Tent-maker, exhorting also in some of his Epistles men to get their livings
with some honest trade: but his meaning is, that he thought nothing worthy to
be known, or coueted no knowledge as excellent in respect, and in comparison
of the knowledge of Christ and him crucified. And therefore whereas there were
some among the Corinthians, a people very famous for their learning and
knowledge, who pleased themselves in a conceit of their great gifts and
sciences, the Apostle not wanting these things, protests unto them, that he
never made this humane knowledge the full scope, drift, and foundation of his
labors, and that he never used them as the treasure of his heart, although he
could tell how far to give them their reverence, their due time, and place in
others; but that he esteemed them in that measure, as they stood him in stead
the better to offer his service to Jesus Christ. Again, we must not here
think, that the Apostle knew not parents, Magistrates and governors, the
gifts of men, and the duties to be given to every one of these: but if he saw
that men did glory in themselves, in their titles, and in their dignities,
then he knew them not in the flesh, that is, he did not esteem them for those
things, but so far he knew them in the spirit, as he could rejoice that they
were new creatures. And therefore men must not think, that for these gifts we
are all in all, but that the cross of Christ is the mark we shoot at,
without the which all authority, learning, and knowledge is accursed of God.
Nevertheless we see it is the weakness of judgment to reject all other things,
in themselves being the good gifts of God, as our unadvised friends have done,
as though the knowledge and practice of Arts, Sciences, tongues, and
handicrafts did defile a man; or as though a man were the more holy for not
using these outward means. But in our days few labor of this disease of such
superstitious austeritie, and in our careless times men are not so much
ouerwise and benumbed in judgment in this behalf; but most men on the
contrary rejoice either as much or more in these things, than in the cross of
Christ: and this is the evil wherewith most men have surfeited, this is the
evil whereat the Apostle strikes. For though men will grant, that Christ is
to be rejoiced in, yet their works do show that they rejoice in some thing
more than in the cross of Christ; and if they show any joy to religion, it is
rather done to countenance their own gifts, than to gain any credit to
Christ. How many, I pray you, in our days rejoice in open wickedness, as the
adulterer in his lusts, the wrathful man in his revenging, the covetous man in
his riches, the envious man in his emulation, and the ambitious man in his
honors? Why do men learn but to get preferment? why do men so labor, but
to attain to profit? why do men take such pains, but in the end to reap
pleasure? So far are we off from rejoicing in Christ crucified, that men now
rejoice in open sins, and that so manifestly, as covetousness and ambition
creeping under the cloak of virtue, plead for ability and maintenance, for
place and countenance, without which, as they say, a man cannot do good. But
these men that thus labor more for promotion, profit and pleasure, than to
find Christ crucified, and cannot find the incomparable joy, if they were new
creatures, may happily carry the face of Christians, but surely by outward
calling as yet they belong not unto Christ. And what are these outward things
to be rejoiced in? Admit that a man had all learning, authority, riches, and
credit; are they not common as well to the wicked as to the godly? are they not
so transitory and insufficient, that the more a man has of them, the more he
may have? do they make the possessor the better, can they keep evil from
him, can they minister comfort to the afflicted conscience, can they make us
rejoice in the hour of death, or can they save us from confusion before God
his judgment seat? Surely this is not in wit, eloquence, learning, friends,
glory, riches, and authority, all which the wicked know better to abuse, than
the godly to use; but in Christ, which was accursed, and in his cross which
was a blessing unto us. Seeing it is so, well did the Apostle to rejoice in
this above all. For were a man never so good, so glorious, so learned, so well
brought up, of such authority, he must stoop at God his judgment seat, and
there fall like a miserable caitife, unless he used these things to God his
glory, and above all rejoiced in the cross of Christ.

But now let us see what is meant by the cross of Christ. Some understand it
of the afflictions which he did suffer for the profession of Christ, because
the Apostle says in another place, how he did bear about with him the marks
of his sufferings in his body. But this sense were too hard to be brooked, that
we should rejoice in nothing but in affliction; albeit this is a truth, that we
may rejoice in those afflictions which we suffer for Christ his sake. Again,
the cross of Christ taken for affliction, cannot be said to be a principal
cause of the world crucified to us, or of crucifying us to the world, although
in some respect it may be counted an inferior cause. Further if we compare this
place with other places of the scriptures, we shall find it to be understood of
the cross which Christ suffered for us, rather than of the cross which we
suffer for him, as 2. Cor, 2 2. where the Apostle labors to know nothing, as
here he rejoices in nothing more than in Christ crucified, as he calls it
in that place, or in the cross of Christ, as he speaks in this place. The
Apostle his meaning then briefly is this. Be it far from me that I should
chiefly rejoice in any, but in Christ crucified, because he can present me
blameless before God his judgment seat, he has nailed my sins to his
cross, he is the immaculate Lamb that was sacrificed for me, and will present
me as clear without spot before his father, as ever I was created. Wherefore
Paul knowing the cross of Christ able to perform all these things, good cause
there was why he then, and we now attaining in some measure to the like
knowledge, should rejoice in Christ crucified, by who^ we become crucified to
the world. First we are to note, that they that with delight lie in sin, or
have no desire to come out of sin, cannot rejoice in the cross of Christ.
For if thou be filthy, and wilt be filthy still in thy flesh, how dare thou
presume to rejoice in the scourged and torn flesh of Jesus Christ? Can thou,
o miser, still like and love this world so much, when thou do more prick and
pearce Christ with thy sins, than ever he was pricked with thorns and
nails? or can the thorns of Christ crucified be precious to thee, when the
thorns of worldly cares do so delight and choke thee? How can thou still
boil in thine anger, when thou do remember how mildly Christ crucified
suffered the bitter anger of his father for thee? Do thou look for great
matters in this world, considering Christ to be borne for thee so basely, to
live so poorly, and to dye for thee so painfully? Surely thou may appertain
to Christ in secret election, but thy sins thus with delight reigning in
thee, thou have no assurance of Christ by thy walking. Well on the contrary,
do thou, thou poor sinner, feel the lusts of thy flesh loathsome unto
thee, that thou even quakest to remember the place, the time, the occasion
where sin ouertooke thee, and feel more terror to think of them, than
ever thou fel^st pleasure in doing of them? then for thy comfort remember, thy
sins are pardoned, the precious flesh of Christ was torn for thee, and that
thou seeing the wrath of God due to thy defiled flesh, shall receive mercy,
because the crucified flesh of Christ does acquit the filthiness of thy flesh,
and the punishment due unto it. Again, does the world begin to be vile in
thine eyes, and thou art ashamed that thine heart has been so long set on
things below, and the thornie cares do now prick and wound thine heart with
sorrow? then remember the head of Christ was planted with thorns, and Christ
for thee despised the world, his hands and feet for thee being nailed, his
side pierced, his whole body for thee being crucified. Art thou angry with thy
self that thou have been so much given to anger, and can willingly take
judgment of thy self, because thou have abused God his presence, and defiled
his holy house in coming thither with an angry heart? then remember how
Christ for thee sustained the anger of God his wrath to take from thee the
imputation of thine anger* Can thou not be content to be a worm of men, and
as it were trodden on? think thou more vilely of thy self than of any other?
art thou now afraid of hypocrisy, and feel thy self troubled that thou
did not more earnestly seek God, and never did so much desire the favor
of men, as now thou desire the favor of God, and think it a great mercy
to have one foot in the earth? then remember how vile Christ was to make thee
precious to God, consider how he was the servant of all, a reproof of men, a
worm, and not a man, trodden down even of the worst kind of men, that he
might free thee from thy vaineglory and secret pride. Art thou grieved that
thou have presumed on the mercy of God, and do thou now think no more, nor
so much to be in thee as in other men, and that thou art not a sinner alone,
but a sinner vily infected, not resting thy self in any opinion of a civil
life? Art thou now as deeply plunged in despair as before thou wast puffed up
with presumption? call to mind that Christ was not only rejected of men but of
God, to bring thee in favor both with God and men, and that he was trobled
when he said, Father if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me: remember
how he labored in a sweat and agony, not in a cold sweat, but so as the
warm blood was feign to run out of their veins: behold how he was hanged
between heaven and earth, as spued out of the one, and accursed in the other,
and suffered the heaviness of his soul to free thee from presumption by his
mighty humility, and to help thee from desperation by his painful cross.
To be brief, there are two kinds of men that cannot rejoice in this cross of
Christ, the one, because they have an opinion of their own righteousness; the
other, because they are senseless for the security of their sins. For the
one, because the feeling of the sore causes us to make much of the salve, and
the sense of sin works a joy in the deliverance from sin; it is sure they
cannot rejoice in the forgiveness of sin, that never could lament for the
guiltines and grieuousnes of sin, which are the cause of Christ his death.
Wherefore our Savior Christ Luke 22. seeing certain women following him with
lamentation, and mourning that so good a man so innocently should be put to
death, says to them, weep rather o daughters of Jerusalem, for your sins,
teaching them, that their most special cause of weeping was their own
iniquity, which was the cause why now he should suffer death. Now then because
we are ignorant, many see not their sins, and for that cause cannot mourn
for them. For they need no joy that feel no sorrow, they need no comfort that
taste no grief, they need no release that are in no bands, and none can truly
rejoice in the cross of Christ, but they that see their sins have crucified
Christ. Wherefore to help our blindness in seeing, and numbnes in feeling
sin, we must come to the law of God, and to the judgments of God there with
adjoined. Why cannot men come to the sight of their sins? because they know
not the law. Why have not men a sense of their sin? because they consider
not the threatening of the law. So that the remedy to make us see sin, is the
knowledge of the law, the remedy to make us feel sin, is the sense of the
judgments of God threatened in the law. And why cannot the Papists rejoice in
Christ, but imagine other histories? is it not because they have imagined a
colored persuasion of the law, thinking that the law may be kept of man,
measuring the interpretation of the law and the observation thereof by gross
sins, and not otherwise, as did the Pharisees, counting all the spiritual
interpretation of the commandments but good counsels, not necessary precepts?
So that they not seeing the law spiritual, nor themselves carnal, cannot see
themselves sold under sin. The Apostles knew gross sins as well as they
did to be the breaches of the law of God, yea and the worldly wise Philosophers
could confess as much, but he saw further, that every little thought rebelling
against the spirit and fighting against the law, was sin, which they never
dreamed of. And therefore Paul sifting his corruption so low, thought himself
even as a slave or dead man, howsoever before he might have thought himself,
and did account himself as upright a man as the best of them. If we likewise
shall look narrowly into the law, seeing the good things commanded, and the
evil things forbidden, and both of them infinite, and then shall consider our
selves to be infinite, our affections not being angelical, but our whole
nature corrupt, and our whole will rebelling, this will rid us of all imagined
righteousness, and will cause us to cast off our hold of our own perfection;
for finding the law commanding good things so plentifully, and forbidding
evil things so manifoldly, and then seeing our selves to do so many evil
things, and to leave undone so many good things, we shall not only be
convicted to be sinners, but we will confess ourselves to be most miserable
sinners. But why are not our affections moved with a sense of sin, as in
judgment we have the sight of sin? because our eyes are still set on the
things commanded and forbidden, and withal we look not into the curses of
the law, and threatenings against them that commit the evil things, and omit
the good things.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
Galath. 6. verse. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.
AS we have spoken of the former fruit of the cross of Christ, which was,
that the Apostle was crucified to the world, and the world crucified to him: so
now we are to speak of the latter effect, that is, he was made a new
creature. And here note by the way, that though mention here be not
expressiuely made of the resurrection of Christ, as was before of the cross of
Christ: yet it is necessarily understood, and that according to the meaning and
custom of the holy Ghost; because as it is the virtue of the cross of Christ
that crucifieth sin in us, so it is the power of his resurrection that
raises us to newnes of life; and as Christ died for our sins, so he rose
again for our justification, Romans 4. and as he died to cleanse us from our
sins, so also to crucify sin in us; and as he rose to impute righteousness
unto us, so also to work in us righteousness and holiness. In that the
Apostle speaks here of a new creature, as also he does 2. Corinthians. 5, 27. If
any man be in Christ* let him be a new creature, etc. we are taught, that it
is not sufficient to be crucified to the world, but we must be also new
creatures; we must not only put off the old man, but we must put on the new
man, and look what we detract from the one we must add to the other: it is
not enough to die, unless we be borne again; it is not enough to be corrupted,
unless we be changed. For as it was not sufficient for Christ to be
crucified, but he ought also to rise again: so it is not sufficient for us to
be freed from the guiltines and corruption of sin, which we received of
Adam, but we must also be clothed with that righteousness, and be made
partakers of that holiness which flows from Christ, so that as none of our
sins shall be laid to our charge: likewise all Christ his obedience is as
fully ours, as we our selves had done it.

Now the better to conceive what it is to be a new creature, we must consider
for the one part that which is Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. Cast off, concerning the
conversation in time past, the old man, which is corrupt through the
deceiuable lusts, And be renewed in the spirit of your mind, And put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness: and
for the other part, that which is Coloss. 3. 9. Ye have put off the old man,
with his works, 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him: briefly the word imports thus much,
that whatsoever we lost in the first creation, we must receive in the second;
and whatsoever we have been deprived of by Adam, we have it restored in Christ.
Adam not in substance but in qualities was made like unto God, and we are new
creatures, made partakers of the godly nature, as witnesses Peter, not in
things essential, but in holy qualities to resemble the Creator. And as Adam
in the beginning, and we in Adam were made wise, righteous, holy, and in perfect
felicity, and both he and we through sin have lost this heavenly image: for
in Christ it is renewed so fully, as he is our wisdom, and takes from us
ignorance; he is our righteousness, and acquiteth us from our sins; he is our
holiness, and freeth us from our corruption; he is our redemption, and
restores to us our liberty. And because we are then renewed, when we are a
wise people, righteous, holy, and waiting for the coming of Christ: we must on
our parts in some measure have our earthly wisdom mortified, spiritual
wisdom renewed, our earthly affections slain, godly affections quickened,
our old conversation quelled, and our conversation from hence-foorth in heaven,
we must not live as we were wont, but our lives must be changed to the
obedience of the word, which we must testify in thought, word and deed.
Briefly then we are renewed by faith in Christ, when we assuredly believe,
that (1. Cor. 1. 30) Christ Jesus is made of God unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and by the fruits of faith,
by Romans 12. 2.) not fashioning our selves like unto this world, but by being
changed by the renewing of our mind, and by (Ephesians. 4. 24) putting on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. First
therefore we must believe, that Christ is made to us wisdom, because
naturally (Ephesians. 4. 18.) our cogitation is darkened, and we are strangers from
the life of God, through the ignorance that is in us. How blind we are by
nature, and what need we have of the Spirit of Christ to enlighten us, the
Prophet David even in that image of a new creature, Psalm. 119. by his often
praying for the same, does plentifully declare. And when it shall please God
thus to enlighten us, then must we labor for a certificate in our
consciences, to have our sins clearly discharged in the death of Christ, and
to assure us that Christ his righteousness in his resurrection is as surely
imputed unto us, as if we had done all righteousness, and though we have been
sinners as others, yet that our sins shall not be laid to our charge. This
the Philosophers and wise men could never see by the light of nature, because
it is a mystery of mysteries, undoubtedly to be persuaded that for Christ his
sake we shall appear righteous before God his judgment seat, as though we
never had sinned, but had fulfilled the whole law of God. For we are imputed
righteous, as Christ was an imputed sinner, and as we hope for the joys of
heaven even as we had committed all the righteousness, which Christ alone
did; so he did bear the pains of hell even as he had committed all the
sins, which we alone did commit. Besides, he must be our holiness, that is,
our flesh must be so crucified in his flesh, and his holiness must so be
communicated unto us, as of profane worshippers, we may become truly
religious; of blasphemers of the name of God, pure users of the name of God; of
breakers of the Sabbath, obseruers of the Sabbath; of careless governors,
careful governors: of disobedient, obedient; of cruel, meek; of unchaste,
chaste persons; of unrighteous, righteous persons; of evil speakers, couerers
of the infirmities of others; of such as have let their thoughts run
uncontrolled, careful watchers even over our least affections. The want of the
knowledge hereof is punished by the devilish vermin of the Family of love.
They say Christ in them is their new birth, we say new birth is wrought in us
by the Spirit of Christ ingraffing us into Christ; they say the work of
sanctification is perfect in this life, we say it is begun here, and continued,
but ended in the life to come. For as our wisdom is not perfect in this world,
unless it be by imputation of Christ his wisdom, but still grows by
degrees, and we are not perfect at the first in faith covering the imputation of
Christ his righteousness unto us, and we grow from faith to faith: so our
wisdom is not here so perfect when we are renewed, but stained with many
blemishes. And as we see in the natural birth children are not at the first
old men, but from infa^cie they grow to childhood, from childhood to their
nonage, from nonage to perfect age and old age: even so in the spirtuall birth
we grow from strength to strength, from measure to measure, until we come to
perfection. Our wisdom is often captiuated, our faith is often weak, our
righteousness is often defiled, our holiness is often corrupted. Now as in the
cross of Christ our sins are discharged, as in the fulness of Christ we have
wisedomeas in his resurrection we have righteousness, and by the working of his
Spirit he communicates to us his holiness: so also in his coming again we
sted fastly look for the fulness of our redemption in him, who was borne for
us, who lived for us, who died for us, who rose for us, who ascended for us,
who lives in us, who will come again to redeem us, delivering our souls
from sin, from grief, and reproach, our bodies from sickness, pain, and
trouble, wiping away all tears from our eyes, and setting us free from death,
misery and corruption: for whom we all cry in our afflictions, Come Lord
Jesus, who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to thy glorious
body, at such time looking for the accomplishment hereof, as he shall come
from heaven with his Angels, to gather together the elect and the reprobates,
the one to receive the sentence of salvation, the other to receive sentence of
condemnation. We are now new creatures by faith in Christ, by hope of our
redemption through him, but we shall be so in effect; we are here renewed in
righteousness, in holiness, in wisdom, but in part: yet we have remnants of
sin, as they that neither through the grace of God sin to death, neither by
reason of our own corruption are altogether free from sin. And therefore we
had need to look for Christ to come a Redeemer, who will clean rid us from
our pride, who will rid us from our unthankfulness from our unbelief, and from
whatsoever thing may hinder the glory of God or our salvation, who will rid us
from all sickness, poverty, sorenes, and calamity in our bodies, that what
freedom we now hold by faith, we shall then have in fruition and most absolute
possession, which, when it draws near, must cause us to lift up our heads
and rejoice. Being thus made new by faith in Christ, we must not stay, but
testify this faith to others by effects, in becoming no more like unto the
world, but putting on a new couersation, after the likeness of him that has so
called us. It is to no end to say thou art a Christian, if thou art not there
with all a new creature, as the Apostle proves, 2. Cor. 5. 27. These effects
are partly in the soul, and partly in the body: in the soul we must be
renewed in our understanding, in our memories, and in our affections.

As our understanding sometime has been darkened concerning the things of
Jesus Christ: so from hence forth we must covet to understand nothing more than
Christ Jesus, and him crucifie^^^ as our memories have bin as fresh in
retaining, as our understandings in receiving earthly things; so now forgetting
the things of this life, we must chiefly remember those things which perish not
with memory, but are heavenly, spiritual, and eternal: as we were wont to
love, hate, like, and mislike for our selves, now we must love, and hate,
like, and mislike for the glory of God. We are therefore to pray, that the
Lord would frame in us new hearts, that as we have been carnally minded, we
may be spiritually minded; and as we must have new hearts, so also must we
labor for new affections. Our love, as I said, which was mingled with
self-love, must be taken up for the Lord his behoof; our anger, which was in
the defense of our own cause, must now be bestowed in the maintenance of God
his glory, and what power soever is within us, it must be spent on the Lord
his behalf. And yet we must go further in this work of regeneration,
offering to the Lord our bodies, as we have offered our souls, that as we have
given our members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity; so now we give our
members servants unto righteousness in holiness, from hence-foorth having new
eyes, new ears, new tongues, new hands, and new feet.

Our eyes have sometimes lusted after popish pomp, they have been ravished
with a delight in the creatures of God, but carnally and without all glory to
God; they have bin haughty, full of pride, fraught with disdain, nourishers of
uncleanness, the wickets of death unto our souls, and carried away with the
covetous desire of worldly things; now they must be renewed not in substance,
but in their duties: whatsoever we behold with them, we must make them
teachers of the soul thereby, and all things seeming beautiful to the eyes in
this life, where the creatures are defiled, ought to provoke us to the beauty
of the Creator, which is infinite, we must testify our humility, our piety,
our chastity, and our upright affections by them.

Our ears, which have been more carried away with the vain chaunting of
Papists, than with the reverent singing of the Church, and have more greedily
attended on lies than on the truth, that have heard sin without grief, and
filled themselves with unchaste songs, must so be framed and fashioned anewe, as
we lend them only to the word, to gracing speeches, to chaste communication
willingly; and whatsoever we shall hear contrary to these, to stop them up,
and to make known our hearty misliking of them.

Our tongues have in time past either in praying ignorantly, vainly, and
superstitiously, or in not praying at all, in abusing the name of God, in
vnreuerent, uncharitable, unchaste, untrue speeches set themselves against the
Lord and his people; now they are to be the spokesmen of our hearts in
understanding, in truth, in sincerity praying to the Lord, they must be the
most glorious aduancers of God his glory, they must be dipped and seasoned with
salt, with grace, with reverence, with meekenes, chastity, and truth, as the
vn^eined witnesses of a renewed mind.

Our hands having been lift up to false gods, being full of blood, violence,
concupiscence, briberie, deceit, and false dealing, are now to be stretched
out to the true God, and to show forth his power in relieuing the needy, in
giving of alms, in helping the afflicted, in punishing all filthiness,
briberie, and falsehood unto the uttermost.

Lastly, our feet that have run so swiftly to sacring and to the
resurrection, that have run so fast to Idol service, to huntings,
bearebaitings, and enterludes on the Sabbath day, that have been so full of
contemptuous disobedience, so ready to shed blood, so swift and nimble in
dancing, so expert in carrying the things of other men, must now run to the
Church of God, to the hearing of the word, to offer pure prayers, to receive
the Sacraments, and must now run as fast from those profane exercises on the
Lords day, they must now carry us to prisons, to sick persons, to the house of
moruning, we must from henceforth number our steps, and order them a right, to
the glory of God, and the good of our brethren. Thus it behooves us to do,
that will make claim with comfort to the death and resurrection of Christ,
namely, as we desire to have our sins pardoned by his cross, so must we
desire to have our sins in some measure pared away by the virtue of his
cross; and as we desire to have the imputation of Christ his righteousness by
his resurrection, so must we pray for the communication of his holiness in some
measure to work in us righteousness by the power of his resurrection, laboring
from henceforth to have our conversation in heaven, and being risen with
Christ, to seek those things that are above, where Christ fitteth at the right
hand of God, Colloss. 3. 1. But alas, many men would have him a Christ to
answer for their sins, that they may be justified, but they labor not that
he should crucify sin in them, whereby they might be mortified, and what is
this, but to make a mock of Christ? And yet I do not here mind to exclude the
forgiveness of sin by Christ, nay I rather grant a continual forgiveness of
sin through Christ, adding only this, that as we desire to have our sins
pardoned, so we should desire to have them purified. Neither do I dream of
being clean without sin, or of any imagined perfection in this life; but I
require that we should not wittingly and willingly lie in sin; and though we
cannot come to perfection, yet to strive to come to perfection. For we are said
to be new creatures not in being perfitly renewed, but in that we are in
renewing, and finding the remnants of sin withstanding the work of new
birth, we look for Christ a Redeemer to make an end of sin in us. Wherefore
we must beware of the doctrine of heretics, imagining great things of
perfection, as also of the prophanenes of hypocrites and dissembling
professors; we must neither be too righteous, nor too sinful, neither too
wise, nor too foolish, neither to look for Christ alone to be without us,
neither to imagine any spiritual Christ to be within us, neither with proud
heretics must we please our selves with any indwelling righteousness, neither
must we rest in Christ without new birth, as the drousie Protestants: for if
thou lie in sin, thou art not in Christ, because old things are gone, and
new things have succeeded their place. It is marvelous that the wretched
heretics cannot see their imperfections, when they still hunger, and eat,
thirst, and drink, sometimes subject to sickness, sometime needing marriage,
and dying as well as other men; all which things should be laid from them if
they were perfitly in^^^sted in Christ, and already had entered into the
kingdom of glory, where we shall neither need to eat, to drink, to
sleep, where we shall neither marry, nor give in marriage, there dwells
incorruption, and immortality. No more than are they perfect in this life, than
they need not these outward things, and still they shall show themselves
imperfect, whilst they shall show themselves to stand in need of them. We then
groan here under infirmity, and hope for our perfection in the life to come;
and this is the excellency of Christiana. But where is this wisdom, where is
this faith in Christ his righteousness, where is this new heart, new mind, and
new affections? where be these new bodies, where is this bold courage in
persecution, and comfortable looking for Jesus Christ to come a Redeemer, so
that with a joyful heart we can think of our resurrection? Alas we are as yet
but chickens, we are but as children, we are but as babes in Christ, and tender
nouices, yet clea^ing to the cradle, and sticking to our swaddling bands, and
well are we if we so be, and labor still to grow on.

But let us further consider of the words of the Apostle: In Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision. We have heard
before that the false Apostles and secret supplanters of Paul's preaching did
not mislike that the Gospel should be preached, but therewithal they would
induce Moses his government, and the discipline of the Jewish traditions.
Against this mixture of the Law and the Gospel of Moses and Christ the
Apostle beats, fearing least a little leaven would sour a great piece of
dowe. Against such, the teachers of our times had need to preach, for many
make a mingle mangle of religion, neither flat Papists, nor sound Protestants,
who not for any conscience sake, but for the easing of their flesh provide a
safe shelter against the storms of persecution. The Jews rejoiced in that
they were circumcised, the Gentiles rejoiced in that they were not circumcised:
but both rejoiced amiss, says the Apostle, in that they should rather rejoice
that Christ Jesus was crucified, than that their foreskin was either cut or not
cut. Again, by circumcision in this place the Apostle means all other
ceremonies, putting part for the whole, whereby he would show, that no
ceremonies whatsoever, no not circumcision, whereof their Doctors so much
vaunted themselves, could do any thing to a new creature. Now if Moses his
ceremonies, which in their time and place had some authority from God were not
available hereunto; then man's traditions, which at no time nor in any place
are in season, or credit, in that they never were authorized by the Lord, can
neither be means nor fruits, neither causes nor effects of regeneration. If
then the Jews were deceived with their ceremonies, as the Papists were by
their traditions, what shall we think of our traditions? for, if the Lord
would not suffer his own ordinances, which for their time were lawful, then
he will never suffer traditions, which were never his, but man's. What shall we
then say? we have pompous Papists, and politic Protestants. Ask the Papists
if they rejoice in the cross of Christ, and if they be new creatures? they say
they be so, and they show it in their crosses, altars, holidaies, metallish
gods, banners, roodes, resurrrection, in finger crosses, in crosses at their
lying down, in crosses at their rising up* in their oil* salt, wafercakes,
pannes, ashes, and such like. Here is their rejoicing. Well, suppose we had
to deal with the more learned Papists, the Jews did not only now rejoice in
their ceremonies and circumcision, but they thought it good policy to retain
these things with the preaching of the Gospel, and our more subtle Papists
will confess, that their traditions are not specially and only to be rejoiced
in, but they will have them mingled with the Gospel as necessary helps, and
furtherances thereof. But in what order soever they are placed, of them Paul
here remembers them to make nothing for a new creature. And as in civil
matters fools to avoid one extreme run into another, some seeing the
superstitions of these men, and that popish religion is more ceremonious than
the Jewish religion, straight affirm, that neither Baptism, nor want of
Baptism; neither receiving of the Sacrament, nor want of it; neither hearing,
nor not hearing; praying, nor not praying, is available to a new creature. And
these Anabaptists, and heretical family of the doctrine of love so far
reject holidaies, that they take away the Lords day also; and as under the
pretense of the Gospel they take away the set days of fasting, which were to
the Jews, they reject fasting altogether, and wholly relinquish that exercise,
unless they maintain a Sabbath in resting from sin, and continue the
fasting in fasting from sin. Thus we see how we sail between two rocks, and
between two flats, and therefore need the stern of God his spirit and
government of the word to sail aright. We must not think that the Apostle in
speaking of a new creature excludes, but rather includes the means to come
to this new creature. For both our Savior Christ, and the Apostles teach as
well by practice as by precept, that we must hear the word, offer up our
prayers, receive the sacraments, and reverence true discipline. First, our
Savior Christ exhorts us to search the Scriptures, which testify of him,
and commands them that have ears to hear, speaking most sharply even
against them that hear not fruitefully. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. forewarneth us not
to quench the Spirit, nor to despise prophesying. And 1. Pet. 2. 2. the Apostle
exhorts the Jews as new borne babes to desire the sincere milk of the
word. As for prayer besides that our Savior Christ did commend the use of it
to his disciples, he also prescribed them and us a form of prayer, whereby we
might level our requests. And Paul often stirs up the Churches, unto whom
he wrote, continually to frequent this exercise. Of the Sacraments the Apostle
speaks plentifully, 2. Corinthians. 10. 2. Cor. 11. 2. Cor. 15. as also of
discipline; 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 10. And although the Apostles
abrogated the Jewish Sabbath, yet they substituted the Lords day, Act. 20. 1. Corinthians, 16* Revel. 2. And albeit we have not a prescript time of fasting, as
had the Jews, yet we know Christ told his disciples, that there was a time to
fast in, as then the Bridegroom should be taken from them, and the Apostles in
their election and instituting of Preachers fasted. So that we affirm nothing
to help to true joy but a new creature, and the means to a new creature.

It remains: And as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon
them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. That the Apostle might show, that
this was no special prerogative to himself alone, but a benefit common to
all, not a work of supererogation in him, but a duty required of others, he
says, As many* etc. As if he should say, Let no man look to have peace in his
conscience, and mercy at the hands of God, unless he can thus rejoice in the
cross of Christ. And by the way observe this mark of a faithful Teacher, he
la^eth not any charge upon others, until he had applied it to himself, and
from his own practice he advises us. The word which he here uses, is a rule,
whereby he notes such a thing, as a Christian man cannot well want, being a
chief instrument, which works in us mortification and sanctification. He
terms it not a good counsel, or a good advice, which we may take up and lay
down at our pleasure, which if we could do, it were well, if we do it not,
it is no great matter, as the Papists account of the spiritual interpretation
of the Law, which our Savior Christ uses, Matthew. 5. For Popery, which is no
better than country Divinity, thinks it were a good thing if we could live
so carefully: but it shakes off this thing as a charge, and will not
acknowledge it to be a rule, wherewith they stand bound before the Lord. A
rule, we know, is commonly used in building, leuelling, or framing, whereby one
thing is made fit for another, and therefore usual to Carpenters, Masons,
Geometers, or such, who measure all things by square and compass. Now because
there is a glorious building in the word, and a man needs continually to be
built up in Jesus Christ, to have his affections leuelled, his heart framed to
faith and obedience, the Apostle borrows this word rule. But what is this
rule? Be it far from me, that I should rejoice, etc. So that we must
especially rejoice in our sins pardoned, in the world crucified, in our
hearts, bodies, and souls renewed. This is the rule of all. And why? Is it not
rather an effect than a rule? Yes, but it is usual to put the name of the
effect for the cause, and the fruit for the means: as we may see Iam. 1. 27
Pure religion and undefiled before God is to visit the fatherless: that ^s,
the effect and fruit of true religion, which God requires with the hearing of
his word, is to visit the fatherless. And Esai. 58. 6. Is not this the fasting
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, etc. That is, is not this
the fruit of fasting, which I have chosen? And so likewise is it meant of the
Sabbath in the same place, the fruit and effect whereof is to rest from sin.
But why then does the holy Ghost rather name the effect tha^ the means, the
fruit tha^ the cause? Even because though we have the means, and do not use
them to effect, it were altogether unprofitable, as we see many carnal
professors, who rest too long in the means, but make no conscience to show the
effect of them. What then? Shall we so rest in the effects, as with the
Heretics of our time we should contemn the means? Shall we not eat and
drink, because we live not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the word of God? Shall we not build, because unless the Lord helps,
the builder builds but in vain? Nay, as we confess, that the means without
the effect are unprofitable: so we affirm, that to come to the effect we must
carefully use the means. Wherefore because the cause not producing it effect is
nothing worth, the effect is rather set down than ye cause. Let not a man
separate those things, which God has joined together. If we rest in our
Sacraments, as the Jews in their Circumcision, we shall never see the fruit
of them. If we keep the Sabbath, if we use fasting, until our bodies be made
most lithe, and labor not to become a new creature, all is in vain, we
separate those things which God has joined together, that is, the fruit from
the means. Again, if on the other side we think now we must obey and not
hear the word, if it be all that God requires to do good, and not to pray,
or that we can believe enough without the help of the sacraments, we deceive
our selves with a false imagination of righteousness, and we make as great
diuorcement on the other side of the means from the effect, as before we make
a separation of the effect from the means. Ask now the Papists what is their
rule, and they will show many means, as the rule of Heremites, of Dominican
Friars, of their Franciscan Monks, of their Augustine Friars, and such like.
Demand of them what rules they have of their effects; they will say, they are
come out of the world to live in monkerie, they have their shauings,
pilgrimages, whipping of their own bodies, voluntary and monastical vows,
traditions, and such like. But come to the other rabble, who are worse than the
beasts of Egypt, forsaking the sweet land of Canaan, and they will deny all
means, and brag they never so much of effects, yet in pure effects they be
most barren hypocrites. If they were as wise as Solomon, or as holy as David,
or as zealous as Paul, yet they might frequent the Temple, and think it a
blessing to be in Sion, and rejoice in the company of Christians. But to leave
these, let us learn as much as we cast off the traditions of the Pharisees, so
much to put on the sweet yoke of Christ, and let us carefully use the word,
and with the word join prayer, and to prayer add practice, using the
sacraments, and by them grow in faith, that by faith we may increase in
repentance, and with the cause marrying the effect, and from the fruit never
divorce the means, because God is neither pleased with our fruitless
ceremonies, if we rest in the means, neither with our holy hypocrisy, if we
refuse his ordinance. This rule the Apostle says, is both for the preachers,
and for the people: for preachers, because he opposed this rule against the
rule of certain false teachers: for the people, in that he names them here
the Israel of God.

By this word peace, he means the favor of God, or the good success in our
enterprises: by mercy, he understands the goodness of God in pardoning our
sins, and relieuing of our infirmities. First, it is probable, that he
speaks of these things to Teachers as well to discourage the false teachers,
as to embolden the pure Preachers of the Gospel against all the glorious
assaults of their adversaries. Again, because the preachers of the word have
taken upon them the guiding and government of the people as well in life as in
doctrine, and in good example to go in and out before them, he preuenteth the
subtlety of Satan, who might by the evil slanders of the false Apostles
move these men to some remission in their calling. And to put away this
temptation, the Apostle Paul puts them in mind of this rule, and
propounding here a promise, he encourages them, notwithstanding their
persecutions, against all attempts of men, and assures them of God his
merciful protection. This promise of the favor of God to his faithful
Ministers is not only in this place, but used elsewhere of the holy Ghost, as
Deuter. 33. 11. Moses the man of God blessing the tribes of Israel, says thus
of Leui the Priest of the Lord, Bless o Lord his substance, and accept the
work of his hands: smite thorough the loins of them that rise against him,
and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. Thus he comfort Leui,
showing that his ministry should not be contemned without reuengement. And
Zachary. 3. 1. 2. it is said, And he showed me Iehoshua the hie Priest,
standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand
to resist him, and the Lord said unto Satan, the Lord reprove thee, o Satan,
even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem reprove thee. Where we see, that where
God his true Ministers are, there is a strife with Satan, who is ready for
them, but yet they are before the Angel, that is, Christ, who will smite the
proud force of Satan, that he shall not be able to withstand us. And Christ
shows, that he has a common ministry in and with his preaching, by them
beseeching some, by them also threatening others: and therefore as he has given
them gifts for his glory, so he is armed with power to confound all that lift
up an high hand against them. Hereupon he so much authoriseth his Apostles,
telling them, whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever they loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Neither does this or
such like promises only concern them, which in every point of doctrine and
discipline are sound, and without error, but even them also, who holding
carefully the foundation, which is Christ Jesus, through some infirmity of
judgment build timber, hay, or stuble, as we may see 1. Cor. 3. Wherefore, if
a man preach that we are all condemned through sin, and that there is no
salvation without Christ, and no condemnation to them that believe in Christ,
and teaches that we must be crucified to the world, and become new creatures,
though he does not all other things perfitly and absolutely, yet keeping this
foundation, he shall find mercy. But if a man destroy the Temple of God,
that is, labor more about the establishing of ceremonies, and maintaining of
errors, than he does to maintain and establish the power of the Gospel, the
Lord will surely destroy him. As then we dare not say, that a man purely
preaching Christ crucified, though he fail in some smaller points of
discipline, shall be damned: so we affirm, that a man maintaining corruptions,
and nothing laboring to preach the cross of Christ, and neglecting the
doctrine of being crucified to the world, and of becoming a new creature, is
to fear, least that if he repent not, the Lord destroy him. For if they
destroy the Temple of God, that is, the people of God by not teaching the
truth, and by keeping out from entering into the truth, not only themselves, but
others, the Lord will undoubtedly destroy such. This place makes much also for
our comfort against heresy and popery, because as God promises peace and
mercy to them that preach and embrace the doctrine of our salvation by Christ;
so he threatens on the contrary his curse and vengeance both to the
preachers and followers of the contrary doctrine, howsoever they hope for a
day, or contemn the flock of Christ. For the same God that made the
Israelites a valiant people in pursuing their enemies, so long as they
continued in the rule he had appointed them; brought them low, and made them
fly before their enemies, when they forsook this rule, so as one chased ten
of them, and ten put to flight an hundred of them. Let us boldly then both
preach and receive this doctrine of Christ* and not fear any corrupt Teachers
whatsoever, seeing their supposed felicity shall be accursed* and our supposed
misery shall be blessed. Which curse manifestly appears in many Papists this
day, that become rebels, traitors, and murderers, as also in heretics, who
are become mad and frantic, the Lord watching over them for evil and not for
good.

And upon the Israel of God. Here with the Preachers the Apostle joins the
people of God, showing that they that willingly hear, and carefully embrace
the doctrine, That by the law we are condemned for sin, and by the Gospel
we are saved through faith in Christ, and therefore from henceforth endeavor to
have this world crucified unto us, and us to be crucified to the world, and to
become new creatures, shall also be saved, and find mercy and peace. Israel
properly signifies one that prevails with God. Now, because there was
Israel in the flesh, which many did boast of, he here speaks of the
Israel in the spirit, as he speaks of the Jews Romans 2. and therefore
calls it the Israel of God, making a distinction between that counterfeit
Israel, resting in the ceremony and outward title of the name, and that true
Israel, whose praise is of God, and not of men. Before the Jews took the
whole privilege of the covenant of God, but now the Gentiles also are
contained in the covenant, because all ceremonies abolished, there is one
shepherd, and one sheepesold. This promise then belongs no more to all
professors, than to all preachers, but to them alone which are truly called to
be the true Israel of God. Whereby we are to learn, that all Christians shall
not obtain mercy and peace, but the Christians of God, that is true
Christians in life and doctrine. Wherefore all counterfeit Christians are to
fear their estate, can they never so well say their catechism, were they
never so well baptized, or confirmed, were they never so often coming to the
Church to hear the word and receive the sacrament. Now if Israel the beloved
of God not reioicing in the cross of Christ, not being crucified to the world,
not being a new creature, shall not find mercy and peace, what comfort are
we to look for being Gentiles wanting the same things? And yet we must
remember the consolation above named, that though Christians be in some points
infants in doctrine, judgment, life, and conversation, yet if they carefully
hold the foundation and build thereupon a godly life in truth and sincerity,
though in some weakness, infirmity and imperfection, they shall obtain mercy
and peace in the end. The truth of this promise, and sure wrath of God on the
wicked may appear to us both in the life and in the death of the true and
counterfeit Christians, in seeing what mercy and peace appears in the one,
what anguish and impatience breaks forth in the other. The dear Martyrs of
God neither were afraid of death on the one side, but rejoiced, in that they
were made worthy to suffer for the truth, neither senseless and blockish as
feeling no pain on the other side. The learned heretics which would seem to
suffer, either yielded being overcome with the pain, or else died like stocks
and stones, being half dead before they came to be executed. As for others
that have died in their beds, the Lord has given a manifest distinction
between the true prophets and false teachers, between christian professors,
and obstinate Papists. The children of God ever have labored to make
confession of their faith, to make known their hope, to witness their
abundant joy at their departure, neither overcome with immoderate fear,
neither sincking down in too much blockishnes: the other have died some
desperately without hope, some presumptuously without true faith, some
murmuringly without all joy.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH PART OF THE WORKS OF THE REVEREND AND FAITHFVL SERVANT OF JESUS
CHRIST, MASTER RICHARD GREENHAM, MINISTER AND PREACHER OF the Word of GOD,
containing an Exposition of the 119. Psalm, found imperfect amongst other
writings of Master GREENHAMS, and perfected by Robert Hill, Doctor in
Divinity: whose observations may be known by this mark.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADJOINED OTHER Meditations upon certain parts of the
Scripture. the Titles whereof appear in the next page following.

VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE
TC
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON,

Imprinted by Thomas Creed, for William Welbie, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swanne. 1611.

THE MEDITATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOVRTH part, are these hereafter following.
1 AN exposition of the 119. PSALM. 2 Meditations on PROVE. 4. from verse 13.
to 24. 3 Meditations on PROVE. 14. verse. 5. 6. 7. 4 The sum of the Epistle to
the HEBRVES. 5 A brief sum of ECCLESIASTES.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN, LORD. STANHOP, BARON OF HARINGTON,
VICECHAMberlaine to the Kings most excellent Majesty, and one of his Honorable
privy Council, Grace and Peace.
RIght Honorable, Though Divinity as an Hand-maide, attend all other
callings, (and by reason of her poverty serves many Masters) yet if she were
esteemed according to her worth, she were worthy to become a Mistress to the
most. Her Conception is Celestial, her Birth, in Paradise, her education in
Canaan, her food Mannah, her habit righteousness, her Arms, the Lamb, her
children Saints, her kindred Angels, her habitation upon Earth, is the Church
militant, and in Heaven the Church triumphant. This poor Lady has ever yet
lived by milk, which being drawn out of the two dugs of the Old and New
Testament, is called the sincere milk of the word of God: after which all her
true children do thirst, as after that food which must nourish their souls.

This Word it was decreed by God the Father, preached by God the Son,
inspired by God the holy Ghost, and by Angels, Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists successively made known to the children of the Church. The Church
of the Jews knew it only for a time, there he thewed his ways unto Iaakob,
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. The Church of the Gentiles shall know
it for ever: he deals now graciously with every Nation, and the Heathen have
knowledge of his Laws. True it is indeed, the Jews have the Bible, but by
reason of that curtain drawn before their eyes, they cannot see him, who is
the end of the Bible, there is a great diference between them and us.

They (as Hierome says) have the books, we the word of those books: they
the Prophets, we the understanding of the Prophets: they are killed by the
Letter, we are quickened by the Spirit: They have Barrabas the murderer
delivered: to us is delivered CHRIST the Son of God. Judas sold him, the
Jew bought him, the true Christian is the possessor of him, whom he finds in
this Word, feels in the Sacraments, and feeds on in his heart by a lively
Faith. The antiquity, necessity, dignity, and commodity of Helie writ, if
it were truly thought of as it should, would breed a greater love to the
reading of it, desire to the knowledge of it, and care to the practicing of it,
then is now a days in the most of the world. For Antiquity, it is in part as
ancient as the first Adam, and in whole, as old as the second, in whom all
the Promises contained in this book are, Yea, and Amen. For necessity, as
needful as the true knowledge of God, whom to know is eternal life. For
dignity, so greas that it alone must be called the Law of God, yea, that law
then which no man can show a better to serve God by, or by which he may
better know his duty to man. Compare we this our Christian law with those
of Lycurgus, Draco, Solon, Zaleucus, Numa Pompilius, Roman twelve tables
themselves, which Cicero prefers above all the books of Philosophers, and
the difference will be as great as the light of the Sun, to a candle, the
Cedar to the shrub, and the little Ant to the great Elephant. ^^^^^ Augustine
considering but one sentence of this book, writes thus: What disputations,
what Epist. 3. ad Volus.
writings of Philosophers, what laws of any Cities, are to be compared to
these two Precepts upon which (as CHRIST says) depend the Law and the
Prophets; Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self? Here are
Physiques, here are Ethiques, here is Logique; here is the la^da^l^ government
of the Commonwealth, etc.

Again, would we know the commodity of the Word of God, Psalm, 19. 7 etc.
David says, the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, the
Testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple the Precept
of the Lord is pure and enlighteneth the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean,
and endures for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether. They are more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold:
Sweeter are they then the honey and the honey comb. By them also is thy
servant made circumspect, and in keeping of them is great reward. 2. Tim. 3*
Paul says the Scriptures make wise to salvation, and are profitable to teach,
to reprove, to correct, and instruct, and to make the man of God, (that is Gods
minister, who only in the Scripture is termed a man of God) perfect to every
good work. And surely if men now a days could lay aside curiosity in searching
after things not meet, affection in loving and hating men too much, ambition in
seeking their own glory, self-love, in liking their own opinions best,
pertinacie in maintaining preconceited errors, and in a word, preiudicate
opinions of some men's gifts, and a popular following of most men's conceits,
and that bitter calumniation, which is used one against another; if men (I say)
could lay aside these, and only hearken what God does say in his Word, there
would be an end of many Controversies, which till then will never be without
controversy. The Prophet that has a dream, will tell a dream: he that has
Gods word, will speak Gods word, Ierem. 23. If once we reject the word of the
Lord, what wisdom is in us? I^^^ 8. 9. I had rather hear what God says by
his Prophets and Apostles, then what all the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and
Doctors, and Casuists in the world can say: though also I will be content to
hearken unto them, when they also should hearken unto the Lord.

It is well observed by Erasmus in his prefuce before Ireneus, that that holy
father did only with the weapons of the Scriptures encounter with the whole
troop of heretics. The sung of David against Goliath* the sword of Goliath
against the Philistines are not comparable to these weapons. The word of the
Lord it is the sword of the spirit, we must fight with it: the light of the
soul, see by it: the guide of our life, walk by it: the fire of the
Sanctuary, be warmed by it: the water of life be purged by it: the food of
heaven, be nourished by it* the interpreter of Gods will, we must know him by
it: the means of consolation be comforted by it: and that mallet to knock out
the brains of Antichrist* we must ever have it in our hands: If ever the son
of Perdition ^^e overcome, it must be by this means.

To the reading of this word, the Fathers, especially Chrysostom, in many
places exhorts the people; and Erasmus in his preface to the new Testament,
protesting his dissent from such as would not have private persons to read the
Bible, says, that the Sun in the firmament is not so common as the Doctrine
of Christ. No man ever hated this light, but either he that wanted yes to
behold it, or feared the light to discover his works of darkness. O then let
us read this, and to reading add meditation, to meditation prayer, to prayer
humility, to humility an aiming at Gods glory and our good, and to all a
desire to turn Gods word into good works. This every word of God is pure* and
is to be preferred before the gold of Ophir. And to the end we might all
delight in it, there is set down in the Bible all such variety of learning as
may give content to each several Reader; Histories for the Temporist,
Philosophy for the Naturalist, Ethiques for the Moralist, Mysteries for the
Artist, and languages for the Linguist. Here is a Flood for the great Elephant
to swim in, and ^* Foorde for the little lamb to walk in. Would we be
acquainted with the vanity of the world? what better means have we then the
book of the Preacher? would we know how to live in the world? whence better
can we have it, then from the book of the Proverbs? and if we would power out
prayers to God, David in his Psalms has a platform of praying, which one
little book is the Epitome of the Bible. Calvin calls it the Anatomy of the
soul: Another, the prayer-booke of the Church: Athanasius the definition of
humane life: Basil the prediction of things to come: Nazianzene the sweet
Companion of life: Augustine the common Treasury of all good things: Ambrose
the Medicine of Man's salutation: Chrysostom a Salve against every sore:
Gregory that Stone which killed Goliath: And Bernard says, that whosoever
faithfully and devoutly does sing the Psalms, in a sort is in association with
the Angels: without which devotion, (what Quirister soever) shall sing them in
the Church, I may say unto him as Augustine once said to the singing men of
his time, Plus placet Deo mugitus Boum, latratus Canum, grunnitus porcorum,
hinnitus Equorum* quam cantus Clericorum luxuriantium: The bellowing of oxen,
the barking of dogs* the g^unting of swine, and the ^eying of horses, do more
please God then the singing of luxurious Quiristers.

Now though every Psalm be of special Observation; yet this one is especially
remarkable. It was penned by King David, that sweet singer of Israel, it has
in every verse a commendation of the word of God, it is artificially written,
every eight verses beginning in the Hebrew tongue, with one Letter of the
Hebrew Alphabet: and the longest Meditation that ever David had, either
concerning Gods word or works, it seems he had it when he penned this
Psalm* which the Jews used as a Catechism for their children To the end
this Psalm might be understood of all* it has been expounded by many
worthy men, especially by that worthy man of God, M. Richard Greenham,
memorable in our Church. It is pity that all his meditations on this Psalm
come not yet to light, but that in former editions about forty verses were
left vnexpounded.

Now that godly man who has the sale of his works, was very desirous that
there might be an Exposition upon every verse, and to that purpose has
employed me. And I finding the four first verses expounded by a worthy
Elisha, upon whom the spirit of this Eliah does rest, was bold to set M. Dod
of Hanwell.
down the same as I found it: the rest I have finished according to the grace
given unto me, and thus offer them to the Church of God.

I remember that an ancient Father says, Iudicem aditurus* patr^num quaere,
Must you appear Gregory.
before the Judge, seek a Patron. I am now to appear before as many Judges as
Readers, I desire a Patron: and I find none fitter then your Honor, who having
for many years post been a bountiful Patron to my labors in the Church,
will (I doubt not) vouchsafe to become a Patron of these labors for the
Church. If ever we must look for a blessing from Counselors, it is then when
they consult with the Lord, and are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. Among
many such Honorable Senators in our Kingdom, we have good cause to number
your Honor. What Sabbath is there, which you pass over without the morning and
evening sacrifice? what Minister is there who preaches before you, whom you
send away without a blessing? what month is there, in which you once are not
a Communica^t at the Eucharist? what day is there, that passes over your head,
in which you use not both prayer and meditation? You were once gracious in the
eyes of that Queen, then whom the Church never had a more nourcing mother:
you are now gracious in the eyes of that King, then whom the Church will never
have a more nourcing Father: and in this honorable Parish wherein you live,
what good you do by your own example, in frequenting Gods house, your
liberality and bounty in maintaining Gods Saints, and your care, that your
family may be the Church of God, I had rather be silent, then say little. Your
old age is a crown of glory, being thus found in the generation of the
righteous. The consideration of your honorable respect to piety and godliness,
has made me a long time to honor you in mine heart, and the consideration of
your* favor to me a poor preacher, emboldeneth me to publish these my
labors under your Honorable name. If it please you to allow that your name,
which I am persuaded is written in the book of life, may remain in this
living and worthy book, I have that which I desire by this Dedication.

Thus craving pardon, I humbly take my leave, beseeching the Lord to continue
you long, a trusty Counselor to our most gracious King: your Honorable
Lady, the Lady Margaret, a precious Jewel upon your right hand: and your
hopeful and happy Children, as Olive plants round about your Table. London:
From Salisburie Rents, at S. Martins in the fields. November the first. 1611.

At your Honors service, Robert Hill.

WHOSOEVER IS DESIROVS TO LEARN AND REMEMber the Word of God, that he might
live after it, let him consider of that which is written in the 119. Psalm.
ALEPH. THE FIRST PORTION.
Verse I. Blessed are those that are upright in their way, and walk in the
Laws of the Lord.
THat which all men seek for and few find, the same is set out in the word of
God, namely felicity and true happiness. And because God would have all men to
know, wherein their blessed estate does consist, therefore Christ begins his
first Sermon with it Math. 5. David his first Psalm with it, Psalm. 1. And the
Prophet in this place his first verse with it, describing therein a blessed
man. A description opposite to all that vain felicity, which ever vain
Philosophers devised out of their deep speculations: or profane men frame out
of their corrupt affections: not consisting in pleasures, riches, honors,
greatness, in civil honesty, formal hypocrisy: or the whole possibility of
nature, but in the sincerity of the heart, and continual walking in the ways
of God. Solomon saw this, and therefore after he had sought happiness in all
things of this life, he wills us to hear the end of all, namely, to fear
God and keep his commandments, for thus says he, this is the whole man.

If this (says one) be the whole man, then without this man is no man; no
though he wallowe in wealth, swim in pleasures, and be carried alofte upon
the wings of Honor. For first all these, (though they were all in the
possession of some one man) cannot possibly fill the unlimited desire of the
soul. So unquenchable is the thirst of man's soul, until it bathe it self in
the river of life, and in the unmeasurable Ocean of goodness and wisdom.
Secondly, they cannot secure the conscience distressed with the apprehension of
the wrath of God, or prevent his judgments, as we may see in Nebucadnezzar:
Dan. 4. and his son Belshazzar: Dan. 5. verse. 6. and Prophesied of Zeph: 1.
17. 18. Ezech: 7. 19. Obad: 4. When our sins are ripe, and ready to take the
flame of Gods fiery indignation, then neither the wedge of gold, nor the
height of place can privilege or protect us. Lastly, they cannot stretch
themselves to eternity: they all can bring us no further then our death bed:
then are they utterly disappointed of their weak and imaginary sweetness, and
are wholly turned into wounds and wormwood, into gall and vexation. They leave
indeed a sting in the conscience that never dies; but themselves die all at our
deaths, and lie down with us in the grave, Job: 20. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 10., etc.

But to come to the blessed man indeed; in that when the Prophet would make
known unto all the world, who are in the happiest estate, and in the highest
place of account with God, he describes and sets them forth by this
property: that they are sincere in heart, and upright in life and conversation;
in a word, such as truly fear the Lord. The point hence to be noted in
general, is this, that Grace and Religion is the way to all Doct. 1. Religion
is the way to happiness. Psalm. 1. 1. 2 etc. and 1 12. 1. Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
blessedness.

This doctrine the Psalmist confirms unto us in sundry other places, as
Psalm. 1. and 112. etc. In the former whereof he declares, who is a man
truly religious, to wit, he that escheweth ill counsels, and sinful
practices, and on the other side, embraces and delights in goodness and
godliness, and in the means of obtaining and increasing the same: and then he
pronounces such a man blessed: Blessed (says he) is the man that does ^ct
walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, etc. But
his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he meditate day and
night. And to the same effect is that in the other Psalm before named: Blessed
is the man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments,
etc. Throughout which Psalm, we may observe as the true and certain notes of
a righteous man, so also his privileges, which are very many, and very great,
both in regard of himself, and of his posterity, which shall speed the better
for his sake. Notable likewise is that place of Deuteromonie, where the Lord
speaks unto his Church in this manner. Blessed art thou o Israel who is like
any ^ thee, o people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword
of thy glory? which speech is not to be understood, as pertaining only to that
nation, but as belonging to all that are the ^^ue Israel of God, and that serve
him with an upright and faithful heart. Now what says he of them? Who is like
unto thee, O Israel? Why, if they should have looked to outward things, they
might have answered, the Egyptians, the Edomites, Assyrians, nay the very
Canaauites themselves are like unto us, yea far beyond us: for at that time
when this was spoken, they were in the wilderness, traveling toward the
promised land: and what great matters had they then? Moses who was the best of
them, had not a house to rest his head in: none of them could say: this is my
ground, there is my corn, thus large are my reuenews by the year, etc. but
they were all tenants at will at a days, or at an hours warning, or less,
even as Gods pleasure was: yet the Lord makes a challenge against all the
world: Who is like unto thee o people saved by the Lord? meaning indeed, that
no nation under heaven was comparable unto them in regard of the wonderful
things that God had wrought for them, and in regard of those heavenly
prerogatives which he had vouchsafed unto them: the meanest hewer of wood, or
drawer of water, amongst them, was to be preferred before the mightiest Monarch
in the world: and that may be said of all true Christians, which was spoken of
them: Who is like unto thee O people saved by the Lord?

The truth of this will more evidently appear, if we well weigh the things
that follow: Namely,

1. What misery grace does free us from. 2. What good things it makes us to
enjoy, 1. In this life. 1. Estimation. 2. Safety. 3. Comfort.
2. In the life to come, all manner of happiness.

1. First therefore that we may see what misery it frees us from, we must
consider, 1. What misery grace freeth us from.
that men naturally are the children of wrath under the curse and malediction
of God, subject to horrible vexations and terrors: all their life long, they
live in fear of death, and of such judgments as are forerunners of death:
their table is a snare, and their prosperity their ruin: their adversity is
imbittered, and their callings accursed, and in a word, nothing makes them
better, but every thing a great deal worse; all being infected and poisoned
unto them by their own sins, and Gods fearful vengeance upon the same. If
they live, it is to the increase of their damnation: if they die, they go to
take present possession of destruction: if they refuse to eat and drink, they
Note.
are murderers of themselves: if they do eat and drink, they are usurpers of
that which is none of their own. If they come not to the Word, and Sacrament,
they are contemners of Gods ordinances: if they do come, they are profaners of
the same, and so shall be further hardened to their final perdition: and is not
this a wretched case? Though for their apparel, they were clothed as Solomon
in the midst of his royalty: though their Robes were as rich as was Aarons
Ephod, or breast plate, or the most costliest parts of his garments, all were
of no worth without grace: though they fed on the daintiest dishes, and did
eat Angels food (as the Israelites are said to do) yet if they be sinful
and rebellious, they shall perish as Corah, Dathan, and Akiron, and many other
of them did. Though their habitations were as sumptuous and delightful as
Paradise was, yet they could have no more comfort therein, then Adam had, when
he had once broken the commandment of GOD, in eating of the forbidden fruit:
Notwithstanding, all things remaining in their excellency as before, yet he
was surprised with the terrors and fears of a guilty conscience, and could
take no pleasure in the goodly rivers, in the pleasant fruits, in the variety
of all the creatures that were in the garden of Eden, etc. but he was feign to
fly from Gods presence, and to hide himself among the Trees of the garden.
And last of all, though their dignity were never so great, their possessions
never so ample and large, and their substance never so plentiful and
abundant, yet they could have no more comfort in ante, or all these things,
then Belshazzar that impious King had: who for all his valiant Captains and
Soldiers, for all his great cheer and plenty of wine: for all his iollitie
and triumphing over Gods people: for all his merry companions that he had about
him, and all the means that he had to comfort him; yet was he in such
horror, when Daniel. 5. 6.
he saw on the wall the Handwriting against him, that his countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, and the joints of his Loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against an other.

This (and much more lamentable then can possibly be expressed) is the case of
all unregenerate men: And how great then must the excellency of Grace needs
be, which freeth a man from this woeful estate and condition? Yet this is not
all, but as it freeth men from this misery, So

2. Secondly, it brings men to the enioyment of all good things; and that
first in 2 What good things Grace makes us to enjoy.
this life it procures them the benefits following:

Namely,

1. First, a good estimation: So that it may be well said, that the righteous
is more excellent then his Neighbor; and that of all other, they are the most
glorious people, that 1 A good estimation. Prou. 12. 26.
have the spirit of Grace and of glory dwelling in their hearts. For they are
precious in Gods sight, as being his chief Treasure: precious in the eyes of
his people: precious in the account of the Angels: yea, reverent in the sight
of the very wicked, who esteem them to be honest men, and dare trust them
before any other, many times with their goods, with their children, and their
portions* yea, and with their souls also. For when they are in any extremity,
lying upon their deathbeds, or the like, oh then they cry out! Send for such
a Preacher: send for this or that good man or woman: now their prayers and
their speeches might do me good, which heretofore I have rejected, or lightly
esteemed: and then none is to be compared to them, none to be sought unto in
respect of them. And when they labor to disgrace and vilify them, by terming
them Dissemblers and Hypocrites, Note.
eue^ then against their wills, they highly commend them; for it is in effect,
as if they should say: These men pretend they have many virtues in them, but I
would not have men think, that they are so good and godly, as they seem to
be: If they be, then they must needs be an excellent people indeed; (for
there is none that has any civility in him, but he will acknowledge that it
is a good thing to hear, and read, and confer, and to spend much time in
prayer, as Gods servants do; but they cry out, that they do not these things
well, nor with a good heart.) Now, if Christians consciences do bear them
witness, that they do perform these duties in uprightness, then they have
the testimony of ungodly men themselves on their sides: and till they can
disprove the soundness of their hearts, they must, whether they will or not,
justify their behavior.

Thus we see how godliness wins a good estimation.

Now secondly, it does also bring safety with it: it sets men out of
gunshot, so that 2. Safety.
neither the Devil, nor all the powers of hell can annoy* or hurt them: nor
any, or all of the devils instruments in the world prevail against them, for
their overthrow: for the Lord is evermore a shield and buckler unto them, so
that they must strike through him, before they can come at them. He will cover
them under his wings, and they shall be safe under his feathers, Psame 91. 4.

Thirdly, the virtue and power of grace is such, that it makes Gods children
to rejoice, even in affliction, as was verified in David, who when he had many
malicious adversaries 3 Consolation. Romans 5. 3
against him, and many troubles beset him round about, yet he had more joy of
heart then they had, when their wheat and their wine did abound And so it is
with all Gods setuants: as their sufferings are many, so are they refreshed
with manifold consolations. Psalm, 4. 2. Cor. ^.


And when outward matters of rejoicing are furthest removed from them, then
are they driven nearer unto God, the fountain of all true comfort, and by that
means their hearts are exceedingly revived. And if they be so much cheered in
the times of their greatest adversity, how much more joyful are they in the
days of their prosperity, when he makes them to rest in green pastures,
and leads them by the still waters: preparing for them Psalm, 23.
a Table in the sight of their adversaries, annoynting their heads with oil,
and causing their cups to runne-ouer, as the Psalmist speaks. And they
withal, have a principal care to entertain Gods blessings with
thankfulness, and to serve him with a good and thankful heart, in the use and
enioyments thereof.

Now if their estate be so blessed in this life, what shall their happiness be
when they depart out of this life, to have the fruition of those joys, which
are prepared for the Saints, in the kingdom of glory? where all tears shall
be wiped away from their eyes, and they The happiness in the Life to come.
being altogether freed from sin and sorrow, shall receive an immortal
Crown of blessedness with the Saints and Angels, in Gods own presence, where
is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore; where
there shall be no parting of company, nor possibility of any unkindness, nor
tediousnes in conuersing together. Psalm 16.


Much more might be spoken of the excellency of this estate, and yet when all
has been said that can be, it is nothing in comparison of that which the
thing is in itself, and we shall find it to be, when we shall lay down this
body of corruption, and be clothed upon with perfect glory. But yet that the
dignity thereof, may somewhat more clearly be seen into, let us consider a
little further of the

1. Price. -- thereof. 2. Rarenes, and thereof. 3. Continuance thereof.
1. First, concerning the price that was laid down for the purchasing of it,
it was the greatest that ever was given for any thing; For there goes more to
the buying of a The price of Grace.
Christian, then to the making of the world* For in the Creation, GOD did but
say the Word, and all things were presently formed according to their several
kinds: but in the work of Redemption, God was not only to say, but to pay
also, and that full dearly, even the blood of his only Son, which was of an
infinite value. And therefore if things are to be esteemed according to that
which Wisemen will give for them, surely the estate of Christianity must
needs be worthy high estimation, since the wise GOD provided it for his
children, at such an inestimable reckoning.

2. Further in respect of the rareness thereof, it is to be accounted very
admirable. If The rarenes of it.
things that are very dear were also very common, that would diminish some
part of their worth: but as for this, it is both precious and rare. There are
but a very few selected ones, that the Lord has singled out, to be partakers
of the life of Grace, and to be afterward Luke. 11. 32. Matthew. 7. 13. 14.
Heirs of the Kingdom of Glory, which makes it to be a gift of far
greater estimation.

3. Lastly, if it were both dear and rare, yet if it were to be enjoyed but
a while, 3 The continuance, of it.
it were the less to be regarded: Therefore this, addition there is unto the
happiness of this estate, that it is also durable, yea, Everlasting. And
whereas all worldhe Excellency, and all Earthly promotions are Temporary, and
vanishing; So that a man may be very high this day, and as low ere the
morrow, and none can be happy in possessing those things, through the loss
whereof, he may so quickly become miserable: it is otherwise with them that are
in the state of grace, for that never falls: once a Christian, and ever a
Christian: as the Lords purpos^ changes not, so neither does our condition
change: ^ut if we have begun in grace, we shall end in glory, that never shall
have end. Psalm. 16 11. Dan. 12. 2.

Is it so, that Religion and true piety, is the ready way to the highest
advancement* then Use. 1.
hence let us learn to set our hearts chiefly thereupon, and above all the
treasures in the world, principally to affect that. We account it good
husbandry in the first place, to s^eke after those things that will do us most
good: if silver be offered, we will prefer it before brass, and if gold be
offered, we will take it rather than silver. Now concerning this heavenly
wisdom, it is said: Receive mine instruction and not silver, and knowledge
rather then fine Pro. 8. 10. 11.
gold: For wisdom is better then precious stones, and all treasures are not
to b^e compared unto her. And this should encourage us rather to use all
industry for the obtaining of this ble^^ed estate, because it is a thing
haue-able. It were in vain for a base person to sue to be a King, a Duke, or a
Lord: none almost is so foolish, as to seek for such preferments, because they
know it would be but lost labor. But there is not the meanest servant,
slave, or bondsman, but may attain to this spiritual dignity, which is far
beyond all advancement that the kingdom of this world can possibly yield. He
that can pray, hear, meditate, confer, and judge himself in secret before
he comes to the Sacrament, and with all good care and conscionable respect
use all Gods ordinances, for the obtaining of faith and other graces, which do
ever accompany the same, shall be sure of good and happy success: for the
Lord will be sound of those that seek him with a true heart; therefore let us
not so cast our eyes on earthly commodities, as that in the mean time we
neglect this pearl of price, and this inestimable Jewel, that will so
exceedingly enrich us. The Apostle tells us, that those 2. Cor. 9. 21.
that run in a race for a prize, though it be but a garland that is set up,
so that they can gain only some small credit of their agility and nimblenesse
in ou^ running one another, yet they will put off all that might clogge and
hinder them in their race; but especially if they should run for a crown of
gold: neither will they be so foolish as to stoop down to take up every
pin or point that lies in the way; and yet they run but at an
uncertainty: when they have done their best, another may carry away both the
honor and commodity from them: and certain it is, that but one alone can
win the prize: and even he also, though he have the applause at one time,
may go away with the disgrace at another, or if his credit do continue all
his life time, yet death will take it away at last. From all which the Apostle
would have us draw this conclusion, that if such kind of persons,
notwithstanding all that has been said, will so bestirre themselves, and
seek to acquit themselves every way like men: then much more ought we to put
our selves to it, and with all alacrity run the race that is set before us,
since we run not at an uncertainty, but are sure to obtain the crown; o^e
shall not prevent nor deprive another, but all shall undoubtedly get that which
they do expect: and especially seeing that withal we strive for an
incorruptible crown, and shall attain unto, not a fading and vanishing, but an
abiding and everlasting dignity.

O but (will some say) if we bestow our p^^n^s and endeavors so much about
spiritual Object.
things, in the mean time, we shall neglect those earthly things that are
needful, and so bring our selves to poverty. N^y, not so, provision for our
everlasting Answer. 1. Tim. 4. 8.
estate, does never impair our present estate: for g(...)th the promises of
this life, and of that which is to come: and thereby shall all matters be
blessed unto us.

Have we inheritance, wealth, reputation, dignity, etc. This will assure us
that we have Note.
a good ti^e unto all, and season and sweeten all, that every one of them shall
be comfortable and profitable unto us, making it clear unto our hearts and
consciences, that the Lord sends them in mercy, as pledges of greater
m^^ters that he minds to bestow upon us.

Have we not these outward things? Godliness will make a supply in stead of
all: for that is great gain with contentment, in comparison of which, all the
promises of contentedness 2. Tim. 6. 6.
that other things make unto us, will be found to be but mere illusions;
because it certifieth our souls that God will provide sufficiently for us,
which persuasion alone is able to stay the restless and unsettled minds of the
sons of men, from pursuing after the unprofitable, deceitful, and lying
vanities of this present evil world.

Seeing religion is such an incomparable treasure, it should instruct us in the
second place to have the means in due estimation, whereby we may be made truly
religious, by Use. 2.
which our minds that are blind, may be enlightened, our hearts of crooked may
be made straight, of proud may be made humble, and of fraudulent may be made
true and faithful. And those means are the Word, the Sacrament, Prayer, and
the like, which are the steps whereby we must ascend unto this honorable
estate: for it is as possible for men to make stairs to climb up unto the
sky, as for us without these, to ascend unto heaven, by any devises of our own
framing.

The word is the key that must open hell gates, to set us at liberty from the
bonds of sin, of Satan, and of death; and to unlock heaven gates, that we
may have entrance into glory: in which respect it is, that Christ says unto
Peter, that he would give unto him (and consequently to all Ministers of the
Gospel) the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is the dispensation of the
word, which makes the way unto heaven lie open to all such as by faith receive
the same into their hearts. So that we should not come unto the means with a
b^se conceit, or light estimation thereof, but with a large and ample desire
and expectation of taking benefit thereby. If men can once espy a way how they
may rise in the world, either in great wealth or promotion, they will be most
industrious and laborious in that course, they will refuse no pains in seeds
time, though the weather be unseasonable and cold* and their work every way
troublesome: but they will put themselves to it with all care and industry, in
hope (though it be but an uncertain hope) of bettering their estate. So those
that live by faires and markets, will not fail one of them ordinarily, neither
heat nor cold, wind nor rain, nor any the like impediments shall hinder
them from pursuing their commodity; and why then should we be negligent, and
play the sluggards while our seeds* time lasts, and the Lord bids us
plough Ietem. 4.
up the sallow ground of our hearts, that he may sow therein the seed of life
which will never fail to yield us a plentiful harvest, if we can wait upon
him for the same? And why should we be slack and careless when our chief
market days and fair days come, and not rather set our hearts and endeavors
to seek after those things, which all that seek shall find, and being found
will make us men for ever.

This should be an encouragement unto us, not to think any thing too much,
that we Use. 3.
can do or suffer, in or for the profession of Christianity.

Oh, but it is an hard matter (may some say) to fast and pray, and mourn, and
grieve our Object. Difficulties in Christianity.
hearts, continually for our sins land when we have done all, to be derided
and maligned, persecuted and slain for a good cause^ and besides all these, to
feel Gods hand scourging us, sometimes with poverty and want, some times with
fears and terrors: sometimes with temptations and inward conflicts, etc.

These things seem very great, and very tedious indeed to flesh and blood:
Answer.
but in truth they are but small, yea matters of nothing, if we consider what
is the use of them, and what will be the end of them; and therefore let us
remember for our comfort when we are in this strait and difficult and
unpleasant way, that we are Note.
going to be installed into a kingdom: and who is there that being offered a
Baronrie, or a Lordship, yea though it be but a Farm, if so be he will take
the pains to come for it: who is there (I say) that would take exception, and
say, alas the air is clowdy, and the weather uncertain, nay it begins to
rain, or hail, or snow already, and therefore I will even stay at home, and
never wet my foot for the matter? Nay if there be but likelihood of some
smaller gain, and the weather foul, and the ways deep, and themselves
somewhat out of temper also, yet they will adventure to go through all, and
rather ferry over, than come short of that profit that is offered: how much
more then ought we to break through all impediments, and swallow up all
difficulties with the consideration of this, that our iourny tends not to the
getting of some small commodity, or to the purchasing of some worldly
possessions, or to the obtaining of any earthly preeminence or preferment
whatsoever: but that we are traveling toward our own country, where we
shall receive an inualuable and eternal crown of glory? and albeit we must
pass through many rough and craggy, and thornie ways, and meet with sundry
things, that will be very irksome and unpleasant; yet let us make account
withal, that we shall find many sweet comforts, and joys unspeakable, and
glorious in the midst of our pilgrimage, and in the end shall have the
fruition of that happiness, which will make amends for all. And this was it
that made the Apostle Paul so comfortable, in the midst of all his sufferings
Therefore we faint not, (says he) but though our outward man perish, 2. Cor.
4. 16. 17
yet our inward man is renewed daily. For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of
glory. Where we may note, that when he speaks of the happiness of another
life, he magnifieth the same exceedingly, both for the worth of it, and for
the continuance of it: calling it a far most excellent, and eternal weight
of glory. To be excellent is much, to be most excellent, is far more: to be
far most excellent, is yet an higher degree: but when he calls it a far
most excellent, and withal an eternal weight of glory, it makes a great
addition unto all the former, and shows that it is indeed, an inconceiuable
and unutterable happiness, that in the heaven we shall enjoy: but on the
other side, he counts his affliction light and momentanie, because it
passes as it were in a thought, and is a thing of nothing, being laid in the
balance, against the never fading bliss, that we shall shortly come unto. And
as for that weight that is in the tribulations of this life, it is but as an
heavy bag of gold, that will make the heart of the owner light, in the very
carriage of it, and so much the more light, by how much weightier it is.

And therefore by all these motives we should persuade, yea, even compel our
souls unto patience under the cross of CHRIST, and to perseverance in the
practice of all the Hebr. 10. 33. 34.
duties of godliness: a pattern of which patience we have in the Hebrews. Who
after they had received the light, endured a great sight in afflictions. Partly
(says the Apostle) while ye were made a gazing-stocke, both by reproaches and
afflictions, and partly while ye became companions unto them, which were so
tossed to and fro. For both ye sorrowed with me for my bonds, and suffered
with joy the spoiling of your goods. And why? knowing in your selves that you
have in heaven a better and more enduring substance. If their riches had been
of such value as they made show of, and as the world takes them for, they
could not have been so quickly taken from them; but since they had betaken them
to their wings, these faithful ones knew, that heaven, which was reserved for
them in stead thereof, was far more excellent, and more durable, and
therefore full glad were they, that for the cause of God, they had made so
happy and so blessed an exchange.

Verse 2. Blessed are those that seek him with their whole heart, etc.
THese words having been expounded before, offer unto us this doctrine: That
whosoever Doct. 2.
would have sound happiness, must have a sound heart.

So much sincerity as there is, so much blessedness there will be: and
according to the degree of our hypocrisy, will be the measure of our misery.
It is not in the action done, or in the words spoken, that blessedness
consists, but in the quality of them, that all be done and spoken soundly and
sincerely: this is required Psalm 15. that he that will be a member of the
Church militant on earth, and of the Church triumphant in heaven, must walk
uprightly, and speak the truth from his heart. And again in another Psalm, a
question is made to the same effect, Who shall dwell in the mountain Psalm. 24.
3. 4.
of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place? and the answer is: He
that has innocent hands, and a pure heart, which has not lift up his mind to
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. In which words we have a description of a
sound hearted man.

1 By his actions, that he deals uprightly, and so has innocent hands. 2 By
his affection, that he lifts not up his mind to vanity, that is, sets
not his heart on any earthly thing: in which sense that phrase is used in the
original. Ier. 22. 27. 3 By his speeches, that he has not sworn, nor any way
spoken deceitfully.
The reasons to confirm this point, are drawn from the great inconveniences,
that will follow on the contrary; for if there be in any a fraudulent and
deceitful heart.

1 First, there is a deadly quarrel, and mortal enmity between God and him:
for who Reasons.
are they that are reconciled to the Lord, whose sins are covered by the
righteousness 1 God has a quarrel against hypocrites.
of his son, so that they shall not be imputed unto them? even they In whose
spirit there is no guile. And what will follow then for those, whose hearts are
full of fraud and deceit, but that they must needs be destitute of all hope
of the pardon of their sins, and so consequently lie open to the strokes of
Gods vengeance due unto the same?

2 And as their persons are hateful to the Lord, so are their services
abhorred of him: Psalm. 32. 3.
for indeed they are not the services of God, but of Satan, and of their own
flesh: and 2 He loathes their services.
therefore be they never so glorious in outward show, and let them pretend
never so much zeal in the performance of them, yet the Lord has them in utter
detestation: As we may plainly see in the hypocritical Pharisees, they would
be every where praying with Matthew. 6.
great devotion: and very often fasting, with great austeritie, and blowing a
trumpet to give notice unto men of their almesdeeds and liberality, and
striving with all their might by external observations, to win themselves
the praise of holy and zealous men: Luke. 15. 16.
yet for all this, our Savior sharply rebukes them, saying; Ye are they
which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts, for that
which is highly esteemed before men, is an abomination in the sight of God. It
is as loathsome unto him as carions, or toads, or any such creatures as man's
nature does most abhor, can be unto us.

Thirdly, this is another misery of hypocrites, that they live in continual
fear and 3 They live in continual danger.
danger: there are holes in their maskes, (at least there will be) and their
double dealing shall be seen into: it shall sometime or other come to light,
how they have abused Gods presence, and dissembled with their brethren, by
making fair shows, and pretenses of that which they never meant: their sins
shall not always lie hid, but either they will give over all, in time of
persecution, as the stony ground did; or in hope of promotion, as Judas, and
Achitophel did, and so discover their false-heartednes: or else it shall be
drawn Luc 8. 13.
forth by their speeches, in their merriments, or in their distempers; or else
Gods spirit in godly men, shall descrie it, by working in their hearts, a
vehement suspicion of them, and causing them with a judicious eye, more
narrowly to pry into their works, and ways. By one such means or other, God
will lay them open to the view of the world: so that being in such peril, they
cannot but have a fearful heart, and a restless conscience. And to this
purpose, notable is that saying of Solomon: He that walks uprightly, walks
boldly Prou. 10. 9.
or surely, but he that peruerteth his ways shall be known. Whence it is
apparent, that the upright man needs not to fear any thing, he needs not
to be afraid of ill men: for though they may disgrace him, they cannot shame
him: he needs not to be afraid of good men: for the oftener he speaks unto
them, and conuerseth with them, the more he is approved by them: neither
needs he to be afraid of God, for he that searches the heart and the
reins, knows and allows of the integrity of their souls. They have no
cause of fear for the present, because all things go well with them: neither
is there any for afterward, because all things shall go well with them, for
they shall never fall away from God: None can pluck them out of his hand;
Satan cannot, because he that is Ioh. 10. 29. Ioh 4. 4.
in us, is stronger then he that is in the world: sin cannot, because grace
will prevail against it: the world cannot, because this is our victory,
whereby we overcome the world, 1. John. 5. 4.
even our faith. And the Apostle concludes generally for all other matters,
that neither Romans 8. 38. 39.
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. What follows now on the contrary part for hypocrites? but he that
peruerteth his way, that is, allows himself in any ill course, though never
so secretly, shall be known: that is, his vile and wretched dissembling shall
be detected, if not in this world, yet when the thoughts of all hearts shall
be made manifest: they shall be found out first or last, and therefore they
cannot but walk fearfully in their ill courses, wherein they walk and give
liberty unto themselves.

This should make us exceeding careful, and wary when we offer our selves to
Gods Use. 1.
services, to search and dig deep into our hearts, that we may cast out all
the loose earth that is there, and so our building may be on a rock, and not
on the sand. We must purge Matthew. 22.
away that leaue^ of hypocrisy, that has wholly infected our nature, that so
we be not found to halt in our worshipping of God, least he take us with the
manner, as he did him that came without a wedding garment, whom he singled out
from all the guests that were present, and that not only to ignominy and
reproach, but to everlasting punishment and torment in hell fire. It is very
dangerous then we see to deal hypocritically with God; it is not safe with men
to pretend and say one thing before their faces, and to speak and do another
behind their backs, because they may peradventure discern it: but it is more
dangerous to dissemble with God, for he does certainly discern it, and will as
certainly punish it.

Many, when they are reproved, or admonished, will snuff at it, and say* What
need you be so hot in the matter? I hope you cannot charge me to be either
Whore or Thief. But though man cannot charge you (which al cannot say) is that
a sufficient discharge for you? Nay you must look unto it, that God find not
matter sufficient to convict you, either of those particulars, or of worse and
viler offenses.

And let none reply, that it is sufficient, that we frequent Sermons, and
partake of the Sacrament, and come to prayer in public, and use prayer in the
family, and perform other duties that Christian men and women should do, and
no more is required at our hands.

Yes, God does require more then this: he calls for the heart in all these:
though a Answer.
man be present at never so many Sermons, yet if his mind run after his
pleasures, or after Prou. 23.
his covetousness, so that when his body travels one way, his affections travel
another way, all his hearing is nothing worth.

And so in prayer, though there be never so many excellent words, apt terms,
and goodly sentences, yet if they come from the head and not from the heart,
from wit and memory, and not from the inward feeling of the soul, they cannot
be accepted. God professes indeed, that he will be found of those that seek
him: but then they must seek him with their whole Ierm. 29.
heart: that is, truly and fervently: they must not come with a part of their
heart: for then they bring no part in Gods account: but with all their heart:
for he that gives him not al, gives nothing at all ^o for the works of our
calling, if we do not labor therein as Gods servants, we can expect no wages,
we may have commendation from men, but we shall have ^ check and rebuke from
the Lord; men's tongues may magnify us, but Gods hand will confound us.

Therefore let us, when we enter upon any good way, endeavor with an upright
and true heart to go forward in the same, otherwise it had been better never
to have entered hereinto. Now that we may make sure work in this regard, let
us try our sincerity by the good effects that do ever accompany the same.

1 One note therefore of a sound heart (which we should take for our trial)
is to be Use. 1.
universal in our desires, and in our practice, that we have respect to every
commandment of Marks of an upright heart.
God, to the first table as well as to the second, and to the second as well as
to the first: that we be righteous toward men, as well as religious toward
God; that we look to our hearts as well as to our actions, and to our actions
as well as to our hearts* Contrary to this 1. Universal obedience.
rule is the dealing of those that will give dispensations unto themselves for
many things, so that they can make a show of some thing. What if we be not so
strict for the Sabbath? Psalm. 119. 8.
(think they) yet we are no swearers nor blasphemers: what if we take a
little liberty for vain sports and idle discourses? these are but trifles;
we will not be adulterers, nor filthy speakers, etc. This is a shrewd sign
of an heartfull fraught with guile and deceit: the property of a good
conscience is to be willing and desirous in all things to walk honestly. If
one be never so strict for the Sabbath, if he will help himself by a lie
now and then, for his commodity, or for his credit sake: and if a man be never
so rigorous and severe for matters of justice, and yet will steal time from
the Lord upon his day, and spend the same in his own businesses and affairs,
whether secretly or openly: and so for any other thing, if we make bold to
borrow a little law of God; this is an argument of a false and dissembling
heart: and therefore this must be taken heed of, as being very dangerous.

A second mark is to have a continual increase in godliness: neither to wax
worse, 2 Growth in grace.
nor to stand at a stay, but still to strive to grow better and better, as the
Apostle Paul testifies that he himself did: I forget that which is behind,
and endeavor my self to that which is before: and follow hard toward the
mark, to the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. 13. 14.
And having showed what he did himself, he annexeth an exhortation also for
us: Let us therefore as many as are perfect, (that is sincere, and void of
gross hypocrisy) be thus minded. Verse 15.
He was not as a vain foolish man, who running in a race will be ever and anon
looking back how much ground he has rid: but his eye was upon the mark,
considering how much he had yet to run, how far off he was from
perfection: and the same mind should be in us, and will be in as many of us,
as are endued with the same spirit that Paul was. We must every day labor to
abound more and more in all wisdom and in all goodness. Romans 15. 14.
If we prayed once a day in private, and that somewhat coldly at the first,
we must afterward pray twice or thrice, or oftener in a day, as occasion is
offered, and that more fervently, Note.
and feelingly then we did in the beginning. If we did read and meditate more
seldom, and with greater weakness and distraction at our first entrance into
profession, in our proceeding, we must use those exercises more frequently,
and perform them more seriously and cheerfully: and the like may be said for
all other duties. Thus if we can labor to do, and when we slip, and so are
stayed now and then in our race, yet if we recover Note.
our selves with speed, and set sure^, and look better to our steps, and make
more haste in our way then we did before: we must not be discouraged, though
we find not so good a progress as were to be wished for: God will accept of
our endeavor, and his spirit will bear us witness that we have a true
heart; Notwithstanding we come far short of that we should, and other of
Gods Saints do attain unto. But on the contrary, if we stand at a stay, or
start aside like a broken bow, and so turn back again unto folly, it is
much to be suspected that we never had any soundness in us. 3 A constant and
conscionable use of all the means.


A third token of sincerity is, constantly and carefully to use all the good
means of attaining to goodness, and to eschewall the inducements that may
allure unto evil. Does any one hate swearing? then let him show it by
avoiding the company of blasphemers. Does any one loath impuritie and filthiness?
then let him testify it by separating himself from all wanton and lascivious
company, and from all suspected persons and places. If one pretend that he^
hates these and the like evils, and yet will adventure upon the bait, Note.
it is sure that such a one wants that truth of heart, which should be in
him, and is in all, so far as they are sound within.

So for the contrary; Does any one desire that grace and religion may flourish
in his heart, and that the fruits thereof may appear in his life? then let
him use all private and public religious exercises, whereby these things may
be wrought and increased in him; and delight in such company, as both by
precept and example may further him therein. Does any one wish that he could
get victory over some special sins and corruptions that he is troubled
withal? then let him enter into combat against them, as the Apostle did, Rom:
7. Let him humble himself by fasting and prayer, and complain and cry unto
the Lord for the repressing of them, and get such forcible reasons against
them out of the Scriptures, as may quell the strength and violence of them: and
thus a sincere heart will do. But if we make show that we desire to be
godly and religious, and yet use not the Note.
means at all, or but some of the^: or if we use them all, it is but by fittes
and starts: or if we use them constantly, yet we do it but remisly and
coldly, we cannot have any assurance that our hearts are faithful unto the
Lord. 4 Respecting God in all things.


A fourth argument of sincerity, is to perform all duties as in Gods
presence, looking unto him, as the directer and discerner of our thoughts,
words, and works, and thinking it sufficient if he approve of us, though men
do dislike us; as the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians* As touching me, I
pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, etc. 1. Cor. 4. 3.
4.
He that judges me is the Lord. And again in the Epistle to the
Thessalonians: As we were 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
allowed of God, that the Gospel should be committed unto us, so we speak:
not as they that please men but God, which approves our hearts. And therefore
he prays in another place, that the Corinthians might do none all, not that
he might seem a^proued, and have the credit of their 2. Cor. 13. 7.
goodness, as being wrought chiefly by his Ministry: but that they might do
that which is honest, though he were disallowed* to wit, by men: for with God
the righteous Judge, he knew that he should be both approved and rewarded. Thus
he that is a servant, faithful and trusty in his place, serving the Lord
Christ in conscience, and not men with eye-seruice, albeit he should be
accounted the most idle and untrusty servant in all the family, (being indeed
the most diligent and painful of all, he will still go on with his
faithfulness, and not diminish any jote of his industry and laboriousnes.

This Job alleges as a testimony of his integrity, that whereas he might
have given free scope to his eye for wanton looks, and to his heart for
sinful affections, yet he says of himself: I made a covenant with mine
eyes, why then should I think on a Maid^? And why Job. 31. 1.
was he thus jealous of himself, and thus careful to guide his eye, and to
govern his heart in a right ma^^er? the reason is rendered, verse 4. Does not he
behold my ways, and ^^ll all my steps? That also is Ios^phs commendation;
that whereas he might have lived in impurity and filthiness, not only without
blame and reproach, but even with the favor of his sinful and unchaste
mistress, yet the fear of the Lord restrained him from that monstrous and
abominable Genesis 39. 10.
sin* How can I do this great wic^edne^ (says he) and so sin against God?
Yea, though she spoke to him from day to day yet he refused, and would not so
much as be in her company, lest any temptation should be offered unto him by
that occasion: he would rather have her displeasure the^ Gods, and rather be
imprisoned amongst malefactors, for forbearing of evil, then to be vexed and
(...) on the ^acke of an evil conscience for committing of evil. And this
good disposition God^ servants do many tim^s find in themselves, that Note.
when they have fal^e into any (...) ^^^ne, and have entertained ^^^^e and
foolish thoughts, or corrupt and carnal affections, when they have ouer-shot
themselves in their speeches or in their carriage, and (...) discerns it, yet
they take themselves with the manner, and knowing that Gods holy eyes are upon
them, they judge and condemn themselves: and are thoroughly angry with
themselves, for that which they have done.

Yea sometimes, when men praise and extol them; yet they blush within
themselves, and have an holy indignation against their own souls, that they
have dealt hypocritically, or vaingloriously, or lightly, or indisc^^^tly, or
passionately. This is a very singular mark, and undoubted argument of great
piety and sincerity. As on the contrary, it is a certain note of gross
hypocrisy, ever to be caring what men think and speak of us, and of our
doings, and never to regard what God sees amiss in the same.

1. The last note (though many other might be named) shall be this, patiently to
endure ^* To receive a rebu^e willingly and profitablie.
an admonition and reproof, and to be desirous of the same, to the intent we
may profit thereby: in public to like best, and desire most those sermons,
wherein our own corruptions are most thoroughly met withal, and struck at
with greatest sharpnes and vehemency: and in private to be most glad of the
society of those friends, that will in wisdom and mercy tell us most often,
and most plainly of our faults.

Hypocrites, cannot abide that any should ^ubbe upon their galled backs, as
it were, or Note.
come near them, to touch their gouty, and festered, and corrupted
consciences, but they will wince and kick, and lay about them, and cry out on
those that are such judgers, and such busybodies (as they term them) and so
reject all wholesome reproves, and carry a bitter heart against the
reprouers. Only those that are sound-har^ed, can submit themselves, in the
lowlines of their minds, and meekness of their spirits, to bear admonitions
when they need it, (be he a superior or an inferior, that administreth the
same) and labor to make a right use hereof, and to love the party the better,
that will deal so mercifully and faithfully with their souls.

Indeed Gods best children may sometimes fail herein, and begin to bustle,
and take Obser.
on, when they are somewhat sharply dealt withal, and cannot so readily and
cheerfully swallow and digest those bitter pills, as they should: but if they
be grieved in their souls, that they find so much pride in themselves, and
though they be a little distempered in company, yet when they are alone, they
are ashamed of their folly, and desire more wisdom and grace to reap benefit
by the admonitions that shall afterward be given them, and begin to think
more reverently of the parties that showed them that mercy and kindness: they
should not be dismayed, knowing that they are true Israelites, in whom there is
no guile, notwithstanding that unwillingness and untowardness to undergo a
rebuke, that they find in themselves, and their corrupt nature.

Thirdly, this is for the great comfort of all such as find these notes of
vprightnes in Use. 3.
themselves, though they have many corruptions and imperfections, mixed with
their best works, yet seeing they have pure hearts, they are happy and
blessed, and shall find the good effects of their blessedness. True
holiness, and true happiness are never separated. Note.
As for perfection, God looks not for it at our hands. If sin hang on us,
but we would feign cast it off; if we find unbelief, but would most gladly
get faith: if we be troubled in our hearts with hardness, but are desirous of
softness: if we be humbled for that we cannot be humbled sufficiently, nor get
such a large heart as we would desire and expect grace from heaven, let us not
be discomforted for our defects and frailties: for the Lord 2. Chron. 30. 18.
19.
will spare us and be gracious unto us in his beloved son: according to that
worthy prayer of good King Hezekiah: The good Lord be merciful toward him that
prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be
not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.

Though many have been braullers heretofore, let them labor to be peaceable:
though they have been worldly, let them strive to be heavenly: though they
have been filthy, let them endeavor to get chastity: though they have been
ignorant and profane, let them study to obtain knowledge and holiness: and
then they may come to the Lords table, and welcome: the Lord will have respect
unto them, and grant them pardon for their sins, and supply all their wants,
and give them more grace to do their duty, in the remainder of their life,
and in the days of their pilgrimage that are yet behind.

Verse. 3. Surely they work none iniquity which walk in his ways.
That is, they make not a trade, and common practice thereof. Slip they do,
through the infirmity of the flesh, and subtilty of Satan, and the
allurements of the world: but they do not ordinarily and customably go
forward in unlawful and sinful courses. In that the Psalmist sets down
this as a part (and not the least part neither) of blessedness, Doct. 3.
That they work none iniquity, which walk in his ways: the doctrine to be
learned A prerogative to be freed from sin.
hence, is this, that it is a marvelous great prerogative to be freed from the
bondage of sin.

If there were no other reward but this, yet it were a happy thing to be
religious, even in this respect, that we shall be set at liberty from such a
service. This point is evident from Romans 6. 17.
the Apostles words, where he speaks thus: God be thanked, that ye have
been the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart unto the form
of doctrine, whereunto ye were delivered. Whereby we see, that this was not the
least privilege that they had being Gods servants, but indeed a matter for
which he was greatly to be magnified; that whereas they had been the slaves of
sin, and (as base drudges) at the command of every vile and wretched lust: by
the virtue of the word powerfully preached unto them, and faithfully received
by them, they had been delivered from that bondage, and made the servants of
God in righteousness, and holiness of life and conversation. And therefore in
that same Chapter, verse. 14. it is promised unto Gods children, as a special
favor, That sin shall not have dominion over them. It may sometimes
tyrannously usurp authority in them, but the strength of grace, and the
operation of the holy spirit of God, will still diminish, and at last abolish
the force and violence thereof: so that it shall never bear such sway over
them, as in the time of their vnregeneracie it did.

The truth of this doctrine, will yet more clearly shine forth, if we
consider, what the Reasons.
master, the service, and the reward of sinful persons are. As for their
master, it is Satan: For he is the God of this world, and the Prince that
rules in the children of disobedience: of Ephesians. 2. 2.
whom all unbelievers are held in captivity, and still employed according to
his will and Satan is the master of all sinners. Their services.
pleasure. Now he is a more cruel and savage tyrant, then ever Pharaoh was:
though he were very fierce against the Israelites, and exercised great tyranny
over them, yet Satan puts his vassals to carry heavier burdens, and to
toil out themselves in baser works, then ever the taskmasters of Aegipt
imposed on the poor Israelites. For all impenitent sinners are in thraldom to
every brutish lust: they must defile their bodies, and corrupt their Note.
souls, and consciences, and pollute all their works and ways, when, and in
what manner soever the Devil will have them; they must converse with every lewd
and sinful companion: they must run up and down, like drudges to follow
every vain and base delight, to pursue every mean and trifling commodity: and
to hunt after every promotion and dignity that offers it self unto their view.

They cannot live peaceably in the day, nor rest quietly in the night: as we
may see in gamesters, who break their sleep, ^^ spend their time and
strength, deprive themselves of a comfortable estate, and bring many miseries
upon themselves, and their families, by the over eager pursuit of their
ungodly and unthrifty courses. It is a woeful and lamentable case, that
frantic persons are in, that must have every one in the family to attend upon
them, and to have an eye unto them, least they should hang themselves, or
drown themselves, or get a knife to cut their throats, or some way or other
work themselves mischief: but far worse is their case, that are possessed
with a spiritual frenzy, and led by the suggestions of Satan, who are
evermore laboring to work out their own overthrow, and to bring upon
themselves destruction of body and soul: which is the reward that Satan
gives 3 The reward.
them for all their pains that they have taken in serving him, and in
fulfilling the lusts Romans 6.
of their own wicked flesh: according to the saying of the Apostle, the wages
of sin is death: that is, everlasting death: which is an utter separation from
Gods blessed presence, and from all manner of comforts whatsoever, to endure
unspeakable and endless torments in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.

Another reason, why it is a great privilege to be exempted from the dominion
of sin, 2 Reason.
is, because it is a testimony that we are the sons of God, as it is said by
the Apostle John: He that commits sin is of the Devil, and whosoever is
borne of God sins not. And why? because 1. Ioh. 3. 8. 9.
the efficacy of the word and spirit do restrain him there from.

A third reason is, because that is it whereby we are made conformable unto
Christ Jesus: 3
when we are freed from the slavery of sin, we are still translated from
glory to glory, and have the Image of God renewed in us daily more and more,
purging our selves even as Christ is pure. 1. John. 3. 3.

This serves for our instruction, that seeing it is such a pre-eminence not to
be a worker Use. 1.
of iniquity, therefore we should hereby fence and arm our selves against all
enticements, whereby we might be allured to sin, either in heart or in
behavior, when pleasure smileth upon us, or filthy lucre sets on our
hearts, or preferment calls for us, etc. Let this be as a buckler whereby to
repel all the fiery darts of the Devil: It is a blessed thing to work none
iniquity, and, what should it profit a man to win the whole world, and to
loose his own soul* Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of Luke 9. 21. Heb. 11. 25. 26.
sin, and the preferments of Egypt for a season.

It was a foolish and mad part of the Israelites, to desire to return into
Egypt the house of their bondage, that they might eat of their fleshpots, and
of the leekes and onions, that in time past they had there enjoyed: but much
more void of sense and reason are they, that when they have bin once delivered
from that spiritual servitude, will cast themselves into thraldom again: and
when they have been pulled out of the snares of the devil, wherein they were held
at his pleasure, will return again to folly, and entangle themselves the
second time. Wherefore let this put strength into us in all conflicts, that we
may stand resolutely, as against other assaults, so against that of the example
of great and mighty men, who usually take their liberty in all voluptuous and
licentious kinds of living. This consideration (I say) should arm us against
it: The Lord has pronounced them blessed that work none iniquity: and if I
^ee of the number of them, I shall be more happy in renouncing sin, then the
greatest Potentate on the earth, is, or can be in committing of sin. And
therefore let us deal as Eliphaz did in the book of Job: I have seen the
foolish well rooted (says he) and suddenly I cursed his habitation: not by
way of imprecation, but of denunciation of Gods Job. 3. 2.
judgments due unto them for their evil works, showing that they took such
courses as did make them and theirs accursed, and bring the vengeance of God
upon them: the meditation whereof was a strong bulwark, to fence him against
all temptations, unto the like sinful and vile practices.

2. This makes for the terror of all such as do drink in sin with
greediness, and Use. 2.
give allowance to themselves in blaspheming, in Sabbath-breaking, in
wantonness, in lying, and slandering, and scoffing, and such other foul
vices. If they be blessed that do not work iniquity, then cursed are they
that make a common practice thereof.

But I hope (will some say) a man's heart may be good, though he ouer-shoote
himself Object.
by rapping out an oath now and then, and by speaking foolishly and lightly,
etc. you must not judge (say they) God knows our hearts.

He does so indeed, and he has made known unto us by his word, that an ill
tongue Answer.
and an ill life, do always argue an ill heart: for out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks: and a good tree cannot bring forth such rotten
fruit nor a pure Fountain send Luke 6 4^. Mat 7. 17. 18.
forth such muddie and filthy streams, as do evermore issue forth at their
profane mouths, and are derived from their impure consciences unto all, or to
the most part of their actions.

Verse. 4 Thou have commanded to keep thy precepts diligently.
THe doctrine that these words afford is this, that nothing is superfluous
that is done in obedience to Gods holy will. Strict obedience to ^e labored
for. 2. Cor. 7. 1.


The word translated Diligently, does signify in the original tongue (
wonderful much) so that the words go thus: Thou have commanded to keep thy
precepts wonderful much. And this the Apostle urges the Corinthians, unto:
Having such promises beloved, let us purge our selves from all fithinesse of
the flesh and of the spirit: that is, from all manner of corruption, Math. 5.
6. 7.
as well inward as outward. And that was the ^rift of Christ Jesus in giving the
true interpretation of th law, which the Pharisees had corrupted by their false
Expositions: I say this was the drift to draw men from resting on the outward
observation thereof, and to bring them to have regard unto their thoughts, and
to the affections of their hearts: and moreover in their practice to do those
things which heathen men and hypocrites could not attain unto: and therefore
he often urges this sentence, to show the sl^ndernesse and insufficiency of
their obedience: What singular thing do ye? Implying that Christians must in
many things be singular, and differ from, and go beyond the common sort of
men.

If one could do as much good as an hundred, yet he could not do the hundredth
part Luke 17. 10.
of that which a Christian ought to perform. Let him say still (for it is a
truth,) I am an unprofitable servant: I have done no more then my duty, nor so
much as my duty. As Christ came to fulfill all that his Fathers law required,
so it behooves us to observe every thing that we are commanded, though not in
perfection, which we cannot attain unto: yet in uprightness, and with our
best endeavors. When the Israelites told Moses that if he would go near, and
hear what the Lord said, and declare it unto them, they would hear and do
all that the Lord should say, the Lord himself testified the equity of their
Deuteronomy. 5. 28. 19.
words, that they had well spoken, all that they spoke, and wished that there
were such an heart in them, to fear him, and to keep all his commandments
always: that it might go well with them and with their children after them.
Whereby we are informed what is acceptable unto God, and profitable for our
selves: namely, entire obedience for our comfortable welfare, and constant
obedience for our continual happiness: and to the same purpose tends that
serious instigation 1. Cor. 15. 58.
of Paul to the Corinthians: Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast,
immovable, abundant always in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

1 First, no vain thing is commanded, but every precept that he gives is
holy, and every duty prescribed to us, is needful to be performed, he
requires nothing but that which is good and just: and who can charge us to do
more than enough, whiles we deal only in that which is just and good? 2
Secondly, the Lord desires to be served with all due care and faithfulness.
Can any man say, I am before hand with him, and I have done more for his sake
than he has for mine? do we not receive from him breath, and being, and life,
and living, and preservation, and salvation it self, and all things else? 3
Thirdly, our labor is not lost, nor travel misspent in yielding obedience to
him: for he will reward it at the full, and above all desert. No man works
for him without wages: not a godly action, not a godly word, not a godly
purpose, not a godly motion of heart shall pass without pay and compensation.
4 Fourthly, every default and omission of well doing, at every time deserves
damnation: and either shall be recompensed with the death of the sinner, or has
been already requited with the torments of Christ* which serves
1 For confutation of the Papists, that little regarding the commandments of
God* Use 1.
expect great matters for their devotion, and their outward inventions and
observations: Against Popish observations.
but who has required those things at their hands? the Lord commands them to
keep his precepts, otherwise they can expect no recompense from him; but that
may be said of all their invented worship, which was spoken of them that were
so full of external ceremonies (as touch not, taste not, handle not) in the
Apostles time: concerning all which he says: That they perish with the using,
seeing they are after the commandments and doctrines Colos. 2. 22.
of man: So soon as the work is done, the reward is gone.

Besides, here may be confuted all their works of supererogation: if GOD
command Against works of supererogatio^.
us to observe his law in perfection, then what can there be left for them to
perform beyond that which he commands? does Christ bid us say, that when we
have done all that we can, we are unprofitable servants, and have performed no
more then our duties? and will they be so audacious as to brag of an overplus
of well doing? Is it possible for obedience to exceed the commandment, or for
ought to be any thing worth that is not done in obedience? but to let them
pass.

This is for our instruction: has God enjoined us to observe his precepts so
exceeding Use. 2.
carefuly and diligently? then let nothing draw us therefrom, no not in the
least circumstance: let us esteem nothing needless, frivolous, or
superfluous, that we have a warrant for out of his word: nor count those too
wise or precise that will stand resolutely upon the same: if the Lord require
any thing, though the world should gainesay it, and we be derided and abused
for the doing of it, yet let us proceed still in the course of our obedience.

Sithence our master does require it as a due, and it becomes us to yield it
as a duty, and our hire is so great for the performance of the same, which will
also be enlarged as our integrity shall be increased; the greater our
faithfulness shall be found, the more praise we shall obtain, accompanied
proportionably with all other good blessings, and let this be a motive further
to incite us to such diligence, that the Lord is much displeased with remisnes
and negligence: sloathfull persons are every where reprehended in the
Scriptures, even for being idle in human affairs, and matters that concern
men's present estate: much more then do they deserve to be sharply reproved,
and also corrected for their carelessness in those holy works, whereabout God
sets them: he that does not as much as he may in the services of God, may
look to have more strokes from his hand, and rebukes from his mouth, that will
be for his comfort.

Verse. 5. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
IN the former verse the Prophet David observes the charge which God gives, and
that is, that his commandments be diligently kept: Here then he observes his
own weakness and insufficiency to discharge that great duty, and
therefore, as ^he by the spirit desirous to discharge it, and yet by the flesh
not able to discharge it, he breaks out into these words, oh that my ways
were directed, etc. Much like unto a child that being commanded to take up
some great weight from the ground, is willing to do it, Simile.
though not able to do it: or a sick patient advised to walk many turns in
his chamber, finds a desire in his heart, though vnhabilitie in his body to
do that which he is directed unto: This an holy Father found in himself, and
therefore he prays to Augustine.
God after this sort, Da quod iubes Domine, and iube quid vis, Give me (Lord)
power to do that which thou commaundest, and then command what thou will.

David saw by the light of Gods spirit, wherein true blessedness did consist,
namely, in the observation of Gods law; willing was he to attain that
blessedness, but seeing that his ways were not Gods ways, nor his thoughts
Gods thoughts, he, observing his own wanderings, desires to be directed in
the good ways. When thou hear (says Augustine) this interiection of
wishing, then, acknowledging the word of wishing, lay aside the pride of
presuming. For who can say that he desires that which he has so in his own
free will, that he can perform it without any help? If then a man desires to
do that which God has commanded, he must desire God to give that which he
has commanded. For of whom else should he desire it, but of the Father of
lights, from whom (as the holy Scripture affirms) does come every good and
perfect gi^t? This then is as much (says that holy Father) as if David should
say, I have learned of thee O Lord my Master, that it is necessary to keep
thy commandments, I none desire thine help that I may keep them: for thou
give both the will and the decide according to thy good pleasure.

The like to this has the Prophet Jeremy, chapt. 10. 23. O Lord (says he) I
know that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it i^ man to walk and
to direct his steps. (Solomon says) the heart of man purposes his way: but
the Lord does direct his steps. Prou. 16. 9. David again says, the steps
of man are directed by the Lord, Psalm. ^7. 23. And therefore he prays after
this sort, Psalm. 86. 11. Teach me O Lord thy way, and I will walk in thy
truth, O knit mine heart unto thee that I may fear thy name.

The word, directed, in the original signifies to strengthen or to establish;
noting thereby his own, and all men's insufficiency, either to know, affect,
believe, or obey Gods will, much less to continue therein, unless it please
GOD to give assistance.

Out of this prayer of David we may observe, 1. The infirmity of man to do
that, which is pleasing to God: 2. The desire of the godly to do that which
may please God. 3. The confession of the godly, that without Gods assistance
they can perform no good thing. 4. The means which are to be used for the
keeping of Gods commandments, namely the consideration of our own
weakness, and prayer to be directed in the ways of God, and that therein
we may walk until our dying day.

Verse. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
commandments.
THis verse has an excellent dependence on the former: there he desired to
be directed by God; here he shows the benefit of that direction: namely,
that having respect unto all Gods commandments, he should neither be ashamed,
as some translations read it, nor confounded, as others have it. In the 22.
verse he desires God to remove from him shame and contempt, here he sets down
the means to avoid both. He wishes Psalm. 83. 16. 17.
in another place, that the wicked may be ashamed and confounded, yea that they
may be Psalm. 35. 26.
clothed with such garments; as for himself he would feign live without
shame: and surely no marvel, for what fruit have we of those things whereof in
the end we must be ashamed, says the Apostle, Romans 6. 21? True it is, that if
a man commit sin, he has good cause to be ashamed of it, but it is better to
carry such behavior in our lives, that we need not, either in our selves, or
before men, to be ashamed of any action; but that he may fail us as Saint Paul
does, this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, etc. He that
walks 2. Cor. 1. 12.
uprightly walks boldly (says Solomon,) but he that peruerteth his ways
shall be known. Prou. 10. 9.


I cannot here omit a worthy saying of that wise man, who did write that Book
which we call Ecclesiasticus, thus I find it, chapt. 41. verse 17. etc. Be
ashamed of whoredom before father and mother: be ashamed of lies before the
Prince, and men of authority: of sin before the Judge and ruler: of offense
before the congregation, and people: of unrighteousness before a companion and
friend: or of theft before the place where thou dwell: and before the truth
of God and his covenant: or to lean with thine elbowes upon the table: or to
be reproved for giving or taking: or of silence to them that salute thee: or to
look upon an harlot: or to turn thy face from thy kinseman: or to take away a
portion, or a gift: or to be evil minded toward an other man's wife: or to
solicit any man's maid: or to stand by her bed: or to reproach thy friends
with words: or to vpbraide when thou give any thing: or to report a matter
that thou have heard: or to reveal secret words. Thus may thou well be
shamefast, and shall find favor with all men. But of these things be thou not
ashamed, neither have regard to offend for any person: of the law of the most
High, and his covenant and of Judgment to justify the godly: of the cause of
thy companion and of strange(...) of distributing the inheritance among friends:
to be diligent to keep true balance and w^ight, whether thou have little or
much: to sell Merchandise at an indifferent price, and to correct thy children
diligently, etc.

Note we then here that the means to avoid shame before men, and confusion
before God and men, is a reverend respect to all Gods commandments. I say
unto all. For he that offends in any one is guilty of all. Dead flies (says
Solomon) cause to stincke and putrify Eccles. 10. 1.
the ointment of the Ap^th^^arie: so does a little f^llie him that is in
estimation for wisdom and for glory. A little hole if it be not stopped will
sincke a ship: a little spot if it be not taken out will defile a garment:
and a little sin, if it be not washed away by that blood of Similies.
Christ, which was shed for the least sin, will endanger the soul. We must
have a respect to all, or else we have true respect to none. Adams one sin
made him so ashamed, that he could not without blushing behold himself, much
less durst he come into the presence of God. David's one sin made him so
ashamed, that for a long time he could not look up. What shall we say then of
the sinners of our time, who imagine mischief upon their beds? who drink up
iniquity like unto water, who eat up Gods people, as it were bread, who
delight when they do evil, to whom it is a pastime to commit sin: whose
foreheads are brass, faces iron, and countenances as that of the whorish
woman, impudent and past shame? Were they ashamed when they committed
abomination? Nay they were not ashamed, neither could they have any shame,
says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, chapter. 6. 15.

In former times sin walked not without a covering, as we may see in Thamar,
Genes. 38. 14. Nay, sinners might not be looked upon, as we may read of Haman:
Hester, 7. 8. But now the wicked walk on every side, they sit in the door,
stand at the window, and are not ashamed to appear before God in his house,
and at his Table, though in steed of their wedding garment, they come clothed
with the menstruous rags of sin and iniquity. Shall not God be avenged of
such a stiff-necked people? Yea, though Noah, Job, and Daniell pray for them,
in the end he will be avenged. For cursed are they that err from his
Commandments. None can look up better then, then the godly: none shall hang
down his head sooner then the godless.

Then shall I not be confounded:] By this we understand (says Calvin) that
so many as follow their own lusts and fantasies, which look this way and
that way, and imagine themselves a mark, and forge themselves such a way, as
seems good in their own sight, that they shall be confounded and deceived.

The only way to avoid this confusion, is, inwardly in heart, and outwardly
in practice to settle our eyes upon the law of God, without turning aside,
either to the right hand by superstition, or to the left hand, by profaneness
of life.

^ verse. 7. I will praise thee with an upright heart when I shall learn the
judgments of thy righteousness.
But what David, will thou give unto God, when he shall direct thy heart so to
keep his law, that having respect to all his commandments, thou need not
to be ashamed? I will praise thee (says he) with an upright heart: and thus as
I take it, is the connection of this verse with the former. The meaning is, that
when it shall please the Lord thoroughly to teach him his will, which he calls
here the judgments of his righteousness, because it contains in it perfect
righteousness, then will be magnify and praise the name of God alone, and
that with a sound and sincere heart void of hypocrisy and counterfaiting.

Learn we here 1. what David especially desired to learn, namely, the word
and will of God: he would ever be a scholar in this school, and sought daily
to ascend to the highest form, that learning to know, he might remember,
remembering might believe, believing might delight, delighting might admire,
admiring might adore, adoring might practice, and practicing might continue in
the way of Gods statutes. This learning is the old and true learning indeed,
and he is best learned in this art, who turns Gods word into good works. Too
much of other learning will make thee mad upon thine own wisdom, yeathy
wisdom, and thy knowledge may make thee to rebel; but this will make thee
wise unto salvation. Other wise men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken:
Lee, they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?
Ier. 8. But Gods wiseman has more understanding then the ancient, Psalm. 119.
verse. 15. more circumspect than his enemies, Ps. 19 and better learned then
either the wise men of the East* or all the wisdom of Egypt 1. King. 4* 30.
But where is this learning found? in the book of God, soundly understood, and
sauingly applied unto the conscience. Who is the teacher? the principal master
is God himself. They shall be all taught of God says Jeremy: God opened the
heart of Lydia says Luke. He sits in heaven that teaches the heart says
Augustine. Paul may plant and Apollos water, but it is God that gives the
increase says Paul. The ministers indeed are Gods instruments in the Church,
and masters of families ought to be his instruments in the house, yet as John
only baptized with water, Christ with the holy Ghost, so these may speak to
the outward ^are, it is God that must give us understanding in all things. If
we pray God to be taught as the Eunuch did Philip, he will say unto us Ephatha,
be thou opened: for an humble petitioner finds that knowledge, which a
curious searcher can never find out. This well is deep, we have nothing to
draw; let down the bucket by this chain, and thou shall draw up living
waters of eternal life. But thou have drawn up, and drunk them down, and
find them sweeter than the honey comb, forget not with the prophet to
praise the Lord; he desires no more, he delights in nothing else. Let his
praise be in thy mouth, when his law is in thine heart. But take heed that thou
praise him in sincerity. For fair without, foul within, white without,
black within, and in a word all painted sepulchers they are abominable in the
sight of God. Chrysostom: speaks to such persons thus, thou hypocrite, if it be
a good thing to be good, why will thou appear to be that which thou art not?
if it ^e an evil thing to be evil, why will thou be that which thou will not
appear? if it be a good thing to appear good* it is better to be good: if it
be an evil thing to appear evil, it is far worse to be evil. Therefore
either appear that which thou art indeed, or be that which thou do appear.
Every one who desires to seem that which he is not indeed, is an hypocrite,
says Augustine.

Verse 8. I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not ouer-long.
THe Prophet now considering all that he had said, namely, that all were in a
blessed estate which keep Gods commandments, that they work none iniquity,
that God had commanded the observation of his law, that he desired to observe
it, lest he should be confounded and that he should have just cause to magnify
Gods name, when he had learned Gods word: he concludes this portion in these
words, I will keep, etc. In which observe, 1. a promise, 2. a prayer. A
promise I will keep thy statutes: a prayer. O forsake me not over long, 4. I
will keep, etc. 1. By thy grace and assistance, (for otherwise I am not able)
I will lay up thy statutes, not in my closer to preserve them from corruption,
nor in thine house to keep them from ruin, but in my memory to remember
them, in mine heart to love and like them, and in my life to be directed by
them. The word statutes, is in our English Leitourgie translated Ceremonies,
and indeed the hebrewe word signifies properly such constitutions and rites
as were used in the Leuiticall Priest hood. And they were so named, because the
ceremonies of Moses were not idle spectacles, or observations belonging to the
outward man, but types, shadows, and pictures of far greater things. But
happily by that figure Synechdoche, this part of the law, is used for the whole
word of God* Yet note that David was not an improuident reader or obseruer of
the Ceremonial law, but was careful to know what was meant by every
ceremony, that in them he might find CHRIST the end of the Law; and in a
word, that the Types of the ceremonial Law, and impossibility of the
moral, might be as a schoole-maister to bring him to JESUS CHRIST.

If the King of Israel keep Gods statutes, the people of Israel will be
ashamed to neglect them. Caesar was wont to say, Princes must not say, Ite, go
ye, without me, but Venite, Come ye along with me. So said Gideon, Judge:
7. 17. As ye see me do, so do ye.

Once again note, that for the better observing of Gods law? we should ever
carry with us holy purposes: and for our better going on in that way, lay
vows upon our selves. David in this verse promises to do so; and verse 106*
swears to do so, I have sworn, and will perform it, to keep thy righteous
judgments.

Last of all, does David labor to find CHRIST in the law; Why then do not we
labor to find him in the Gospel, and upon every occasion to apply him to
our selves? When I am (says Augustine) assaulted by some wicked thought, I
then b^ take me to the wounds of CHRIST; when my flesh casts me down, by
the remembrance of my Saviors wounds, I rise up again. Death Satan assault
me, I fly to those bowels of mercy; who are in my Savior, and he
departs away from me. Am I enflamed with lust, I quench that fire with the
meditation of Christ's Passion. Am I in any trouble, I find no more effectual
remedy, then the wounds of CHRIST* in them I sleep securely, and repose my
self without fear.

CHRIST died for us, there is nothing so deadly, which is not cured by the
death of Christ. I see (says he) the bowels of CHRIST, through the wounds of
CHRIST; and even through the hol^s in his side, I behold the secrets of his
heart.

O Lords forsake me not over long*) God had begun a good work in him, his
desire is that he would finish the same: and therefore he prays, that
howsoever, by the corruption of his own heart, the malice of Satan, or the
pleasures of the world, he should perhaps fail in keeping that vow, which
he had formerly made: and therefore, for a time be left to himself, and
forsaken of God, yet it would please him not to forsake him over long: but that
though he fell, he might rise again, being taken up by Gods own hand. Saul
was forsaken, and forsaken utterly: David fearing the like desertion, desires
that he might not be forsaken for ever.

True it is indeed, that for the correction of some sin, the trial of their
faith, the exercise Why God seems sometimes to forsake his children.
of their patience, the manifestation of his glory, and for their own better
knowledge of themselves, GOD seems to withdraw himself from his servants:
And as a Nource deals with young children, to leave them to themselves, and
to hide her self at some Pillar, or under some curtain, that they taking some
falls, may both see their own weakness, and know how much they are
beholding to her for preserving them Note.
when they fell not, and taking them up being fallen. Thus Peter was forsaken
for a minute: CHRIST JESUS for a few hours: David for a few months: and Job
for a few years.

Against an utter desertion in this kind David prays in this place, and
according to S. Augustine, is in effect thus much. O Lord, if, lest I should be
proud, and should say in my prosperity I shall never be removed, it pleased
thee to tempt me, yet forsake me not ouerlong: that is, if thou have thus
forsaken me, that I may know how weak I am without thine assist me, yet
forsake me not utterly, lest I perish. I know that of thy good will thou have
given me strength, and if thou turnest away thy face from me, I shall forthwith
be troubled, O forsake me not, that I perish not. If Christ be a sleep the
ship is in danger, and if the Lord absent himself but for a while, we are
not able to stand in temptation. And yet it pleases the Lord to exercise his
dearest servants oftentimes with these desertions. For (as that judicial
divine Master In his treatise of desertions.
Perkins observes, whom I follow in that which follows) the blessings that
God bestows on them are of two sorts, either positive or privative: positive,
are real graces wrought in the heart, by the spirit of God: privative are such
means whereby God preserues Priuatiuae gratiae sunt p^ures quam positiuae.
men from falling into sin; as crosses, desertions. And these in number
exceed the first, as long as men do live in this world.

Before it can be declared what these desertions are, this conclusion is to be
laid down. He which is once in the estate of grace, shall be in the same for
ever. This appears in the eight of the Romans, 30. Where Paul sets down the
golden chain of the causes of salvation that can never be broken; so that he
which is predestinate shall be called, justified, glorified. And a little after
he says, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? and, Who shall
sever us from the love of Christ? and, I am persuaded that no creatures shall
be able to sever us from the love of Christ: which he would not have said, if
men being in the estate of grace, might fall quite from grace. And how should
they which are justified have peace with God, if they were not sure to
persevere righteous before God to the end? And how shall it be said, that hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God (wherewith God loves his Elect) is
shed abroad in their hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given them, if any may
utterly fall from that love? How should the testimony of the spirit, which
testifies to the Elect, that they are the children of God, be true and
certain, if it may be quite extinguished? Lastly, how shall that of John be
true, they went out of us, because they were not of us: if they had been of
us* they should have remained with us, if a man may wholly fall from Christ,
which has once been made a true member of him? Our Savior Christ says, My
sheep hear my voice: and I know them, and they follow me: and I give life
eternal to them, and no man Ioh. 10 27. and 6. 37.
shall take them out of my hand, or out of my fathers hand, and whatsoever my
father gives me, shall come unto me, and whosoever comes to me, I will not
cast out. And if any of the Elect being effectually called might wholly fall
from grace, then there must be a second insition or engrafting into the
mystical body of Christ, and therefore a second Baptism: nay for every fall a
new insition, and a new Baptism; which must in no wise be granted: wherefore
they which are predestinate to be in the estate of grace, are also predestinate
to persevere in the same to the end.

Hereupon it follows, that the desertions of Gods Elect, are first of all
partial, that is, such as wherein God does not wholly forsake them, but in some
part.

Secondly, temporary, that is, for some space of time, and never beyond the
compass of this present life. For a moment (says the Lord in Esaias) in mine
anger I hid my face from Esa. 54. 10.
thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. And to this purpose David well acquainted
with this matter, prays, Forsake me not ouerlong. Ps. 119. 8.


This sort of Desertions, though it be but for a time, yet no part of a
Christian man's life is free from them: and very often taking deep place in the
heart of man, they are of long continuance. David continued in his dangerous
fall about the space of an whole year before he was recovered. Luther
confesses of himself, that after his conversion, he lay three years in
desperation. And common experience in such like cases can make record of longer
time.

The manner, God uses in forsaking his own servants, is of two sorts: the
first is by taking away one grace and putting another in the room; the second,
by hiding his grace as it were in a corner of the heart.

God takes away his grace, and puts another in the room, diverse ways.

1. First, he bereaueth his own children of outward prosperity, yea he will
load them with crosses, and yet he will make a good supply by giving patience.
David is driven out of his kingdom, by his own son, a heavy cross: yet
the Lord ministers an humble and patient spirit: so as he was content to
speak, If the Lord thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold 2. Sam. 15 26
here I am, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes. So likewise
Christian Martyrs are bereaved of all outward safety, and laid open to the
violence and persecution of tyrants yet inwardly they are established by the
power of the might of God, when they are most weak, they are most strong, and
when they are most foiled, then they obtain victory.

2. Secondly, the Lord cuts off the days of this life, and for recompense to
his own elect gives life eternal: The righteous is taken away from the evil
to come. This is manifest in Josias, Esa. 57. 1. 2. Reg. 22 20
of whom it is said, Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and though
shall be put into thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the
evil which I will bring upon this place.

3. Thirdly, God takes away the feeling of his love, and the joy of the holy
Ghost for a season: and then in the room thereof he kindles an earnest desire,
and thirsting with groans and cryings unto heaven, to be in the former favor
of God again. This was David's case, Psalm. 77. 1. 2 3.
when he complained and said, My voice came to God, when I cried, my voice came
to God, and he heard m^: in the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore
r^nne and ceased not in the night: my soul refused comfort. I did think up ^n
God and was troubled: I prayed, and my spirit was full of anguish. Selah. The
like was the estate of the Church making her moan unto God Esa. 63. 17.
in Esaias, O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened
our hearts from thy fear? return for thy servants sak^, and for the tribes of
thine inheritance.

4. Fourthly, God graunts his servants the holy means of salvation, namely,
preaching, prayer, Sacraments, and holds back the efficacy of his spirit for
a time. In this case they are like the corn field that is plowed and sowed
with good corn; but yet for a time it never gives rooting beneath, nor so much
as a show of any blade appears above. Thus the spouse of Christ, when she
comes into his wine-seller, she falls into a swowne; so as she must be stayed
Can. 2. 4. 5.
with flaggons, and comforted with apples because she is sick of love.

5. Fifthly, God gives his children a strong affection, to obey his will, but
he lets them fail in the act of obedience it self, like as a prisoner who
has escaped the hand of his Iayler, has an affection to run a thousand miles
every hour; but having happily his bolts on his legs: he cannot for his
life but go very softly, gauling and chafing his flesh; and with much grief
falling again into the hands of his keeper. This is it, that Paul complains
of when he says, I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man, but I
see another Romans 7. 22. 23. 24.
law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captine to the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death*

This second manner of Gods forsaking of his Elect is, when he hides his
graces for a time: not by taking them quite away, but by covering them, and by
removing all sense and feeling of them. And in this case they are like the
trees in the winter season, that are beaten with wind and weather, bearing
neither leaf nor fruit, but look as though they were rotten and dead, because
the sap does not spread itself, but lies bid in the root. David often Psalm.
77. 78.
was in this case, as namely, when he says, Will the Lord absent himself for
ever? Ana will he show no more favor: is his mercy clean gone for ever?
Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? has
he shut up his ^ender mercies in displeasure? Selah.

This comes to pass, because the Lord very often, in, and by one contrary
works another* Cuncta Dei opera sunt in mediis contrariis.
Clay and spittle tempered together, in reason should put out a man's eyes: but
Christ used it as a means to give sight to the blind. Water in reason should
put out fire: but Elias when he would show that IEHOVA was the true God, powers
water on his sacrifice, and fills a trench therewith to make the sacrifice
burn.

The like appears in the work of grace to salvation. A man that has lived
in security, by Gods goodness has his eyes opened to see his sins: and his
heart touched to feel the huge and loath some burden of them, and therefore to
be wail his wretched estate, with bitterness of heart. Hereupon, he presently
thinks that God will make him a firebrand of hell: whereas indeed the Lord is
now about to work and frame in his heart sanctification and sound repentance,
never to be repented of. The man which has had some good persuasion of Gods
favor in Christ, comes afterward upon many occasions to be troubled and to
be overwhelmed with distrustfullnes and grievous doubtings of his salvation, so
as he judges himself to have been but an hypocrite in former times, and for
the time present a castaway. But indeed hereby the Lord exercises, fashioneth,
and increases his weak faith. In one word, mark this point, that the graces
of God peculiar to the elect, are begun, increased, and made manifest, in or
by their contraries.

A man in this Desertion, can discern no difference between himself and a
castaway: and the rather if with this Desertion be joined a feeling of Gods
anger: for then arises the bitterest temptation that ever befell the poor
soul of a Christian man, and that is a wrestling and struggling in spirit and
conscience, not with the motions of a rebelling flesh, nor the accusation of
the Devil, which are oftentimes very irksome and terrible, but against the
wrath of a revenging God. This hiddden and spiritual temptation more
tormenteth the spirit of man, then all the rackes or gibbets in the world can
do. And it has his fits after the manner of an ague, in which even Gods own
servants ouercarried with sorrow, may blaspheme God, and cry out that they are
damned. Job was in this estate: as he testifies, Oh that my grief were weyed
(says he) and my miseries were laid together in the balla^ce: 2 Job 2. 2 3* 4.
for it would be heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up, for the arrows of the Almighty are in me, the venom thereof
does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God fight against me. And
further, he complains that the Lord is Job. 13. 34.
his enemy, that he Job. 16. ^^.
sets him as a But to ^^^^^e at. This was David's temptation when he said, Ps.
6. 1. 2. 3. 4.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chostise me in thy wrath, have
mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed,
my soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou delay? Return O
Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

Hence it follows, that when any that has been a professor of the Gospel
shall despair at his end, that men are to leave secret judgments to God, and
charitably to judge the best of them. For example, one See the book written of
his death.
Master Chambers at Leycester of late, in his sickness grievously despaired,
and cried out that he was damned, and after dyed: yet it is not for any to note
him with the black mark of a reprobate. One thing which he spoke in his
extremity ( O that I had but one drop of faith) must move all men to conceive
well of him. For by this it seems he had an heart which desired to repent
and believe: and therefore a repentant and believing heart indeed. For GOD at
all times, but especially in temptation, of his great mercy accepts the will,
for the deed. Neither is it to be regarded, that he said he was damned; for
men in such cases speak not as they are, but as they feel themselves to be.

Yea to go further, when a professor of the gospel shall make away himself,
though it be a fearful case, yet still the same opinion must be carried.
First, Gods judgments are very secret. 2. They may repent in the very agony
for any thing we know. 3 None is able to comprehend the bottomless depth of the
graces and mercies which are in Christ Jesus.

Thus much of the manner which God uses in forsaking his Elect: Now follow
the kinds of desertion, which are two: desertion in punishment, desertion in
sin.

Desertion in punishment is, when God deferreth either to mitigate or to
remove the cross and chastisement which he has laid upon his children. This
befell Christ on the cross Math. 27. 46.
My God (says he) my God, why have thou forsaken me? this was the complaint of
Gedeon. Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken
us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites* Judge. 6. 13. Fox. Act.
Mon. 1555. Sept.
M. Robert Glouer martyr, at Couentrie, after he was condemned by the Bishop,
and was now at point to be delivered out of the world, it so happened, that two
or three days before his death, his heart being lumpish and desolate of all
spiritual consolation, felt in himself no aptness, nor willingness, but
rather a heaviness and dullness of spirit, full of much discomfort, to bear
the bitter cross of Martyrdom, ready now to be laid upon him, whereupon
he fearing in himself, least the Lord had withdrawn his wonted favor from
him, made his moan to one Austine his dear friend, signifying unto him, how
earnestly he had prayed day and night unto the LORD GOD, and yet could receive
no motion nor sense of any comfort from him, unto whom they said Austine
answered again, willing him patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and
howsoever his present feeling was, yet seeing his cause was just and true, he
exhorted him consta^ntly to stick to the same, and to play the man, nothing
doubting, but the Lord in his good time would visit him, and satisfy his
desire with plenty of consolation, etc. The next day when the time came of the
Martyrdom, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the
stake, although all the night before praying for strength and courage, he could
feel none, suddenly he was so replenished with the holy Ghost, that he cried
out clapping with his hands to Austine, and saying with these words, Austine,
he is come, he is come, etc. and that with such joy and alacrity, as one
seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as
one passing out of the world by any pains of death.

Desertion in sin, is when God withdrawing the assistance of his spirit, a
man is left to fall into some actual and grievous sin. And for all this no
man is to think that God is the author of sin, but only man that falls,
and Satan. A resemblance of this truth we may see in a staff: which if a man
shall take and set upright upon the ground, so long as he holds it with his
hand, it stands upright; but so soon as he withdrawes his hand, though he
never push it down, it falls of it self. In this desertion was the good King
Hezekiah, of whom the holy Ghost speaks thus. 2. Chro. 32. 31. 32.
Hezekiah prospered in all his ways, therefore dealing with the Ambassadors
of the Princes of Babel, which sent to him to inquire of the wonder which was
done in the Land. God left him (namely, to the pride of his heart to exalt
himself) in tempting him: that he might try out all that was in his heart. To
this place appertain, Noah's drunkenness, David's adultery, Peter's denial of
Christ. The reason of such desertions may be this. If a patient shall be
grievously sick, the Physician will use all manner of means that can be
devised to recover him, and if he once come to a desperate case, the physician
rather then he will not restore him, will employ all his skill; he will take
poison, and so temper it, and against the nature thereof he will make a
sovereign remedy to recover health. The elect children of God, are diseased
with an inward, hidden, and spiritual pride; whereby they affect themselves,
and desire to be something in themselue^ fo^^h of Christ: and this sin is
very dangerous: first, because when other sins die in a man, this secret
pride gets strength: for Gods grace is the matter of pride, in such wise, that
a man will be proud, because he is not proud: for example, if any shall be
tempted of the devil to some proud behavior, and by Gods grace get the
victory; then the heart thus thinks, Oh thou have done well, thou have
foiled the enemy, neither pride, nor any other sin can prevail against
thee: such and such could never have done so: and a very good man shall hardly
be free from such kind of motions in this life. Secondly, there is no greater
enemy to faith then pride is: for it poysoneth the heart, and makes it
incapable of that grace, so long as it bears any sway, for he that will
believe in Christ, must be annihilated, that is, he must be bruised and battered
to a flat nothing, in regard of any liking or affection to himself, that he
may in spirit mount up to heaven, where Christ sits at the right hand of the
Father, and as it were with both the hands of faith graspe him with all his
blessed merits, that he may be 1. Cor. 1. 30. Ioh. 15. 2. Gal. 2. 20.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, life, good works, and
whatsoever good thing he is, neither in, nor by, nor for himself; but every
way forth of himself in Christ. Now, this blessed condition of a believing
heart, by natural self-love and selfe-liking is greatly hindered. God
therefore in great mercy to remedy this dangerous corruption, lets his elect
servants fall into trouble of mind and conscience, and if they happily be of
greater hardness of heart into some actual sin: and so declaring his
wonderful mercy in saving them, he is feign against his mercy to bring them to
his mercy, and by sin to save them from sin. By this means the Lord, who can
bring light out of darkness, makes a remedy of sin to slay pride, that
invisible mo^ster of many heads, which would slay the soul.

Though this be so, yet none must hereupon venture to commit any sin against
Gods commandments, least in so doing they cast away their souls. For the
godly man, though he fall into sin, yet it is against his purpose, and it makes
his heart to bleed: and the course of his life shall be always upright and
pleasing unto God: because he is led by the spirit of God.

The ends for which God uses desertions are three, the first is the
chastisement of sins past in the former part of man's life, that he may search
them out, consider them, and he hear^ily sorrowful for them: for this end was
Jobs trial. Thou writest (says he) bitter things against Job. 13. 26.
me, and make me to possess the sins of my youth.

The second end is, that God may make trial of the present estate of his
servants: not that he is ignorant what is in man; but because he would have all
men know themselves. To this effect says Moses, And thou shall remember all
the way which the Lord thy God lead Deuteronomy. 8. 2. and 13. 3.
thee in the wilderness for to humble thee and to prove thee, to know what
was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his commandments or no. This
also was the end why the Lord left Ezechias, to prove and try what was in his
heart.

The trial by desertion serves for two purposes: for other whiles the Lord
uses it for the manifestation of some hidden sin, that the godly may be
deepelier humbled, and ^raue more earnestly the pardon of that and other sins.
For as the beggar is always mending and peecing his garment, where he finds a
breach: so the penitent and believing heart must always be exercised in
repairing it self where it finds a want.

Again, often times this trial serves to quicken and revive the hidden graces
of the heart, that men may be thankful for them, and feel an increase of them
in the heart. The good husband man cuts the branches of the Vine, not that he
has a purpose to destroy the^, but Ioh. 15. 2. Cant. 5.
to make them bear more fruit. In the Canticles when Christ left his spouse,
then she rises out of her bed, she opens the door, her hands drop myrrh on
the bar of the door: then further she seeks and calls for him, and praises
him more then ever before. David testifies the like of himself: In my
prosperity I said, I shall never be moved, etc. but thou did hide thy face
and I was troubled. The^ cried I to thee, O Lord, and prayed to my Lord.
Lastly, men that live in the Church, being for a time left of God, become so
impenite^t as that they must be given up to Satan: yet for no other cause, but
that the flesh may be killed, and the spirit made alive in the day of the Lord.

The third end is the preventing of sin to come. This appears in Paul. Least
(says he) I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, because I should not be exalted out of measure. In the
former times when the Lord among many other had set out Cra^^er for the
maintenance of his blessed truth against his and Gods enemies, he left him for
a while to fall from his religion, and to make a dangerous recantation: but so
as thereby he prevented many sins, and prepared him to a glorious martyrdom. As
some of his own words may testify which he spoke a little before his end:
And now (says he) I come to the great thing that so much troubles my
conscience more then any thing that ever I did or said in all my life, and that
is the setting abroad of a writing contrary to the truth: which now here I
renounce as things written with my hand contrary to the truth which I thought
in my heart, and that for fear of death, and to save my life, etc. And for as
much as my hand offended writing contrary to my heart, my hand shall be first
punished therefore: for may I come to the fire, it shall be first burned.
Answerably, when he was at the fire, first he burnt his right hand which
subscribed; his body suffered the flame with such constancy and steadfastnes
as he never almost moved: his eyes lift up to heaven, often he repeated his
unworthy right hand. Thus, death which he most feared, he most desired, that
he might take revenge of himself for his sin.

The use that all good Christian hearts are to make of these desertions, is
manifold. First if they have outward rest and walk in the fear of God, and be
filled with the joy of the holy Ghost, Act. 9. 31. Romans 11. 20.
let them not be high minded, but fear, least a forsaking follow. Secondly, if
in any temptation they judge themselves forsaken, let them consider this
wonderful work of spiritual desertions, which God exercises upon his own
children very usually: and then it may please the Lord, they shall find it to be
restoratiue against many a quame and swound of spirit and conscience, into
which otherwise they would certainly fall. Thirdly, seeing God for their trial
does often withdraw himself from them, let them again draw near to God, and
press unto him, even as a man that shiuers of an ague is always creeping to
the fire. If it be demanded, how a man should come near G O D, the answer is,
by the use of his word and prayer. For by his word he speaks to thee, and by
prayer thou speak to him. Lastly, seeing by desertions God will take
experience of his servants, let every man tri^ and search his ways, and ever
Iam. 3. 10. P^. 119 59. Act. 24. 16. Pia. 26. 1. 2.
b^ turning his feet to the ways of Gods comm^ndements: let him endeavor to
keep a good conscience before God and before all men, that so he may with
David say, Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine innocence: my trust
has been always in the Lord: I shall not s^ide: prove me, O Lord, and try
me, examine my raines and my heart.

Verse. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man redress his ways? in taking heed
thereto according to thy word.
FIrst of all be persuaded that the word of God is that only rule whereby the
whole life of every man, and that in every thing must be ordered, even the
life of a young man, who has most reasons for himself, why he should be
excused as he is most disordered.

Verse. 10. With mine whole heart have I sought thee: let me not wander from
thy commandments.
THen upon this persuasion give your self unfeignedly to the reading and
heating of God his word, as the means whereby God has appointed to teach you,
and pray to God in the careful use of those means for his holy spirit, that
thereby you might come to the true understanding of his word.

Verse. 11. I have hid thy promise in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee.
THat which you have thus learned, let it not only swim aloft in your
brain* but let it be deeply settled and graven in your heart as a treasure,
laboring to frame all your affections according to it: otherwise if thou know
never so much, it will notkeepe you from sinning against God.

Verse. 12. Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.
YOu thus profiting, give thanks to God always for that which you have
learned, be it never so little, it is more than many in the world do know: yet
content not yourselfe with it, as though you had sufficient, but pray unto him
to be further enlightened, because it is less than many other do, and
yourselfe ought to know.

Verse. 13. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
But above all be careful to talk of that to others, which you do daily learn
yourselfe, and out of the abundance of your heart speak of good things unto
men.

Verse. 14. I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
riches.
THat you may do all these things, labor to have a joy in the word, and in
all the exercises of it more than in any worldly thing, and to be occupied in
these things with greatest delight: for in what soever we take greatest
delight, that will stick fastest in us.

Verse. 15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.
LAst of all, meditate and consider of that with yourselfe which you have
learned, and muse upon it alone, not contenting yourselfe with the general
rules: but laboring in your conscience to make the use of them profitable to
yourselfe in the particular practice thereof.

Verse. 16. I will delight in thy statutes, and I will not forget thy word.
THus doing all these things carefully, you shall surely never forget that
which you learn: for though you do not remember every thing, yet God will by
his spirit call so much especially into your remembrance, as is needful for you
to know, and the^ especi^ally when you have most need of it, as in the hour
of death, and in the day of temptation: but as you fail in all, or in any of
these, so may you fear to fail in the truth of them.

Nicolas Bownde D. of divinity, Preacher of Gods word at Norton in Suffolk.

PORTION. 3. GIMEL.
Verse. 17. Be beneficial unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.
THe Prophet desires life, where he teaches why me^ should desire to live,
that is, that they might keep Gods word: for life is common to them with
beasts and plants: and yet all desire to live, some for one end, some for
another: but Gods child makes this the end, that he might keep Gods word.
And in that he joins these together, he signifies that his life without it,
is no life, as in the 4. part, verse. 11. where he counts himself dead,
unless he find a readiness to obey Gods will. A widow living in pleasure, is
dead whilst she lives, and this is to be understood of all that live in any
sin. And this if all they considered which are not joined to Christ, it would
amaze them: for though this appear not now, yet at the last day it shall
appear.

This cannot be persuaded to the carnal man, but to us that have the knowledge
of God, it ought to be certain: and we must try our hearts whether this be
our desire to live, that we may keep Gods word. Many men do speak this, and
sing this; yet few in heart do this: therefore if we be thus minded, we must
show it by referring all our doings to Gods glory, which we shall then do,
when we measure all our doings by the word. Therefore Paul (Romans 4. and Phil
2.) desires not life, but that he may be joined to Christ. All other religion
is of no effect, till this principal end be in our hearts; for no man can have
two ends of his life, as to come to preferment, and to be saved: but this must
be only the end, that we might be joined to Christ. He desires not to know,
but to keep, which presupposes knowledge: we are here then provoked to
practice, and not to rest in knowledge, but to labor to do that we know. And
this is the cause why they of the old Testament desired longer life, that they
might finish that only which they had to do, at such time as they felt some
signs of Gods displeasure, and had not sufficiently tasted of Gods favor: so
we, if we cannot find assurance of the forgiveness of sins, then let us
desire to live: but when we are come to this, that with Paul we can say, I have
finished my course with 2. Tim. 4. 7.
joy, then will the children of God be ready to dye. Many there be that have
neither care of life nor death: and although they feel and see signs of Gods
displeasure, yet they are not moved: but the children of God know, that it is
better to be a living dog, than a dead lion. And seeing by their evil life
they have dishonored God, they would be joyful to purchase some praise to him
by their holy conversation.

He knows his great vnhabilitie to do good, and therefore desires it of
God. It is not in our choice to do good or cuill, for then this prayer had
been in vain: he knew that this was not in him to keep Gods word; and
therefore in the next verse he desires that his eyes might be opened: where he
acknowledges, that he had not so much as the knowledge of Gods word in
himself; therefore he was far from yielding such obedience thereunto as the
Lord requires. He desires now to understand, which goes before practice, and
is lesser than it, and yet it is the means to come to practice. And if we
cannot understand it without special grace, then much less can we practice it.
Many of us in judgment do hate Papists, yet in practice we are such, seeing
we do many things without prayer, and the knowledge of Gods word. Knowledge
goes before practice, and therefore many in vain do say that they keep the
word, when they labor not to know it.

Verse. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law.
IN the former verse he showed that he could not keep the word without Gods
grace, now he shows that he cannot know it unless the Lord open our eyes,
this is the want that is in all men, but flesh and blood shall not reveal
this, and Paul says, that it was hid from the Princes of the world, which must
serve to humble all flesh, and to stir us up to pray to the Lord when we come
to read it, otherwise we shall read and not understand it, because
wonderful things are contained therein: therefore when we see the
wonderfulnes of this law, this is one degree of profiting, because the ignorant
think they have knowledge enough.

David well instructed in the word, yet made this prayer* to teach us that we
must go daily forward, for we know but by degrees, and ignorance is mixed
therewith, therefore many continuing long, fall in the end away, which may
teach us to pray that he would not lead us into this temptation, that we
should think we have knowledge enough.

This is the cause why many fall into errors, because that they resting in that,
which they have conceived in their own brain, and have heard or learned of
others, and in the mean while never looking to be taught by Gods spirit: when
they see their teachers fall away, then do they fall away also, because their
ground is gone. So many therefore as love to abide steadfast in the truth, and
never to be removed there from, let them never rest, neither in that they
conceive of themselves, neither in the words and doctrine of men; but let them
always by prayer crave that the Lord by his spirit may instruct them: and this
if they do, the Lord will not turn them away empty, but will so season their
hearts by his spirit, that though a thousand fall away on the one side, and ten
thousand on the other, yet shall they continue steadfast to the end.

The cause why we have so great need to pray, is set down, when he calls
the things contained in the word, wonders. And surely if iniquity be a
mystery, as the Apostle calls it, then much more is the law of God. Yet so
it is not unto al, for the Prophet in this Psalm says, that the very entrance
into Gods word gives light to the simple. And Psalm. 88. when he had called
the word parables, he says, that fathers must teach them to their children:
and we know that the things which fathers must teach to their children, ought
to be very easy and plain. The word then is said to be full of mysteries or
parables to all those, whose eyes the Lord has not enlightened, and whose
hearts he has not touched by his spirit. But as for them who are beloved of
God, and whom the Lord bestows his spirit upon for their direction, those
have an easy entrance into his word, and they do behold the mysteries of the
law. Therefore says Christ unto his Apostles, To you it is given to know these
things, but to the other are all things spoken in parables. Then it is for good
cause that the Prophet desires to behold these mysteries: yet he restrains
his desire, and desires to know no other mysteries than are contained in the
word. Many would gladly desire mysteries, and many fly to revelations; yet
they will not be kept within the bounds of Gods word, but will needs follow
the speculations of their own fantasies, of this sort is the Family of love.
But we must desire with this man of God to behold mysteries, and keep our
selves within the compass of the word, ever craving for the good spirit of God
to enlighten our hearts in the true understanding thereof: that we never be
like the carnal Protestant, which rests in the outward word, never craving
for Gods spirit, to help their understanding therein; neither yet like the
fantastical Family of love, which follows revelation, and illumination
without the word.

Verse. 19. I am a stranger upon earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
I Am a stranger upon earth: He sets down another reason why he would be
instructed in the law of the Lord, because he is but here a stranger, that is,
that he had not here any long abiding place, but continued here for a while.
And this do all the men of God profess, Heb. 11. verse. 14. that they looked
for another city: and therefore God was not ashamed to be called their God: so
in another place David says, I am a stranger as all my fathers were. If this
were the affliction of Gods children in times past, it must be in us now, if we
with them will be partakers of the same promises in the kingdom of heaven. We
see then where we must make the beginning of all godliness and good religion,
even in denying this world, and acknowledging our selves to be but pilgrims
in the same. When a son is sent beyond the seas to learn the tongues, etc.
and has his time appointed him how long he has to tarry, the consideration
of that time, if he be any thing toward, will move him to take pains, that
when he returns home, he may please his father: So let us then often set our
times before us, let us in time learn knowledge, and apply our hearts speedily
thereto. Again, if we be strangers, we have few friends and many enemies, and
therefore it stands us in hand to be careful of the law of God, which may
teach us that good path, in which if we walk, we shall well please God, and
so be guarded and defended against our enemies. We have our own corruption to
strive with, the vanities of the world, the evil examples of wicked men to
provoke us to do the like, their malicious practices against us, and the great
enemy of mankind the devil: and with principalities and powers in heavenly
things. If we do well and wisely consider of these enemies, we shall soon
see what need we have to be instructed in the law of God, that we may be
able to resist them.

Hide not thy Commandments from me. The Prophet beholding these enemies,
craves of the Lord that he would not hide his commandments from him. This
hiding does the Prophet oppose to that inlightning which he spoke of before:
as our Savior Christ does, when he says, I thank thee O Father, that thou
have hid these things from the wise, and revealed them unto babes: where is
signified, that unless the Lord do reveal his law unto us, he is said to
hide it: for it is hidden from us, and we cannot attain unto the knowledge of
it, unless he make it known unto us.

Verse. 20. Mine heart breaks for the desire to thy judgments always.
THe Prophet shows the vehemency of his desire, when he says, that his
soul faints for the desire thereof. So in another place he says, that his
heart pan^^t, and that his soul cleaves to the dust; and many such complaints
the man of God makes, when he sees the Lord withdrawing his spirit from him,
that he cannot so clearly see into Gods word: as contrariwise he shows his
joy, that in heart he conceiueth, when the Lord by his spirit does open his
sight, that he can feel some comfort thereby, when he says, How sweet are
thy precepts unto my mouth? Oh, how love I thy Law? etc. Many men, being not
acquainted with this practice of the Prophet, do think that it is some
melancholic humor, etc. when they see Gods children suddenly sorrowful, or
suddenly full of rejoicing: but those that have experience of these things do
know, that the grief sits near their heart, when they cannot feel comfort
in Gods word: and that then they are most comforted, when the eyes of their
minds are most enlightened. For seeing that our nourishment and life is in the
Word, we ought continually to fetch nourishment from thence, by meditating
therein. Therefore many are on a sudden cast into great sadness and heaviness
of heart, and yet they know not for what cause; whereas this no doubt is one
among the rest: because they use not to meditate in Gods word, therefore by
this means would the Lord drive them to his word, that there they might find
comfort, and so for ever after have the word in greater estimation, and bestow
greater diligence thereupon.

By judgments here is meant the whole word of God, whether it be promises or
threatenings; Judgments.
wherein the Lord ^heweth himself to be as good as his word, in performing
and bringing to pass that which he has spoken.

This desire which the Prophet had to Gods Commandments, it was not for a
start, and soon done, but it was continually: wherein he shows a plain
difference, between a true desire, and that which has no truth in it: for
there is not the wickedest man that lives, but he may for a time seem to have
very good things in him, and at a start the most wicked will make a show of
very good desires; but all this is like a morning cloud, and soon vanishes
away: therefore if we will have our desire to be true, let us also labor
Simile.
that it be continual.

Verse. 21. Thou have destroyed the proud: cursed are they that do err from
thy commandments.
THe Prophet does not let pass Gods judgments without profit, but meditateth
upon them, that thereby he may be kept in greater obedience: because the Lord
has in former times executed his judgments, he will show himself righteous
still: and therefore the Prophet gathers, that though the wicked be not all
presently punished, yet they are all accursed, and in time they shall be
punished. By erring he means not every slip, but the falling away from God.

Verse. 22. Remove from me shame and contempt: for I have kept thy testimonies.
IN this confidence, that the Lord will destroy the wicked; he assured
himself that he would defend him against those, that set themselves against
him. The judgments of God then have these two effects: first, to humble him:
secondly, to comfort him: as portion 7. and 15 so that he fears when his
heart is broken; he also loves when he receives hope of help, in confidence
whereof he makes this prayer. The use of Gods judgments upon others, must we
make to ourselves; first, that we be brought to acknowledge our deserts, and so
fear, and to behold his justice, that we may have assurance of mercy. This is
hard to flesh and blood, for some can be brought to rejoice at the destruction
of others, and cannot fear: some, when they are feared cannot receive comfort.
But those which God has joined together, let us not separate: therefore let us
make these uses of Gods judgments. His prayer is this, Lord let not mine
enemies which pursue an evil cause, let them not have their desire, in
bringing me to contempt, least whiles I labor to keep thy Law, and ^m become
contemptible, thy Law also should receive some blot. First, here we see that
it is no strange thing, that they which keep Gods Commandments, should be
standred: and therefore we must reform our judgment, which is ready to
condemn those, of whom they hear an evil report. Secondly, seeing he
prays against contempt, he shows that contempt is the greatest cross that
can come to the children of God: for many could loose their goods, which yet
would be grieved for the loss of their name; he here prays so, not only
because of that natural cause which he had, but chiefly because his name was
joined with the glory of God. All the punishmte^s of Christ did not so much
grieve him, as when he was reproched: therefore the devil chiefly goes about
this, that when this comes to pass, that all speak evil of us, we might
doubt whether our cause were good or no, and so fall away: therefore the Prophet
prays thus earnestly against it. When we are brought to contempt for our
deserts, we ought not otherwise to be grieved, than that God is dishonored;
but when he shall by this means bring us to the knowledge of our sins, then
shall we be content to shame ourselves, because thereby we shall glorify God.

Verse. 23, Princes also did sit, and speak against me: but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes.
HE was thus abused even by Princes, and these did speak against him eue^ in
judgment, whither he was drawn as a malefactor; therefore he prays thus
earnestly against it.

We must then prepare ourselves for evil words, not only of the common sort,
but also of the chiefest. David had comfort in Gods statutes. When we are thus
dealt with rightfully, then let us be humbled: but if in a good cause we be
thus dealt with, then let us take heed, for the devil will go about, either to
make us use unlawful shifts and means, as to revenge, to lie, or to contend
by our own wit and policy, and to flatter, and confess that to be a fault
which is none: or else altogether to despair of help, or to be careless of
our calling, and to cast it off, that thereby he may have more advantage; for
he will make us weary of well doing by trouble, therefore many are overcome
thereby. The help against al these is Gods word, for that will assure us that
our cause is good, and that God will help us therein.

Verse. 24. Also thy testimonies are my delight, and my counselors.
BY this means had he help by the Word, by making it his delight and
counselor: for this the devil in trouble will go about* to bring men to
their wits end; or else to break their hearts, and make them faint, and a
wounded spirit who can bear? He put not away craft with craft, but made the
commadements his counselors, whereby he first learned wisdom, and then good
means to withstand the wicked. Hereby then we shall not only have wisdom
but also comfort: we are not come yet to be called before Princes, yet who so
will live godly in Christ, shall have troubles, though not always in goods,
nor life, nor banishment, yet in reproach and contempt, even from thy wife, thy
servants, thy children, thy neighbors, etc. The word teaches, that reproach is
not without cause: for when the ways of a man please the Lord, the righteous
shall be his friend, and the beasts of the field shall be at league with us:
therefore there is some sin in us which the Lord by this means would correct;
then let us first look to that, and then seek to the word, that there we may
find comfort and wisdom to sustain us. For this is the cause that we are
without comfort in our trouble, because we meditate not in his statutes, and
make them our counselors. If thou be Gods child and despisest lighter
troubles, he will send greater, till he have broken thy heart: but if thou
belong not to God, the curse shall be hid from thee, and thou shall be eaten up
before thou be aware. Thou must not strive with the devils weapons, as to
requits evil for evil; for fire is not quenched with fire, but with water:
evil is not overcome with evil, Simile.
but with good; and therefore rough speeches must be overcome with gentle: and
ever when thou art discourteously dealt with, then consider thine own sins,
and labor to feel them, and thy heart shall be brought down: for then shall
thou be brought to the presence of God who will not suffer thee to be honored,
because thou have not honored, him, etc. yet consider that he does but
fatherly correct thee, and therefore put thy trust in him. Mark what wisdom
he has given to his children in the like troubles, and then go to him by
prayer, and lay open thy self to him with hope and faith, and thou shall have
comfort. But if when the tentation comes, we cannot come to the word, and to
prayer, that thereby we may find comfort, we have not laid up the word in our
heart, though we can say it all by heart; therefore we must turn a new leaf,
and learn after to lay up the word in our heart.

PORTION. 4. DALETH.
Verse. 25. My soul cleaves to the dust: quicken me according to thy word.
THe comfort and wisdom which he had, was by vicissitude, and change,
sometime comfort, sometime sorrow: so Gods children find this change both
into joy and sorrow; those know this that have experience of it, others know
it not. Here then is a mirror of Gods children; the worldly minded men would
always keep one tenor and never be moved: but the children of God do thus
change; they cannot find this wisdom and comfort at the first, but then,
when they are brought low. Many, when they hear a promise, think to have it
by and by; but they ma^ke not, that a promise and the fruition of it is not all
at once; for the law will make them fit before they enjoy it. This causes
many to fall from the promises, which seemed to believe, because they have not
help at He that believes makes no have.
the first: but the children of God melte and cleave to the dust, and yet trust
in God and wait on him, and then feel comfort^ others in the beginning of
trouble pray, and wait a little, but if help come not quickly, then cast they
all away. But the child of God has a patient spirit, and therefore feels
comfort, when the hasty minded man wants not his woe. He marketh the
deliverance of others, and hops for the same, and so waits still on God.
He was as good as dead, and saw no help but the word. The nature of man is
ready to trust in means, so long as he has them; therefore God pulls all
means from us that we may only trust in him. Let us think that God has
delivered others, and therefore he will deliver us.

Verse. 26. I have declared my ways, etc.
VEers. 59. He considers his ways, that is his inward imperfections, and
outward aberrations from the strait, and st^eight ways of God: and here he is
not ashamed to declare them; that is, to acknowledge and confess, that all
this came upon him because he was forgetful to do^ Gods will. My soul claue
unto the dus^, because I claue not to thee. I have declared my ways of
wickedness, teach thou me the ways of rigt^eousnesse.

I have declared my ways*) Our ways are our sins, or rather that course
which we follow in sinning, we ought with the Prophet to declare them, that
is, we must deal with our sins, as the judge deals with malefactors. 1,
Apprehende. 2, A^ra^g^^. 3, Condemn our selves as guilty before God For he
that hides his (...) sh^k not pr^^p^r, Pro^. 28. 13. See what declarations, or
rather declamations the Saints m^^e against themselves, 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 32.
and 51. Neh. 9. 33. 34 35. Da^. 9 5 6. 7 8. 9 10. It were good for us in our
life time to keep a register of all our sins, to recount them often before
God, that having from him our quietus est ^ere, we may not hereafter be
called to an account* Men carefully look how they stand in the world, but are
careless to see how they stand before God: and therefore may justly have the
statutes of bancke-rupts sued against them.

And thou heardest me) This is the benefit that comes unto us, upon the
unfeigned confession of our sins. He that confesses and forsakes them, shall
fin^e mercy. Prou. 28. 13. Uncover thou, God will cover: declare thou, God
will hear. In the seat of Justice upon earth, we say open confession, open
confusion, here it is far otherwise. 1. Ioh. 1. 9.

And thou heardest me.) God hears our prayers two ways: first in mercy,
when he grants the requests of such as call upon him in the fear of his
name. Secondly he hears men's prayers in his wrath. Thus he gave the
Israelites quayles at their desire. Psalm. 78. 29. 30. 31. and Hos. 13, 10. 11.
Thus men often times curse themselves, and others, yea their children and
ca^tell, and accordingly they have their wish. David was not ever heard at the
first: neither are we over heard at the first. It pleases God to deal with us
as with the woman of Canaan. Matthew. 15. 24. 1. To prove us by delay: 2. To
exercise our faith: 3. That we may acknowledge from whom we have received that
which we prayed for: 4. That we might more esteem of the graces given by
importunity: 5. To whet on our desires after such things as we pray for: and
6, that others may learn that, he that believes will not make have, Isay 28.
16 Nay it pleases God oftentimes not to hear us at all. 1* Because we the^
know not to ask as we ought, Matthew. 20. 22. 2. Because we ask amiss, James
4. 3. 3. Because they are not good for us 2. Cor. 12. 7. But because the
Prophet says, thou heardest me: after what manner does God hear the prayers
of his servants? Answer: 1. By granting the thing which was asked according to
his will. 2, By denying the thing desired, and by giving something
proportionable unto it. We ask temporal, he gives spiritual blessings: we
ask deliverance: he gives patience. The Cup was not removed at Christ's prayer:
his manhood was enabled to bear Gods wrath. The prick in the flesh was not
taken from Paul, but he heard this voice: My Grace is sufficient for thee.

Teach me thy statutes.) This often repetition of this one thing in this
Psalm, argues, 1* The necessity of this knowledge. 2, The desire he had to
obtain it. 3, That such repetitions are not then frivolous when they proceed
from a sound heart, a zealous affection, and a consideration of the necessity
of the thing prayed for. 4, That such as have most light, have little in
respect of that they should have: 5. As covetous men think they have never
gold enough, so christian men should think they have never knowledge enough.

Verse. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, and I will meditate
in thy wondrous works.
HE goes on in his former petition, and considering that every man is a beast
in his own understanding, like the owl that cannot behold the sun, and the
Mole that wants sight; he desires that God would partly by his spirit,
partly by his ministers, partly by afflictions, partly by study and labor,
make him to have a right and sound understanding, not only of his statutes,
but of the w^y of his statutes, that is, after what sort and order he may live
and direct his life, according to those things which God has commanded him in
his Law. Learn here first, how hard a thing it is for man ouerweening
himself in his own wisdom, to know Gods will, till God make us to know;
we are fools, and slow of heart to believe all that is written in the Word,
till CHRIST open our eyes. Luke, 24. we say with N^c^demus, how can these
things be? John, 3. Secondly, it is not enough to understand the Word, but to
know the way to walk in it, that by it we may be directed what to do,
when, where, and how we ought to perform every action.

And I will meditate] or as some read, speak of it, as if he should say, if
thou teach me, I by thy grace shall teach others: and surely to what end does
God give knowledge, but that we should be careful to edify others by it. We
may not desire this knowledge only to know, this is foolish curiosity: or to
be known, this is vanity: or to gain by, this is covetousness: but to edify
our selves, this is wisdom: and to edify others, this is charity. The woman
of Samaria had no sooner a knowledge of Christ, John 4 but thee runs into the
City, leau^s her pitcher, and says: Come, see a man that has told me all
that I have done, Is not he the Christ? Am I my brothers keeper, was Kayns
speech, Gem4. But he that belieueth in me says Christ, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of the water of life, ^o^^.

I will m^dit^^e] Three things says Luther make a good divine, Prayer,
affliction, meditation: this last is as the chewing of the cud, which we read
of in L^^^t^cus. Meditation without reading is often erroneous; reading without
meditation, makes a barren student.

In thy wondrous works.] Or wonders, that is, either of those wonderful
things that are contained in thy law, as verse, 19. of this Psalm, and verse,
129* which being high and hidden mysteries, did cause him to have them in
admiration and reverence: or of those wonderful works which God before had
done in the world, and daily did amongst the sons of men, and which ought to
be had in perpetual remembrance.

Note we first first, that Gods word is wonderful, because it contains in it
such things as transcende the reach of man's capacity, and without illumination
from above, cannot be understood by the wisest in the world. But especially, if
we consider the power of this Word, in that it is that immortal seed, by
which we are begotten again, that sincere ^ilke, by which we are nourished:
that silver Trumpet, by which we are awakened: that Christ all glass, in
which we may behold what manner of persons we are: and that mighti^ arm of
GOD, by which we are corrected for sin, and protected from sin: we must
needs say, that this Word is wonderful. Give me a man as lascivious as a
Goat, as rau^^^^^ as a Wolf, as covetous as Hell, as prosu^e every way as the
prodigal son; if this Word assisted by Gods spirit seize upon his soul, it
will change him as if he were a new man: and to say as one once did to his
wanton lover, it is not I.

Now as for the works of God, whether we look upon them in the creation or
preservation of them, they are every way wonderful. David could not look upon
them, but he cries out, Psalm: 8. O Lord how wonderful are thy works
throughout the world? And Psalm. 139. But considering the frame of his own
body, he says: I will praise thee O Lord, for I am wonderfully and
fearfully made.

Verse. 28. My soul melts for he^^ines, raise me up according unto the Word.
ME thinks I see David here resolved into tears, and pouring them out at his
cies, as at ^ well with two buckets, by reason that the hand of God was heavy
upon him. He can find no comfort but in the word of God, and therefore he, to
be raised up by it, be takes himself to this ciaculatory prayer. He thought
it not enough to say, My soul cleaves to the dust: verse. 25. but here will he
add, that it melted for heaviness. The spirit of a man may bear his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? says the wise man; Prou. 18
14 There is much in this book concerning afflicted consciences, and therefore
I need not to add much. In all those sorrows which the soul has, arising
from the consideration of Gods wrath for sin; the first consolation is from
the word of God, in which is promised grace, and forgiveness of our sins. Thus
it will quicken, and comfort us in trouble, and assure us of this harvest, that
though we sow in tears, we shall reap enjoy.

But because we can neither apprehend nor apply this word, further then we
receive grace from God, we must with David pray to the Lord, that he would so
guide us that we wander not, uphold us that we fall not, confirm us that we
funt not, encourage us that we despair not, and quicken us, that we dye not.
This verse requires rather the meditation of a penitent convert, then the
Exposition of a learned Divine: as for the wicked they understand not what is
here written. Though the righteous fall, he shall not be cast off: for the
Lord puts under his hand. Psalm. 37. 24.

Verse. 29. Take from me the way of lying, and grant me graciously thy law.
AS before he prayed to understand the way of Gods precepts, so here he would
be kept from the way of lying, and because they whom God* keeps, are best
kept: he therefore continues his prayer to God, desiring so to be instructed
by his word, that his mind being purged from all vanity, he may be taught to
obey Gods word. The way of lying is that which the Prophet calls vain
inventions, Verse. 113. falsehood, Verse. 163. the way of the wicked, Psalm. 1. Our
own ways, Ezech. 18. In a word the Prophet here desires to be confirmed by
God against all corruptions in doctrine, and disorder of conversation, which
Satan by his witty and wily instruments does seek to set abroach in the
world. These are called the way of lying, 1. Because they are invented by
Satan the father of lies, 2. They are countenanced by man's wit, the
storehouse of lies, 3. They seem to be that which they are not, which is, of
the nature of lies, 4. They are contrary to God and his truth, the discouerers
of lies. This way of lying before sin came into the world, it was a way so
unknown to man, that indeed it was as a desert wilderness, in the which
never any foot had tro^e: but now it is so broad and wide a way, that the
most in the world walk in it. The heathen by his Idols, the Turk by his
Alcoran, the Jesuit by his new Gospel, the Lutheran by his
Contransubstantiation, the Protestant by his denying the power of godliness,
the Schismatike by his pretenced purity have walked so along in this way, that
the way of truth they will not know. We have wrangled so long about truth
in religion, that as he could not find Rome, in Rome: so we cannot find
Religion, in Religion. And we have cloaked so long truth in conversation,
that true dealing is banished from the sons of men, he that will use it must
dye a beggar. Hijs diebus iam peractis, nulla sides est in factis: m^l in ore,
verba lactis, fell in cord fraus in factis.

Help Lord for good and godly men do perish and decay,
And faith and truth from mortal men is banished quite away.
Had we not need then with this holy Prophet to hate al vain inventions, but
to pray most earnestly with him to the Lord, that he will take from us this
lying way, and to teach us that good and old way, in which if we walk all the
days of our life, we shall in the end find rest to our souls? when as they
that trust in lying vanities, do forsake their own mercy, Jonah: 2. 10.

And grant me graciously thy word.) He boasts not on his own merits, but
desires all for Gods goodness: and till it please God to make us rest in his
word, and in that alone, we shall be carried about with every blast of new
doctrine, run a whoring after our own inventions, and never be guided in any
good way.

Verse. 30. I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid
before me.
THough the Prophet prayed in the former verse against the way of falsehood and
lying, yet it seems that by the spirit of God he had made choice of a good
way, for here he protests that for his part he had chosen the way of
truth, and laid before himself the way of Gods judgments. God laid before
him two ways, the one strait, the other wide: the one of life, the other of
death: the one of lying, the other of truth: which does he choose? the way of
truth: that is that path which leads to truth and well-doing, and in one
word to him, who is the way, the truth, and the life. But how comes it that he
makes this choice? is it in the power of his free will? nothing less, no man
can come unless he be drawn: walk, unless he be directed: run, unless he
be enlarged, or choose this way, unless he be guided by the work of Gods
spirit, without which we can do nothing.

I have chosen:) why then should not we choose it? surely he makes this
confession, both to stir up others by his example, and to testify his
resolution, that though he were in danger for this choice, and had few
companions, yet he for his part would never seek out any other way: as Ios.
24. 15. Ioh. 6. 67. 68. 69.

The way of truth:) thus he st^leth the word of God, which alone shows man the
way by which he may walk safely, and vprightlie. But before a man can be
set in this way, he has many seducements offered unto him, to draw him into
by* paths. It seems that David overcame them all, and made Gods word that
Ari^dnes thread, by which he passed through all sorts of Labyrinths. If we
intend to make choice of any other way, doubt not but we shall have
counselors enough; but this is the way, choose it.

And thy judgments have I laid before me.) 1. Thy word according to which
thou will pronounce sentence, that have I said before me, it is ever in my
sight, it is my counselor, my comforter, my guide and governor. O happy
David if thou had ever done so, then had thou not fallen either by pride of
heart in numbering the people, or uncleanness of life with the spouse of Vriah.
Hence springs all impiety that we lay not GODS judgments before us.

Verse. 31. I have cleaued to thy testimonies, O Lord confound me no^
IF ever good man had occasion by crosses to forsake his profession, and hold
of piety, David had: never was man more beloved of God, yet never was man so
molested by men, remember his troubles and his truth will appear. Did he now
forsake his standing: abandon his general: or start aside like a broken bow?
no he did not. In the Lord was his delight, in Gods word was his comfort. He
did cleave so fast unto the word of God, in which his will is testified to man,
that no trouble could make him to forgo his hold. Me thinks I may bring in
here Paul speaking as David does. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or naked
^^sse, or peril, or sword? As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all
the day long: we are counted as sheep for the slaughter. Nevertheless in all
these things we are more then conquerers through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come: Nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall b^e able to separate us from the love of GOD which is in
CHRIST JESUS our LORD. Romans 8. 35. etc.

Confound me not.) If I cleave not to thy testimonies, thou will confound
me, as all they are who start aside from thee: if I cleave unto thy
testimonies, men will confound me, O LORD suffer me not to be confounded
by them, or to do that whereby I may be ashamed, either before thee or before
any man. Thus David fearing that by daily accidents, his faith and profession
might be shaken, and he should in the end become a scorn to his enemies (as
who more scorned then the most godly) desires that he might have, as he had
trusted* such good success, that upon none occasion, that hold which he had
laid upon Gods word, might be taken from him. Where we see it is the custom
of the wicked to put most shame upon them, who desire to stick most fast unto
God, and to serve him with greatest sincerity: this is the great grief of
Gods Saints, that they are thus confounded for well doing; let them go on, as
David did, let them pray as David here does, in the end they shall either see
the confusion of their enemies, or else rejoice in consolation of a good
conscience, that they are hated without a cause.

Verse. 32. I will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou shall
enlarge mine heart.
THis last verse is a golden verse, in which he shows principally with what
speed and cheerfulness he will serve God. But because this race celestial
cannot be undertaken unless we know Christ, and in him the remission of
sins, which alone knowledge does enlarge the heart, drawing it out of the
dolors* of death, and perfuming it with a new joy, by which it rests quieted
in the Lord, therefore, as before he desired to be quickened and cheere^d
according to Gods word, so here he promises, that he will most cheerfully go
on in the ways of Gods statutes, where it shall please the Lord to set his
heart at liberty by taking away from him the fear of his displeasure
purchased by sin, and the fury of his enemies of whom he was in danger.

I will run etc.) it is a metaphor borrowed from runners in a race, who
questionles do run with speed. Such an one was Ahimaaz 2. Sam. 18. who
out^an Chushi to bring David tidings of Absolons death: And John, who did
ouerrunne Peter to the sepulcher. John. 20. 4. David will imitate these
runners, he will make have, and delay no time to keep Gods righteous
judgments. So would Paul himself Philip. 3. 13. I forget that which is
behind, and I endeavor myself to that which is before: And follow hard
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
And to this race he exhorts the Corinthians. 1. Epistle. 9. Chapter. Verse.
2. So run that ye may obtain. Now in this race, some creep on, as inceptors
in Christianity; others walk on as proficients in Christianity; a few run
on as absolute christians in the race. First, Every christian is the runner,
Secondly they begin to run after justification by faith in Christ, and
Regeneration. Before which the shackles of sin hinder their running. Thirdly,
the end of this race is the end of their life. Fourthly the race it self is
the way of Gods statutes. Fifthly the place for these runners is this present
world: for in the world to come we need not to run, we shall then receive
the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our souls. Sixthly the mark
at which they aim is Jesus Christ, that they may perfectly know, love, and
possess him: and therefore this race is nothing else but a continual and most
ardent desire, study, and endeavor to profit in the knowledge, faith, love,
incorporation, and possession of Christ. Seventhly. The price appointed for
such as run well, is eternal life with Christ in heaven. Eighthly this race
has in it these degrees, mature, propere, recte, constanter. First, mature,
begin betime: Secondly propere make have: Thirdly recte, keep on right.
Fourthly constanter, continue to the end. All which that we may perform, we
must resolve: First, that we have never run far enough: for this were to
dream of an Anabaptisticall perfection. Secondly we must ever aim at our
mark which is Christ Jesus. Thirdly, we must forget our ground behind us, and
all those steps we have trodden in it. Fourthly, we must ever endeavor to that
which is before us. Fifthly we must cast off all impediments in this race.
Sixthly and lastly let us consider that when we have run here as fast as we
can, yet is our reward and crown in heaven; and this will make us to run on
still.

When thou shall enlarge mine heart) Some think that the Prophet straightened
because of his enemies, means that if God should grant him victory over
them, then his feet should be as hindes feet, to run on in the above named
way: But it is probable he speaks of that grief he had, at the consideration
of Gods wrath for sin: and indeed such sorrows do so draw together the
heart, that they make a man not only slow to do good, but that he cannot
move a foot in this way: but if God remove them, and quiet the conscience:
Romans 5* 1. we are so ready and fit to every good work, that we will not only
walk in these paths, but with great alacrity run on in the same. Nothing
can stay us, when that sorrow is taken from us, no, not contempt,
imprisonment, or loss of life.

THE 5. PORTION.
Verse. 33. Teach me o Lord the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto
the end.
I observe that in this one octonarie, which is not to be found in any of the
rest, namely, that in every several verse there is a several prayer. In the
first whereof he prays to be taught, and then promises to take that which
God shall teach him. He had before resolved to run in this way, but he felt
forthwith his own natural aberrations, and therefore comes to this guide to
be taught.

Teach me O Lord) As the Eunuch in the Acts desires Philip to teach him, and a
schollet in the school his master to teach him, or a stranger in his journey
some guide to teach him: so David here desires God to teach him. It seems
this way is hard to be found by any man, and worthy to be found out by all
men, in which David so often desires to be directed. He was no doubt a guide to
the blind, an instruct^r of the ignorant, and a learned scholar in the
school of Christ, but fearing all his own ways, and hungring after greater
knowledge, which is as the principal wheel of a clock to the rest, he still
be^aketh himself unto prayer. Why then shall we think that if he have once
gotten a gli^pse of Gods glory revealed in his word, a sma^ch of that knowledge
manifested in his will, a taste of that sweetness which is in his Law, or some
understanding of that way which leads to life, we have enough, and are of our
selves able t^ behold that glory, apprehend that knowledge, relish that
sweetness, or run on in that way? O let us rather say as David does, Teach me
o Lord.

Thus the faithful, after God has liberally bestowed on them great graces,
ought always to walk in fear and humility, knowing that they are subject to
many temptations, which they are never able to resist, unless he that has
begun his good work in them, do make them to continue in the same.

And I will keep it unto the end) It is not enough to begin well, but we must
go on: this is the comeplement of true piety, righteousness: Is our garment,
it must be like Joseph's party colored coat, down to the heels: not like
that of David's Ambassadors cut off in the midst. It is the Christians
sacrifice, and God requires not only the head, that is the beginning, but also
the tail, that is the ending of this sacrifice. Remember Lots wife; let us
read that history, least we our selves become an history.

Verse. 34. Give me understanding, and I will keep thy Law; yea I will keep
it with my whole heart.
Give me understanding etc.) We think that wisdom is only found amongst the
politicians of this world, and that he who can provide for himself, prevent
his enemy, circumuent his friend, and see furthest into the affairs of this
world, he is the man, yea the only wise man. But David here thinks that true
wisdom is in understanding and keeping the Law of God. Moses thought so
Deutr. 6. Solomon thought so, Prou. 1. 6. Job thought so, chapt. 28. 28. and
he that is not of this mind, shall one day be enforced to say, Alas I have
rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in me? Isa. 8. If any one
therefore do want this true wisdom, let him as David does, and James
exhorts all to do, ask it of him who gives liberally to all men, and
vpbraydeth none. James. 1. 6.

And I will keep it with my whole heart,) As he promised before p^^seuerance,
so he promises sincerity. The heart is the Christian sacrifice: the fountain
of all both good and evil actions: and the principal gift which God beggeth
at our hands, My son give me thy heart. It was once ^^ saying of the Bishop
of Rome, when he would give license to our English Catholics, to come unto
our Churches, and so be present at our prayers, Fili da mihi cor tuum, and
s^^ssicit, Son give me thine heart and it suffices: but he has retracted
this his teleration, now he will have all, or nothing. Our God is not like
their God, our adversaries being judges. He indeed requires the heart, because
if we bestow it on him, we will forthwith give him all the rest. Let us not
think that any service pleases God, but that which proceeds out of an
honest heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

Verse. 35. Direct me in the path of thy commandments* for therein is my
delight.
STill David sees the necessity of walking in Gods way, and his own pronenes
to run out of that way: therefore he desires direction from the Lord: that as
he had given him a desire, so he would enable him to perform. Questionles we
are of our selves ready enough like unbridled horses in the ways of this
world, to run our selves even out of breath, and we have many occasions here
to spur us on: only the Lord can keep us in this path: therefore must we
pray for his direction: which if we once obtain, we shall not wander either
in judgment or practice out of the right path.

For therein is my delight.) I take pleasure in nothing more then having a
right understanding of the Law, to perform obedience to thee according to the
same. Of this delight we shall speak verse. 92. In the mean time note that
David in this was a type of Christ, to whom it was meat and drink to do the
will of his Father which sent him. Ioh. 5.

Verse. 36. Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.
IN the 3. former verses are three petitions concerning Gods way: In the first
he desires instruction, teach me: in the second apprehension, give me
understanding: in the third, direction, direct me. But because, he saw many
stumbling blocks in this way, some offered to his heart as covetousness, others
to his eyes as vanity, in this and the next verse he desires the remouall of
them both.

Incline mine heart to thy testimonies:) Who now can think that man's heart can
of it own accord be carried on to knowledge of Gods will revealed in his word,
and of it self practice the same, when he shall but consider this prayer of
David, who though he was a man according to Gods own heart, yet durst not
presume upon his own heart, with this gracious inclination from the Lord.

The most excellent wits that ever have been, or shall be, will prove in the
end great instruments of Satan, and false witnesses against these testimonies
of God, unless it please him to refine them by his spirit, and incline their
hearts to his testimonies.

And not unto covetousness) I take it that praying against this one sin, he
prays against all other sins, as pride, malice, Luxury, lust, etc. But
this one is here named, because, as Tim. 6* 10.
the Apostle says, it is the root of all evil. For as there is no branch of
a tree, but it is nourished by the root, no stream of a river, but has his
current from the spring, and no vein in the body, but has his blood from the
liver: so is there no one sin, no, not the life of man, which ha^^ not life
and liuelihood from this one sin. 1. It is as (I may say) the ^other sin,
breeding, and bringing up all the rest. Like mother, like daughters, all bad:
but covetousness is the worst of all. Yet I know not how it comes to pass,
that men are now a days called good men, not of their goodness, but of their
goods: he is the best man that has the best purse, money is the man, yea the
whole man. From the peers to the pesant, all are enamoured with Lady Lucre.
But why should they be so? is wealth any thing else but thick clay? is it not
a part of that refined earth, which man ought to tread under his feet? when
in the infancy of the Church, possessions were sold, the money was laid at the
Apostles feet, Acts. 4. to signify (as some think) that we must rather
trample upon and contemn this trash, then to have over great admiration of it*
Alas! why should we labor so after things temporal, that they hinder us from
getting things eternal? what will it profit a man to get the whole world, and
in the end loose his own soul? shall we prefer money before God? before
heaven? before our own souls? can it give satisfaction to us? No it cannot.
Man's heart indeed is so little of it self, that it will scant give a kite her
breakefast, yet is the desire thereof so infinite that the whole world cannot
satisfy it. Are we the better because we are rich? no more then the horse is
for his gaye trappings. Can we carry them away with us? nay we brought nothing
into this world, and it is certain we shall carry nothing out. The sumpter
horse may carry all the day treasure on his back, but at night it is taken
from him, and he carries nothing into the stable, but often times a galled
back by reason of his burden. David says, if riches increase set not your
heart upon them. Solomon says, he that trusts in his riches shall fall.
Christ says, Psalm. 62. 10. Prou. 11. 28. Matthew. 19. 24. ^. Tim. 6. 9. 1. Tim.
6. 17.
it is harder for a rich man to enter into heaven then for a camel to go
through a needles eye. Paul says, they that will be rich fall into many
temptations and snares: and therefore charge Timothy to charge rich men that
they trust not in uncertain riches. I say then with our Savior Christ, take
heed and beware of covetousness, and that you may pray ever with this blessed
Prophet, Incline mine heart to thy statutes, and not unto covetousness.

Verse. 37. Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity, and quicken me in thy
way.
HEre he prays against the vanity of the eye, which in truth is a vanity of
vanities. Thus Vanity seduced Heuah, entangled Gods children, corrupted Dinah,
endangered Sarah, enchaunted David, allured Achan, and by these windows many
sins enter into the soul. Read in this book that godly chapter of the
government of the eyes, and in an other book the vanity of the eye, and with
Job make a covenant with your eyes, and with David pray, turn away mine eyes
etc. and you shall look better all the days of your life. It were better to
have none eye, then either a wanton, or a wicked eye. If such an eye offend
thee, pluck it out.

And quicken me in thy way) he considers his own deadnes and dulnes of spirit,
and he desires God to quicken him in his way, this pronoune thy is very
emphaticall, opposing Gods way to man's way. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, Psalm. 1. 45. 18. all the ways of God are mercy and truth. Psalm. 25.
The ways of men are altogether vanity, and lead to death and destruction.
Only this way gives sound comfort to the soul of man. Truth it is, that the
ways of men are pleasant for a time, but the issues thereof are the ways of
death. The ways of God are difficult and dangerous, but at the last they will
bring thee to heaven.

Verse. 38. Stablish thy promise to thy servant, because be fears thee.
WHat does the Prophet in this verse? he confesses himself to be Gods
servant. An honorable service it is to serve God: an argument of his humility
to acknowledge this servitude. He desires that God will make good his promise
unto him, and this is all that he will desire* God had promised that he would
make him King, that he would deliver him from his enemies, that he would
guide him, and quicken him in his way, by prayer he desires the accomplishment
of this promise. Out of this learn we, that as David prays for nothing but
that which God had promised to grant, so we ought to pray for nothing but
that which he has promised to grant. If we thus ask according to his will,
he will hear our prayers, and grant our requests. But God promises nothing
but to his servants: he hears not sinners, the prayer of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord.

Because he fears thee) And who would not fear thee O King of Nations? for
to thee apper^^in^th the dominion: for among all the wise men of the Gentiles,
and in all their kingdoms there is none like thee. I^r. 10. 7. Some read
these words thus, that he may fear thee, as if he should have said, O Lord
thou have promised to be good unto me, I beseech thee establish this promise
of thine, that I fearing thee, may trust in thee, and prefer thee before all
earthly means in this world. And indeed, the true fear of God breeds an
holy security in the children of God. Others think that the Prophet by this
does prove, that he is indeed the true servant of the Lord, because his
conscience tells him, that he fears God above all earthly things, which in
truth is a true note of a true servant of the living God. But none must think
that David here does allege his own merits, but only does testify that he
is not an unfaithful servant, because the fear of the LORD was ever before
his eyes, his service was not eye-seruice. Of the fear of GOD you may read
much in this book.

Verse. 39. Take away from me rebuke which I fear, for thy judgments are
good.
Blessed is the man that fears always, says Solomon: Pr^u. 28. Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling, says Paul, Philip. 2. 12. Take away
from me rebuke which I fear, says David. In the Hebrew it is, take away my
rebuke: as if he should have said, O Lord I may commit some such evil
against thy good law, yea some such notorious transgression, as may tend to my
shame: I beseech thee take it away* or else, I have already, O Lord by diverse
sins, and by name through adultery and murder brought shame and rebuke upon
my self amongst me^, I entreat thee to remove this shame and rebuke. Out of
the first Exposition we learn. First, that the godly are subject unto
notorious sins. Secondly, that those sins will cause shame in them, though the
wicked will not be ashamed. Thirdly, that God only can take away this shame.
Fourthly, that we may pray for the removing of shame eue^ amongst me^,
especially that which may bring with it some dishonor to God. Fifthly, that the
godly are most jealous over themselves. Sixthly, the way to avoid sin, is
ever to be afraid, least we should sin.

Out of the second Exposition note, that the remembrance of our former sins,
must draw out of us prayers unto God, that for them we may not be rebuked in
displeasure in this life, nor confounded and abashed in the life to come.

But some do yet make another interpretation of these words, and think that
the Prophet here prays not only against those private contumelies and
reproaches which were cast out against him, because he followed that which was
good (though to an heroical mind, any thing can be better borne then
reproach) but especially against those public reproaches which the adversaries
of the Church, observing the destruction of Gods law, and oppressions of Gods
people, do foame out against God himself, and say where is now their God.
These David feared: and because they were joined with the dishonor of God, and
hurt of the Church he prays against them.

Thus the Prophet feared least God should be dishonored, so ought we: thus
he was grieved when Gods people were oppressed, so ought we: thus he made
the rebukes of others his rebuke, so ought we: and thus he prayed that this
might be taken away, so ought we.

For thy judgments are good*) The judgments of the wicked are badde
judgments, but the judgments of God are good: I pray against those, I appeal
to these: I fear the one, I approve the other. Now the judgments which God
pronounces in his word, be they threatenings in the law, or consolations in the
Gospel, yea and those also which he executes in the world, whether upon the
godly or godless, they must needs be good, 1. Because God is goodness it
self. 2, He cannot be deceived. 3, He will not be corrupted. 4, He alone is
no respecter of persons, but judges according to every man's work.

To this judgment seat we may appeal: this righteous judgment we must
acknowledge; by this court if we be once tried, we may say with the Apostle. I
pass not of man's judgment, for he that judges me is the Lord. What avails
it if man absolve, and God condemn: ^. Cor. 4.
or if God condemn, and man absolve. Let them contemn the unrighteous
judgments of men, who can in the testimony of a good conscience approve
themselves and all their actions before the righteous judgment of God. Shall
not the judge of the whole world do righteously? Genes. 18.

Verse. 40. Behold, I desire thy commandments, quicken me in thy
righteousness.
AS before he said, that Gods judgments are good, so now he makes his
appeal to this judge: and it is in effect thus much. O Lord my Lord, do any
doubt whether I desire thy commandments or not? I appeal unto that eye of
thine that sees all things, behold I desire. etc. I desire to know them, and
I desire to obey them, yea with an earnest and ardent affection, I desire both
to know and do thy will.

Behold, I find this word used these several ways, 1. As a note of
prediction, Isay. 7. 2. Of attention, Psalm. 133. 3. Of admiration, Matthew. 2. 4.
Of admonition, John: 5 14. 5. Of irrision, Ioh: 18. 6. Of testification, as in
this and other places in which they desire God to behold that, which they are
most willing he should be witness of. If God say to man behold, it argues the
thing is worth seeing, and that man of himself is unwilling to see it: if man
say to God behold, it seems it is a thing not hypocr^tically counterseyte, and
that he would have him to behold it.

I desire thy commandments.) O that this desire were in the people of this
land: then the book of God would be more in their hands, the knowledge of God
would be more in their hearts, and the practice of godliness more in their
lives. They would come to learn, learn to live, and live so here, that they
might live ever hereafter: men would not make a show of godliness, and deny
the power of it in their lives; but earnestly desire that the good work
begun by the Lord, it might in due time be accomplished by them.

Quicken me in thy righteousness.) He said before quicken me in thy word, here
in thy righteousness: all is one: for the word of God, is the righteousness of
God, in which is set down the rule of righteousness. In this the Prophet desires
to be quickened, that is, to be confirmed, that in cheerefulnes and gladness of
spirit he might rely upon the word of God. If any by righteousness understand
that justice of God, by which he defends such as commit themselves to him, I
gainesay it not.

VAV. THE 6. PORTION.
Verse. 41. And let thy loving kindness come unto me O Lord: and thy salvation
according to thy promise.
HE goes on yet in his prayer, and here beggeth of God two things. First
mercy, secondly salvation, and both because God had promised them. No marvel
if he desire Gods loving kindness. For thy loving kindness says he is
better then life: it were better to be in hell with Gods favor, then in heaven
without it. Man's savor is mutable, Gods immutable: man's temporary, Gods
eternal: man's of desert, Gods free: man's respects somewhat in man, Gods
beholds man in Christ. This we must desire above all earthly things.

And thy salvation.) First mercy, and then salvation, the one is the cause,
the other the effect. By salvation, he means, aid, deliverance, victory,
and eternal life: this he calls Gods salvation, because it comes only
from him.

According to thy promise.) This is ^^ which he ^uer charge God with all: it
is an easy matter to trust God on his word, in presperitie, (...) that can do
so in adversity, he is the man indeed. But what benefit shall thou have
David, if God be a merciful Savior unto thee? etc.

Verse. 42. So shall I make answer to my blasphemers, for I trust in thy word.
MAny adversaries had this holy Prophet, they came about him like bees, they
laid to his charge things which he never did, and especially because he made
his boast of God, and trusted to his word, they oftentimes reproached him for
it: and when he was driven to any extremity they beganue to say, where is now
his God? Thus became he the shame of men, and the contempt of the people. All
they that saw him had him inderision: they made mowes, and nod^ea their heads
saying; He trusted in God, let him deliver him: let him save him, seeing he
loves him. Psalm. 22. 6. 7. 8. In this he was a type of our blessed Savior
who was taunted in the like sort upon the c^osse. Matthew. 27. 39. 40. 41: 42.
43. What now does this man of God labor for to confute, and put to silence
these his blasphemers? Surely the performance of Gods loving kindness and
salvation, the which it pleased him to make promise of. This, if we pray for
in all our troubles, as the propher here does in his: this if we stay our
selves upon, as David ever did; though our enemies he never so many, never so
mighty, never so malicious, we shall in the end have such assured victory,
that we shall not only answer our adversaries; but they with shame shall
answer themselves and say, we fools thought his confidence sollie, but now
we see that he is the Lords beloved, and blessed are they that trust in him*

Observe. 1, That it is no new thing, for the adversaries of religion, to
scorn such as trust only in God, and rely upon his promises of salvation
made unto the^. These wicked ones knew no arm, but flesh: no security but in
the things of this life: as for such as think the name of the Lord to be the
strongest tower, them they have daily in derision. 2. Not that if we trust in
the word of God, we shall be able to answer all our adversaries, for Christ
will give us a mouth, and wisdom, whereagainst all our enemies shall not be
able to speak or resist. Luke 21. 15.

Hugo Cardinalis, observes that there are three sorts of blasphemers of the
godly, the devils, heretics and slanderers. The devil must be answered by the
internal word of humility: heretics by the external word of wisdom,
slanderers by the active word of good life.

Verse. 43. And take not thy word of truth utterly out of my mouth: for I wait
for thy judgments.
HE might for a while not find the word of truth to answer; yet he prays
that the word be not utterly taken from him: so he said* ^^^sake me not over
long: This then shows that our case does alter and change, ebb and flow, as
it pleases God, which reproves them that are always in the same case; for
the children of God have a other course, and we must look to be so our
selves. And this is a comfort, when we feel our selves weak, yet Gods
children have been so; also it may humble us, considering that God does for
some sin lay this upon us; let let us pray, that we may not be so for ever.

For I have w^^ted, etc.] This shows that we may be so for a while, yet we
must wait, til it please him to help us. For thy judgments: that thou will
execute judgment on the wicked, that thy children may obtain the promises:
for then does the Lord execute judgments, when he punishes the wicked as he
has threatened, and when he fulfilleth his promises to his children, giving
them a tongue to answer his blasphemers.

Verse. 44. So shall I always keep thy Law for ever and ever.
IF thou will deal thus, then shall I keep thy word: where he teaches,
that if God do daily assist us, we shall stand; but if he do not, we shall fall
flat. This must teach us to pray, and that earnestly: and this shows
perseverance, contrary to the Papists, which te^^^ to doubt of salvation: for
the persuasion of Gods goodness does assure us that we shall continue to the
end: and if we feel our faith weak, and pray with assurance of his
goodness that he will help us, we may be assured to stand.

Verse. 45. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.
HE will walk in the commandments that he may be at liberty, for that is the
plain way, all other are bi^-paths, which he shall be free from if he stick
to the commandments. For this is the cause that we are troubled and entangled,
because we ask not counsel at Gods word, and wholly stick unto that: and
therefore we fall into some sin, and be overcome with some temptation. For
the word is a lantern to direct our steps: without this we shall wander; but
if we tend to this light, we shall be at liberty. This sets out the
benefit that those have which enjoy the word; and their misery that want it.
This then requires, that we be thankful for Gods word: and reproves them
that having the word, yet wander astray, and love darkness more than the light,
and falsehood, heresies and lies more than the truth. This is a sin to be
punished, when we have the word, and yet walk not at liberty, and if we
cannot be at liberty when we have the word, it is sure that we cherish some
secret sin, and do not search into God word. For that is so full of wisdom,
that it will rid us our of all. Yet the children of God have their infirmities,
out of which they have good issues. But the ignorance of Gods word is the cause
of many troubles; for though a man were in as great a straight as Abraham was
when he should offer his son, yet should he be directed. Then this lays a
straight charge on us to study the word of God.

Verse. 46. I will speak also of thy testimonies before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.
IF God will thus assist me, I will speak even before the wisest, and stand
in the sight of the Kings though it be fearful. This then will assure us that
we shall never fall, if we study, hear, read, etc. on Gods holy word, and
take heed to our ways according thereto. Then if we desire to stand for ever,
let us meditate on Gods word; for God has given this not only to the learned,
but also to idiotes. Here we see that we never rightly profit, till we be not
afraid before whomsoever we come: for if we be assured that our cause be
good, then may we be assured that it shall be given us what to answer, and
this makes men afraid when they doubt of their cause. We are not afraid to
speak to a Gentleman if a Lord be with us: then shall we not need to fear
a King, when the King of Kings is with us: as Moses, Hebr: 11. None then have
this gift of bouldnes, but they to whom God gives it, not the wise, not the
mighty of the world. The Word gives us what to answer; then if we fail, it
is a sign that we fail in the Word. But let us deal earnestly with the
Word, and keep a good conscience, and it shall be given us. This does again
commend the word of God unto us. If we be not ashamed of him before Kings, we
shall be Kings in his Kingdom.

Verse. 47. And my delight shall be in thy commandments, which I have loved.
THat he may come to this grace, he will love the Word, because he delights
in it, for delight is the sign of love. Do we not then delight in the Word?
we have not a love to it: so of prayer, and hearing the Word, if we delight in
it, we will prepare our selves to hear it, and meditate in it afterward; for
he shows his love when he says: I will meditate: then, if we will not find
terror of conscience, and fall into many evils, let us make conscience to call
it to mind: For if we do take the Name of GOD in vain, by hearing the Word
without meditation; then the Word being a true witness, shall be a witness
against us in that day: for this meditation is commended, Part. 13. There are
set times for hearing, praying, etc: but meditation must ever be with thee,
that thou may know, whether the thing thou do be agreeable to his will,
and whether thou may look for his blessing in it.

Verse. 48. Mine hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have
loved: and I will meditate in thy statutes.
IT was not sufficient (as he thought) to acquaint GOD with the delight of his
heart, unless he also made manifest unto him that his outward gesture was
answerable to his heart. You shall observe it even in little children, that if
they desire to have any thing that they see, they will stretch out their hands
that they may get hold, and having once gotten it, you shall hardly get it
from them again.

And certainly, if the inward man be sound, you shall observe it by the outward
gesture of the body. The people were desirous to hear Christ's Sermon, their
eyes were bent and fixed upon him, Luk: 4. 6. David would express his love to
God's Ark, he da^nced before the Arc of Gods Covenant. If we love Gods Word,
and love it in truth, our hands will be as ready to turn over the leaves of
that blessed book, as our hearts are desirous of the understanding of it, that
in this longing desire, taking it into our hands, we may in the end have such
fast hold of it, that we will not forgo it for all the world. We cannot
employ our hands in a better work, especially when we have freedom from our
callings, then to take up the book of God, and peruse it over.

Augustine took it up, and was converted by that one sentence, Rom: 13. 14.
The night is past, the day is at hand, etc. Vrsine took it up and was
comforted by this one sentence, None can take them out of my Fathers hands,
John, 10 29. Chrysostom took it up, and was assured that in his zeal he
should not want, because David had said, The earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is. Bil^ey took it up, as it is in the book of Martyrs, and was much
quieted by that saying of Saint Paul, This is a true saying, and by all means
worthy to be received, that JESUS CHRIST came into the world to save sinners,
of whom I am chief. And such was the love of one Gregory Crow, of whom we
may read in the said book, that suffering shipwreck, he cast away his money,
and kept his Testament in his bosom, and after many days floting on the Sea,
upon a maste, being taken up by a certain passinger, his first care was for
that book of his, fearing least it should have been wet with the Sea. If he
had looked for a Crucifixe as he looked for Gods book, surely the whole world
should have been acquainted with it.

Does David thus show his inward love by his outward gesture, let us do it
whenever we come either to hear God speaking to us, or will our selves
speak unto God. Let our eyes be fastened, our ears attentive, our hearts
intent, our persons reverent before our God, that whatsoever we do, may argue
our piety to God, and be answerable to the inward affection of the soul.

And I will meditate.) And why should not we? The Jews are reported to be so
skilful in that Bible, that many of the^ were able to tell how many times every
letter of the Alphabet was in the Hebrew Bible. The Scriptures are a light
shining in a dark place. 2 P^^. 1. 19. we must attend unto them while we are
wandering in the dark places of this world, can we attend without meditation?
the word of God is the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. without meditation it is
a sword in the hand of a child, or a mad ^^a^. How many take delight in reading
of b^llads, and idle discourses, who never meditate to the word of God? The
sick stomach refu^^th meats, the wicked heart the word of God. Will the spice
smell unless it b^ bruised? and c^n the Scripture be comfortable unless it be
meditated?

PORTION. 8. CHETH
Verse 49. Remember the promise made to thy servant.
WHen he had said, he would keep Gods Law, he then prayed that he might do
it. Secondly, he had the promise for that he prayed, to teach us to rule our
prayers by Gods word. Thirdly, he sticks to the promise of the Gospel, not
to the law. Fourthly, when he says, remember, he does not reprove the Lord of
forgetfulness, but rather prays that he himself might be kept, that he should
not fall.

He had not any particular promise, but applied the general promises to
himself. This must serve to answer the devil asking what promises we have of
salvation or forgiveness of sins; for we have the promises that are made to
the whole Church, which we have applied to our selves. So did Abraham Genes.
22. the woman of Canaan: Matthew. 15.

Thy servant: the promises are made to us, not that we should abuse them, but
thereby should become his servants. Wherein thou have: There is a time between
the making and the fulfilling of the promise, which God does to try whether
we will account of the promise, and stick unto it: By this it is manifest
that faith and feeling are not all one: but that is faith which without feeling
believes: for when feeling is, the^ it is an experime^tal faith.

Verse. 50. It is my comfort in my trouble: for thy promise has quickened me.
WHen he felt sweetness in it, then he was comforted; for there is a changeable
working in Gods children. He shows the nature of faith, which will neither be
stayed in vain, nor wicked things; but all his delight was in the word, where
though he felt not full comfort, yet he had so much as stayed him. This is
contrary to the men of the world, which in their trouble will either seek
delight in va^ne things, or in evil things. This is the nature of faith to
feel comfort then, when they are at the point of death. This shewet^ that Gods
children have sometime comfort, sometime none. And this is true faith that can
comfort us when all means fail, and when we have them, yet not to stay in
them. For a righteous man lives by faith: and therefore when he feels Christ
live in him, in forgiving his sins, renewing him, and giving him hope of
everlasting life; he lives: but if he cannot feel that, then he is as a dead
man. Can we find comfort and delight in the word, when we cannot find comfort
in any thing else? this is a notable argument of faith. And though we feel
drowsines, yet if we can by fear shake it off, and find sweetness in the word,
this is faith. The word then and prayer are the chiefest comforts in troubles.
Co^trarily when the word fears us, because we feel sin abound in us; and
because we find not that taste in the word which we ought; as that the
threatenings fear not, the promises comfort not, etc. If (I say) we can then
fear, though we have plenty of all outward things, and there be no outward
occasion to fear, this is an argument that we have faith: but if faith be
carried with the time, then it is no faith, but is choked with prosperity or
adversity.

Verse. 51. The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: etc.
THe Prophet was in great distress, because of the reproaches of the wicked, as
Psalm. ^^. yet for all this he was stayed by Gods law, though their mocks were
exceeding great, that is, often, and in grievous manner. It is no new thing
then, that Gods children are had in derision: and it is one of their sorest
outward troubles, as we see in our Savior Christ, which heard this, he saved
others, etc. after which he cried, My God, etc. and this was the last
temptation, therefore the greatest. For if this come once into the mind that
we suffer for evil doing, then will there be no comfort. The Heathen would
do any thing for their country; yet would not lose their praise. And this is
the cause why we see many fall to heresies, because they cannot be in
estimation as they would. The greatness of this temptation did not drive him
from the law, Psalm. 37. Every one will be forward when others will speak
well of him: but few do learn here with David to do well though they be
ill used. And this did the devil epsy in the nature of men, therefore he says
of Job, Have thou not hedged him about? etc. Then let us try our selves
whether such reproaches will drive us from our duties: for if they do, all is
not well: but if thou see they do not, then take comfort, and know that thou
must approve thy self to God, and not to men; which to do, is an argument of
faith, as in Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. David, though his sin was not known, yet he
cries, Against thee have I sinned. Then if thou can be sorrowful for thy
secret sins, though men speak never so well of thee, and neither will, nor can
accuse thee, thou have says. Thus then briefly reproach and discredit amongst
men must not drive us from well doing: neither must praise and credit among men
make us favor our selves in our sins, or take greater liberty to our selves.

He swarued not from God law: but we see, that if we be mocked, we will mock
again; if we be reviled, we will revile again. But David would not so do: as
we see by his doings when She^^i cursed ^^m, 2. Sam. 16.

These are true notes of repentance, when men can charge themselves more sore
than others will: and that they labor to approve themselves to God, which
tri^th the hearts.

The proud. Faith makes humble, but infidelity makes proud. Habac. 2. for by
faith we know that we have no goodness, are full of corruption, disposed to
evil, and unfit to goodness; and this humbles. But they that know not these,
are proud, whatsoever they seem to be. Such are those that contemn the
threatenings, and will continue in their sins. For faith in the commandment
humbles and throws us down: and faith in the promises does make us with
fear to wait upon God, and to be humbled. They are humble to their brethren,
which are humbled to God in their heart: and they that are proud and contemn
their brethren, are not humbled in their heart. For if they did see that the
Lord had forgiven infinite sins to them, then would they forgive a few to
their brethren. Secondly, if they considered, that whatsoever they have, they
have it for their brethrens profit, then would they be humble to them. Thirdly,
if they knew that there is no difference but by grace, then, etc. Can we not
forgive? then are we proud. Can we not devour injuries? then are we proud.
For our own sins being not forgiven nor cared for, therefore we cannot
forgive others, nor regard them. Humility is a true mark of Gods children,
and pride is a note of the wicked.

Verse. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and have been comforted.
HE shows how he was stayed, namely, by looking into the judgments of God
against the wicked, and his deliverance of the just. It is not then the good
nature of men, the wisdom, etc. that can comfort against reproaches, but
rather make worse; but it is the word that comfort. Thereby he knew that
howsoever the wicked flourished, yet they should perish; and howsoever the godly
be afflicted, yet they shall be rewarded. Peter speaks against these mockers
in the last chapter of the second epistle, The world shall perish in fire:
where he teaches to answer them, that it is as easy for God to destroy the
world with fire, as it was with water, seeing he has spoken it. So David,
when he was brought to say, My God why have thou forsaken me? then he stayed
himself by this, Our fathers trusted in thee. So Psalm. 67. I will remember thy
works of old. So Psalm. 119. part. 15. by all which he shows that as God had
done, so he would do still.

He remembered all the judgments of God: so Heb. 11. by all the works of God
showed in his children, it is proved that we must suffer affliction patiently.
So Psalm 106. Then Gods people must have a multitude of examples; that if we
profit not by one, yet by another: if no^ by a ^ewe, yet by many: for so have
the children of God done from time to time. This then is the cause why men
fail in reproach, or any other cross, because me^ have no^ store of examples
out of Gods word, especially out of the stories, to strengthen them: for if
they would look into the word, and gather them, they might be stayed. If this
man were strengthened by former works, how much more ought we which have many
more* especially this, Act. 17. that the Son of God has suffered that he may
judge all the world: so the great works of God in the Apostles time, the great
works of God in the days of Queen Mary; and in th^se days the judgments of
God are on many that have daili^d with his word, in giving them over to
heresies: Then how ought we to be comfor^ed with the assurance that God will
come to judgment?

Object. This so^meth hard, that he was comforted in Gods judgments, whereas
in another place ^e s^ith, ^ fear because of thy judgments.

Answ. Although they fear the judgments in their flesh, yet they dare approve
them to be Gods judgments, as David says, O God of my righteousness: not
comparing them to God, but to the wicked, and looking to that promise which in
grace he has made to us; yet not in all our life, but in some righteous cause
that we have in hand, as Steven did. Then if men ever fear at the judgments,
and nothing else, the heart is not yet upright; for they are sinners: therefore
we must labor to feel comfort by them, in knowing that we are sheep, not
goats, that we shall have a reward, and that the wicked shall be thoroughly
punished. For otherwise the devil will buffet us, in seeing those that men
call wicked, how yet they flourish and the godly are in misery. Then have we
truly profited by the word, when with comfort we can behold Gods judgments,
as is often said, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. For the child of God is not
afraid of ^uill tidings, Psalm. 112.

Verse. 53. Fear is come upon me for the wicked, that forsake thy law.
THis agrees well with the former, which was a spiritual joy: for when he
sees that the Lord will judge, and that he is guiltless, he is comforted:
but when he sees the wicked sin, and by sin provoke Gods judgments,
because they are his flesh, and because they are Gods image, therefore he
feared. The zeal of Gods glory causes Gods children to fear: as Elias,
^onely, etc. and David, My zeal has, etc. and their own sins, as Psalm.
119. part. 15. Gods children then are afraid when they see the glory of God
defaced, and men run to their own condemnation. And here is a difference
between true joy, and worldly in Gods judgments, Prou. 24. 1. Cor. 5. the
one, because their hearts desire is fulfilled: the other, that sin is punished,
that Gods glory is revenged, and that they are delivered: for in respect of
the parties punished, they fear, as Christ over Jerusalem mourned: and this is
usual in all the Prophets, when they see the judgments of God approach. Here
is a difference between the zeal of the worldly, and of the godly: the one
when he ^eeth a sin done he laugheth, and rejoices: but the other fear, as,
The rebukes of them that rebuke thee are fallen upon me. The former is the
cause that many fall by Gods judgment into those things which they find fault
with in others. The other is a true note of faith, to fear for the destruction
of the wicked, which they themselves fear not. But this is especially, when
they see a professor fall, for that grieueth them greatly. The third difference
is, that Gods children when they are comforted, they also fear; for the
regenerate part only is comforted, the unregenerate part does still fear; and
there is good cause that it should fear; as Noah feared, and David, Psalm. 119.
part 15. but the wicked have no fear, but are overcome with fleshly joy: and
therefore the Apostle says, Phil. 3. Finish your salvation with fear, because
of corruption, that either does or may break forth: as David was afraid when
he had sinned. We must then be comforted by Gods judgments, but so that we
fear. Secondly, we must think that sin is not a small thing, not to be
laughed at, but to be feared. Thirdly, that we must be touched for the sins
of others, as if they were our own. Fourthly, to forgive injuries against our
selves, but to be greatly displeased and vexed for the dishonouring of Gods
name. For all these are proper to Gods children.

When men take a carnal pleasure in Gods judgments, they abuse the grace of
God to wantonness: but the children of God, as they joy in their inward man; so
do they labor to be humbled by the law in their flesh, which otherwise would
be proud: for the flesh would hold no mean, but either would be too
sorrowful, or else too joyful.

Thus David mourned for the sins of others: so Paul says the Corinthians
ought to do, 1. Cor. 5. and 2. Cor. 7. where he shows, that this was the
estate of the whole Church, to mourn when any one member had offended. And
this is not a new thing: for those are saved which mourned for the iniquities
of Sion, Ezech. 9. Then we must be grieved for the sins of others, to show
that we are free from their sins, that we are lovers of righteousness, and
desirous to glorify God. And when this sorrow can work in us a prayer for
them that sin, it will be an argument that we shall be comforted, and shall
escape when the judgment comes. Then men ought to mourn for their own
sins: for if Gods children cannot be discharged, unless they can mourn for
the sins of others; how much less shall we be discharged, if we cannot mourn
for our own sins?

Verse. 54. Thy statutes have been my Or (...)
songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
HE shows that he was not envious against the wicked for their delights; but
takes a delight in another thing, that is, in praising God, that he might not
be entangled with their pleasures. The remedy of sin, that we fall not into
those sins which others have, is to fear least God punish some secret sin
in us, as he has done in them: For God does never let us fall into gross
sins, but to punish some other sin we lie in, which is secret, and Not^*
we will not come out of, because it is unknown. And if we will not be
entangled with the pleasures of the wicked, we must do as David does here, so
acquaint us with the word, as that we make our songs of it: that is, that we
do not only read, hear, and talk gravely of it, but also make it our songs
when we will be merry, as Paul Coloss. 3. for where there is a delight, there
men will even be singing of it. And hereof come these spiritual songs in the
Bible, to show their great delight in the word. So (Ephesians. 5.) Paul makes this
a sign, that we are full of the Spirit, when we can sing of them.

Here we are taught that our songs ought to be made of the statutes of God, and
agreeable to the same, and not after our own will. This we see to be the matter
of these Psalms, the laws, the promises of God, etc. The talking of godliness
makes worldly men heavy: but the children of God use all worldly things as
though they used them not, and then they are heavy when they displease God:
but contra, etc. The want of a spirit in singing, does show a great decay in
godliness; and coldness in this holy exercise argues a coldness in faith and
true religion. Then if men object: Will you not have men to be merry? Yes, but
yet with the word, otherwise their mirth is sin. The want of this shows
that men do not their duties with cheerfulnes, which thing is threatened in
Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

Verse. 55. I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy
law.
AS in another place, the name of God is a strong tower: to the former means
he adds this of prayer, to show that without this the other are unprofitable.
In the night: First, that is, continually, because in the day also. Secondly,
and simply, because he avoided the applause of men. Thirdly, cheerfully,
because the heaviness of natural sleep could not overcome him. All these show
that he was wholly given to the word: as we see men of the world will take some
part of the night to their delights. And in that he did keep Gods testimonies
in the night, he shows, that he was the same in secret, that he was in the
light: whereby he condemned all those that will cover their wickedness with
the dark. Let us examine our selves whether we have broken our sleeps to call
upon God, as we have to fulfill our pleasures. All these means did the Prophet
use to keep him from falling by the reproach of the wicked: which we also must
use if we will overcome it.

Verse. 56. This I had because I kept thy precepts.
AS God does punish sin by sin; so does he reward goodness with goodness:
as that, To him that has it shall he given. Matthew. 23. for the Lord crowns
his own gifts: so that if there be in us a love of Gods word, this beginning
will God increase and bless, so that rivers of water shall flow from him, Ioh.
7. and the little lump of leaven shall sower the whole.

If thou be wicked, God will punish one sin with another, as in Saul. So
David, when he was not thankful for his sleep, he fell to adultery, which
was punished with murder. But if we be thankful for that we have, we shall
have more. This then is the cause that we have no more mercies, because we use
not them well which we have: for if we could open our months wide, we should
be filled, Psalm. 81.

PORTION. 8. CHETH
Verse. 57. O Lord, thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy words.
HEre the man of God protests that the Lord is his portion; and he further
says, that he will keep Gods commandments. All will say that God is their
portion, and that their chief desire is to be in his favor: but David
seuereth himself from others, when he says, that he will keep the
commandments. And hereby he is assured, that the Lord is his portion, because
he makes his word his chief desire. We shall then know that we make God our
portion, when we have this delight to hear the word, etc. and those that have
not a delight in the word, they make not God their portion. The like saying is
part 15 verse. 2. Let us then always examine and try our hearts to Godward by
the word: if we say that he is merciful, then let us see if we believe his
promises: if that he is just, then that we believe his threatenings. Thus if we
can set the word aloft, it is a sure argument that we have made God our
portion. Again, if we can be grieved, when neither promises nor threatenings
can affect us, and we are desirous that they might: this shows that we have a
longing desire to have God our portion.

I have determined. David was fully resolved of this: for he had duly
considered all things, and therefore in wisdom made his choice, and has made
a full resolution. Many have such motions by starts, as the covetous man, the
adulterer, etc. but it passes away, therefore they show that they have not
made God their portion; for if they had, then would they have this resolute
purpose.

Verse. 58. I made my supplication in thy presence with my whole heart: be
merciful unto me according to thy promise.
HE shows by a second argument, that God is his portion, in that he prays
to God: for that which we love, we desire to commune and talk with. Then by
this we may likewise try our selves: for if we have this delight to pray, and
if we be sorry when we cannot do it, then do we further show that the Lord is
our portion, or else not. Again, we see that it is not enough to make a
determinatio, unless we further pray that the Lord would assist us in our
purpose. This is the cause that we cannot make such determination, nor have
such good purposes, because we are not often in prayer. The devil will be most
busy to tempt, when we have determined; and we our selves are ready to be
secure: therefore even then we have most need to pray.

With my whole heart. He shows that he is not an hypocrite: And then shall we
know that we are not, when our hearts are set before God, and we power them out
before him, as much as we have uttered in words before men. This makes the
children of God to sigh when they pray, because they have to do with God: and
this makes the hypocrites that they cannot see themselves, because they know
not that they have to deal with God. And when the children of God cannot come
to show their hearts to God, then if they sigh and groan for want of a heart;
this is a testimony that we pray in the Spirit, Romans 8. But when men pray as
though they prayed not, and hear as though they heard not: nothing does the
Lord hate more than this.

Have mercy. This is the chief of his prayer, and the first, that God would
give him mercy; not to crown his work wrought, contrary to the Papists which
plead merits: for though the Lord do give new grace, yet not of merit, for
that we have is defiled by us, but because he has a love to crown his own
gifts. He does not pray for mercy of fashion, but even in the presence of God,
because the true feeling of his need did drive him to make this prayer. For as
when we in the feeling of our heart can long after mercy, this may be a
pledge that we shall find mercy: so they that have no feeling of their
infirmities, cannot long for mercy; and therefore have no assurance that they
shall have mercy: for it is the feeling of our misery that makes the mercy
of God sweet unto us.

He prays not for what he lusts, but for that the Lord promised: for Saint
James says, you pray and have not, etc. and this is the cause, that we have
not the thing we pray for, because we pray not according to the word. His word
must be the rule of our prayers, and then shall we receive: as Solomon prayed
and obtained: he has promised forgiveness of sins, the knowledge of his
word, etc. these if we have, let not our hearts be set on the other.

He prays for the promise, and makes not a stipulation by the law: for it is
the promise that gives grace: then shall we here have comfort if we can
believe, because we have the covenant of grace, and not of merit. For if we
had but the law, the best man must fail and miss, but now it is the promise,
of which the worst shall not fail, if they do believe. Object. He had some
special promises. Answ. He had but the general promises, whereon he grounded
these particular. The promises therefore are generally made, that every one
might know that they belong unto him, and that he might apply them to himself;
as here the Prophet does.

Verse. 59. I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies.
HE shows how he came to make God his portion, because he had considered the
vanities and inconveniences of his ways, and the mischief that they would
bring him to.

Thus then shall we come to turn our steps to God, by examining our sinful
ways and the reward of sin. And because men do not thus examine themselves,
therefore do they make so small account of the word of God: for if they knew
that the gain of sin brings loss, and pleasure brings pain, then would
they not continue in their sins.

The like does David set down, Psalm. 4. where he calls the^ to examine
themselves before God, and thus Paul 1. Cor. 5. provoke the eloquent
Preachers to the judgment of God.

This is a new argument to prove God to be his portion: for seeing he had made
God his portion, it behooued him to search if there were any thing in him that
might displease God, that then he might avoid it.

If we consider that sin makes us ashamed before God, as Adam was, it will
make us leave sin, Romans 6. 22. If we then will daily consider, whether we
may offer them up in Christ to God, or whether they make us ashamed, and
whether they be to be allowed of men or not, this will make us more wary.

Testimonies. There is no true examination without the word; for thereby we
know that sin brings death; but righteousness brings peace in this
life, and everlasting joy afterward; this joy made him examine his ways.

Verse. 60. I made haste and delaied not to keep thy commandments.
THis shows his care that he had to make God his portion, by this speedy
haste he made. All the lets that are in a man, all the corruption of the world,
and all the baits of Satan did not stay him; but the spirit made him with joy
full haste to seek after God. Paul had lets, and this man had not greater
perfection; yet both of them, speaking of a regenerate man, show that if we
will not nourish occasions, the Spirit will not suffer us to be overcome:
therefore we may attempt the like haste in trust of his help, and we shall
find that we shall be enabled in some measure hereunto.

Verse. 61. The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
Law.
THough the troops of the wicked band themselves against him, yet he forsakes
not the Lord: and this is a true trial of his love to the word, that he stood
in this affliction. For that love which continues to the word in affliction,
is true: and he that has such a love, has a true love. For if when we are ill
dealt with, we do not so again, but still stick and continue our love to the
word; it is an argument that we love the word, because it is of God, and not
for glory. The children of God in affliction have been daunted; as Job, etc.
and this man, no doubt, felt his flesh: yet here he shows that he overcame
it, and stayed himself in faith of the promises, and continued in obedience.

Verse. 62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy
righteous judgments.
A New argument, because he gives thanks to God for his judgments, even at
midnight. Then we must be occupied in setting out the praises of God; for it is
the special note of Gods children, for hypocrites for need may pray. The
children of God feel great want in this: therefore when our hearts are
prepared to give God thanks, it is a great gift of God. Midnight, shows that
he was both sincere, and also earnest. Do we this at noone day? if not, then
we are far from this: for he used this at morning, noone, and evening: so did
Daniel. Singing of Psalms was usual after meat, as our Savior did.

Judgments. That is, that God took vengeance on the wicked, and performed his
promises to his children: and this confirmed his faith; for here he had an
experimental faith. And this if we note the judgments of God, in that he is
the punisher of sin, and rewarder of goodness, we shall have strength against
the temptations which shall be offered, to make us think that sin is not
punished, and that it is lost labor to serve God: and of this argument are
many of the Psalms. And this he did at midnight, when all things are most
fearful, and therefore a fit time to examine our selves in fear: and this
showed that his faith was sound, seeing he could now praise God. His
subscription to the righteousness of Gods judgments, was an argument of his
faith, for the nature of flesh is to think they are rigorous.

Verse. 63. I am companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts.
TO receive help from them, and to be helpful unto them: so Psalm 16. Then
if we will make God our portion, we will make much of good men: for if David
did this, how much more ought we? It is an argument of pride to despise the
company of others. If thou want knowledge, it is to make thee seek it of them
that have it: if thou have more than others, then ought thou to bestow it
upon others: so that thou ought not, either for the greatness of thy
knowledge, or for the want of knowledge, to withdraw thy self from the
company of them that fear the Lord.

If he loved good company, he hated evil men, Pro. 29. for they are
abomination one to another: as he says, I hate them that hate thee. And this
is the property of a good man, Psalm 15 yet this must not stay us from doing
them good in our callings, as the Magistrate to the subject, etc. As the evil
may be in good men's company, yet not companions to them; so may the good be
with the evil, and yet not their companions: for we believe only the
communion of Saints.

That fear. Here is the description of Gods children: first, that they fear
God, which is the foundation of all: Prou. 1. and then they that fear God rest
not in the judgment of men, but approve themselves to God, to do, or to leave
undone any thing, as it pleases or displeases God. This fear brings forth
obedience: and without this fruit, it is but to boast of fear. And these men
are they that we must be companions unto.

Verse 64. The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.
THe same thing was in the second verse, yet after another manner. Though the
whole earth be full of mercy, yet he desires only the statutes of God: and
this is the eight argument. So he says, show me thy favor, teach me thy
statutes, part 9. and 1^. and because he made this the chiefest sign of Gods
favor, to know his word, it is an argument that the Lord was his portion. Let
us see how often we have made this petition, and how vain our petitions are
desiring riches, etc. he desired not his kingdom so much as this. He was a
Prophet, yet he desires it: and this is it, the more we know, the more we
must desire to know, and never make any stay* He prays chiefly for the
teaching of the Spirit, without which he should err. He differs far in
desire from the men of this world: for they crave many things before knowledge,
and if they have knowledge, they rest therein, and never look, nor ask for the
teaching of the Spirit. Secondly, he confirms himself that the Lord will
teach him, because his goodness is over all the world: he lets his Sun
rise on the evil, how much more will he grant the good requests of his
children? When we would then pray to receive, we must remember all Gods
goodness, and we must desire the teaching of the Spirit, so far as agrees
with the word, and not desire the revelation of the Spirit without the word.

PORTION. 9. TETH.
Verse. 65. O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant according unto
thy word.
HE puts the Lord in mind of his former mercies, and so comfort
himself. For when he had said that the Lords goodness was over the earth, and
that he also had found the same, hereby he comfort himself in that he
shall receive more. For God is not as man is; but take we never so much from
his treasure, there is never the less: and the more he gives, the readier
he is to give. He knew that Gods gifts are without repentance, and that he
is not weary of weldoing, but will finish the thing he has begun: and
nothing is more forcible to obtain mercy, than to lay his former mercies
before him. Here are two grounds: first, if he dealt with him well, when he was
not regenerate, how much more will he now? and secondly, all the gifts of God
shall be perfectly finished. And here is a difference between faith and an
accusing conscience: the accusing conscience is afraid to ask more, because it
has abused the former mercies: but faith, assuring us that all his benefits
are tokens of his favor, bestowed on us according to his word, is bold to ask
more, accusing our selves of our unworthiness, and laboring to come out of our
sins.

When he asked according to Gods word, he made the word a rule of his prayer,
which assured him that his prayer should be heard, we must not then abuse Gods
mercies, least they accuse us: but if we accuse our selves, then let us see if
they have been given according to Gods word, and then may we ask new.

Verse. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.
HE makes this prayer often, but we do not so; and therefore the vanity of our
prayers is rebuked, which so often ask other things, and so seldom ask this.
He was the man of God, regenerate, therefore he makes this spiritual request;
which though carnal men mislike, because they cannot conceive of the word, yet
it is a sign of faith. He makes this prayer though he believed; because his
knowledge was in generals, but his practice in particulars: therefore if God in
the particulars did not direct him, he should fail in doing. Hereof comes
it, that the learned men are deceived in particulars, because they rest in
their general knowledge. Example of admonition: we have general rules to
teach us to admonish; but when we come to practice in particulars, then must we
either have the new grace of God, or else we shall fail in the practice.

If this man that believed prayed thus; how much more ought they that believe
not? And they that believe generally, must confess their blindness in
particulars: and therefore they should pray for it.

Although ignorance be helped, yet it is not altogether cured, therefore have we
need to pray. Secondly, because our knowledge is in generals, but practice is
in particulars, and therein must we have a new assistance: Therefore when we
have not good success in our business, we must not, as men are wont, lay the
fault on this or that; but we must see the cause in our selves, who although
we have the general rule of our doings; yet fail in the particular practice
thereof.

I believe. He confesses that all wisdom was in Gods word: and this although
we confess, yet in practice we often think that some wisdom of men must be
added thereto. But he confesses that all wisdom is in the word, and that it
is sufficient to make men perfect.

Verse. 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now I keep thy word.
THis is another reason which moved him to pray, that he might not be as a
horse always beaten; but teach me that I may prevent these beatings. If I be
taught of thee, I miss not; if I be not, I err. In prosperity I could not
seek to be taught, but in affliction draw me thereunto, so that now I desire
to be taught of thee. If prosperity made this man worse, seeing we are in
prosperity let us be jealous of our selves, and now seek for that, which God
will bring us to by affliction, and which will bring affliction upon us. If he
will hear when we humbly cry in affliction; how much more if we make our
humble suite in our prosperity? Afflictions come because we will not judge our
selves; then it is a blessing to have the word to judge us, and the Preacher to
rebuke us, that our wanton lusts may be corrected. Then we are fond, if we
will be weary of the word, or of daily admonition.

If the word help in affliction, how much more in prosperity if we tend
thereto? Whom God loves, he corrects: and we shall know that God loves us
when we are corrected, if we be made better by it: for in it self it is a
punishment of sin, but when in the death of Christ it is sanctified to us, so
that it makes us dye to sin, and that sin is loathsome to us; then is it a
token of Gods favor. For afflctions are common to all, Eccles. 9. but when we
profit by them, then are they good to us. For if good things become hurtful,
if they be not sanctified: much more shall afflictions, if they be not
sanctified in the death of Christ, to make us examine our ways, and see our
sins, and to drive us to Christ. But the wicked are either Note.
worse, or no better. Then we must profit by them, or else we make away for a
greater punishment.

Verse. 68 Thou art good and grati^us: teach me thy st^tutes.
HE desires to be taught by God, that whether he were in prosperity or
trouble, he might live well; because prosperity would make him forgetful,
and affliction would ou^^ whelme him, if God did ^ot teach him. This must teach
us, that in what state soever we be, we desire to be taught of God, otherwise
we shall false. After he had showed that he keeps Gods commanden e^ts, he
craves for grace, where he pleads not his merit. Though he kept the word,
yet he prays that he may still be raught, because he kn^w not all, and
because he was r^adie to e^^e both in practice and judgment. And t^^s must
teach us not only to desire to be taught when we e^^e, but even when we do^
well* He pray^th especially for the teaching of the spirit.

Verse. 69. The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy
pr^cepts with my whole heart.
HE shows another cause why he would be taught, and that is, he has to
fight with the world. And we have the same causes, as our corruption, and the
world. The world loves none but her own. And if we were as zealous as others
have been, we should be as sore troubled. For they are envious, and if we
should fight with them with their own weapons, we were too weak, and
therefore we have need to be helped of God.

Proud. Faith humbles, and infidelity makes proud. Faith humbles, because
it lets us see our sins, and the punishments thereof, and that we have no
dealing with God but in the mediation of Christ; and that we can do no good,
nor avoid evil, but by grace: but when men know not this, then they think
much of themselves, and therefore are proud. Therefore all ignorant men* all
heretics, and worldlings, are proud. They that are humbled under Gods hands,
are humble to men: but they that despise God, do also persecute his servants.

By proud, he here means them that had good gifts: to teach us, that though
we be persecuted of them that are in high places, yet this is the manner of
Gods people. These first mocked him, part 7. then they did him injury, part 8.
and here they devise subtle devices against him: and this is the continual
practice of the wicked. This is a great temptation, to set a fair face upon an
evil cause, and to deface a good cause; as is noted by the Hebrew word. This
was great grace that he could withstand it. The way is to approve our selves
and our cause to God: for if we depend upon men, then shall we be amazed. This
makes that true, which is Eccles* 8. that it happens to the good as though
they were evil, and contra. This is the practice of the Family of love, to
raise up evil reports against the cause of true religion, and against the
persons, and they prevail much. This is the practice of men in these days, to
deface the persons by calling them Puritanes, and the cause that it will
overthrow states.

With my heart. The word must have the whole heart, and not a part: or else we
shall not outstand this temptation. He meant that he did thoroughly meditate;
not that he did nothing else. For want of this, we see that many being well
colored with the word, yet do shrink when evil reports arise.

Verse. 70. Their heart is sat as grease: but my delight is in thy law.
HE further shows the danger of this temptation: for as they were subtle to
devise wickedly, so were they able to bring their wickedness to pass. For by
this speech he means that they had all things at their own will, and were
through their riches in great authority.

I delight. He shows how he overcame this; by fatting his heart with the
word, as the wicked fatted themselves by their riches; or else he should have
been carried away. Then let us never rest in reading or hearing the word, till
we come to such delight in it, as that we fat our selves with it, as the
worldlings do with their riches.

If we could do this, then should we easily take our hearts from these
earthly things: for this is the cause that men set their delight on earthly
things, because they know no better. And that they may find this delight, it
is needful that they find comfort in the promises, by the forgiveness of
sins, by the assurance of Gods favorable providence in this life, and
everlasting life afterward: which when they feel and find, then shall the
word be so sweet, that they shall forgo all things for it. Till we come to
this delight, temptations will daunt us; but if we once can come to this, that
we can make the word all in all, that is, our glory, our honor, worship,
riches, fame, credit, pleasure, etc. then shall we be soon brought to
account these outward things as nothing; so that we may have and enjoy the
benefit of the word, and the comfort thereof.

Verse. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes.
HE utters the same thing that he did before, but he adds somewhat
thereto. First, he says, that it was good for him that he had been afflicted:
noting the goodness and mercy of God in taking riches, health, etc. from him,
and giving him affliction which turned to his good. Riches, health, etc. are
the good blessings of God* but ^ll manner of affliction, as sickness,
poverty, etc. of themselves be evil, because they are the ^agges of Gods
curse, and punishments of sin. How then can it come to pass, that good
things should become evil, and evil things become good? The good blessings of
God, when by our corruption they are abused to wantonness are made hurtful
unto us, because they make our condemnation greater: but these crosses, when in
the cross of Christ they are sanctified unto us, then are they good, for as
much as they work a care in us to keep the commandments.

Where he says it is good that he has been afflicted and not, that I am
afflicted, it agrees with that which is in the epist. Heb. 12. No affliction
is joyous for the present time: for in poverty there are no riches, in sickness
no health, etc. we must not then look presently when any cross comes, to say
it is good: for this comes afterward, when we have been so exercised with it,
as that we are more humbled under the hand of God, and have some greater ca^e
to please him; when I say we have been thus exercised, then will the cross
bring the quiet fruit of righteousness, and then shall we say, it is good for
us that we have been afflicted. But if we be impatient; or if the cross make
us either more careless, or no better than we were before, that cross is but
a preparation to another* etc.

I will learn, etc. Because there is none but he will vow and promise
amendment, when the hand of God is on him, but the children of God alone reap
fruit afterward; therefore in these words does the Prophet sever himself
from the wicked: and whereas he said before that he did keep the
commandments, noting a present fruit of his affliction; so he now moreover
adds, that he will keep them, noting that the use of his trouble should
continue with him for ever. Let us then consider of this, all of us either at
one time or other have vowed somewhat to the Lord; let us see if we be now
careful to keep and perform it: if we be not, our affliction has done us no
good, we have no profit by it.

Verse. 72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me, than thousands of gold and
silver.
HEre he notes one fruit of his affliction, that he was brought to make such
account of Gods word, as that he preferred it to infinite numbers of gold and
silver. And truly if we consider that it is the word of God that sustaineth us
in our trouble, and is our comfort, we cannot then choose but make much of the
word. No number of goods can help us in misery, and if the word do that
which al other things cannot do, very meet it is that the word should be
preferred to all other things whatsoever.

PORTION. 10. IOD.
Verse. 73. Thine hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding
therefore, that I may learn thy commandments.
HE prays still for wisdom and understanding. Those men are beasts, which
being in ignorance, love it better than knowledge, and darkness better than
light: these men must be sent to the beasts to learn, Esa. 1. The Ox, etc.
The heathen say that 1
this is a natural property to desire knowledge. The Lord must teach these
men with rods; 2
for they will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm, etc.

He seeks knowledge out of the word, to make a difference between him, and
the heathen, 3
which by their knowledge get nothing but commendation: but our wisdom must
be out of the word, Deuteronomy. 8.

He desires knowledge that he might practice it; whereby he condemns them
that 4
seek knowledge, and care not for practice: and teaches us to seek all
knowledge only to practice it.

Seeing he desires to be taught, he condemns them that think they may come
to 5
this knowledge by their own study and diligence, without the teaching of the
spirit.

David so well learned prayed thus earnestly, and shall we be thus cold? he so
much to 6
feel want, and we to be without feeling? for to be without knowledge, is to
be without desire of more, and a little knowledge if men rest in it makes
proud.

How goes it then with them that think they know all things, seeing this man
to whom 7
they are inferiors, prays thus? This request was made before, but he adds
a new reason. So in the first part, and second, and third, and fourth* and
fifth, and almost in every part this request is made, and in every place a new
reason to move the Lord to hear his prayer.

He puts the Lord in mind of his former mercy, that he might obtain more,
and says he is a creature, even a man with a soul, and not a beast; therefore
give knowledge, etc. wherein he confesses that if the Lord give not knowledge
to him, he were better be a beast: and such are all those that are but only
men: for all the pleasures in this life are not 2. Cor. 3.
worthy the sorrow in the life to come, Eccles. 11. Therefore if men have not
their reason sanctified by the word in faith and love to serve God: they are no
better than beasts.

Seeing God has given reason, he will give knowledge, with this he is
comforted.

Objection. But how can he hereby be comforted, seeing others have reason also?

Answer. All mercies must be considered in Christ, through whom they are
sanctified, and by whom we are sure that the Lord will crown his own gifts.

Another reason to teach us when we have the gifts of God sanctified unto us,
is, when we are humbled in our selves, and mislike our selves though we have
received more than others, for we must think our selves unworthy of them, and
desire that God will yet more sanctify them to us, and give us the right use
of them: then shall we, and we may, lay them before God as an argument to move
him, that he would deal mercifully with us, and further continue and increase
his mercy and good will toward us; because hereby we know that in Christ they
are sanctified unto us.

Verse. 74. So they that fear thee, seeing me shall rejoice, because I have
trusted in thy word.
HEre is an end why be desires knowledge, for that others by my example shall
be moved to seek thee, and shall have hope that thou also wilt hear them when
they 1
cry. This then is a great honor, that we shall not only save our own
souls, but also be helps to others, that they may be saved, wherein the Lord
vouchsafes us great honor: for to cause the careless to seek God, and to
confirm the weak, is a great honor. Likewise hereby we shall stop the
mouths of them that speak against the ways of the Lord.

Contrariwise when a professor falls away, he loses his soul, he hurts
the weak, hardens 2
the wicked, and opens the mouths of the wicked. Thus by the one God is
glorified, and our brethren profited: and by the other the clean contrary.

When we see any man trusting in God to be delivered out of remptation, then
may we be confirmed and comforted with hope, that we also shall be delivered.
This is said, Psalm. 34. Other shallbe comforted. And Psalm. 40. They that see
me, let them be comforted. For when 3
the Lord confirms any of his promises to any of his children; we may
likewise be comforted that we shall find them also true. So the Apostle
reasons, Abraham was justified; therefore shall we: so Hebr. 11. As
contra^iwise, when we see the truth of Gods threatenings upon any, then we
should know, that if we have the same sin, we shall also feel the same
punishment.

Then must we consider of Gods children, how that by nature they are no better
than we: therefore if we can believe, then shall we have hope to become like
them, for God does not accept persons. We must likewise consider of the wicked,
that by them also ^e may be instructed.

None shall rejoice at the example of the godly, but they that fear God; and
this fear is the beginning of all goodness: some that fear God may have a
doubtful conscience, and they shall have comfort by the examples of Gods
mercies in others. Without 4
this fear men can not rightly consider of Gods works; but who so fears, he
shall profit by them.

Here is the true use of all the Scriptures, not to marvel only at the
examples of Gods mercies or judgments; but to be comforted and confirmed by
the one, and to fear by the other.

Verse 75. I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou have
afflicted me justly.
THis is somewhat like, that It is good that I have been afflicted: but after
a new manner; as though he should say, Thy judgments are righteous and just,
though my flesh does 1
persuade me the contrary. And to show the certainty of this, he says, I know,
This know ledge he had by the word: because we shall then subscribe to the
justice of God, when we can subscribe to the word. Then if we would subscribe
to the righteousness of Gods judgments; let us by the word meditate upon his
threatenings and promises; and though we cannot 2
see the reasons of all, yet must we acknowledge them to be holy, because the
Lord is holy; and his word is holy, therefore his works are holy.

If we be not able to behold the beams of the Sun, much less can we see the
brightness Simile.
of Gods works: and let us ever accuse our selves of blindness and rebellion,
rather than the Lord of injustice. He is then acknowledged to be just, when we
yield to the righteousness of his precepts. And when we can confess his justice
thus, we shall well confess his mercy. Then if we will confess the justice
of God, we must confess his judgments to be holy; otherwise we do not.

And that, This is a special Note of faith, that he can apply that particular
to himself, which the Lord had given generally: and till we do thus, we
neither believe promises nor threatenings. We must not rest the^ in generals,
but apply them to ourselves, whether they be promises or threatenings: and this
will draw us out of sin, and comfort us in trouble.

In faithfulness: He had before confessed Gods justice, and now he confesses
his mercy: as if he had said, Thou of thy mercy have thus laid thy rod upon
me, that I may be such a one as thou may perform thy promise to, as Psalm.
130. This must make affliction sweet, because the special end thereof is not
to punish us, but to make us fit to receive his promises, and he uses it as a
remedy and medicine against sin, and as he shows his justice, in that he
suffers not sin in his children; so he shows his mercy, in that thereby
he cures them.

Verse. 76. I pray thee that thy mercy may comfort me, and according to thy
promise unto thy servant.
BEcause he had confessed the merciful dealing of the Lord, therefore he
craves mercy, for he knew that with the Lord is mercy to be feared, Psalm.
130. He dare not stand to the rigor of Gods justice, but he flies to his
mercy, contrary to the Papists, P^lag^a^^s, and Family of love.

And thus must we labor to cure our vnbeleese by his promises, that we ^^ll
not to despair, 1
for we are ready to presume in prosperity, or to despair (...)* but they
must be both cured, the one by the meditation of Gods judgments in prosp^^^^,
the other by the promises in trouble. For then the judgments have done with
us, when they have brought us to humble our selves to the Lord, because of our
sin, and then are we to look for his mercy: for then are we fit for it. We
must then couple justice and mercy together, and make use of both.

He had joy before, and yet he craves comfort; where we note the change of the
consciences 2
of Gods people, sometime joyful, sometime sorrowful. This must be a stay to
us against the temptation which Satan will ^ffer, saying, Thou art ^ickle, and
^^^^ ch^^ging, all is vain: N^y, we are as the children of God in all ages
have been.

Accordi^^ (...) had no special promise, but applied the general promise to
himself; for 3
all the (...) made in general manner; Come all. etc. that all the Church
might have their part in (...), and ^ore should think that they were shut out.
This h^d the woman of C^na^^ wh^^ (...) to Christ: because she stated on this
genera^^ promise, that he was sent to the (...)* (...).

As we c^n (...) leave (...), or come to true repentance, unless we believe
that that 4
God which has pu^^shed (...)* will also pun^^^* sin in us; so shall we
never receive comfort by the promises, vn^^^se we can (...) apply those
promises to our selves, which are generally made to the Church. But i^ we can
do this, we shall have comfort in our souls, and strength to withstand the
^^^ptation which the devil ministers, saying, What promise ha^t thou that
thou shall be saved?

To know that God is merciful, is not enough, unless we be among those, to
whom the 5
promises belong, and then we may know that we shall be hol^^^; because through
his promises, Similie.
he is become a voluntary debtor to us. As a man, that is able to help us, yet
we have no assurance that he will help, unless he give his word to us. Then
though God be merciful, yet is not the misery or worldly men cured* because the
promises do not belong to them, unless they believe. Then it is no marvel,
though the Papists doubt of their salvation, because they have no faith, nor
will have to apply the general promises of grace to their own hearts.

There is a difference between Gods children, and the wicked in their trouble:
first, the children of God are convinced both in judgment and in affection:
but the other are but only convinced in judgment, as Pharaoh, Ahab, Saul. For
where the judgment and affection are both convinced, there follows
conversion: now because these were convinced, and yet not converted, therefore
it was only in judgment, and not in affection Secondly, the children of God
do so confess his Justice, as that they also confess ^im merciful, which
setleth them in sound judgment, and inflameth their affections: but the other
do only Note well.
confess his judgment; and therefore we see thieves and whores rec^^t, and yet
return to their filth again; because justice can break, yet mercy only
cha^geth from evil to good. Thridly, the children of God by one fault are
brought to amendment of their whole lives, through sorrow which works
repentance: but the wicked by Gods judgments are brought to a confused
thinking of sin and amendment, or else rest so much in one, that they look
not to any other: as Pharaoh confessed that God is righteous, but he let not
the people of Israel go: Achab confessed, yet he restored not the vineyard
again: and Pharaoh by this one sin was not brought to the sight of his
Idolatric, nor to any care to leave it.

If we will then have use of this threefold difference, let us ever pray, that
our affections may ever yield to that, which our judgments do subscribe to:
and that not only for fear of punishment, but because with the Lord there is
mercy: and when we are convinced of any one sin, let us so labor to amend
that, as we also look the whole course of our life, to amend whatsoever is
amiss therein.

Verse. 77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy Law is
my delight.
IN that he doubleth this request in two verses, he shows that he had no
light feeling of sin, yea that he was as a dead man, because he felt not the
life of God in him. Ephest. ^ 18.
This must we mark, that when we are brought to so low estate, that all
comfort seems to be past, yet let us remember that Gods children have been
so; and therefore let us double our prayers, knowing that with the Lord is
mercy, with him is life in death, and help in the greatest extremity. This
if we can do, then shall we be armed against the greatest temptation that
Satan has; and that is this, to persuade us that our case is such, as never
any of Gods children were in: our temptations such, as no man had; our sins
such as none have committed: with which if he can prevail, then does he make
us past hope of recovery, then does he make us past using any means to be
recovered: for when we are persuaded that the disease is incurable, then we
leave all means that might help us* Mark the tender consciences of Gods
children.

If this man of God, which had been no common sinn^^, was so humbled for
sin, that his moisture was turned into drought, Psalm. 32. before he could be
brought to confess his sin; it first shows, how greatly sorrowful we
should be: and again, the great hypocrisy that is in our hearts, whereby the
devil works in us, to think that our sins are but small, and therefore to
be careless of them, that at the last he may make them so great, as that we shall
think they be not able to be forgiven. This is his practice and his purpose,
therefore let us take heed of it.

That I may live: He did eat and drink, and he had the use of his senses, yet
this he counted 1
no life, because he felt not himself reconciled to God; but was in sorrow and
heaviness: yet he was skillful in music, which might have put sorrow away:
he had also friends, and many valiant men, in whose company he might have
delighted; yet in all these he took no pleasure, but still this was in his
mind, how he might be reconciled to God. What shall we say then of them,
which, so that they may have these outward things, they never care for Gods
favor: or if they be in trouble, they only s^eeke to put away their trouble
by company, play, etc. and never seek with their heart to be reconciled to
God? Both these are far from the affection of this man: and let us know,
that though we had kingdoms at our pleasure, though we had at commandment
all pleasure and pastime; yet if we were not reconciled to God, and if they
were not sanctified to us in Christ, they would nothing avail us, and the end
of them would be but heaviness.

Then let us not flatter our selves, for the life of sin is the death of the
soul, and without 2
Christ there is no life: but if through Christ we be reconciled to God, then
can no misery make us miserable: and though we want all outward things, yet
we have all in God through Christ.

For thy Law is my delight: He felt not this presently, but he meant, that when
God should restore him to life, that he might not deceive himself, he should
feel Gods mercy in his word: so that without Gods mercy in his word, he felt
no comfort. Many will confess them to be miserable, if they have not Gods
mercy; but few will with David acknowledge that without mercy in the word they
are miserable. The word is the means to bring us to Gods mercy, therefore by
the word we must esteem Gods mercies.

Let us examine, if the reading, hearing, and meditating of Gods word be as
sweet 3
unto us, as our very life: or whether we have special feeling of Gods favor
in his word; so that the feeling of Gods goodness does even make us with this
man of God to delight in it.

The great delight in Gods word ouershadoweth all worldly pleasures, and will
make men use them, as though they used them not: but if we cannot come to this
delight, then is it no marvel, if that we put our whole pleasure in these
outward things.

The way to come to this delight, is to keep a continual war against our
affections; for if we please our selves in them, then shall not the word be
pleasant, till those affections be controlled; but if we can tame our
affections of anger, lust, etc. then shall we feel sweetness in the word when
we come to it.

Verse. 78* Let the proud be ashamed: for they have dealt wickedly and falsely
with me: but I meditate in thy precepts.
AS he had before said that the godly should be comforted in his deliverance,
so here he says, that the wicked should see their wickedness, and be
ashamed, either with such shame as might bring them to repentance, or which
might confound them if they would not repent.

He prays against their enterprises, not against their persons, nor the image
of God in them. He has some prayers given by special instinct for the
overthrow of the wicked in other places; but here he makes that prayer which
the Church ought to make. For we cannot pray that Gods people may be comforted
in our deliverance, but we must also pray that the wickedness of the wicked may
turn to their shame. This being observed, that we pray not against their
person, but their enterprise; then this, that we simply respect the glory of
God, and the good of Gods people. For if we should do it of some special
grudge, then should we make Gods glory a cloak of our evil purpose, and sin
against him.

We may then pray that the Lord would bless his word among us, that he would
sanctify us by it, that our good works might be known to others, for his
glory. Therefore we may pray (so that it be in love) that the heresies of
Papists, Families of love, and others may be discovered and ouerthrown, and the
persons ashamed of their doings.

They dealt falsely with me. This shows that their dealings that he prayed
against, and not against their persons, because their dealings were wicked and
false. And this teaches when we must thus pray, even when their wicked
dealings are plain, and their doings false; and then may we pray with hope,
because the righteous God loves righteousness; and if the cause be good, it
will come to a good end. For though truth may be ashamed, yet it cannot be
ashamed for ever: for God will defend his own cause, and though the wicked for
a time prevail, yet in the end they shall come to shame. This then first
comfort us in every good cause, that it shall have a good issue: and again,
that we take no evil cause in hand; for if we do, it will bring shame at the
last.

But I meditate in thy statutes. He repeateth the same thing often, and surely
if the world could not contain the books that might be written of Christ, and
yet for our infirmity the Lord has comprised them in such a few books, and
yet one thing in them often repeated, it shows that the matter is weighty,
and of us duly and often to be considered. And again we are taught that, that
is a thing, that none do so carefully look unto, as they ought. And he
shows, that as his enemies sought by evil means to hurt him; so he sought to
keep a good conscience, that so they might not hurt him. Then we must not set
policy against policy, nor Cretizare cum Cretensibus: but let us always tend
to the word, and keep us within the bounds of that, and fight with the weapons
that it teaches us. And this is the cause, that many good men are overcome by
the wicked, because they strive with them with their own weapons* and then
they must needs be too hard for us. Again, seeing they never want evil means
because they give over themselves thereto: so if we would give over our selves
to God and his word, and admit nothing but that which agreeeth to the word;
then should we be made wiser than our enemies.

Verse. 79. Let such as fear thee turn unto me, and they that know thy
testimonies.
AS he had not his own flesh to fight against only, but the world also: so
he did not only fight himself alone, but seeks the help of others. When
many see that religion cannot be truly professed, but danger will come of it,
because many set themselves against it, they fly from it, and go to the
greater part, which is the wicked. If we will avoid this, let us join our
selves to Gods children, and they will help us with counsel and advise: for
one may be strong when we are weak, another may have counsel when we shall
not know what to do: therefore by them, we shall be kept from many evil things.
So Paul, 2. Timothy 1. 16. after he had complained of the wrong that many had
done unto him, he straightway gives thanks for the family of Onesiphorus,
which refreshed him more than all his enemies could discourage him; so that he
durst oppose this one household to the whole rabble of the wicked. It may also
be a comfort to us, when the temptation of Elias comes to us, to think that
godliness were gone out of the world: for then shall it be good to set the
children of God before us, that we may hear of them, and be in their company,
and so be comforted.

Again, it is no small thing to be godly indeed: for then we shall be a
comfort to Gods children, when they hear that we continue in godliness:
whereas otherwise, we are very many stumbling blocks, if we shall be ready to
fall, or have fallen.

Again, the mouths of the wicked shall be stopped: for when the Magistrate,
Minister, and professor continue in holiness, then though he would speak evil,
yet his mouth should be stopped; and what great glory should come to God by
this? so that here is a special spur to move any to stand and continue in
godliness.

If David did thus desire the company of Gods children, what ought we to do?
But men know not their wants, they know not the communion of Saints, therefore
they are careless of this. Yet Paul desired to come to the Romans, that he
might receive mutual comfort: for every member of Christ has somewhat
wherewith he may do thee good: because he is anointed with the same oil that
thou art; therefore by him thou shall remember something forgotten: or have thy
judgment reformed in some particular thing. But we know not the profit of
this, because we have no use of it.

In the eight part, he said this, chiefly that he might do them good; and
here chiefly that they might help him. He shows that the feet of Gods
children are directed by God; and if they come to us, it is a blessing of God;
if they do not, it is his punishment.

By fear, he means, that when good men fear God, they have a chief care to
please God, and a chief care that they might not displease him, but may be
approved of him in all their doings. He joins knowledge with fear, because
that knowledge without fear puffs up, and so becomes unprofitable.
Secondly, because knowledge without fear rests not simply in the word, but
seeks by means. Thirdly, because if men have knowledge without fear, they
will not come much to the afflicted, because they have not been humbled.
Therefore that we may be humbled, and that we may not run ^oyot, but contain
our selves in the word, and become profitable and comfortable both to others
and our selves; fear must needs be joined with knowledge. It is also necessary
that knowledge be joined with fear: first, because fear without knowledge may
at the last kick against God, as did Paul, and the Jews: and Papists of
conscience whiles they feared God without knowledge, persecuted Gods children:
secondly, because many that fear God aright, yet do hurt in good causes by
indiscreet dealing, whereas they had no purpose so to do. Knowledge then must
direct fear, and fear must season knowledge, and both must be joined together
Job. 31. does show notably in many causes, how needful the fear of God is;
where this is rendered as a reason of many things, that he feared God.

Verse. 80. Let mine heart be upright in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
HE prayed before for good understanding, here he prays for sound affections:
this order in prayer must we also use: first to pray for knowledge, and then
for good affection. For good affections without knowledge, are nothing worth,
and knowledge without affections is nothing. Then we must pray, that as we have
greater knowledge than others, so our affections may be better than others, and
our hearts more upright. He shows that there is no uprightness but in the
Commandments, therefore what good affections soever seem to be in Turks,
Papists, and such as have not knowledge, these cannot be upright, because they
have not the word. No man can know his own heart but by GOD, (Ierem: 17.)
and by the word, which is of the same nature that God is.

PORTION, 11. CAPH.
Verse, 81. My soul sainteth for thy salvation: yet I wait for thy Word.
IN this part he shows his miseries, that he was in, and his hope to be
delivered, which in the latter end he prays for. His soul faints: and this
is amplified in the verses following. His affliction was great, and through the
infirmity of his flesh, he was grieved with it. The Philosopher thought that
it was patience to contemn sorrow, and not to be moved with it: but the
examples of Scripture show that the children of God do seele their sorrow;
yet they are sustained by waiting for Gods mercies, whereby they are at the
last delivered. It is necessary that we should be touched with our troubles:
First because, if 1
we felt it not, we should be proud as the manner of worldly men is. Secondly,
we should 2
not come to the feeling of our sins, for which afflictions are sent to us:
Thirdly, we 3
should have no trial of our Faith: Fourthly, if we should not know that Gods
children 4
had feeling of them, then when we feel them, we should be brought to
despair. For then shall we think, that we are not in the number of Gods
children, and therefore we should leave off striving, and give over our good
cause, and so fall from God.

But when we consider that as Elias, so all Gods children have had
infirmities, James, 5. and Paul, and Barnabas, Acts, 16. when we shall see
that they, which are set before us for examples, were brought to streightnes,
and that they did not despise them, but by striving overcame them: then if we
feel such weakness in ourselves, we shall be encouraged to take the Cross
upon us, with hope that with them we may overcome. It is good to know these
things before affliction; for the more we profit in this doctrine, the better
we shall bear our afflictions.

When this man was thus afflicted, he waited on the word, because of his
weakness, and in patience did tarry the Lords leisure: neither doubting of his
own cause, nor yielding to the evil causes of his enemies: this is patience,
and this is the practice of Gods children, as Job, 33. Then must we look for
these afflictions, because of our sins, because of the greatness of the
wisdom of GOD, and his mercy, to deal thus with us, that he may heap up
blessings on us in this life, and everlasting glory in the life to come. If we
cannot abide small afflictions, how should we abide greater? Again, some will
abide small and short troubles, yet if they increase and continue, they will
fail: which shows that men have not Faith to glorify God. For that Faith
glorifieth God, which belieueth Gods word to be true, and waits for the
accomplishing of it. For because we live by Faith, therefore we have need of
patience, Hebrews, 10* for the Lord will deliver those that are such, Psalm,
147. Esaias, 57. For he will save them, and come to dwell with them, because he
has a pleasure in them.

Verse. 82. Mine eyes fail for thy promise, saying, When will thou comfort me?
THe next verse has the same meaning, and the doubling of it, makes it more
weighty. He says Word or promise, for salvation, to show that the word
brings, and confirms our salvation. When he says that his eyes and body
were troubled, he shows that the fainting of the soul, is the fainting of
the body, to teach us in the diseases of the body, not only to look to
natural causes and remedies, but to have an eye to the soul, and remedy that;
for a wounded spirit who can bear? The way to cure the body, is to cure the
soul first, as Psalm: 103. and healed, (Job: 33.) God speaks once or twice,
etc: his flesh shall be as, etc. Example Ezechias was sick, but after his sins
by prayer being forgiven, then his disease was healed, Esaias 28. and Chron.
Benhadad was sick of a (...) disease, yet for his sins it could not be
helped* Job was a very Lazar, for the trial of his faith, yet the way for him
to recover (says Elihu) was thus to be humbled for sin; and Elihu for this
was not reproved, but the Lord confirmed his words from heaven. Then though
Gods children be not chiefly punished for sin, yet because they have sin
in them, therefore they must take this way also. As we see Job confessed his
sins before he was restored. So Hebrew. 12. 3. You have not fought to blood:
meaning that though God might justly punish, yet he will use affliction for our
trial, and withal will kill our corruption. Psalm 32. after he had called
them blessed, whose sins, etc. he shows how he was brought to it, first, by
setting down the corruption of men, which God must cure with corrections; yea
they were so sore on him, that his moisture was turned into drought: but when
he confessed his sin, then the Lord forgave the punishment of his sin. Must
this man be taught by this means, and have not we need of it? In the book of
the Chronicles, Asa is reproved because he sought to the Physicians, and not
unto the Lord. His meaning is not that Asa sought not to God at all, but that
he sought not chiefly, nor first to God: so that this is spoken by comparison,
that he sought not to God so much as to the Physicians. Again, the purpose of
Gods spirit is not to disallowe the use of Physic: for when Ezechias was
absolved of his sins by Esaias, then did the Prophet command that fig
leaves should be taken, and laid to it: and how can he then mislike that, which
he there commanded? This general doctrine then may be gathered, that what
disease or affliction soever comes to a man's body, for what cause soever, yea
though it be for the trial of faith; yet the way to come out of it, is to
look to our souls, and to cleanse them: for if they be once purified, then the
body will be easily cured. For if God said, judge your selves that ye may not
be judged; he will be likewise sure not to judge us, if we will judge our
selves; but when we shall begin to judge our selves, he will leave off to
correct us, Psalm. 89. and 1. Corinthians. 11.

Verse. 83. For I am like a bottell in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.
WE must remember the promises and the commandments in all our troubles, and
they will sustain us: for if any fail in trouble, it is because they trust
not the promises, or keep not the commandments. If we will be sure then that
no affliction shall hurt us, but help us, and turn to our good, and to assure
us of life everlasting, and to be delivered out of them in Gods good time; then
let us look to all the promises made to us in Christ, and build a good
conscience upon Gods commandments. But if we fail in these, then may we be
sure that in trouble we shall fail, 2. Cor. 7.

And these two help one another: If thou will be sound in the faith, then
labor to keep the commandments: and if thou will not be driven from the
obedience of the commandments, then confirm thy self in the promises of the
forgiveness of sins, of Gods providence, and of eternal life. For if thou
can believe these, then neither pleasure nor pain shall make thee forsake
thy obedience: but these shall be so pleasant to thee, that thou shall wholly
labor to please God. These two reasons Paul uses 1. Tim. 3. to move men to
obedience; First, the promises of the forgiveness of sins: secondly, of
everlasting life, and to these add Gods providence. And this is the cause of
all sin, because men believe not that the threatenings of God are true. For if
they could be persuaded of that which is Psalm. 89. He will visit their sins,
etc. the children of God should not need to think of hell, and other torments
belonging to the wicked in the life to come. Because that if they knew, that
though they were delivered from pains in the world to come, yet the Lord would
punish their sins in this life, and would bring them to poverty, to contempt,
to be reproched, Note.
to be slandered, etc. even this would make them loath to offend. And surely the
Lord will do this: for if he be neither a wise nor loving earthly father,
which will not correct Similie.
his sons when they do evil, surely it must needs be that God must either
be unwise and not loving, or he must punish them his children that offend. For
though he has made a covenant with them, that hell shall not prevail against
them; yet has he not made a covenant to free them in this life, because that
he will drive them to the cross of Christ, by laying crosses upon them.

Again, if men could believe the promises of God made in Christ, for the
forgiveness of sins, for Gods fatherly providence, and for life everlasting;
then would they, having these promises, purge themselves from all filthiness,
and finish the course of their salvation 1. John 3. 1.
in sear, 2. Cor. 7. verse. 1. And this belief in Gods promises is it, that
makes men leave sin for conscience sake, and to yield obedience to Gods will;
so that this belief brings forth pure obedience to Gods will. Again,
belief in Gods promises is strengthened by obedience: as Peter says, Make
your election and calling sure by good works. For when the Lord shall see that
we have a care to do his will, then will he multiply the graces of the spirit
upon us, so that we shall be better co^sirmed in his promises. If we will not
then be brought to doubt or despair of Gods promises, when trouble and anguish
shall come; then let us labor to build a good conscience upon the word and
commandments. And if we will not be drawn away with worldly pleasures, then
let us consider those promises which God has made unto us. For when men begin
to doubt of Gods promises, they begin also to doubt of the commandments: and
when men doubt of the commandments, they also doubt of the promises: and when
men doubt of both, then is sin a light matter unto them. For faith in Gods
promises breeds obedience, and obedience confirms says in the promises:
therefore we must labor for them both, and pray for both.

Verse. 84. How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute
judgment on them that persecute me?
THis verse and the second verse, show that it is lawful for Gods children to
make known their infirmities to him, so that they wait patiently for help
from him. For this only displeases him, when we please our selves in moyling
against them: otherwise when we come in reverence, it pleases God that we
should lay out our infirmities before him. Thus Abraham and Mary laying out
their infirmities, with misliking of them, desired that they might know how the
things should come to pass: but Sara and Zachary did contrary. This is a
comfortable thing, that when we are in any trouble, we may lay our our
temptations to him, so that it be with trust in the promises, and misliking of
our infirmities, with a longing after Gods mercy, in a fear of his Majesty,
and a desire to be helped of our evil and corrupt infirmity.

When. He had been exercised a long time, and now he prays that he may be
helped, least he through infirmity put his hand to evil. Many will make their
complaint, but it is too soon, even before they have been exercised. But we
must be contented to be in long trouble, and we may yet look for Gods help,
acknowledging it to be his great goodness, that he continued and held us out so
long in trouble.

Will thou execute. This is an ordinary prayer, not against any certain
persons, but rather generally against Gods enemies, and their evil causes. For
the Lord executes judgment upon his children for their conversion, as Paul,
Act. 9 and upon the wicked for their confusion. He prays against them that
belonged not to God, and yet not so much against their persons, as their evil
causes, and no otherwise against their persons, than they ^re joined with the
causes. And thus may we do, for the confusion of Gods enemies; otherwise we
cannot.

Verse. 85. The proud have dug pits for me, which is not after thy law.
THis showed first that he prayed against their evil cause: secondly, that he
suffered unjustly: first, because he suffered for the truth: secondly, because
he behaved himself godly in his cause, not using unlawful means. And we must
look that we have these things before we pray this prayer: first, that our
cause be good: secondly, that it be rightly handled: therefore heretics and
wicked men cannot make this prayer. David was long in this trouble, and yet he
provoked them not with evil words, but labored to overcome their evil with
goodness, as Psalm. 33. So when we do them no evil, when we have labored to
do them good, and prayed, and fasted for them in patience and long suffering;
then, i^ it be against Gods enemies and their evil causes, we may pray this
prayer.

Verse. 86. All thy commandments are true: they persecute me fulf^ly; help me.
HE has an assured persuasion of the truth of his cause, and of the evil
using of his enemies; both which he knows by the truth of Gods word: this
makes him to stand out in his good cause, and to stick to the truth of Gods
word. This is a great thing: for the devil will throw into men's minds; if this
cause were good, it should not be persecuted: but thou art more precise than
needs, etc. to this end, that if he could once ^^ing them to doubt of their
cause, they should leave suffering: for if men be once persuaded that their
cause is eu^l, or if their cause be good, and yet if they know i^ not, then can
they not suffer for it. Therefore if we will stand in trouble, let us now in
peace be assured, and grounded in the knowledge of the truth, and build up our
selves now in faith and a good conscience. For if this be once said to us of
the devil, Thou have heard much, and yet least not profited, leave thy cause
betime, or else thou will shame thy self, and thy cause to^; then it must be a
great thing that will make us stand.

Hel^^. Though he had been long in trouble, so that he was ready to be
destroyed, yet he prays, contrary to the reason of the flesh. This teached,
that even in the greatest trouble we may call upon God, and when all help
see^eth to be past, then is the ^^me to be helped, because the wickedness of the
wicked is at the full, and our ^iall is manifest. For the lot of the wicked
shall not, etc. Verse. 87. wants.

Verse. 88 Quicken me according to thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the
testimony of thy mouth.
HE shows that he was dead: and when he desires to be quickened, by loving
kindness, he shows that without this there is no quickening, for there is no
(...).

I will keep. He that kept them before, yet in weakness; and his affl^ction did
somewhat hinder him, as Psalm. 17. Deliver me from the affliction, etc. therefore
he (...) to keep them better. For troble hinders the course of obedience, and
makes us ^^get many things which we have learned: Then what a benefit have
we which now are in quiet, and have our liberty? Without loving kindness there
is no quickening. He plays to be delivered, that he may keep Gods
commandments: and this is the ^ight end of this prayer, ^^ther to be delivered
out of the present evil, or to be preserved from it. We do ^^^^ pray to be
preserved; we pray for our Queen, etc. But i^ it be not to this end, we (...)
nothing from beasts. This was the end of David in his prosperity, Psalm. 23.
and this was his end why he would be delivered from trouble, that he might
dwell in Gods house a long season: For it was his grief that he could not
glorify God. He desires to be quickened to keep Gods commandments: then
what are we that are as dead men, when we hear and pray?

PORTION. 12. LAMED.
Verse. 89. O Lord, thy word endures for ever in heaven.
THis part shows the comforts that stayed him in his trouble: his eyes
fainted, yet he saw Gods word to endure for ever in heaven. And this is his
says, which when he saw no help in earth, yet could lift up his heart to
heaven. And he notes the weakness of his enemies, that though they had almost
made an end of Gods Sai^ts in earth, yet they cannot take the word out of
heaven, which is the seat thereof. This must comfort us when persecution waxes
hot, so that we might say with (...), I am ^^^^ alo^e: yet the Lord keeps
his word in heaven, from whence he will send it to another place. In the
confidence hereof David cries; Psalm. 2. Why do, etc. and in the death of
Christ, the Savior of the world seemed to be dead, so that they mocked him, He
saved others: yet Gods word was in heaven, and Christ became a Savior to them
that believed. When the children of Israel were brought low in Egypt, yet Gods
word in heaven was true, and they returned to the promised land. When the Jews
were translated to Babylon, so that all hope of return was taken away, yet
Daniel and other knew the word was in heaven, that after 70 years they should
return. This is true in particular persons, as Job, David, Ezechias, and
others being brought very low: yet through hope of Gods word which is in
heaven, they looked for deliverance, though they saw no help in earth. This is
good for us to lay up against trouble to come, and this comforted Bradford,
Rogers, etc. which said, God would bring his word from heaven to this land
again.

And because we cannot see heaven (though we must believe it by faith, which
is of things not seen) therefore he shows that it may be seen in earth, Thy
truth indureth from Hebr. 11. 1.
generation to generation, etc. though all things under the Sun be changeable,
yet Gods truth is one for ever. Heaven and earth shall pass. Matthew. 24. and
Luke 21. This generation shall not pass: where under Jerusalem he sets out
the state of the world till the last day. For as the Jews did not receive the
true Christ, so they were deceived with a false: and when they would not look
to cure their souls, the Lord sent famine, war, and pestilence to consume
their bodies: and as they would find no place in their souls for his word; so
the Lord would leave them no place in that good land. And thus shall the word
continue throughout all generations. For wheresoever the Lord has a number of
his, thither he will send his word to work in them faith and repentance, and
so to strengthen them that they shall never fall. And as for all the rest, the
Lord will try them with his word: and when they shall be found not to receive
the truth in love, they shall be given up to believe lies; afterward love shall
wax cold, and then iniquity shall prevail: so that the Lord shall be
constrained to send famine and pestilence, with which they shall be exercised
till their final destruction. Thus did the Lord deal with them at Jerusalem,
and thus shall the Lord do from generation to generation. For his word after
this sort shall go from one nation to another people, till the Gospel of the
kingdom has been preached through all the world, and then shall the end
come. Then we see that the contempt of the word brings destruction to cities
and nations.

Verse. 90. Thy truth is from generation to generation: thou have laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.
THe earth, as the Philosophers think, stands in the midst of the
firmament; and as the Scriptures teach us, the waters are above the earth: so
that to reason the earth seems to be very fickle and ready to fall, albeit
to our sense nothing seems so steadfast. How comes it to pass then that the
earth falls not, or is not covered with water, but because of the word
wherein God has commanded it so to be, as in the beginning he made it by the
word? The Lord gave bounds to the Sea the which it should not pass, and those
bounds it kept two thousand years; then by the word of the Lord it ouerflowed
the earth: but after that, it has to this day continued within his banks,
because God has so appointed it. And if these be so sure by the word of the
Lord, the word must needs be sure and steadfast, wherein God has promised that
he will have his Church to the end. The like reason Jeremy uses, chap. 31. and
35. 36. 37. So long as the Sun and the Moon continue in heaven, so long will I
have my Church upon the earth, though the wicked rage against it. This must
stay and comfort us, when these thoughts assault us: Oh, if the word should be
taken from this place, where then should it rest? If this King, or Queen
should dye, where should the word become then? This must assure us, I say, that
the Lord will provide for his Church so, that the word may continue amongst
them, so long as his covenant of the night and the day abides.

Verse. 91. They continue even to this day, by thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.
THese are deputed of God to be his servants: and this answers an objection.
Object: These things are chaungeable. Answ: This, in that they are so, it is to
se^^e Gods judgments, for the salvation of the good, and the confusion of his
enemies.

The Sun is certain, and yet for the glorious victory of Gods people under
Joshua, it stood still So did it turn back for Ezechias. The waters also were
his servants, to take vengeance on his enemies at the flood: so likewise the
red Sea saved Gods children, and destroyed his foes. Then when these creatures
keep not their course, it is the work of God for the good of his people, and
the hurt of his enemies. Much more are the ordinary works his servants, as
moderate rain, dry weather, etc Leuit 25. for to restifie his favor to his
children; as immoderate drought for the hurt of his foes. So discord, ^amine,
plague, war, etc: all these wait on GOD, to serve him when he will punish
any people: as peace, love, plenty, health, strength, etc. are to the comfort
of his people.

All are his Servants.] All the creatures round about, are ready to serve him
at his will, from the Angels in heaven, to the worms in the earth: therefore
he is called the Lord of Hosts; they are not ordered by nature, fortune, or
such like, but by Gods providence: example, Psalm. 107. If we were persuaded of
this, then should we be seared, if our hearts were not right with God: and we
should be comforted when our hearts were right before him: knowing that these
serve to testify his love to them that fear him, and to testify his wrath
where he is displeased. This must drive us from second causes, to look to GOD:
If God be with us, who shall be against us? If we were persuaded, that they
shall all bear witness with us or against us, then would we be fearful, and
desirous to be reconciled to God: for he has given these creatures to us no
otherwise to use, then that we may be in CHRIST; for if we be not, then must
we give account for them: but if we be reconciled to GOD, then have we a
special comfort, that nothing shall burt us, and when they might seem to
hurt, they shall help us: our enemies shall be our friends, and the stones
shall be at league with us; and nothing shall separate us from the love of God.
Fire shall burn us easily, and water shall easily drown us: for though
Tyrants abuse these for a time, yet they are Gods servants, and they groan
with us for our redemption. Do all creatures groan, and shall we be secure?
Do they their service, and shall not we do our duties? Then most grievous
shall our condemnation be.

Verse: 92. Except thy Laws had been my delight, I had even now perished in
mine ^^^^^ction.
IT seems by many verses in this Psalm, that David was much afflicted, for
his life was in his hand, his soul cleaued unto the dust, he was sore
troubled, and had it not been for comfort out of Gods Word, doubtless he had
perished in his trouble.

This verse I may call A perfume against a Plague: the sick in ^^^ ^^^^^: the
afflicted man's consolation: and a blessed Triumph; in, and over all troubles.

In which note, 1. That David was afflicted: 2. that he was ready to perish
in his affliction: 3. the remedy against his affliction; namely, Gods Law: 4.
the application of that remedy, it was his delight.

1. David was afflicted: he was the beloved of the Lord, one of his worthiest
Captanes we read of in the Bible, and indeed a man after Gods own heart:
yet the Cup, nay, the bitter cup of affliction could not pass away from him:
but because he was made strong enough to bear this mingled drink, (and surely
all men's brains bear not wine alike) therefore did he drink up many a full
dr^ught.

We ought to think of David's troubles, and to esteem it as an argument of
Gods great favor toward us, if to the great carowses which we take of Gods
blessings, it shall please him to add a purging potion of affliction. There is
no true son, but (since folly is bound up by nature in his heart) the rod of
correction must be laid upon him. From Adam to Christ, in whom we all are, all
have been partakers of affliction. It was David's judgment. In the sweat of
thy face shall thou eat thy bread: it was a part of Christ's consecration, by
affliction he was made the high Priest of our salvation.

Exulerat Christus, comites nos exulis huius
Essedecet, cuius nos quoque membra sumits.
Our head Christ here an exile was:
We members must this exile trace.
But why does God thus visit his dearest, and most dutiful servants? Answ. I,
to show how he hates sin, when he will punish it in them ass we may see in
this kingly Prophet David 2. Sam. 12. 2, to bring them to an examination of
themselves, as he did in the Mariners. Jonah: 1. 3, to move them to repentance
as in the Israelites, Hoseah: 5. verse: 15. 4, to try them as the Eagle her
young ones, and the goldsmith his metals, as he did l^b: chap: 1. 5, to
confound Satan and all his ministers, who would joy if Gods children should
ever prosper, do these men serve God for n^^ght? Job: 1. 9 6, that as the
camomile does spread better by treading, the tree grow better by pruning, the
Pomander smell better by rubbing, the iron look better by scouring, and the
body like better by purging: so the godly might be better by affliction. In a
word, were we not sometime in trouble, we should forget God: we should not
call upon his name: nor be distinguished from bastardes: nor conformable to
Christ: nor weaned from this world: nor understand Gods will: nor desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ.

Use. Is David afflicted? who then can judge of Gods love or hatred by outward
things, Eccles: 9. David in his trouble thought he was cast out of Gods favor,
but he was deceived: David's enemies thought, that God had forsaken him, but
they were deceived: and even Gods children do oftentimes think the proud,
and rich, and Epicures blessed, but they also are deceived. To gee on, is David
afflicted: 1, Suspect thine estate, if thou ever art at ease in this world. It
is the greatest misery never to taste of any misery. 2, Be patient to endure
crosses, since the most godly have been thus crossed: 3, If the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the wicked and the sinners appear, 1. Pet: 4.
18.

I had perished.) 2, Note that David was ready to sincke under this burden,
to faint under this cross, to be swallowed up of these waves, and to perish in
this trouble of his. Thus God wounds, but he heals again: casts down,
but sets up again: kills, but reuiueth again: and afflicts, but
comfort again. We, before troubles come, are like unto Peter, we think
we can walk upon the Sea, but it pleases the Lord to send one dangerous
storm or other, that we may say with the same Apostle, Help master I perish.
But why was David thus ready to perish? he saw the Sea, but not the Whale: the
Egyptian, but not the salvation: the water, but not Christ's power walking on
the water. He was impatient of delay, looked too much to man, trusted over
much in himself, and thought more of them that were against him, then God and
his Angels that were on his side. And is not this our case when there is but a
thin curtain drawn for a while betwixt God and us? O let him that is
exercised with troubles but ask his own heart of this point.

Except thy law) we have heard how David was wounded, here is that plaster
which cured that wound, namely, the law of the Lord his God. He being pursued
with the heart betaketh himself to these rivers: persecuted, flies to these
mountains: environed, hastes to these bulwarks: and afflicted, with delight
he comes to these comforters. The word of the Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous flies to it and is delivered. Here note a difference between humane
and divine laws, Philosophy and divinity. Art thou in trouble: what will
Philosophy say unto thee? all that it can say is but thus much, ferendum est
quod vitari non potest, I must undergo that which I cannot avoid: But come to
divinity, it will teach thee whence troubles come, why they are sent, how thou
must endure them, by what means get out of them: to depend upon God, repent of
thy sins, examine thy ways, that the end will be good, and that death is
advantage unto thee: it will teach thee, that sin is pardoned, Satan
vanquished, and that Christ is thy companion in troubles, and crown after. It
is as the sword of Goliath, no weapon like ^^^ that spiritual Mannah, no food
comparable to it: and that poole of (...) or ^^^^^ river, into which if thou
once descend, whatsoever thy disease be, assure thy self of cure. But it must
be applied, or else it will do thee no more good, then the bread that is ever
in the cubbord, the cloth in the drapers shop, the wine in the vessel, or the
medicine which thou keep ever in thy pocket. Daui^ applies it, by delighting
in it.

My delight) This word my is very remarkable: David a great man delighted in
the laws and statutes of God, he made them his counselors from which (as from
grave Senators) he ever received the best counsel. One faith, that books are
the best counselors, because they teach without flattery: it is not ever true
of the writings of men, their masters teach them to speak silk^n words, but
it is most true of the word of God, which as a true glass shows to every one
his proper favor. If great men would take counsel here, they would not in so
short a time make Rehoboams division of their inheritance upon earth, nor sell
heaven Esau-like for a mess of pottage. But because in steed of the book of
God, they delight in dice, cards, pride, pleasure, luxury, flattery, and all
vanity, no marvel, that the place which did honor them, does honor them no
more.

Delight) In the original it is the plural number, delights, as if he should
say, all my delight, only my delight, my chief delight. And no marvel, for
what is it that can delight the heart of man to read of, which is not
contained in the book of God, is it history? here is the most ancient, and
true history: is it poesy? here are most harmonicall, and golden verses? is
it Philosophy, the secrets of nature are here opened: is it morality? here
are most Christian ethiques: is it mysteries? what greater mystery then the
mystery of godliness, preached to Adam, shadowed out to the Jews, manifested
in Christ, and revealed in the word? is it policy? Aristotle never wrote such
politikes as here are: would you read much in few words? Theognis, and
Phocylides, and Pythagoras short sentences come far short of Salomons
proverbs. In a word are we merry? here we may sing David's Psalms to David's
harp: would we be sorry? who can read Ieremies lamentations, and not lament?
In this law young and old, rich and poor, high and low, males and females
may find that which will delight them. And truly all ought to make it their
delight: it is the word of God, the way to life, the sword of the spirit, our
fathers testament, the trustiest friend, the most comfortable companion, and
the best salve that ever we can apply to our diseased souls. When Chrysosteme
was to be exiled by the Emperesse, he comforted himself with this saying, The
earth is the Lords and all that therein is, Psalm. 24 1. when Vrsinus was driven
almost to despair, he comforted himself with this saying, my Father that gave
them me is greater th^n all, and none can take them out of my Fathers hands.
John. 10. 29* Now if we would be known to delight in Gods law, we must read
it with our eyes, hear it with our ears, treasure it in our memories, ponder
it in our hearts, talk of it in our assemblies, and practice it in our lives:
least we, with Saul rejecting Gods word, he in the end reject us.

We should indeed have this delight, but we have not, by reason 1. of our
natural corruption: 2. it is against natural reason: 3. it shows us our
sores: 4. we think it simple: 5. we come with preiudicate opinions; 6. we say
o it is difficult: 7. we are impenitent: 8. we resolve not of repentance, 9. we
think those laws are against our profit: and 10. we see that the maine
promises annexed to this law are for hereafter in heaven, not on earth. But if
with a pure heart, knowledge of the grounds of religion, love of God, denial
of our selves, faith in Christ, an aiming at Gods glory, earnest prayer, and
an holy admiration of the majesty, purity, and power of this word, we set
upon it, we will cast with Jerome all vain pamphlets out of our hands, and
both lift up our hands to these testimonies, bend our eyes to look upon these
statutes, and set our hearts to delight in these laws, especially such as
promise salvation.

Verse* 93. I will never forget thy precepts: for by them thou have quickened
me.
THis afflicted good man is now comforted: his comfort came from the delight
of Gods law, he thinks of it, he feels the force of it, and therefore to the
end he might ever receive the like comforts, he will bind himself by a promise
to the Lord, that he will never forget his precepts: adding a reason, they were
to him spirit and life, (By them I will never forget.)

He that never thinks of times, and things past, his life is no life, says
Seneca. Memory, qui nihil de praeteritis cogitat, vitam perdidi^.
it is the storehouse of all such things as we see, hear, or invent. A
forgetful mind, is like the land of Sodom, in which nothing grows which
perishes not; or that L^thean Lake, in which nothing comes which dies not:
or the Ostrich, that forgets her eggs: or Messala Coruintes, who forgot his
own name: or a casting stomach, that casts up whatsoever it receives.

There are four things which we must forget; first, wrongs, Leuitie. 19. 18.
2. Benefits bestowed: Matthew. 6. 3. 3. The pleasure taken in sin: Romans 6. 21.
4. The progress already made in godliness. Philipp: 3. 3. But many things
there are, that we must ever remember; as first, the mercies of GOD, Psalm.
103. 2. 2. His Judgments, Psalm. 119. 52. 3. The day of death: Luke, 12. 19.
20. 4. The day of Judgment: Eccles. 11. 9. 5. The death of CHRIST* 2. Tim: 2.
8. 6. The vanity of this world, Psalm: 1 19* 96. 7. The joys of heaven: 2.
Cor. 4 ^7. 18. 8 The torments of hell: 2 Thessalonians: 1. 8. 9. 9. The confusion of
the careless: Prou. ^4 32. 10. The taking away of the godly: Isaiah, 57. 1. 2.
3. 11. The lives of the godly to follow them: Phil: 3. 17. and 12. The law of
God, to keep it. I hear many complain of bad memories: they cannot carry
away any thing of a sermon, they forget all they read of Gods word, or good
books; Why? can thou coming to an Enter^ude remember much of it, and of a
sermon do thou forget all? Art thou able to repeat many dainty dishes set
before thee in thine own house, and not to record any one so much as tasted of
in Gods house? If thine appetite were spiritual, thy memory would be more
firm then it is? Old men have bad memories, yet never forget where treasure
is laid. O but I would feign get a good memory. If I were a Physician, I
might speak of many good means for that purpose, or an Orator, appoint images
to place words in: but I am to speak now as a divine. I advise thee therefore
to use 1. temperate diet: 2. attention: 3. delight: 4. meditation, or chewing
of the cud, saying to thy soul when thou come home, my soul, what have
thou been taught to day? 5. conference. 6* practice, Use memory, and have
memory; 7. press not memory with overmuch at once. 8. write, but take heed
that thy book be not more learned then thy breast; 9. bind thy self ever to
remember somewhat, especially, that which does most concern thee: 10. hoc age,
do that only for which thou come, let not thy mind be at home, when thou
art at Church: 11. draw ever as much as thou can remember into a short
prayer: 12. teach others that which thou have learned. 13. consider that the
end of the word is the salvation of thy soul: 14. and lastly, change that
good word into good works. I had rather with David remember Gods precepts, then
with that mighty governor Mithridates, be able to speak two and twenty
several languages, Mithridates Cyrus.
and to call with another, every soldier of many thousands in his Camp, by
their own names.

For by them thou have quickened me:] Ten several times in this one Psalm,
does the Prophet make mention of this quickening, partly by the way of
supplication, that he might be quickened, and partly by way of exaltation,
that he was quickened: as in this place where he protests with joy, that by
the power of Gods word, accompanied with Gods spirit, he was, (as it were)
raised from the grave of despair, to the life of Faith: and so became a
living, or rather indeed a lively man.

It is reported that a Philosopher being demanded what good he got by the
study of Philosophy? his Answer was, Vt vtramque Fortunam patienter far
possim: That is: I get this good, that I can patiently bear, either
prosperity or adversity.

If the rules of philosophy could teach him this, our rules in divinity must
teach us as much. By them says David, thou have quickened me. It seems that
David before was become as a dead man in his own sense and feeling, but now is
revived by the word.

Thus Gods children, both Ministers and Auditors are not always alike, either
in their faith, or the fruits of faith. They have their waxings and waynings
as the Moon, their settings and rysings as the Sun, their ebbings and flowings
as the Sea, and their springing and falling as the leaf. And (as they that are
troubled with an intermitting ague) they have their good and badde days;
Sometimes you shall see them as heavy as lead. 1, by reason of the weather. 2,
their complexion. 3, some grief. 4, some sin committed. 5, some good
omitted. 6, some means of salvation not used. 7, some sin not repented of*
8, or not fully repented of. 9, unthankfulness for benefits. 10, pride of
gifts. 11, to provoke them to pray. 12, that they may see what they are when
God leaves them: and not to presume upon their own strength. At other times
observe with what delight of heart, cheerfulness of countenance, volubilitie
of speech, nimblenesse of wit, strength of memory, and dexterity of the whole
man they go about every good thing: and what is the cause of all this? God
puts into them his good spirit, and makes all things as it were possible
unto them. He that knows not this, be he Minister or Auditor, knows
little of the Christian combat. Is this so? 1, humble thy self under the
mighty hand of God that he may exalt thee in due time. 1. Pet. 5. 7. 2,
despair not, though sorrow come in the evening, joy may come in the morning:
they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. 3, censure not, when men are not
alike cheerful in divine duties: especially Ministers, who oftentimes partly
for their own sin, and partly for the sins of their auditors, who either
pray not for them, or love them not, or grace them not, or are not worthy of
the best things, are put to silence. Augustine reports of himself, that at
his meditations of many sermons he was often most cheerful: in the Pulpit on
the sudden heavy. And I heard once a godly man in the like case, speak thus
to his auditors. I was never so humbled as this day the Lord has humbled me
in my ministry, because you have not assisted me with your prayers. A
willing, patient, loving, and charitable auditorie sets an edge upon the
zeal of the Preacher. 4, art thou dull? wait for this quickening* for in
coming it will come, and will not tarry. That Martyr found it, who after the
combat of many a days conflict, cried out even at the stake, Austine, it is
come, it is come. Mistress Honnie-wood that worthy woman found it, after many
years conflict betwixt frayletie and faith: and here the Prophet David found
the same. 5, use* all holy means to stir up the graces of God in thee, as
men do to raise up one out of a dead sleep, the neglect whereof is the grave
of many graces. 6. fear this relapse into deadness of spirit after some
extraordinary joy, and when you have most means. It is strange to see what
readiness there is in many people that want Gods word, to go many a mile for
it, to study and talk of it: and what small account it is made of amongst
them that have it in abundance. 7, take heed of the souls languishing, no
consumption is like to this.

For by them, etc. Quickened he was (as he says) by GOD, but yet also by the
word* soundly preached, sauingly understood, and particularly applied to the
conscience. This then does the power of CHRIST'S death make a man indeed to dye
unto sin: then does the power of his resurrection make him to walk on in
newenes of life. No Aqua-vitae, or caelestis like unto this, by which we have
inward peace of conscience, and an outward obedience to GODS commandments.
David rejoiced in this blessing, so ought we: we desire to be ever quick,
and cheerful to all good duties, it is only GOD by his spirit in the word
that can give it.

Verse. 94. I am thine save me: for I have sought thy precepts.
IN the former verse the Prophet felt the spirit of God stirring up his heart
to believe Gods promises, here it becomes the spirit of supplication; for he
yet feeling terrors within, and troubles without, cries to his Savior, Save
me o Lord. Yea David, but thou art a grievous sinner, think thou that God
will hear sinners? did not thou affirm Psalm. 66 18. if I regard iniquity
in mine heart, God will not hear me? why then prayest thou unto me? why Lord,
I am thy servant and the Son of thine handmaide, I am thine, save me: yea but
many, very hypocrites will say, that they belong unto me; how prouest thou that
thou art mine? He that seeks to know and do thy will he is thine, but I have
sought to know and to do thy will, therefore I am thine, and this is the sum
of this verse.

Save me) Salvation then belongs to the Lord. Psalm. 3. 8. yea it belongs to
him alone, he saves both man and beast; an horse is a vain thing in the day
of battle, neither is any man delivered by man's might. He is that Aiacis
clypeus, under which we are safe, those Eagles wings, upon which we are
carried: that strong tower, to which we must resort: and a very present help
in the time of trouble, when neither the wisdom of thy mind, nor the
strength of the body, nor the gold in thy chest, nor the endeavors of thy
friends, nor the multitude of an army, nor the defensed city, can do thee
any good, then the name of the Lord is a strong tower, every righteous David
may fly unto it, and is delivered. How often does God complain of Israel,
that they had trusted in man, and in the power of man, and did not make him
their salvation? It is man's nature to rely more upon outward means, as
physic in sickness, friends in disgrace, an host in war, etc. then upon
God. But he that without this captain will conquer, shall have Zenacharibs
reward; without this Pilote will enter upon the sea shall have Pharaohs reward;
without this Physician will be cured shall have Asahs reward: and he that will
pray unto any other for help save the God of Israel, shall in the end have
the reward of B^all, Prophets. When all sail us, God will not sail us. Cast
thy burden upon the Lord, and he will nourish thee, Psalm. 55. 23. cast your
care upon him for he cares for you 1. Pet. 5. 7.

Save me) with the Prophet let us at all times, in all places, for all persons,
upon all occasions call upon God. For 1. it is his commandment: 2. a part of
his worship: 3. an honor to him: 4 a testimony of our faith: 5. it
distinguishes him from idols, us from idolaters. 6 By it we obtain all
things: 7. our many wants move us to this duty. 8. all nations call upon their
Gods, shall not Jonah call upon his God* 9. By it we talk with God: 10. the
contrary argues an Atheist. Psalm. 53. 4. Say therefore in all troubles, Save
me o Lord for thy mercy sake. 1. But remember that thou must call upon God
alone forsaluation. The Gentiles that know not God, have many other Saviors:
the idolaters that know not God aright have many also. But cursed is the
image, and the image maker: an idol is nothing, nothing worth, it works
nothing: The learned Papist knows this, the ignorant must not. 6. If they
would not have the poor people to adore their breaden God, why do they make
it at sometimes to bleed? or their wooden gods, why do they cause them
sometimes to speak, otherwhiles to sweat, many times to smile, and oftentimes
to stretch forth the hand to receive oblations offered unto them? Origin says
well, Impossible est vt qui Deum recte nouit supp ex sit statuae* It is
impossible that he who truly knows God should fall down before an image.
Lactantius said well, Non dubium est quin nulla sit tbireligio, vbi simulacrum
est. How shall they call upon him whom they have not believed? how shall they
believe on them which are no Gods, but the work of men's hands.

I am thine.) This indeed is an excellent motive, to draw from the Lord help
in trouble. I am thine, thine by creation, I was made by thee: thine by
adoption. I was assigned over to thee: thine by donation, I was given to thee:
thine by marriage, I was espoused to thee: thine by redemption, I was purchased
by thee: thine by stipulation, I have vowed my self unto thee. Save me, for I
am thine: Then 1: God has especial care of his: 2. he above the rest has
regard of his anointed: 3. a sinner may be Gods child, nay unless a sinner
first, not Gods at all: The whole have no need of the Physician, but such as
are sick, 4. none can truly call upon God but such as are persuaded they
belong to God. 5. a man may, nay he must be persuaded that he is Gods child.
2. Cor. 13. 5. Omnis anima (says one) est aut sponsa Christi, aut adultera
diabols, Every soul is either the spouse of Christ, or the devils strumpet He
will not be his own, he must not be the devils, he dares not be the worlds, he
is Gods own child, he will not serve two masters. In this service is true
liberty, to be Gods son is the truest nobility. We think the Barbarians
seely people, who in many places of the world prefer iron, or lead, or some
base metal before gold, but as for such amongst us as make gold their God,
we think them wise men: see thou a man wise after this sort? there is more
hope of a Barbarian then of him.

For I have sought thy precepts.) Many signs there be, and trials of our
adoption, as Rom 8. 15. I he spirit witnesses to our spirits that we are the
children of God: and, Io^. 3. 14* by this we know that we are translated from
death to life because we love the brethren. And Ioh. 8. 47. He that is of God
hears Gods words. But to seek out the knowledge of Gods will, and to
practice it in life and conversation, this is the very badge of Gods child.
Read but this one Psalm, and you shall find David many times protesting his
love to Gods law, promising his obedience to Gods commandments, praying for
knowledge of Gods will, and valuing this treasure above all the treasures of
the earth. Seek them to know, know to remember, remember to believe, believe
to practice, and you shall be blessed in your deed.

It is curiosity to seek only to know, or at least to know that which is
above our knowledge, it is piety to seek to know and do those things which
belong to the peace of conscience, and pure conversation.

Verse. 95. The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.
HE prayed before that God would save him, had he not need think you when the
wicked waited to destroy him? thus this and the former verse have their
coherence. Here then he complains against his adversaries, and protests
notwithstanding his recourse to Gods word.

He describes his adversaries, by their names, calling them wicked ones* 2. by
their Ra^^ang Mali^^ Gn^shar Duies.
diligence they lay wait. 3 by their malice, they wait to destroy him. For
the first, the hebrew word translated wicked, if the letters be transposed
signifies a rich man, because it is hard to find goods and goodness, riches
and righteousness in one person: and I think that Solomon calls riches, the
treasures of iniquity* Prou. 10. 2. not only because they are gathered by
badde means, but also because, often their owners are bad men. These wicked
persons, strangers from the womb, the sons of men, the children of Beliall,
scoffing Ishmaels, parasiticall Doegs, persecuting Saul's, David often
complains of in this Psalm as veres. 23. 52. 61. 69 78 85. 87. 110 241. 157
261. and here, and in many other Psalms. And surely not without cause, for
many were these evil spirits that vexed him, his brother Eliab accused him of
pride, Goliath the Philistine despised him to his face, Saul the King hunted him
as a partridge, Doeg the Edomite slandered him to his Lord, Absolon his son
drove him out of his kingdom, Achitophel his counselor counseled against
him, M^cho^ his wife contemned him in her heart, Shemey his subject rayled on
him, in his misery, Nabal the Charmelite played the churl with him, and they
that did eat of his bread, and were entertained as friends became in the end
his utter enemies: and all because the Lord loved him, and he followed that
which good was. When Caine and Abel can agree in one field; Ishmael and Izaak
in one house, Iakob and Esau in one womb, then shall the wicked and godly
agree together, not before: see Prou: 29. 29. It is the nature of the wicked to
be opposite to the good, and persecutors of the godly, therefore are they
compared to Lions, Bears, Tigers, Bulls, Serpents, Adders, Archers, and
Foulers: the godly man is the Partridge, they the Hawk. 1. let the Hawk all
her lifetime sit upon her Lords fist, yet when she dies she is but cast upon
the dunghill: let the Partridge be chased all the days of her life: yet after
her death, she shall be brought in a silver dish to her Lords table. Yet know,
that if thou oppose thy self against the godly, thou art to be reputed but a
wicked man.

Waited:) They were vigilant, diligent, and wise to do hurt, never did Cat so
wait for the mouse, or Wolf for the sheep, or Lion for the Lamb, or Hawk
for Partridge, or Fouler for Bird, or the Soldier for his enemies as they
waited for him: they bent their bow, they made ready their arrows upon the
string, that they might secretly shoot at him that was upright of heart. David
complains of this, so may we: David provided for these, so ought we: and
though they wait day and night, and lay all kinds of battes that can be, yet
in the end David has the best; for in the name of the Lord he shall destroy
them. This is our comfort, wait they may, but they can do no more Luke. 22.
31.

For me) David had many followers in the time of his troubles, yet his
adversaries aimed especially at his life: Strike say they the Shepherd, and
the sheep shall be scattered: Stub up the root and the branches will wither:
chop off the head, and the members will perish; if David be once gone, who
shall resist? Thus the worthiest Princes, grauest counselors, and most
vigilant Ministers, have ever been the mark of wicked Archers. Thus like the
King of Aram they say 2. Chron: 18. 31. Fight you not with small or great, but
against the King of Israel only. Experience we have had of this in the days
of our gracious Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, and our worthy King James,
whom the Lord long keep to rule over us, that the iawebones of the Lions may
be broken before ever he be given a prey to their teeth.

To destroy) Before he showed their vigilancie in waiting, now he declares
their malice in destroying, nothing will quench their thirst but his blood, he
used all kindness to them, they practiced all cruelty toward him. Thus the
wicked never leave till they have killed, they will persecute, and take, and
destroy to root out the memorial of the godly out of the earth. Haman could
not be satisfied unless the Jews were destroyed: nor the Scribes, unless
Christ were crucified: nor the Persian Sages till Daniel was delivered, not the
Pa^^^^an Massakerers till the Protestants were killed. The Lion is often
satisfied when he has brought *under his prey, the Bear will not be
satisfied till it be devoured.

But I will consider thy testimonies) It was a grievous temptation to be sought
for to slaughter, but a greater mercy to consider Gods testimonies, even then
when his life was sought for; had it not been for the consideration of Gods
testimonies a thousand to one he had fallen away.

But I) Though I was thus assaulted yet I despaired not of thine aid: cast not
off my calling: was not careless of mine estate: used no deceit: could not
flatter: avenged not my self: became no politician: confessed no fault where
none was committed: trusted not in my sword: went not to witches as Saul did:
but being assured of the innocence of mine heart, the goodness of my cause, the
help of my God, and his comfort in trouble, I considered thy testimonies. It
is good for a Christian not ever to arm himself with the weapons of flesh,
but to put upon him the armor of the spirit, which she must fetch out of Gods
armorie.

Consider thy testimonies.) Bernard wrote 5. books of consideration to pope
Eugenius, They that consider Gods testimonies, that is, the commandments of
God, which were testimonies to the Israelites that they were bounden to keep
them, and the covenant of grace testifying to all Gods mercy in Christ, have no
great need of those books, no if it were the Pope himself, who I am
persuaded does not read much of Gods book. This consideration will make us
patient in trouble, forgetful of wrongs, and in the end we shall get such a
conquest of our adversaries, that they shall say to us as Saul did to David 1.
Sam: 24. 17. 18. My son David thou art more righteous then I.

Verse. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandem ^t is
exceeding large.
IN his precedent meditation he considered Gods testimonies, here he breaks
out into acommendation of them, and by the consumption of things upon earth,
observes the consummation of the word of God. Where note first that the most
perfect earthly things are but imperfect, they shall have an end. The goodliest
cities seuelled with the earth I am seges est vbi Troia suit.
the mightiest Empires divided into Dukedomes, the auncientest buyldings come
to the ground, and the greatest Monarchs have not long left their inheritance
to their children* where is Solomon with all his royalty? Absolon with all his
beauty? Dives with all his wealth? Haman with all his honor? Sampson with all
his strength? Achitophel with all his wisdom? yea or David with all his
victories? they are gone, and so gone, that man must say, as David once said,
surely every man, nay every thing, in his best estate is vaniti^: van^^tis of
vanities, all is vanity: We that now live, nay the greatest that now live, what
shall become of us, ours, them and theirs, but an hundred years hence, which
yet is the age of some one man?

Alternante rota moras mutantur in horas
Omnia, nunc huius, mea cras, post nescio cuius.
The turning wheel things changes all,
His now, mine then, next have who shall?
Aetas nostra canit Veneres, postrema triumphos.
This age of ours sings songs of love:
The next of triumphs got by love.
2. David like a wise man, sees this with his eye, and ponders it with his
heart. A wise meme^to for all me^: quod cuiqua^ cuiuis, that which may come to
al men, may come to every man, and mansion upon earth. It is the point of a
wise man to observe the passages of honors and honorable personages in the
world, and it will make him to say, No^ a^tum sap^re sed time, be not high
minded but fear, Rom: 11. As they have been, so I may be. As David the father
had these eyes, so also had Solomon his son, Preu: 24 30. I passed (says he)
by the field of the slothful, and by the vyneyard of the man destitute of
understanding. 31. And lo^ it was all grown over with thorns, and n^ttles had
covered the face thereof and the stone wall was broken down 32. And I behold,
and considered it well: I looked upon it and received instruction. Happy are
they that have such eyes.

But thy commandment, etc.) out of the imperfection of other things he
gathers the perfection of Gods word. And in truth what is the dross to the
gold? (...) Christus, ama^el^it mundus. If once the glad tidings of the Gospel
affect us, the sweetness of this world will be bitter sweet, or rather indeed
mere bitterness unto us.

Exceeding large.) Extending to al times, persons, places, actions, and
circumstances of actions: The ancient laws of the Persians, Grecians, and
Romans are gone, or at the least mos^lie gone in their governments: but the
word of our God will endure for ever in it self, and make us to endure for
ever: This one verse is an excellent meditation for great ones that they
presume not, mean ones that they repine not, and all that they build not upon
this present world. We see now an healthful, and happy time, do we know how
long it will co^unue? we do not. There dyed in the year 160^. in, and about
this City of London forty two thousand nine hundred eighty and nine persons,
whereof of the plague thirty six thousand eight hundred si^^e and two. Our
sins deserve the like desolation, the Lord give us comfort out of that word
of his, which is able to comfor^al, and to teach them of whom, by whom, under
whom, to what, and above what things they are, and that they shall have an
inheritance with them that are sanctified.

PORTION. 13. MEM.
Verse. 97. Oh how love They law? it is my meditation continually.
THis Psalm is a lively representation of a man regenerate, and teaches us,
what are, or ought to be his meditations, his exercises, and his affections;
so that The use of this Psalm to a man regenerate.
by how much a man shall have found himself to be truly conversant in this
Psalm, so much may he think himself to have profited in regeneration: and
by how much the less he has found, that he is less occupied in the
practice hereof, so much he is to suspect himself to fail and come short of
newness of life. In these days, because we attribute so much to ministerial
knowledge, and have felt so little profit by Ministerial knowledge.
the teaching of the Spirit, and seeing we brag so much of faith, and have so
little love; lastly, whereas we boast of our profession, and yet are so little
profited in holy conversation, the Lord for such contempt of his truth, does
Anno Dom. 1580* and 1581.
now teach us by deluding spirits, and fantastical deuisers, and the lying
Family of love. Wherefore unless we be more enflamed with a love of the
truth, and an hatred of heresy, than we have been; it may come to pass, that
as in the Primitive Church the Gospel of Jesus Christ being preached at the
first, of men of the lowest state, and afterward for the good liking of it, was
brought to be preached after the more learned sort: even so heresy now
beginning in the unlearned and ignorant Haresie.
people, may by the just judgment of God, for the contempt of the word, take
place even among the best learned. For it is as easy for the Lord in his
judgments, to send a lying spirit into four hundred learned men, as to suffer
the common Israelites to be deluded therewith: so then we have the mysteries
of iniquity to teach the mysteries of righteousness, and we must learn love of
them, which are the abusers of love. Wherefore if we desire Family of love.
to know Christ crucified by the spirit in his word, if we will know him to be
our Prophet, our Priest, and our King, we must be new creatures, for the old
things are gone, and new things have succeeded them in their place; we must
let love be laborious in us, and fruitful in good works. But when we have
not so good misliking of heretics, we shall find them as the grasshoppers of
Egypt, we shall see new and old enemies join together, to the great dishonor
of our God.

Oh, how I love thy law. We have then in this verse a just occasion to examine
our selves, how we profit in the love of Gods word, wherein the Prophet for our
example and imitation, pathetically protests, how he loves the word of the
Lord, and to declare that it was not in outward show, but in inward affection*
and that he did not indeed delude himself, as we do in many things, he
proves it by effects, for that here alone is true wisdom, and not elsewhere
to be found. Wherefore it shall not be amiss, to gather all such proofs,
True arguments of love to the word.
whereby we may see his love was unfeigned, and came from the bottom of his
heart. The first is a special hatred that he had to the contrary, that is,
to all false religion, opposed to the true service of God. Secondly, it may be
showed in the circumstance of the time, and 1
that for two causes, both in respect of the law, which then had little
countenance, and in 2
respect of his person, which then did suffer contempt. The third is the
reposing of his felicity 3
in the word, when either he felt the sweet promises of God, or his inward man
delighted with the law, in that he preferred it before all profit, pleasure,
and glory, with which things natural men are most delighted: as also his
great grief of mind, when either he felt not such comfort in Gods promises,
or his inward man not delighting in his word; or 4
when he saw any other tra^sgressing the same. The fourth is, his careful using
of the means, which were many, namely, his conference with Gods children,
either in reaching his gifts unto them, or in the participating of their gifts
with him, his praying, and praising of God* his holy meditations, and his
vowing with himself to keep the law of the Lord.

In that so vehemently he bursteth forth into this speech, Oh how love I the
law? we are Wearines in good things.
to see his great zeal, to compare our selves with it; and where he says,
(...), we are Wearines in good things.
to learn, that if we find in our selves any weariness and loathsomeness to
this exercise, we are not as yet sound at the heart.

Concerning this word, thy law, we may note, that he puts the law of God,
and his love thereunto, for his love to God, for this end, because every man
will say, that he loves God; as the Turk, the Pope, the Family of love; but
few of us, and none of them, do love his word. For is there any heretic, or
has bin, who persuades not himself, and would persuade Love God, love his
word. Ioh. 14. 23.
others, that he loves God? Wherefore to our use, we must know, that if we
fear the Lord, we must fear him in his threatenings denounced by his word; if
we say, we love him, we must love his promises contained in his truth; if we
obey him, we must obey his commandments revealed in his will; if we will
worship him, we must worship him according to the prescript rule of his own
ordinances.

For the first reason, which we have showed to be, the hearty hatred of false
doctrine, or 1. Argument of our true love to God.
false religion, he says, Portion 15. Verse. 113.
verse. 1. I hate vain inventions, but thy law do I love. And in Portion 21.
Verse. 163.
verse. 3. I hate false hood and abhor it but thy law do I love. And in the
fourth Portion verse. 5. he ^larly prays against it, saying, Take from me the
way of ly^^g, and gra^^t me graciously thy truth. Where we see, that as the
mail of God shows his love to the truth, so he shows his hatred to lies.
Neither must we understand here, that which he calls the way of lying, for a
breach of any particular commandment, but for a general breach of the whole
law of God, and for a thing opposite to the truth of Gods word: so also is it
to be understood, when the Spirit of God calls Satan, the father of lies,
that is, of fained and forged doctrine, both in religion and life, as also God
is said to be the Father of all truth.

Now it is manifest, I need not, as I think, to show this out of the Law, nor
by the Prophets, nor by the example of godly Kings, how it is by precept
commanded, and by practice used: only we will show a few places in stead of
many, Deuteronomy. 7. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. Natural love must give place to
heavenly love.
13. 6. 7. Zach. 13. 3. Where we may see, that natural love shall give place
to heavenly love; the second table must give place to the first; and the love
of man to the love of God. Psalm. 16. 4 the Prophet professes, that he will not
once make mention of their names within his lips. For examples we may see
Revel. 2. 6. how acceptable it was in the sight of the Lord, that the Church of
Ephesus hated the heresy of the Nicolaitans: and Revel. 3. 15. the Spirit of
God reprooueth the Laodiceans, because they were neither hot nor cold. So
grievous a thing is it in the eyes of the Lord, when the world will rather take
up false religion, than zealously gainsay it.

But it may be, that their civil conversation, and outward courtesy, does
much slake our Civil conversation of heretics.
hatred against their superstition and heresies. But what? is this such a thing
to bleere our eyes? has not the like kind of life been pretended in the
Pope, in the Turk, and in other kind of heretics? But we must know, that we
are espoused unto Jesus Christ, and that two manner of ways: first, by pure
means; then by single and pure hearts rightly using those means, by whose
Gospel preached seeing we through him are washed and purified, to be presented
a bride blameless before God, shall we think that presumptuous sin shall
prevail against us?

It may be we shall fail in some particular things, but it shall not break
the whole course of our life: we may sin of human frailty, but we shall
not sin of devilish hypocrisy; Presumptuous, sins.
temptations may give us a foil, but they shall not finally overcome us; sin
may dwell in us, but it shall not reign over us. Now when a man will be
ouerwise and over righteous, not contenting himself with those ways, which
the Lord in his word has set down, he cannot be sound, because his religion
being corrupt, his life cannot be vncorrupt. Religion corrupt, life cannot be
vncorrupt.
On the contrary, if we find our sins to be covered in Christ, that our
ignorance is enlightened by his wisdom, our guilty lives justified by his
righteousness, our unclean affections sanctified by his holiness, and our
miserable and unstaid spirits stayed upon the hope of his redemption, we may
boldly say sin shall not reign, and over master us, seeing God has
justified us, who will come and lay any thing to our charge? Wherefore seeing
we are purified by faith, and our faith is grounded on Gods word, and seeing
all their civil behavior is hidden under hypocrisy, covered with self-love,
and Popish superstition described.
stuffed with vainglory, we may boldly say they are but hypocrites deceiving
us with the histrionicall visard of civil righteousness.

Furthermore, if we shall compare the estate of the Church of God, with the
condition of the malignant Synagogue, we shall see them as far differing, as
the light and darkness, as the shadow and the body, as God and Be^iall. As to
point out one estate, namely in affliction, we shall find in them neither
faith, nor constancy, but hypocrisy, and perjury; no The true religious and
irreligious discerned in temptations and afflictions.
wisdom of the Spirit to desend themselves, but dissembling to hide
themselves; no heavenly joy, in their suffering no patience of mind, but
miserable murmurings, and blockish insensibleness, no long sufferings, nor
heroical spirits when they shall boil in cauldrons, as some good Christians
have done; all which notwithstanding we shall find in Christ his Church,
wherein they that suffer are persecuted for the testimony of a true faith;
their faith is unremovable on the word of God, their constancy in perseuering
wonderful, their wisdom in answering abounding with courage and humility;
their joy through hope, and as it were a present enjoying of the life looked
for unspeakable, their patience vnminishable, which thing whilst the wicked
Church goes about to follow, it is like an Ape Simile.
imitating a man, and may be compared to the Ass, which would be like a Lion.

For da^e heretics avouch their sects, as the true Church profess Christ and
his Gospel? will they not lie and dissemble, when Christians speak their
conscience? will they not rail, Heretics discovered by the cross.
when Gods children speak humbly, and constantly? do they not die either like
ravening dogs, or else become like blocks and stocks? so that Satan
seems even to have possessed them wholly. Let us see then if the malignant
Synagogue does not so far differ from the true Church as an Ape from a man,
or an Ass from the Lion. Again, if we look on them in prosperity, they are
nothing like unto us, the Papists curse us, we in holiness of the Spirit do
pray for them: their Church the more it florisheth before man, the more
abominable it is in the sight of God: our Church is all glorious within, and is
the beloved spouse of Christ: finally, they are devils in m^ns shape; for even
profane Christians and Protestants dare not but in great secrecy blaspheme
the name of God, profane his Sabbaths, defile their bodies with adulteries;
yet these men will not stick to do these things openly; when light and
darkness with them are so confounded, when ignorance is simplicity, when
evil and good are shuffled together, what constancy can be looked for among
men? They be bleared with the viz^rd of civil honesty, which notwithstanding
A shame to Protestants to suffer Papists to be more righteous than they be.
Papists may not be spared for their civil honesty. Simile. The 2. argument of
our true love to God, love to the word.
is to our shame, in that they can do so great things for vainglory, and to
get credit to their sect, when we cannot do half so much for Gods glory, and
to maintain his word. But if we will be politic to spare with Saul (evil
men) the Lord in his wrath will make us persecute good men (for Saul not
punishing Agag, did afterward persecute David:) wherefore our righteous souls
must be grieved with the iniquities of our times, and we must show our zeal in
religion by a hatred of lies, howsoever they be cloaked with the histrionicall
visard of civil honesty. For as it is dangerous to adventure our selves to be
^ainted with the gross air of the pestilence: so must we care and make
conscience, to keep our selves from all contagion of pe^ilous untruths.

The second reason as we said, is the circumstance of the time, both in that
his own person was contemned, as port. 14. 6. The wicked have laid a snare for
me, but I swarued not from thy precepts. As also in that the word of God was so
slenderly regarded and almost brought unto utter contempt, as in port. 16.
verse. 6. It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have destroyed thy law.

For the first how wonderfully does it commend his love to the word, that when
they made fair profers, no gain could get him; when they began to threaten
him, no terror could dismay him; when they circumuented him with preferments,
no pleasure could prevail with him, no promise could win him? For the
second, they oppressed him with injuries, they undermined him with benefits,
they supplanted him with politic slanders, and set fair faces on their vile
causes, and yet none of these did so prevail, that either their violence could
enforce him, nor their liberality allure him, nor their policies and subtle
cauilling beguile him one whit, to be drawn from the true worship of God,
which was an infallible token, that unfeignedly he loved the law. O singular
trial, that when the law elsewhere had no entertainment, yet he did defend it
though he was so highly contemned.

Experience does teach us, that the more godliness is oppressed, the less it
is regarded, and that not of the ungodly and wicked ones only, but even of the
very children of God, as well by calling, as by election. David Psalm. 73. says
of himself, that he fretted to see the prosperity of the wicked: Job,
Jeremy, Ab^uck in times past, and many of the Saints of God in our times are
greatly troubled and grieved, to see how it goes with the wicked, and fares
with the godly. This then is a sure token of his love to Gods word, even then
to esteem it, when of the times it was hated: neither is this any true trial
or argument of the love of Gods word, to favor it whilst others do favor
it, but when all formal liking of it begins to decay, then in truth and
constancy to profess it, argues true and constant love of it. And it must
not be strange unto us, that the Church is often vexed with wicked heresies,
because it is the infinite justice of God, when men with fear and love, do
not obey the truth in a good conscience, whereby they diminish the glorious
credit of the children of God, to give them over to some horrible heresy. At
what time we may see both the grace of God in giving strength to his to believe
even in the midst of heresies, as also the faith of his children even then to
be constant when others revolt from the truth. As to continue in our former
example of David.

First he was taunted, when it was said, who is this man? is it not the son
of Ishai? Then being betrothed and contracted to the eldest daughter of Saul,
he was deluded and deprived of her. Afterward Saul provoked him with open
violence, how beit still he perseuered in the love of Gods truth.

To apply this to our selves, if a man now a days ^e called a precisian, or
termed by the name of a Puritan, and that some worldlings thus reason with
him: What will you become Application.
a Precisian? will you give over and forsake your friends? and commit your self
to their 1
company, who are not able to prefer, pleasure, nor profit you? will you now
enter so hard a life? and suffer so odious a name? Does it not come to pass,
that this first blast blows us away? Other some can be content to give their
names to God, but when they can take 2
no course to get living and preferment, then they begin to shrink. These men
making godliness a gain, will so long worship God, as they may get profit by
it. But we must neither let contempt abash us, nonbenefits allure us, and when
all law is against us, and of all we shall be trodden under foot, when we
shall be compassed with so many evils that these temptations will come upon us,
it is better for you to give over, than thus to run on, and to put your self
in danger: that which has been in you, was but a melancholic humor, if you
give place to such affections, you may hurt your self: when all these things
shall meet with us, we must show our love by resisting them and cleaving to
Gods law. If we be not Ieroboams, yet we may be Rehoboams; Jeroboam he set up
Calves; R^^o^o^^ a Jeroboam and Rehoboa^ how like one another.
while determined to keep the laws of the Lord, but afterward he fell to
(...) exercise. This now is a singular trial of his love, who says of
himself for our instruction, I have bin had in derision, and the bands of the
wicked have robbed m^^e, etc. They have fo^^ged lies and laid snares for me,
yet do I not forsake thy law. So that no injuries could weary him, no
contempt discourage him, no benefits allure him, no subtle dangers make him
to quail in despair: his faith was so sound in Gods word, and his love so
pure in an whole heart. One thing we have omitted in the former reason which
here must not be left out. If we be espoused to Christ in the Gospel, we are
assured that he will keep us from falling, or if we fall he will save us from
lying in our sins.

But leaving this, let us come to the third reason, which was the great
felicity, which he 3
felt in the word, and the sorrow, which he felt in the contrary. For the first
he preferred the The third argument of our love to God.
word: 1. Before all profit, as port. 16. 7. I love thy commandments above
gold, ye^ above fine gold. 2. Before all pleasures, as port. 13. 7. How sweet
are thy promises to my mouth? yea more than honey unto my mouth. 3. Before
glory as* port. 8. 1. O Lord thou art my portion, I have determined to keep
thy law. And portion 14. 7. Thy testimonies have I taken as my heritage for
ever, for they are the joy of my heart. Now, because in a spoil all these
things do meet together, ^ Gods word yields most profit, pleasure, and glory.
^.

Seeing then we are given to love our selves* and to make (...) a gain, or
rather love the word for gain, pleasure, and vain glory, we shall see how
great a thing it is, to love the word for it own sake, that is, because it is
the word of God* But many will urge the use of lawful things and say, Why may
I not eat this mea^e? may I not wear this fashion? may I not put on such
apparel? they be lawful the^^ natures* I answer, that Note this of liberty.
they be indeed lawful in themselves, and while the^^^ are nakedly
considered, and as they are unclothed of other circumstances; yet we are to a
(...), with meditating on things convenient, least we turn the liberty of the
Spirit to a (...) of the flesh. See here how we love pleasures more than the
word. Some are godly so long as they can get gain by their godliness, who
quickly can be cold, when they have gotten greater preferment in the Church of
God. They forget that which we must remember, that we must grow in zeal, in
love, in affection, and indiligence, as we ^^rease in outward things, that we
may show our selves not so much to seek after profit as after a better life,
not vain pleasure, but pleasure of the mind, not carnal glory out the hope
of Gods kingdom.

On the other side, we are to see how his afflictions grew, when he saw the
neglect or contempt of the law in others: for his eyes failed, his heart was
(...), his spirit panted, his flesh parched away. Thus, whilst he measured
himself by the word how his inward man ebbed and flowed in a delight of the
word, his joy increased, and decreased with the estate of the mind, insomuch
that he desired for no other end to live, than to feel the comfort of Gods
promises, and his affections governed by the word of God. For he says, portion
3. 1. Be beneficial unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.
Wherein he agrees with a saying of Paul, Galath. 2. 20. I live, yet not I now,
but Christ lives in me. But I fear that I The natural man counts all
spiritual things as paradoxes. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
speak mysteries and paradoxes unto a great many* who yet are but natural
men, and may learn these things of simple men in the country. Well let us
learn if we cannot bring forth 100 fold, yet let us bring forth 60 fold;
if not so much yet at the least 30 fold; unless we be either stony ground,
who for want of root, in time of tribulation and persecution will be offended;
or as the thornie ground, being choked with worldly cares; or as trampled
ground, which is trodden of all men. And here is one thing to be noted more
notable, that is, he was not grieved for himself alone, but eue^ for others,
which made no conscience of Gods word, was he grievously vexed and tormented,
as portio 7. 5. Fear is come To lament the want of others
upon me for the wicked, which forsake thy law. And portio 17. 8. Mine eyes
gush out with rivers of water, because they keep not thy law. And in portio
18. 3. My zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words. He was not only grieved for his own incredulity, but for the
incredulity of others; he lamented not only his own wants; but also the
wants of others; his glory was then chiefest, when the word was glorified; his
grief, when the word sustained wrong, did most abound. Like zeal was in Paul,
who cared not for his own bonds, so the word of God might be free: neither did
he care how much he did suffer for the Gospels sake, which he preached, so
others might thereby ^e confirmed.

Now if we shall lay this with due examination of our own hearts to our
several lives, Application. Many grieve for their own sins, which are not
grieved for the sins of others.
we shall see many grieved for their own sins, which are not grieved for the
sins of others. But if we could be grieved both for our selves and for
others, it were an infallible token, that we sought not our selves, but Gods
word* Many likewise are comforted, when they find Gods glory set forth in
themselves, who cannot so praise God when they see it in others.

Many indeed (as Io^ witnesses) can declare ^loquently against the sins of
others, yet we see few weep and lame it for them, as he did* But above all*
notable is that place of the Spirit of God to stir us ^^^ to this practice,
which is Ezech. 9. where a man is mentioned with a writers in^khorne by his
side, which is sent of the Lord to go through the midst of Jerusalem, and to
save from the destroying and revenging Angel (which was to come) all them that
mourned and cried for the abominations, which were done in the city. In which
place* by marking the children of God unto salvation, is showed the manner of
the^, to w^^* to mourn, and c^ie out against the wickedness of the people,
which they see committed against Gods glory. Paul (1. Cor. 5.) shows the
Corinthians, that they had rejected and despised the incestuous person, but he
also tells them, that they had not mourned for him: the effect where of is
set down 2. Cor. 7. where the Apostle rejoices, that he had wrought in them a
godly sorrow, not to be repented of. We must therefore learn to lament the
sins of them; with whom we live, and specially of them over whom we have
charge* least in not so doing we be made guilty of the sins of others. Let
us then away with that carnal emulation in the graces of another, and let us
learn to give God the praise of his gifts in others, as though they were
bestowed on our selves. But alas, our corruption is great here in* and is well
set down (in Luke) in the elder brother, who repined at the receiving of his
younger brother into his fathers favor.

Now to draw to the fourth and last reason, which concerns the means used of
the The fourth argument of our love to the word.
Prophet they were these; conference, prayer, praise or thanksgiving, and a
vowing of his obedience to the Lord, whereof I will speak in order, and of the
first: first, I am (says he, port* 8* 7.) a companion of all them that fear
thee, and keep thy precepts. And port. 10. 7. L^^ such ^^ fear thee* turn
unto me, and they that know thy testimonies, that I may both ** Cor* 1* 3* 4*
Rom* 1* 1^* How sweet and comfortable the (...) is of Gods children.
impart my feelings and comforts unto others, and that they may strengthen me
with their gifts: such was his humility* that notwithstanding his high
calling, he desired even to profit by others. In natural things experience
does teach us, that young men cannot satisfy themselves with a private use of
their exercise, but if any one have invented a pleasant conceit, he cannot be
quiet until he have joined himself with others therein: such is their love to
their carnal devices. Which thing if it be so usual in earthly things, how
much more is it requisite in heavenly things? Many will study for a trade and
method by themselves, whereof none shall be partakers, but they will still be
the fathers of it: but it was not so in David* but whatsoever he had, he would
teach it others, and whatsoever good thing he Conference and admonition. Rom*
1* 12. 13* Heb 3* 12. ^^ Iud. ver. 22* 23*
heard* he would learn it. He had not this spirit, to say, Tush, I have
enough, I know many things, I need not to confer. Paul thanketh the Romans,
and protests himself a debtor unto them, for their communicating of
spiritual things unto him. Wherefore let us exhortione another, where one
another, admonish one another, and watch one over another for good* and suffer
our selves to be exhorted to perseverance, to be whetted for our duties, and
to be admonished of our infirmities, and let us be grieved that we have made
so little exchange of our talents, to bring so small increase to the Lord.

The second mean is prayer: wherefore he said so often, portion 5. 2. Teach me,
O Lord, the 2
way of thy statutes* etc. and portion 9* 2. Teach me good judgment and
knowledge. Where sometime Prayer.
he delireth to have his judgment enlightened; and sometimes his affections
cleared. Well, was he one that was wiser than Gad and Nathan, and yet had this
affection to grow in the knowledge of wisdom, and shall not we be ashamed,
if we pray not? He felt this joy and delight of the word by measure in him, he
felt sometimes a clean heart, sometimes Note.
an hard heart* sometimes unspeakable joy of mind, sometimes exceeding dulnes
of mind, sometime he seemed to have enjoyed the comforts of Angels, sometimes
no comfort at all* So let us think our selves to be as between light and
darkness, clouds and brightness, sometimes having patience, and sometimes
murmuring, sometime purposing to do good, sometime fainting in bringing them to
pass.

Concerning thanksgiving, which was another of his exercises, it is said, port.
21. 4. Seven 3
times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. Where he
shows, that he Thanksgiving.
used this kind of worship often; which thing with us is far contrary,
because we pray more than we give thanks* The reason is, we are given in
greater measure to feel our wants, which provoke us to prayer, than to see
Gods benefits received, which might move us to thanksgiving*

The next means, by order the fourth, which the man of God uses, is here by
name set down, meditation. But some will say; How comes it to pass, that
among so many and Meditation*
sundry means no mention is made of hearing and reading the word of God? We
answer, that this is a Psalm of experience, and not of knowledge. And he
that seeks for The 119* Ps. i^a Psalm. of experience.
knowledge here will want method: but we must travail with the Prophet to
find the truth so applied to our hearts, as we may show as well our
infirmities, as our excellent graces. Again, because hearing is the sense of
discipline, and many will attend on reading and hearing, which will not bestow
time to confer, to pray, to give thanks, to meditate, or vow their obedience
to the Lord, he comprehends the one in setting down the use of the other. For
if in our reading and hearing for want of meditation we do not profit, we are
as colored in the Sun: wherefore we must admonish, and ^ee admonished; we
must pray, and provoke to pray; we must meditate and often think o^ those
things which we have heard or read.

Indeed knowledge, reading, and hearing are sweet even to a natural man: ^ut
to More attend hearing and reading, than conference and meditation.
confer, to be admonished, to pray, to give thanks, be things hard and
difficult. It may be that some can pray to serve the times, because of the law
which constrained them: but how many shall we find that do it privately, in
truth, and voluntarily? Some read, and they rest in the general rules, not
making any use of it to themselves, and so learn that which is another man's,
not appropriating it to themselves for want of meditation. Whereof it comes
to pass, that we see many make a learned sermon in general precepts, who
when they come to particulars, to comfort those that lie sick, or to raise up
them that are tempted, for want of practice in themselves can say nothing. The
very Heathen A Christians life is the meditation of the law of God, etc.
could grant, and you know who speak it, that a m^^s life was a cogitation of
death. But because we can meditate of death, for that we join with it the hope
of immortality, I say, that a Christian man's life may well besaide to be a
meditation of the law of God* and how he shall stand before Gods judgment
seat. Which meditation in this man of God shows, that even from the heart he
loves the law of God. If we examine our selves, we shall find our tongues to
cleave to our teeth, and to the roof of our mouths* whereby we see, that we
Affections dead.
cannot say this with the prophet, that from the abundance of the heart our
mouth speaks For we sinde by practice, that we hear, read, and sing so
coldly, as we show, that our affections are almost dead within us.

There follows in the end of the verse, continually. We know by proof of
daily experience, that whatsoever we love, of that we continually think. And
in that this quality or Meditation must be con^^^^^d. Psalm. 1. 2.
circumstance is joined with meditation we are taught, that though we must
read, hear, confer, pray, and give thanks often, yet we must meditate
continually. For as it is absurd to say, that a man should be continually
reading, or conferring; so we must know, that it is requisite in all these
things to examine our selves by meditation, whether we read profitably,
confer effectually, or pray understandingly.

That we now have this continual meditation, we must pray that we may have a
love to the word. Love indeed were of it self eloquent enough, if we had it in
any good measure; Meditation must (...) or on the word.
but to stir up this love, we must use many reasons about the nature of the
word, how it is mystical, pure, and eternal; which when we see in truth, we
shall love the word.

Where he says, in it is my meditation, we must understand, that it was no
rouing meditation, but that it was circumscribed within the compass of the law
of God. Now to our profit, let us learn to meditate according to the law of
the Lord, and so, as under the generals we may touch the particulars, to make
the use of them in our selves. Thus we have seen the cause of this effect, to
be love. For as the rich men of this world meditate of gathering goods,
natural lovers of their love, and ambitious men of their preferments; so the
man of God having no greater riches, pleasure nor glory, than in the word,
makes it his whole delight and study. For where we love, thither love does
easily draw our affections with it.

We have heard why mention is made only of meditation, namely, because it is
the life We will always think and meditate of the things we love.
of all the other means, and makes them more fruitful; and why his
meditation was married to the law, even because it excludes all vain
collections, which proceed of general knowledge. Besides, therefore is
meditation named, because it most agrees with the nature of love. For though
we cannot always be reading, hearing, or talking of those things which we
^^^^, we may always think and meditate of them. Now what is the cause, that
(...) is preached, and ^o little is practiced, but because we use so little
conference, prayer* and meditation? The remedy hereof is, to know what a
sin this is, and that among all (...) in the day of trouble, none so great to
torment our consciences, as that we have tested in a general (...), and ^^^^ng
of the word, without applying of it to our several practices by meditation. He
has showed now his love: in the verses following he sets down the fruit
of his love. For as he showed, that the word of God is of such nature, that
above all other things i^ is eternal: so also he shows, that the effects
thereof are eternal. And whereas men desire nothing more, than that wisdom
whereby they may excel their enemies in policy, their teachers in doctrine,
and the aged in counsel, he declares that he made this choice, to set his
love on Gods word, which performs all these things. As love then is the
mother that breeds meditation, and meditation is the nurse to cherish this
love: so here, because the argument of the effect does most with men prevail,
he shows the mighty power and operation of the word of God. What is the
reason why men do not r^st and stay themselves wholly on Gods law? Surely,
because they are not persuaded, that there is such excellent wisdom in the
same. We see then, that we must learn for the generals, to be wise in
sobriety, and according to the word of God, knowing that the Scriptures are
sufficient to touch, to improve, and correct, and to instruct i^
righteousness, that the man of ^^^^ may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works, 2. Tim. 3. The Wiseman counsaileth us, Eecles. 7. 18. that we
should not ^^^ just euermuch, ^^ make our selves ouerwise, least web: (...).
Where he shows, that this is the way to bring blockishnes, to make our selves
wiser than God, and to deuile to become more just than the word prescribes us.
What is the cause why so many are so foolish in their death, when they have
ouerreached themselves, as Achitophel, Surely because the Lord does in^^uate
them, whilst they would be wiser than the Lord, so that their wisdom is (...)
into childishnes, and their policy comes to nothing. What is the cause that
we are no more occupied Wherefore so many neglect the word.
in the reading and hearing of the word? Doubtless because it is a base and
simple thing in our iudgemen^^ and contains not so high mysteries in it, as
the Prophet here sets down by proof in his own person. Neither must we
think, that as it were with a trumpet he does here blow and sound forth his
own praise, but rather by his example is desirous to stir others up.

Verse 98. By thy commandments thou have made me wiser than mine enemies: for
they are ^uer with me.
THe first of the particular effects, is contained in these words: By thy
commandments thou have made me wiser than mine enemies. We see how men now
adays strain their wits to match their enemies in policies and devices, but
few think on this sound means, whereby we shall surely prevail against them.
Now if it be so that whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction and
comfort, in making mention of the means, the Prophet of the Lord does teach
us, that it was no extraordinary work of the Lord proper to him, but a means
appointed of God for us all to follow. Whereby he teaches us, that God will
bless us to attain to the like wisdom, if we will endeavor to use the like
means.

To apply this to our profit, we must gather the particular out of the
general doctrine Application.
on this manner: whosoever shall have the commandments of God ever with him,
he shall be wiser then his enemies, than his teachers, than the ancient: but
David did so, or we do so: therefore David and we shall find this wisdom.
But some man will say, Experience teaches us a clean contrary doctrine, that
Gods children are not so wise in Objection. Answer.
their light, as the children of this world are in their generation. I answer:
That it is true, experience proves, and our Savior Christ teaches, but this
I add, that the experience comes from our small sight of the word, and not
for any want of the word it self, when Gods children have it on their side.
And our Savior Christ his speech tends rather to show what it is, through
our corruption, than what it ought to be; so that justly he uses it to our
shame. Indeed civil wisdom which choketh in them all temptations, Carnal
security.
with worldly delights, having the devil to be their school master, does
work in them a contentation of mind, while for a season, they smother, as
they think, the judgments of God breathing upon them. And because on the
contarie, the spirits of Gods children are occupied in heavenly things, yet
often the flesh so labors against the spirit, that whilst they would be
wiser than the Lord, or would use any indirect means against their enemies, or
in using good means, fail in prayer, or, in not staying themselves on Gods
providence, and appointed time of deliverance, it comes to pass that they
are overcome. How enemies are overcome.
But whilst they renounce themselves, and their own wisdom, and crave
counsel of God in his word, and the direction of his Spirit by prayer,
whilst they use good means in a good cause, and keeping a good conscience,
wait on the hand of the Lord, they shall be sure to have the overthrow of
their enemies. Proof does teach us that a silly soul in the Country, which
walks in the ways of the Lord, will soon discover the shifting policies
of a worldly learned man, brought up in the University; because the wrath of
the Lord hangs over the one, and his merciful spirit watches over the
other: But so long as we will shoot with Satan in his own bow, and repel
policy with policy, what Not! to shoot with the devil in his own bow.
folly shall be found in us? though we can howl loftily with the wolf, and
deal cunningly with the Grecians, when as the Lord will never suffer a good
cause to be maintained by evil means? Some of us seek the word, but in
seeking it we rest in our own good meaning, not humbling our selves before the
Lord; but our wisdom herein must come from the spirit. For we can no more by
the eye of reason, see the light of the word, then Howlets look upon the
bright Sun. Wherefore the Lord will have us in all controversies with our
adversaries, to depend on him, and to know, that the cause must not depend on
our own shoulders, then must we by faith in the bloodshedding of Christ,
believe that our sins, neither new nor old, shall hinder the helping hand of
the Lord. We must trust on Gods providence and promises, and stay our selves by
prayer on his wisdom, if we look to be wiser than our adversaries.

An excellent example hereof we have to prove, that secret sins not repented
of, may Secret sins not repented of.
hinder the Lords dealing with us against our enemies. We read that after that
filthy incest mentioned in Judge. 17. which made the Leuite (whose wife was
abused) to cut her in twelve pieces, and send her through all the parts of
Israel; there was war between the Beniamites and Israel, and the Beniamites
being but few in number, and maintaining an evil cause, in two battles
overcame the Israelites, until at length they humbled themselves with prayer
and fasting, and repented of that evil which was amongst them: so that in the
third assault, the Lord gave his people strength mightily to prevail against
their enemies. So we may have a good cause, and use good means, and yet for
want of reconciling our selves to God for some sin new or old, we may suffer
the overthrow. If then our cause be Note.
good, we must use good means, faith in Christ, trust in his providence, and
staying our selves on his wisdom. Do we not see by experience, how the
Martyrs of God humbling How to prosper in a good cause.
themselves on this manner, prevailed in mighty power against their accusers?
Deuteronomy. 4. Moses shows, that the enemies of God were driven to confess, that
only Gods people were wise, even because God gave them good laws. This was it
that made Joseph wiser than his brethren, Moses wiser than the Egyptians, and
Daniel than all the Magicians of Babylon, and David than all his politic
enemies.

Mark (I pray you) all figurative, hyperbolicall and dark speeches, the
Metaphors and Parables, which are in the word of God, and you shall find, that
they were learned people to whom the books were written, and had attained that
measure of wisdom and knowledge, which in our time none can understand, but
they which are brought up in learning: which thing we may also observe in them,
of whom the Histories of the book of God are written, and yet who were more
blockish then the Jews, after they had transgressed so obstinately the law of
the Lord?

But shall we understand this, as though the children of God were in every
particular How far the faithful are said to be wise.
action wiser then the wicked ones? No, but only in those things, and then,
wherein and when they used this wisdom of the Spirit, and gave themselves and
their causes to be governed according to Gods word. Look on David, who though
he was wise, so long as he kept a good conscience, yet harkening to policy,
and not willing to stay himself on the simplicity of Gods word, how suddenly
was he overcome, and yielded so far, that he dissembled even to fight
against Gods enemies? Whiles he was in his fetching policies, did not the Lord
send enemies the instruments of destruction to his wife and children? Whilst
he would rest on God he was wise, but when he would number his people, he was
confounded. What did his policy in adultery prevail, to disguise in such
sort Vria^, to make him drunken, to set him in the forefront of the battle,
was he not much foiled? Solomon, who whilst he walked before the Lord, was
wiser than his father David, when he gave himself to many wives, and began to
be secure, and to run into gross Idolatry, was greatly displeasing in the
sight of the Lord. Iehosaphat so long as he obeyed the Lord, Iehosaphat
punished in his posterity.
was feared, but when in policy he joined himself in affinity to a wicked
King, he was almost confounded, and surely had been punished, had he not in
repentance turned, and humbled himself before the Lord, whose policy also in
joining his ships with the ships of Ahaziah, was afterward punished in his
posterity.

Verse. 99. I have had more understanding than my teachers, for thy testimonies
are my meditation.
IN the second particular effect, the Prophet says, he did excel his
teachers, which he does not to brag or boast of himself, but commending the
free graces of God, he stirs up himself to make other men not only to
content themselves, with a care of hearing the word, but also to make
conscience of meditation. This then is le^t of the Spirit of God for our
comfort, in that we may find the like fruit, using by prayer the like means;
so that if we bring not forth an hundredth fold, yet threescore, or at the least
thirty fold, according to Gods wisdom.

True it is, that the scholar often becomes better learned than the teacher,
which is a singular blessing of God, that the learned man should ascribe
nothing to himself, and to give God the glory, he enlighteneth where he
thinks meet, and increases when he sees it good. Now we may see this by
experience even in heathen men. Aristotle was wiser than his Master Plato, in
whom this blessing of God appeared, in that they joined study and meditation
with their learning. In Law and Physic they are most frequented, who with
much reading have used much musing and practicing. None either in peace or
war Meditation.
have ever governed excellently, but they were great musers, and did often
sequester themselves from company, then more freely to attend on meditation.
This doctrine shall be taught in a contrary thing. We know there is a special
kind of musing, whereby Satan does often teach and communicate things to many
in greater measure, than they can receive by all the books in the world; so
also there is a special meditating, whereby the spirit of God communicates to
us more heavenly things than either we hear or read. As when Satan will
polish a man's wit to any evil, he will have him to wait on him: so God would
have us to fill our judgments in the particular meditation of things heard, to
see how all circumstances hold and fail. This is then the wit which experience
confirms, that when we are taught any thing, which by reason is conceived,
we can add, if this be true, then that is false; if it holds in the
lesser, then it holds in the greater. On this sort Note.
let any man hear with meditation, he shall find something by the general
rule heard: having the Spirit of God for his teacher, which the Preacher had
not, or saw not, or seeing expressed not. Do they then most profit, who after
hearing do meditate, and see more by the ministry of the Spirit, than by the
ministry of the Pastor? Let us mark it then, by the blessing of God upon it,
and let us note the contrary by Gods curse upon it. What is the cause that
there is so little profit by the ordinary ministry of the word, and so great
fruits arise, where it is more seldom used; but because meditation is the
life of learning, and the death of things conceived is the want of musing?

Man's mind is infinite, which nothing can satisfy but God or the devil; and
continually The ^inde of man.
rolleth either in good or ill. In that he adds, thy testimonies are my
meditation, we must note, that to have a sound meditation, we must be
circumscribed within the limits of the word, otherwise it will be erroneous;
but being joined with knowledge, it refineth our knowledge, and teaches the
use of it. If Philosophers saw that a man's life was a meditation of death,
whereby as they abstained from many pleasures, they became nevertheless very
vainglorious, yet could they not attain to any sound comfort, because they
were destitute of the hope of a better life. But Gods children meditating on
the last judgment day make a conscience of many things past, pare away many
present corruptions, and sigh for the remembering of their poisoned temptations
to come. How godly people have excelled their teachers, it needs not long
proof out of the Scriptures.

Moses excelled all the learned men in Egypt, Daniel surpassed all the
Magicians in Babylon, Scholars wiser tha^ their teacher.
Paul excelled his teacher Gamaliel, because though the Egyptians were learned,
and the Babylonians profound; yet Moses and Daniel refined their knowledge
(humane) with the study of Gods word. And Paul being brought up in the
doctrine of the Jews under Gamaliel, after he came to meditate on the Gospel
of Christ, excelled not only his teachers, but ouer-reached all other of the
Apostles, in heavenly knowledge. We may then blush at the great knowledge in
times past, but herein we may be comforted, because they as they were wise,
were also wicked: but we may be as wise using their means, and more godly
meditating on the word, which cutteth off all errors in doctrine, and
corruptions of life. Again, Elie brought up Samuel, who proved wiser than Elie
by his continual meditation. Solomon excelled David by study and prayer,
until he forgetting himself, gave himself to women. Paul was taught of
Ananias the principles of religion, but he excelled him as far in the learning
of the Spirit, as he surpassed Gamaliel in the doctrine of the Jews.

Let us mark then the blessings of spiritual meditations, which make us fit
in wisdom to admonish, and in the spirit of consolation to comfort. For in my
judgment, their wisdom which depend on general rules, is in their books,
and must be fetched from their teachers; but meditations may well be called a
ready mother of knowledge, and a nursing mother of wisdom.

If men then will whet their wits, and help their memories, they must use
meditation, because when Gods word has taught us, we shall never need to
consult with our book, nor take advice of our teacher.

Verse. 100. I understood more than the ancient, because I kept thy precepts.
IT follows: I understood more than the ancient, etc. As we have heard of the
glorious effects of the word in this man of God, how he excelled his foes in
policy, and his teachers in wisdom: so now he shows, how he went before
his elders in prudence and understanding. He was wiser than his enemies. Why?
because in all his attempts, deliberated not with flesh and blood, but asked
counsel of the Lord, by the word and by prayer. He excelled his teachers in
good learning: wherefore? because he contented not himself Note.
to stay on the naked rules by them delivered, but further labored with his
conscience, to make the use of them profitable to himself. He ouer-reached his
ancients: Why? because he ever had a special care to keep a true faith, and a
good conscience, whereof many had made shipwreck. Whereof then comes it to
pass, that the scholar is often better than his master? comes it not from
hence, because the Lord works according to his will, and bestows like
effects where like means are used, blesses and curses, depresseth and
raises up, according to the using, and not using of necessary means? By
meditation the judgment of the godly is refined, by musing the wicked grow by
high degrees The devil helps the wicked in their meditations.
to the mystery of iniquity. For as they be much given to this kind of
occupying their minds: so Satan does most thereby convey himself into them,
putting such platformes and devices into their head, that otherwise were
wonderful to come into a mortal man's mind. So then they, that do not rest
in hearing and reading, but endeavor by meditation to find and draw out an use
of it in themselves, wonderfully do profit, and mightily excel others. Let us
not rest in our ouersights, but stir up and provoke our affections to take a
new view of those things which we have heard, whereby we may gather more unto
our selves, than that which we have heard. And why? Man is a creature
reasonable, and by the light of nature can thus reason with himself; if this
be true, then the contrary is false; if it holds in the greater, then it
holds in the lesser. If this good thing has good effects, then tho contrary
evil has ill issues. See how knowledge by meditation does increase. Again,
because every member of Christ is anointed with knowledge, according to that
measure which the Spirit works, as well the hearer as the speaker may profit
by using the means. For by meditation the judgment is refined, the wit
helped, the memory strengthened, and stirs up affections, as thus: Is this
good? I will do it: Is this the obedience rewarded? I will obey it: Is this
forbidden? I will avoid it: Is this threatened with so fearful judgments? I
quake and tremble to think of it. By the help of this, many will speak on a
sudden, because they speak out of the experience of their own consciences,
when the learning of others is in their teachers head, or else in their book.
It is then the righteous judgment of God, that we are so unapt to practice,
wanting dexterity of wit, bereaved of sound judgment, besides many other
punishments, due to the contempt of Gods word, when our own conscience shall
accuse us, saying: This good thou might have had, this comfort thou might
have enjoyed, had thou meditated on the word.

There remains the third effect, which is in these words, I am wiser than the
ancient, etc. Oh notable wisdom! that made him wiser than gray hairs, which
are of longer experience. He does not compare himself with dotish old men, but
the wise Ancients, in whom though not the quicknes of wit, yet the pith and
marrow of knowledge remains. Neither does he speak this so much to praise
himself, as to stir up others. If then we shall see a comely old man,
speaking law on the bench, and desire to hear some wise experience, the man of
God here tells us the way, how before those times we may attain unto it. And
through the blessing of God on those means, the graces of God shall be greater
in young years, if we labor for knowledge, and with knowledge join
conscience, and with conscience practice. For the high way to knowledge is to
meditate with our knowledge, and to tremble in our hearts, at the majesty of
the word, not ceasing to labor with our selves, until by musing we have felt
some comfort. Here of it proves, that they which have heard the word of God
but a year, have more profited tha^ they which have heard it six years. For
unto him that has, more shall be given, and from him that has not, even that
which he has shall be taken from him. If we observe it, we shall find
profane Protestants, who now have seen three Governments, which both are
ignorant in knowledge, Carnal Protestants.
and have gotten many placards and curtains for their gross sins. This may
teach us to see into Gods judgment, who punishes so severely the decay of
faith; as also the mercy of God toward them, that lay up in their hearts, the
meditation; and in their lives, the practice of that which they have heard. I
see no more fearful Fearful tokens of public calamities. Most read, not
the wisest men.
tokens of the desolations of our times, than that men promising whole worlds
unto themselves, seek so much for themselves, that they neither desire Gods
glory, nor the Churches profit.

A man may talk with a great Reader, and there be some good things in him, but
talk with an exercised mind, and you shall find in him far greater, and
more excellent wisdom. Why do not the old Protestants grow in knowledge, as
they grow in age? but because they do not use to meditate. Many men seemed to
have good gifts, great knowledge and dexterity of wit, who now are destitute
and barren of all these heavenly graces. What is the cause? surely the want of
faith, and of a good conscience, does make us fail Want of faith and of a good
conscience, make many barren in good things. Youth spent in vanity, commonly
ends oldage in profaneness.
in many good things: or else the cause may be some secret sin not repented of,
why there is such store of ill, and such barrennes of good things. So that the
Lord strikes many with such folly, that they which sometimes tasted of the
good graces of God, are now become dull heads. Another reason, why old men do
not grow in knowledge, is, because the more they have, the more they do
desire. Many are so vain and light, that a man shall as soon bring an hog
from his haunt, as them from their delights: so the Lord does make them end
their age and life in worldlines, which spend their lives and youths in
vanities. If we see one given to vanity, what say we? Oh, there is a witty
young man: if we see one given to worldlines, what say we? Oh, there is a jolly
thriuing fellow: and thus for want of a sanctified wit, and sight, we remain
fools and unthrifts in spiritual things.

But it stands with the righteous judgment of God, that they should be
deprived of the understanding of heavenly things, which so greedily turn al
their wits to worldlines. On the contrary, where we make conscience to
meditate, we grow from a small grain of knowledge to an whole field of
understanding. For we see many using their wits to worldliness, die in folly,
because the Lord recompenceth the vanity of their youth with ignorance in
their age. So it is the mercy of God, to give them comfort of conscience in
their death, which have had care of his word in their life. Now, we see,
because some men Good death.
think so basely of the word of God, how the Prophet has commended it by the
effects, found by experience in himself.

Again he shows, that this was not in him, by any particular prerogative of
Gods spirit, (although the spirit wrought wonderfully in him) but that it earne
by using the m^^^^s of the word. Teaching us that as he was wiser than his
enemies, because in all pe^ils ^^ asked counsel of the word: wiser than his
teachers, in that he rested not in their vniu^^s (...)* but by meditation did
appropriate them to himself: and wiser than the An^^^^ because he learned as
well to line according to the word, as to love it: so we also vs^^g Note.
^^^ (...), shall find the like effects, though not in like measure. By which
effects we (...)out these means, we become foolish, dol^^ish and blockish.
The word of God (...) a ^^easure, that if such an holy thing be cast to swine,
I do not dou^^^ (...) see our God will execute his heavy vengeance and
judgments. Whereof now (...) it to pass, that w^^^^^ young men, die old
fools, empty of Gods grace ^f (...) youth were well brought up of their
parents, (as Iohaz under I^hoiada) Old doting and ^arnail Protestants.
who also whil^st they did look into their former life and repent, spoke very
effectually aginst sin, but in their age, have not so much knowledge as before?
but because they continue not in the faith, and in a good conscience. It were
better to preach to one that never heard of Jesus Christ, than to such an old
Protestant, because the one is thankful, the other is unthankful. Tell me O
man, I speak unto thy conscience, when thine eye did see into the word, when
thine ear did hear it; when thou did look into thine own conscience,
when thou feltest sweetness in Gods promises, when thou did tremble with
sear of Gods judgments, and did delight in the ways of the Lord: Oh, how
quiet was thy conscience? what comfort did thou find in thy mind? Oh, how
whole an heart was in thee? And on the contrary, when neither Gods promises
were sweet, nor his judgments fearful, nor his ways pleasant unto thee,
oh, how cold was thy zeal? how weak was thy conscience? how feeble was thy
heart in good things? We shall see some now adays, and that many, being but
private men, speak with greater knowledge and conscience, than a Preacher. Why
may a Preacher spend his breath, his strength, and his life in preaching, and
so small profiting comes of it? even because he preached well, and practices
ill. Wherefore we see here how necessarily, upon the foresaid effects, the
Prophet pronounced as follows.

Verse 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep
thy word.
SEeing the Lord will put much into their hands, who handle a little well, we
must express our knowledge by life, and our profession by practice. If a man
would consider, how fearfully the Lord has made him, how wonderfully he has
redeemed him, with what power he has converted him, should he spend his youth
in vanity, or his age in worldliness, Youth blessed of God.
and so become deprived of all Gods graces in death? Look into the former
times: Joseph being but seventeen years old, was wiser than all his brethren:
young Samuel was wiser than old Ely: Moses than the Egyptians: David than
Saul: Solomon was wiser in his youth, than the gray hairs: Daniel, Azariah,
Mishel, wiser than all the Astrologians, Chaldeans, and Magicians: Timothy
being but young, was preferred to the Euangelistship: Paul wiser than all the
Apostles. Behold our age, how mercifully the Lord has blessed many young men;
and why are ancient men now so barren of knowledge? even because they are
barren in a good conscience.

There was in time past less knowledge, more practice, less science, more
conscience, less understanding, more wisdom; but now there is more
knowledge, and less practice, To keep the word in a good conscience, brings a
man to wisdom.
because men labor not to keep the word of God in a good conscience. When we
shall see therefore heretics grow wiser then Preachers, Idolaters wiser then
true Professors, some young impes of Satan, wiser then old Ancients in the
house of God; we must know, they are made so foolish, either because they are
not of a good conscience, or lie in some secret sin.

Would it not grieve a good (...) to labor many Winters and Summers, and in
the end to find no Ha^uest? what (...) full thing, think you, would it then
be to a Minister, after he has long travailed to ^^^^ no fruit? The Lord
undoubtedly will punish such fruitless Professors, with hardness of heart, i^
they will not hear with care, that care may cause prayer, that prayer may
bring forth meditation, and meditation may have in fruit in godliness, and
practice in perseverance.

In this verse then, the Prophet declares, that as before he used the right
means to godliness, Two special things to attain true godliness.
and therewithal had the proof of good effects: so now he had power from God,
to resist all lets, hindrances, and encombrances thereunto. Whereby he
teaches us, that these two things especially make to attain true godliness;
the one, to use good means thereto; the other, to avoid carefully all
occasions which may hinder us from the same. Neither must we think that all
these things can be done presently: for if Rome was not built all in one day,
who would think Jerusalem should be built in one day? Surely the necessity
True godliness, ^ow hardly come by.
of this practice is such that unless men make covenants with themselves, and
bind themselves as it were in body and soul to avoid occasions of evil, they
shall never attain to true godliness. Many will confess, that they ought and
will learn the way to holiness of life; but in the mean time, because they
will not forsake their evil ways, they fail in their purpose. To the bettter
understanding of the Prophet, we must understand, that evil ways are in two
things considered, either as they be evil in their own natures, or as they
Evil wa^es, how many ways considered.
be evil by circumstance: the first, all men will confess to be avoided, as
full, concupisce^ce, wrath, murder, malice, and such like: and yet the cause
why many men are less careful in holy things, is, because they make no
conscience to stay evil things, no^ to vnburde^ themselves of all worldly
delights. But what is the cause that thou can not overcome worldlines and
vanity? thou do not consider that thy reason is corrupt, and that if thou
fightest not against thy corrupt reason, thou can not avoid corrupt
affections. If a man would fight against Ambition, he must not first fight
against the thing it self, but against his own Ambition, how every sin n^r
reaso^eth Strive against reason.
reason leaving him there unto, which on this manner persuades him. If I may
attain to such dignity, I shall not become so much subject to others, but
others shall submit themselves to me: I shall purchase to my self credit,
countenance, and authority, to pleasure my friends, and withstand mine
enemies. Thus we see why we cannot ouer-wrastle the vanities of this life,
because we strive not aright. Now likewise, how are we so enabled to forsake
our worldlines, even because we do not depend on Gods providence. Then the way
to fight against covetousness, is to fight against the distrust of Gods
prouidene, and want Covetousness, how to overcome it.
of belief in the word of God, in that for too much love of this world, and
too little love of the word, they do not divide their times, that sometimes
they may give themselves to prayer, to reading, to conferring of the word. And
how do these men reason with themselves? I shall one day be old, and Age is
accompanied with many evils of weakness and impotencie: I must not think then
to live without misery, unless I live now with some care: I must provide for
my wife and children, and not leave them to the broad world; it stands me
therefore in hand, to work, and to take pains, whilst I may. So the pleasure
of this temptation, takes away the sweetness of the meditation of the life
after death. Many Anger.
strive against anger, and yet the more they strive, the more they fret,
because they resist not the beginning of their Anger, which is a secret pride
conceived in their minds. For of pride, (says the Holy Ghost in the book of
the Proverbs) comes contention. Such men have this reason, whereunto they
yield; I have deserved well of their hands; I never did them injury, they
ought to have esteemed otherwise of me, they have abused me greatly; who
therefore can bear such contempt and miuries? Now if we fight in humbleness
Corrupt judgment.
of mind, against this corrupt reason; we shall fight against our Anger. I
suppose a brute beast is not so ill in his kind, as a man in his corrupt
judgment. Then lowliness in taking a fight of our wants in good and heavenly
things, is the thing that will humble us. This is that, which will cut our
combs, when we think too well of our Humility.
selves, when we see too much by our painted sheath, this will make us to pull
down our peacocks tail.

What makes young men so loose, and profit so little by all the admonitions,
which are used to them, but only their corrupt reason, which on this sort
deceives their souls: Why, is not this lawful? do I any body harm in so
doing? do not all others this as well as I? Well, if they will not bid war
against these corrupt imaginations, they shall never prevail against their
evil affections. Whereof is it, that the wisest men become whore-hunters, and
the wisest women often become whores? is it not because the Lord punishes the
pride of reason with filthiness, and whilst they will not fight against
corrupt reason, they cannot get the victory over their filthy affection? they
will thus reason, I have been thus long married, and have no children, my wife
is never quiet, she is a shrew; I will see if I can have children with another,
and have quietness abroad. Bid battle then to reason, if you will fight
against sin, for judgment being convinced, we may the better encombate with
affection. Let us then take heed to those conceits, which are not yet in the
bowels of the brain; for then the devil is brought to infect reason, and so
draws near to corrupt affection. All idle thoughts and discourses coming
but to the mind, must make us afraid, least we become corrupted. And let us
remember, that we must love the The first motions unto sin must be crucified.
Iam. 1. 13.
Lord, with all our hearts and minds, and that he takes up to his glory al our
cogitatio^s. And therefore though we yield not to lust in affection, we must
strike at co^cupisence at the first motion, because our thoughts have not been
wholly with the Lord: We must destroy the brood, whilst it is in hatching, and
wound sin before it have received a perfect shape. For it is better to strive
against sin, whilst reason is on our side; than when both reason and
affection are conspired against us. Now let us examine our selves, and every
man search his own heart, whether we be grieved for the sudden discourses and
glauncing imaginations in us, or rather whether they be not sweet unto us.

What is the reason why we refuse to sin? is it not because we think thus
with our selves; What shall I do this thing? Shall I commit this fact? It is a
beastly thing; it is a dangerous attempt. For there are some which will mislike
to have themselves misled with the temptations of murder, of stealing, or
adultery, and yet will let pass quietly in them rouing imaginations, and idle
cogitations. We see in many after their fall repentance comes: Rouing
imaginations dangerous.
for if in judgment we could before sin prevailed, discern the corruption
of reason deceiving and leading captive our affections, as we do after we
have sinned, we should not so soon be deluded. For we see it commonly comes
to pass, that we repent us, and mislike our selves for some foregoing evil: we
say, Oh what a fool was I, that could not consider of this? where was my wit?
how was I besotted? Convince a natural man of Why so few heretics are
converted.
his reason, and he will be ashamed of his purpose, but so long as he has
reason on his side, he will not yield an inch. Why comes it to pass, that
there are almost no Heretics converted, and so many profane professors
converted? but because the sin of these men is the sin of affection; the
sin of the other is the sin of reason and judgment. Peter of whom we read
in the Gospel, did not so much sin of affection, as in reason* For being put
in mind of Christ his afflictions, how he should go up to Jerusalem, and
suffer many things, and consulting with reason, thought it a very strange
thing, and not agreeing to equity, that such a Prophet and mirror of the
world, and that he that had done so many good things, and had wrought so many
miracles, in that country, never doing any harm to any man, should suffer of
such men. Wherefore when as our Savior Christ saw Peter given so much to
natural reason, in that he cried Master save thy self, he checked him
saying: Come behind me Satan: thou sauorest not of things which are of God,
but of flesh and blood. Upon which occasion least the other Disciples also
should have presumed, our How to labor against our corrupt reason
Savior Christ gave this general doctrine, that if any would become his
Disciples, they should take up their cross and follow him. As also that none
could follow him in truth, unless they denied themselves: where in denying of
our selves, he means nothing else, as the occasion of his foregoing speech
plainly shows, then the forsaking of the reason of the flesh* S. James chap.
1. teaches us, that if we will mortify our affections, we must first use
the means: secondly the steadiness, stillness, and mildness of our mind, in
that we will not dispute with reason against any thing in our regeneration.

I see, that many that will not deliver themselves and their reasons to be
captiuated unto the truth, and refuse to believe the mystical power of the
Gospel, are in time carried away by foul and effectual illusions. For there
are many who hearing in the word of the wonderful creation, redemption, and
preservation of man, and of the matter of the Sacraments, cannot believe them;
yet afterward go to witches, and to be caught of the devil, which Witchcraft.
they cannot, unless they profess and practice an evil faith; so that they
which will no: profit by the truth, will suffer themselves to be deluded.

The other kind of evil in my division was of things not apparently evil. As
in times past we were careful for nothing more, then with liberty of mind to
use the creatures of If outward liberty brings inward bondage, the^ outward
things may defile a man. Wickedness and wantonness.
God: so now adays nothing is less to be taught, because loose liberty and
licentiousnes serve so for the flesh, and we do not by our liberty, serve one
another in love. We can say, outward things are lawful, every man obiecteth
outward things cannot desile a man. I answer, that when outward liberty
brings inward bondage, and the pretense of outward things lawful hinder the
necessary inward things, they be made unlawful. All things are unlawful says
Paul, but I will not be brought under the bondage of any thing. Well howsoever
we pretend this lawful use of outward things, which in their own natures are
the good creatures, to cloak our wantonness withal, let us know that the
wickedness begins in wantonness, and wantonness ends in wickedness,
because it is the way of a dangerous downfall of our souls. For either the
Lord will punish it with present and temporal punishment, or else will cast us
into some great sins hereafter. And though I will not affirm, that every
wanton young man is a mere wicked man, yet I dare affirm that wantonness is
the way to further evil. Besides, this am I sure of, wantonness makes us
unapt to good works, it takes away the comfort of Gods spirit, the joy of the
word, the sweetness of prayer, and of the Sacraments. Again, as it is
certain that wantons pray not, meditate not, nor do any good thing aright,
because that sin desires all evil, and hinders all good things: so if the
word would teach us sin, we would learn it, if it make for our good, we
cannot learn it. And that we may see, to how many evils youth and wantonness
be subject, read Galath. 6. 1. Cor. 6. Eccl. 11. Psalm. 25. Job. 14. Ierem. 21.

So now we know what is the meaning of the man of God in this word, evil way,
that is, that which is occasion of evil. We can say in worldly things, because
the way is dangerous through ditches, thieves, pits or such like; Oh that the
same mind were in us to prevent the perils of our souls! Our Savior Christ
taught us, that if our eye offend us we should pull it out: if our hand or
foot offend us, we should cut them off; the meaning whereof is, that we should
not indeed shred them off, but resraine from the corrupt using of them* and
turn them to a better use. We have showed hitherto, how carefully the man of
God used the means to godliness, and also how careful he was to avoid all
occasions of evil. We must not then think christianity to be so small a
thing, if as lingerers we make such frivolous excuses, that it is hard to be a
good man, we shall surely never come to so high a dignity. We have also
showed, that unless we labor to deny our selves, we shall never buckle our
selves after the graces of God.

Verse. 102. I have not declined from thy judgments, for thou did teach me.
AS if he should say: I have seen and observed, that whosoever did resraine
from evil, they were wiser than their enemies, they became more learned than
their teachers, and proved grauer than the ancient; and that they which did not
resraine were greatly Note.
punished, plagued, and trodden down, and as thou have punished some, so will thou also punish others: wherefore I have not declined from thy judgments.

Was there ever town, people or person, which truly believed in Jesus Christ,
in whose life and death did not appear plentifully Gods mercy? And contrarily,
how have the unbelievers bin given over to hardness of heart, and a reprobate
mind, many plagues, wars, and other judgments of God to them incident? Old
Protestants are now become rustie, because they made no account of Gods word in
their youth. Esau lost his Birthright for a mess of pottage; he sought it
afterward with tears, but could not have it, whose profaneness grew by
pleasures. We see many wanton men to come to fearful ends and silthie
adulteries, who beginning to condemn the word, fell to spending, from spending
to rioting, from riot to adultery, from that to theft, and from stealing to
death. If we will observe godly discipline, we must first learn Gods doctrine:
if we will learn his judgments, we must learn his mercy. We attribute too
much to fortune, to fatal destinies, to charmings and such like; but no man
does look up to the hand of God, wherein we take his name in vain, in not
using aright his judgments.

Thou have taught me, that is, thou have besides the ministerial preaching,
given me an extraordinary knowledge of thy judgments. Many know much, who
notwithstanding To be taught of God.
cannot profit by Gods judgments. So that the brief and plain meaning of the
Prophet, is thus much in effect, O Lord I have not had this knowledge in and of
my self; but I received it of thy Holy spirit, it was thy mercy and thy
grace, that made me know thy judgments.

The man of God then shows us in this verse, that he did always set the
judgments of God before him: what made him then so careful to do them* the
considering of them in his mind, the occupying his eyes to mark them, the
using of his ears to hear how God performed his promises to the obedient, and
executed his fearful threatenings on the wicked. A thing than which nothing is
worthy of greater meditation. We hear often with our ears, but with little
profit, the glorious promises and wonderful vengeance of the Lord, what is
commanded, and what is forbidden: but when we consider, and see before our
eyes, how the Lord has performed these things, we are humbled from sin, and
comforted The consideration of Gods judgments.
to obedience. This is it that breeds trial, proof, and experience, to see
how the Lord has in his mercy dealt with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and
David his faithful servants, and how he has plagued the Egyptians, the
Sodomites, the old world, and other of his enemies. Thy judgments of old O
Lord, says David, have I considered. We shall never effectually observe the
judgments of old, unless we observe the judgments of God of late. For they
must both join together, least that we considering of them being old, and
not on new, should think they were not, or at least that we resting on the
judgments of God executed of late, not lifting up our eyes to the judgments
of old, should ascribe them to evil fortune, chance and destiny.

We may then see how they which used the means of good things increased in
them, and how they that resrained not from evil, did slide back unto
wickedness. Wherefore that we may thoroughly be persuaded of the truth of the
Lord in things commanded, forbidden, threatened, promised, it is requisite to
observe the proof of them, so often as God gives just occasion thereof. For
until we look on these things, and see his blessings and Judgments.
his judgments, we shall never have a care to do good, nor a conscience to
avoid evil, and to look into them, is to look into the glass of Gods word.
Many deny providence, because they have not a knowledge of the word, or else
leaning to their reason, give too much to natural causes, or lastly, because
they have not a daily growing in the word. For that may well be the sense of
this place, Thou do make me to grow in knowledge.

Here is also commended unto us the teaching of the spirit by the ministry of
the word. For otherwise we may often read the Scriptures, and yet be ignorant
in Gods judgments, in not ascribing every judgment to his peculiar office.
For when we hear of an heretic, we say, what is he an heretic? I marvel
he is become such a one, I knew him an honest man, I never knew any evil by
him: yet the word of God tells us, that some men's sins go before to
judgment, and some men's come after, and that it is come to him, either for
want of good works, or for some secret sin.

It follows. Verse. 103. How sweet are thy promises unto my mouth! yea,
sweeter than ^^ny unto my mouth.
We have heard in the ninth portion, that until we put our whole folicitie
in the Whole folicitie in the word.
word, we shall not profit. That which here is called promises, I take rather
for judgments, partly because in the proper tongue the word is left out, and
partly because he had used this word, judgments in the verse immediately going
before. But so me will say, how can the judgments of God he sweet, which are
so troublesome, fearful and grievous? I answer, that the godly have no
greater joy, than when they feel either the mercies of God accomplished
toward them, that fear him, or his judgments showed upon the reprobates.

Unto my mouth. That is, I take as great pleasure in talking, conferring, and
persuading thy judgments, as my mouth, or the mouth of any that loves honey,
is delighted therewith. So he says, portion 2. verse* 6. I have had as great
delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in ^^ manner of riches. The meaning
then of the verse is, when I feel, O Lord, such effects of thy promises in my
self, and in others that fear thee, and such fruits of thy vengeance on them
that despise thee, I find great comfort in thy word. The Prophet David found
this sweetness by experience in himself, and therefore spoke by proof. Why do
not we feel the like comfort? because we use not the same means, we find not
the like effects. For if Means to he carefully used.
we could see our enemies put to the wall by the word, then should our
knowledge exceed the knowledge of others: if we felt the allurements of the
world, the inticements of the flesh, and the motions of the devil bitter unto
us; then should we taste this sweetness. Wherefore before we make conscience
to use the means of good, and to avoid the occasions of evil, we cannot
profit. Thus we have showed how the judgments of God may be sweet, that is,
unto them, that rejoice either to see the promises of God performed to the
penitent, or his wrath fulfilled in the impenitent. This delight made the
Prophet out of the abundance of his heart to speak joyfully of them, portion
2. 6. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth: And because
they testify no small love to a thing, which for affection to it will rise at
midnight, he adds portion, 8. 6. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto
thee, because of thy righteous judgments. This is then a true note, that a A
good note of our love to the word.
man has delight in Gods word, if from the abundance of his heart, his mouth
can speak of it, and when the word of God dwells so plentifully in him, that
he can speak it in wisdom. Again, if we have such an earnest and natural
delight being weary, to refresh our selves with fables; what a dullness is it
in us, that we cannot find as great comfort in the word of God? Wherefore we
are to examine our own hearts, that how so ever we have bin delighted before
to hear vain and frivolous tales; so from henceforth we may please our selves
in true histories in the word. For though other may be corrupt with flatterings
yet these histories are true, and free from all assentation, because they
register as well the sins of the Kings and their kindreds, as their virtues.
Neither can we ever sound the Prophet, until from the experience of our own
selves, we can proclaim forth the examples both of Gods promises, and of his
judgments. We showed that the cause why we felt not such profit, as the man
of God did in the word, was, because we used not the like pains; we use
fewer means, therefore our love is the less to the truth; we avoid not so
many occasions of evil, therefore we sin the more. If we then would be more
diligent in conference, more fervent in prayer, more given to meditation, we
should profit more; if we would refrain from evil, and abstain from
occasions of it, we should both be great in good things, and avoid many
afflictions.

The cause then why we either speak not of Gods judgments at all, or
speaking, speak so coldly, is because we are so dead in using the means of
good, and so dull in avoiding the occasions of evil. The Prophet, port 7. 4.
says, I have remembered thy judgments of old, and have been comforted. Where
we are to note, that we are not at utter defiance of sin, Note.
and in full league with goodness, until we have found comfort, when either the
Lord showed mercy upon his, or vengeance on the wicked. And then Gods
judgments will be sweet unto us, when remembering that no sin shall be
unpunished, we abstain from sin, and seeing that no good thing shall be
unrewarded, we are moved to goodness. For what can strengthen a man more, than
to consider this, that God will punish sin one day, and that in time he will
fulfill his promises to his children, which walk in truth before him, although
in great weakness? We have also taught, that we must use such a moderation of
our affections, as we may stay our selves in meditation, and that this
depriueth us of much profit herein, in that we do not appoint some certain
time for meditation, moderating other things of our ordinary callings, and
making a conscience sometimes to refrain from our common speeches So our
understanding, our judgment, our will to practice will be To redeem the time
f^r good meditations.
bettered. If then at our tables, in our beds, at our work, we would redeem
some time to read, to pray, or to confer, we should find wonderful
profit, and walking in earthly things, we should have heavenly minds.

Verse. 104. By thy precepts I have gotten understanding: therefore I hate all
the ways of falsehood.
AS in the beginning of this part, the Prophet of God protests his love to
the word; so now in the end he shows his hatred to the contrary. This then
as we have partly set down before, and more largely by Gods grace shall show
hereafter, is a true token of love to the word, when we either hate falsehood
in religion, or corruption in manners. We are then Of our love to the word, the
true mark.
to look into our hearts to see, if we hate Popery and heresy, if there be
in us an hatred against blaspheming of the name of God, against adultery,
false dealing, and such like. For we cannot love the true worship, but we must
hate heresy; we cannot love Gods name, and yet not hate the abusers of it; we
cannot love chastity and true dealing, but we must hate adultery, and
unrighteousness. But if we feel our selves to be indifferent persons, and
come what come may, we care not greatly, undoubtedly we are of no religion.
For if thou do not hate an Atheist, thou love not God; if thou hate not
heresy, thou do To hate sin.
not love Gods law; if thou hate not adultery, thou art not truly chaste; if
thou hate not false dealing, thou art unrighteous. We see heretics never hate
one another, because none of them love the truth: for the Papists can be
content with the Family of love, and the Family of love with them. Wherefore we
see, that many do falsely pretend religion, chastity, and true dealing.

Note here in that he says, I have gotten understanding by thy word: as though
his understanding Heresy.
was the cause of his zealous hatred of the false worship. What is the cause
then that men do not hate evil in greater measure? because they be ignorant
and know nothing. Indeed novelty displeases them a little, but when they be
somewhat acquainted with that which is taught them, they will like it well
enough. Why do we hand over head take any religion? even because we have not
gotten understanding. Why does heresy get such easy entertainment with many
of us? because we are unconstant and borne away with every blast, as witness
Peter and Jude, and because we are not fast rooted in knowledge, as is
mentioned Ephesians. 4. Many in our country are stiff in heresy, because they
were never sound in judgment, they were ever inconstant, they were never
rooted in Jesus Christ, and therefore were carried away with every puff of
vain doctrine. Some indeed (as we have said before) fall for lack of good
conscience: but some never come so far, because they heard not, or else heard
very negligently: and therefore whosoever shall now come, and blow an illusion
in their ear* he shall be heard. How shall we know an enemy? he comes under
the cloak of love, and is covered with the vizard of honesty, but his
understanding fails, his judgment is corrupt.

In that it is here said, all the ways of falsehood, we must note, that we
are to grow from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to faith, from glory to
glory, that growing in godly understanding, we may grow also in hatred of
falsehood. This verse may seem to have some contrariety with the verse a
little going before, where he says, I have abstained from every evil, that I
might keep thy law: but indeed there is none; because no true mortification,
both here and in that place, is required an hatred avoiding of evil. We must
know Note.
that the way to make good things fr^^^te, is the way to feel evil thing
sour: As when thou art grieved to feel thine eye an occasion of evil, or
evil thoughts to be in thine heart with bitterness and vexation of spirit,
thou must strive against them, and God will give thee strength to strive not
only without constraint, but also of a love of good, and a hatred of evil.
The first way then unto righteousness, is wear som^^es of sin, and to strive
against it though with great trouble, because the more we vex, torment, and
disquiet our selves, the more we shall come to the love of good, and then the
hatred of sin will grow of it self. If then a man cannot find this hatred
of sin in him, he must labor to avoid all occasions that hinder his
understanding of the truth, as distractions and troubles of mind, and use all
means to grow in knowledge, as reading, hearing, conferring, and such like.
For our not profiting in knowledge, is our not profiting in hating of heresies,
and our ^ot Why we do not more dete^^ heresies.
hating of heresy, is a token of our not profiting in knowledge* When we hear
then, if our hearing do not work in us a love of the truth, and hatred of the
contrary, we have not profited in knowledge: but if we grow in knowledge, we
shall know it by profiting in the love of the truth, and in the hatred of
falsehood. We have showed, how in the former portion, the man of God
testifying his affection to Gods law, and concluding with his hatred to the
contrary, intermi^gieth his reasons, that because he found by experience, that
the word of God made him wiser then his enemies, than his teachers, and the
aged, and did preserve him from every evil way: therefore he found such
comfort in it, that no natural thing was so liking to his outward man, as this
was to his inward man.

PORTION. 14. NVN.
Verse. 105* Thy word is a lantorne unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
THis portion following is a prayer to the Lord, to be further instructed in
the word of God, and to have his affections thereby more reformed. The reasons
which he uses be three: the first is his faith in the word, in that he made
account of it to be the only means, whereby he should be directed in all his
ways, and this is contained The part and branches of this portion.
in the first verse of the portion: Thy word is a lantorne unto my feet, and a
light unto my (steps) or path. The second, is his constant purpose to persevere
in the obedience of Gods word in the verse following: I have sworn and will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. The third is his
miserable calamity, wherein he was, which constrained him to pray, which
appears in the next verse: I am very sore afflicted, O Lord, quicken me
according to t^^y word These things are afterward showed in the verses
following, as his faith in Gods law in the two last, and his calamity in the
first and sixth verses, with prayer couched in the midst of the portion.

It is a marvelous strange thing, that one thing should be so often repeated,
as this to commend still Gods law, and to pray still to be taught in the same.
This proceeds from the comfort which he felt in the word, and from the fight
of the corruption of his own heart, and is commended to us in writing, to show
us our corruption, and to labor for the like fruit* Wherefore seeing
experience has taught us thus much, we must learn, that we can neither see
the comfort of our seeking after God, nor our calamity and misery to be
delivered out of it, unless we pray with the Prophet for the right knowledge
of the law of God: so that we are much to thank our God, that he gives us in
another such a fight of our own corruption. Note.


As in the first verse, there is a notable commendation of the word: so is
there also a singular declaration of his faith: Thy word, O Lord, is a lantorne
to my feet, and a light unto my path. This seems to all men, to have been
learned long ago, and belched out in time of Popery, and that it is no new
thing, but a saying very well known: but when we look into the several
practices of men, which is the righteous judge of all men's judgments, we
shall find men to be far from any inward faith showed in such fruits. This
made the Prophet to swear, in that he saw on one side his happiness so great in
the word, and the corruption of his heart on the other side. And in meditating
day and night in Gods law, and considering his righteous judgments, he says
in truth, Thy word is a lantern, etc. If we will look into our selves, we
shall find, that those things which seem to be most easily believed, are
furthest from faith, and that things most easy to be learned, are furthest
from practice. True it is, that every man will say, Who will not believe this?
what a beast were he that would deny the truth of Gods word? But alas, our
careless reading, our rare meditating, our cold praying, and praising of God
for his word, our seldom conference of the word will testify against us in
time to come, that we never truly believed. We must first look and note our
selves, and then we shall profit somewhat more. The man of God opposes here
the word to man's wisdom, which he had mentioned in the verse going before, as
light is contrary to darkness* For as in darkness we cannot go safely, without
the light of a lantern, or such like: even so are we in ignorance and
rebellion, if we be not continually guided by the word of God and his Spirit.
This then is a further thing, how durst blind bayards be so bold, who living in
the darkness of Egypt, think they are in the light, and being unable to
discern between persumption and despair, between promises and threatenings,
between things straightly commanded, and voluntarily done, suppose themselves
to be sharp sighted? Nay, we shall find these fruits to be but in few. It is
said, Matthew. 22. 23. The light of the body is the eye, if then thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be light. 23. But if thine eye be wicked, then all
thy body shall be dark. Where our Savior Christ borrows his speech from the
senses of the body, and translateth it to the powers of the soul. For as every
part of the body is lightsome, whilst the eye sees: so a man being
enlightened Simile*
with the word, and the Spirit, having his eyes always to heaven, has his
affections aright: and on the contrary, as all things are loathsome to that
body, which for want of the eyes is wholly darkened: so a man sitting in the
darkness of ignorance, having his mind wholly set on earthly things, has his
affections disordered.

Now, that there is no light in us, but all is darkness in our souls, the
Apostle Peter does plainly show it, 2. Pet. 1. 19. We have a most sure word of
the Prophets, to the which ye do well, that ye take heed, as to a sure light
in a dark place, etc. Where he commending the Christians for their care of the
word, shows, that it is a light in the dark, and teaches us, that how much
knowledge we have, so much we are in good affections. Also Paul, Ephesians 4. 17.
18 says, I testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not, as other
Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, 18. Having their cogitation
darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in them, etc. Where he shows, that the man unregenerate has his mind,
understanding, and heart corrupt and blind in that life, which God lives in
his, and that as the man which sees being in darkness, or in light the blind
man gropeth uncertainly; even so all our doing; are endless and headless,
which are without the light of knowledge.

Shall we think now that every man believes this to be true? No, for if they
did, they would do otherwise. If they felt this in affection in any measure,
would they not come Simile.
out of their prison to the liberty of Gods saints, would they not avoid the
darkness to see the bright sun? What a folly were it for a man, who having
scales and gleamy diseases Wilful ignorance, and voluntary perdition.
on his eyes might be cured, and will not? This is a double fault, that when
men may know, they will lie in errors and ignorance, and when they may be
converted they will dwell still in Heresy. Oh what a thing is this, wilfully
to remain in darkness, and to sleep at the hearing of the word, when the
Lord gives them a lantern for their feet, and offers knowledge; and yet to
be no better than the stocks they sit on? If it pleased the Lord who Simile.
gives understanding to the ignorant, and draws light out of darkness to
reveal the light into their dark consciences, they should know that when
light came unto them, they Light refused for darkness.
refused it, and that they are lovers of darkness more than of light. But he
that works all things mightily i^ all men, must show this light unto their
darkness, because they that are in hell think on none other heaven, and they
that lie in unrighteousness, think of no other righteousness, and sitting in
the valleys of death, they remember none other life. We must therefore pray,
that the Lords glorious light of the gospel may open the eyes of their
consciences, and let every man examine his own heart, that he may pray to have
his judgment cleared by the true knowledge of the word, and his affections
renewed to the due obedience of the same. For how much knowledge we have, so
much light have we; and look how much we lie in ignorance, so much we lie in
darkness. We know but in part, when we are at the highest in this life, how
great then is that darkness, when we know not so much as the word may instruct
us in? When a man sees as much in a Papist, as in a block, let him consider,
that as little as the care is, which we have of the word, and as small as our
conscience is in the obedience of the same; so little is his light in heavenly
things. Yea, though we have knowledge, and live not after it, we are yet in
darkness, we grope as it were a far off, who having knowledge, have no
conscience.

A saying that may touch us to the quick, that we are but having a glimmering
light, as Paul had in the outward man at his conversion, or being as purblinde
men, not having Purblinde they are, that either know little, or, knowing never
so much, do practice nothing.
our eyes clean out, nor our sight clear, when we have knowledge, and labor
not to build virtue upon virtue. If then thou have not a care to profit by the
word, thou have a dark sight, and a glimmering light, there is a shadow
before thine eyes, thou can not discern chalk from cheese. No marvel
then, why so few are sharp sighted in the word, since either we know little, or
knowing somewhat, we practice nothing.

Again, as if we have gone some part of the journey in light, and yet pass
the other in darkness, it is very dangerous: likewise in regeneration, though
we have spent some part of our life in the obedience of true knowledge, and in
the residue of our life do not escape the willnes of the flesh, we cannot
without dangerous darkness hold forth our course in the Spirit. If we mingle
light and darkness together, and confound the world and the Church, the wisdom
of God, and the inventions of man, we do not as yet truly obey, nor walk in
the light of the word.

For as whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, and whatsoever is not in the light
is darkness: so whatsoever is not done according to the light of knowledge, is
done in the darkness of ignorance. In all our affairs then we must learn to
ask counsel of the word.

Here then is a good comfortable doctrine also, that we are so much in
darkness, as in whole or in part we be in ignorance: so whether in part or in
whole we be warranted by Darkness or light, in whole or in part.
the word of God for our doing; so far we have a guide, we have a
load-starre, a lantern, and a sure light, as Peter witnesses, to conduct us.
The Papists then are here confuted, which say the word contains hard things:
we grant indeed that there are many mysteries in the word of God, and that
the testimonies of the Lord are wonderful, especially in the doctrine of
salvation, and to a natural man; yet there be many things easy to a man
regenerate, and the very entrance into them gives light to the blind, and to
them which are lowly in their own eyes. It is our great corruption, that when
we know in part, we A lantern yet may lead a man that will follow the light
thereof. Simile.
are as they that have a glimmering sight of their way, and therefore least
they should be accounted stark blind refuse a leader. But although we see
as in a glass, in part, and in measure, yet as a man may follow, if he be not
blind, the light of the lantern: so we may come to knowledge, unless we shut
our eyes at the truth. We may therefore as safely for the souls health, follow
the light of the word, as we may for the safeguard of our body, follow the light
of a lantern.

The way of salvation prescribed in the word, is an high, plain, and heaten
way, if any thing hinder us thereunto, it is the curse, and our sin in that
we are not careful to be directed. For surely this is the word to open our
understanding, yea, though we be borne blind, if you do not willingly shut
your eyes. But we must note that Gods word is a lantern, when Gods spirit
works thereby: for whilst we go about the bare and literal sense, it is no
otherwise then if a blind man should read, or a man having sight, should put
a veil before his eyes. Wherefore the man of God prays, port. 17. 5. Direct
my steps in thy word, etc. and verse: 7. Show the light of thy countenance
upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes. Why then do we so little profit
by the word? because we, thinking that of our selves we can conceive aright,
do not pray to be taught by God his spirit. For as no man sees, or can see
what is in man, but the spirit of man, and that which he utters with his
tongue: no more can we see what is in GOD, but being taught by the spirit of
God and his word. Wherefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 2. 20. God has revealed
them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God. 11. for what man knows the things of a man but the spirit of a
man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit
of God. Flesh and blood, as our Savior witnesses to Peter, cannot reveal the
things of our salvation unto us, but the spirit of God.

And why then are we yet so unprofitable? surely because we are not guilty of
our own infirmities, and we see not the darkness and blindness which is in
us, or if we see it, we feel not our selves pressed with the miserable
captivity and bondage, wherein it holds our souls. This sight made the
Prophet so often use this prayer, Teach me true judgment, teach me true
understanding, teach me thy statutes etc. All which repetitions might otherwise
have seemed to have bin a vain babbling, had he not used such a narrow sight of
his inward corruptions with a desire to be delivered from them, which may
condemn us of our darkness, and teach us, that there is no light in us, but by
the word.

Many indeed are of a modest spirit, and have some sight of their ignorance,
yet they Particular sight and loathing of special sins.
have not a feeling of their misery in particular things, and do not examine
themselves in every particular thing, what it is to be in darkness; and
therefore, as we have said, do no more desire to be enlightened and governed by
another, than he that having a slender eyesight and hardly discerning his way,
refuses to have a guide, as though he were blind. And though the Lord often
shines upon us, and makes us guilty of our blindness, yet we do not see how
loathsome, yrksome, and uncomfortable a thing darkness is, nor how pleasant,
amiable, and comfortable a thing light is, although we confess in general,
that we have not the light but are in darkness.

The want of seeing the monstrous vglines of this palpable darkness makes us
dull in prayer for the light of Gods spirit. Wherefore we must desire that that
may be stricken into our consciences which we have in judgment, that is, that
we may see how amiable, Note.
glorious, and heavenly a thing it is to be enlightened with Gods light, and how
horrible a thing it is to be plunged in the darkness of the soul; how sweet,
excellent, and beautiful a thing it is to believe and love the word, and how
loathsome and palpable is mistrust and ignorance.

We must then be persuaded, that though we are not in prison, we walk in the
night and in the darkness, whilst we are in ignorance, yet the Lord will* give
us in time to suspect our hearts of ignorance, and work in us both a desire
and a delight to love and live after the word, and that we shall find the truth
of this verse in ourselves, to say with the Prophet, Thy word is a lantern to
my fecte, and alight to my paths.

Many there are which do not so much as acknowledge this doctrine* Some are
come out of this darkness into the glorious kingdom of Christ, and yet swerve
so much in life, that they show not themselves to have this true faith. And
where men's manners swerve besides their profession, we see this sentence, more
professed in mouth, than practiced in life, and they only do believe this to
be true which enterprise nothing but that which Warrant one of the word.
has it warrant out of the word. For these acknowledge, that in themselves
there is nothing but darkness, and that they stand in need to be enlightened by
the ministry of the word, and working of his spirit.

And as we confess the truth of this in general, so must we deduce it to
particulars and Work without warrant is a work of darkness. The word
necessary. Ignorance cause to humble us. Safe when the word directs us.
Curiosity. Godly care and study.
seuerals, so that every man may say, I am either in light or in darkness, if
I have a warrant for this which I do, out of the word, I am in light; but if I
do it by the motion of mine own brain, I am in darkness. Besides, as this
does show the great necessity of Gods word: so also it must humble us, because
of our ignorance: as also it yields this comfort, that as we think we
travel safely in respect of our bodies, so long as we have the light of the
Sun; so also we are in the safe way to salvation, as long as we are guided by
the word. And when as some do object, that the Scriptures do contain great
difficulties, and are hard to be understood; we said, that though the smallest
things were deep mysteries, yet they be plain to the least of Gods children.
For Proverb. 8. 9. Wisdom says, that all her words are plain to him that
will understand, and straight to them that would find knowledge. And the man
of God says, Portion 17. 2. The entrance into thy word shows light, and
gives understanding to the simple. And though all men are not curiously to
search into questions, yet all men are careful to seek the way of salvation.
No man then can herein complain of darkness, but as it is in his own mind;
neither need that so to be, if he will use the means to avoid it, and in a
repenting heart crave the light by prayer. The cause therefore why the word is
a parable, and a dark riddle unto so many, is either the pride of their own
wit, when they think their wit to be so good, as they can conceive every
thing, and their judgment and learning to be such, as that they can understand
any thing, and profit by their own industry; when, as God is the author, so
he is also the reuealer of his truth: or else they do not esteem so
reverently of the truth, nor are so much grieved with their blindness and
ignorance as they should be.

Verse. 106. I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.
NOw as his faith was the first argument he used: so the second was his
conscience, his The second argument.
love, and his affection to the word, which he shows by his oath: and that we
may know it to be no wandering motion of his mind, carrying him away, but a
thing well considered of, and constant, he protests that he will keep his
oath. Wherein he declares, that many men have sometimes motions to good, but
they either die presently, or else Sudde^ motions to good.
they be so cold, that they quickly fall away. But as we may see, he was no
such lightheaded man. We have here to learn, that this is a judgment of God,
why many do not profit in the word, because they cannot, (being void both of
grief, for their natural blindness, as also of the clear sight and faith in
Gods word) say in truth, Thy word is a lantorne to my feet, etc. Now if these
things be in us, we must pray that we may be moved with a purpose to continue
in them, and purposing we must beware we break it not, but be constant.

I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. Concerning this binding of himself with an oath, which the man of
God here uses, it declares his care to keep a good conscience, in laying the
judgments of God which were past, and the judgments of God to come, up in his
heart. We see then, that as when men swear voluntarily, An oath.
it is a token of their good conscience; so it appears most in good men, who
setting so much by the glorious name of God, can sustain any private
discredit, and swallow many troubles to maintain the credit of it. Wherefore
Gods children, though they are carefully to avoid all sins, yet make a
greater conscience of this sin, than of any other; and when they take an
oath, though before they made a conscience of that thing, yet now they make a
greater conscience. If he had found no weakness, no mistrust, or
doubtfulnesse in himself, then needed he not so straightly to have bound
himself For if he had been always careful, what needed he to have used an
oath? But the care which he had to meet with this weakness, was the cause of
his solemn covenant, which teaches us, that such infirmities as are in us,
were in him, who because of the vanity and sluggishnesse, The Prophet had our
wa^ts and weakness.
which he felt in his corrupt nature, did provoke and stir up himself to a
greater care by an oath.

Then if we see, that even the man of God thought this to be a necessary mean
to stir up his infirmities, why should we not think it as necessary for us?
when the most diligent amongst us, may think himself to be behind him in
many degrees. But the cause why we make no such oath, is, because we are
fearful, and our delaying of this practice from time to time shows, that
there is not in us that feeling of our wants, that reverence of his word, nor
experience of his goodness, which he felt.

This must make us afraid, and ashamed of our selves, that we having the like
infirmities, have not the like affections. True it is, that to be sparing in
these oaths, is a good token of a Christian, so that he be but a nouice in
Christ's school (for every man must not use this oath, because he knows not
his own strength) but we must not always be at A. B. C. and dwell still in
the principles of Religion.

Neither must we think that the Prophet here made any new or strange covenant,
but rather he iterated that covenant, which before he had made in circumcision,
and although we make no such covenant now, yet we must know, that we have made
them before. For this was a renewing of his oath, which he made, when he was
circumcised, and entered into Gods family. And because I am not here to enter
into the discourse of many particular vows; we Our vow in Baptism ever to be
remembered of us. What a vow is.
shall speak of our general vow, which we make in Baptism, which though we
do not renew, yet we are much to be ashamed of it. We find, that vows are
either general or particular. And here by the way we must note, that that
which we call a compact between man and man, the same is a vow between God
and man. For as in civil affairs, a compact is a straight thing and binds
us more before men, than a ba^e promise; and promises simply made, seem to
have greater liberty than a compact: so also promises made to the Lord must
keep us in obedience, but especially vows, as a double bond, are far more
nearly and carefully to be performed.

Concerning general vows, we know that in the ordaining of Kings, vows were
made from them to the Lord, as also some passed from their Princes to the
people, as 2. Chro 23. where Iehoiad^ took the Captains of hundreths in
covenant with him: And all the Congregation made a covenant with the King Io^sh
in the house of God. And as 2 Chronicles. 34. 31. Josiah when he had destroyed the
Idols, and reformed the Temple, after the finding of the book of the Law,
stood by the pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord to walk after the
Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes.
etc. Also Neh^. 10. we shall find a general covenant confirmed by an oath.

Concerning particular covenants, they are either simply according to Gods
word, or Particular covenants.
else taken up for some special end, either as means to come to some good, or
else as bridles to avoid some evil, as 2. Chron. 15. 12. When the people made
a covenant to seek the Lord, etc. 14. They did swear unto the Lord with a
loud voice. Also Nehem. 10 the people take a new oath and seal it. Ezra. 9
where we may see, that when Ezra had wept and fasted for the sins of the
people, in that they had taken strange wives of the people of the Lands. 3.
Made them to make a covenant with the Lord, and to put away their strange
wives: as also Nehem. 5. On this sort Jeremy preswadeth his people, chap. 34
to make a covenant concerning the liberties of their servants, and denounces
the fierce wrath of God upon them, for breaking their promise. Of these two
kinds of covenants, ^he self same rules are to be prescribed. If we feel in
our selves any special dulnes, we must bewail it, and when we see that we
have the more streights of mind, we must stir up our selves and not neglect
the means. We speak not here of free vows, but of such as the word of God
commands, and that for fear of relapse and falling from the Lord, we may use
these means, more surely to tie us unto him.

A contract is between man and man: which when it is between God and man, it
is called a vow. In contracts men leave some liberty to themselves, so that
for some circumstances they need not keep it: but it is meet that every vow
be performed to God.

These vows and covenants, are either general, such as the King makes with
his subjects, as Ioas, and Josias, and Nehemiah makes a general covenant: or
particular, as Asa made a particular covenant; which covenant is either
commanded, or taken up for some cause, of and in respect of our selves, as
means to avoid evil, or to lay hold of goodness, Ezra. 9. The particular
covenant or vow, which is commanded, is ever contained under the general, and
has respect unto some special part thereof. And therefore many godly Kings
took oaths of their subjects to leave some special sin, or to do some
special good deeds. So men, etc.

So Nehemiah made a particular covenant with the rich men, that they should not
oppress the poor, Nehem. 5. So Jeremy caused the people to make a particular
covenant. 44.

There is the same reason of the general covenant and the particular that is
commanded, for we are bound to do them: therefore if we be slack in either
of them, we must be sorry for it, if we have received grace we must stir it
up, and for the stirring up of our selves we must not neglect this remedy.

Now, where some take this to be a place from whence they might either draw an
argument Free Will.
of free will, or prove by it that we are able to keep the law of God: they
deceive themselves: for first, note the word here used, he says not that he
has sworn to keep the law of God, but the judgments of God, which he often
before and after in the second verse from this uses, for the righteous
performance of Gods promises, or executing of his just vengeance; neither does
he mean here a simple keeping of them, but rather an inward and careful
receiving of them in his heart, and notan outward performance. Thus the word (
keeping) is often taken in the holy Scriptures, even for a laying up of the
truth in our mind, from whence we may draw out the use of it, as occasion
shall serve; as where it is said, Blessed are they that hear the word of God,
and keep it: that is, faithfully lay it up in their hearts, with a full intent
to practice* when God shall give just occasion thereof. So that the meaning of
this word is nothing else, but a solemn laying up of the judgments of God in
his mind, mentioned also before, portion 3. 6* Remove from me shame and
contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies. So that he shows, how he did
mark diligently how God fulfilled his promises to his children, and executed
vengeance upon the wicked. And because the fulfilling of Gods promises, is to
give strength to his to keep the word, he shows, how he would take a view,
how God performed this grace in his servants, both in forgiving the sins of
the repentant, and giving his grace to them that crave it.

Now there are two things especially, which hinder us from this practice.
First, the subtletie How we be kept from holy vows.
of Satan, thus reasoning in us; I would gladly vow, but when I have vowed
such a good thing, I am further from performing my vow, than ever I was before.
We answer, that this indeed is so, and comes as a judgment of God for
vowing so high a thing unadvisedly and rashly, with a secret presuming of our
selves, and not of God, with want of a prayer to the Lord for grace to perform
the same, as the Prophet did. For so soon as the Prophet had vowed thus to the
Lord, he immediately makes his prayer, fervently asking of the Lord, that as
he had given his heart whole unto him, so he would confirm this grace of his
Spirit in him. Now, seeing the Lord has also promised to cleanse our hearts,
and that Jesus Christ is our wisdom and sanctification, and we are become
the children of the highest, our meaning is not, that the full performance
hereof should be sought for in our selves, but in Christ.

The second thing whereby we are hindered, is that, wherewith Satan does
buffet us: 2
when we have made some breach of our covenant made to the Lord, saying: Thou
have not Objection of Satan.
kept thy promise, thou have broken thy bond, thou have violated thy covenant,
and to do this once is as good as twenty: this will be a sufficient evidence
against thee why do thou therefore continue, and striuest any further in
vain? We see how this prevails oftentimes, because there is no greater
sin, than the sin of them, who sometimes have been religious, and by this
practice of the devil, for some particular offense, have been persuaded that
they have made an utter breach of their covenant. We answer for this, Answer.
that seeing that Christ did not only die for our sins before Baptism, but
also for our sins after Baptism, and did not only satisfy for our sins
committed before our calling, Note well.
but for those also which we commit after our calling, though through
infirmity and frailty we have fallen, and yet not lying down in presumption
and malice, but there is a reverent fear and trembling in our hearts, that our
corruptions rebelled against the Lord, the particular covenant being broken
cannot take away the general, and cannot be excluded, but must be included in
the same. When then we have made a breach of humane obli^^ion, and not of
obstinate maliciousnes, this is as well forgiven in the general, as other
sins. We may see this in politic matters between a good Lord and his
servant, Simile.
(for I presuppose a merciful, a courteous Lord) the Lord will not be
displeased for failing in some particular performance of some particular
covenant, so he finds him ready to yield honor and obedience to the
general covenants which are between them: even so the Lord, whose love
exceeds the love of a father, Psalm. 103. and of a mother, Esaias. 49. toward
his, will spare us for a particular breach, so it be not a general contempt,
and done of wilful malice. If then in such a case we will humble our selves
with sorrow, that we displeased our God, and desire the Lord not to take
vengeance for any final breach, because there was no final intent to fall
from the Lord, we shall surely find mercy and pardon at We renew our covenant
so often as we come to the Sacrament.
his hand. This is a doctrine very requisite, because it is the policy of
Satan to persuade a man, that having broken one covenant, he has broken all.
The remedy then is, that we know our sins to be pardoned, and that we renew
our covenant, which we do so often as we come to the Sacrament. Let us learn
therefore to make all our oaths with the Lord in great reverence, as did
Nehemiah chap 5. who caused the oath to be ministered in the presence of the
Priest; then must we use prayer, and all means, whereby we may continue in the
same: lastly, if we slip or fall in some particular, we must not be
discouraged or ^aint. The cause then why men do not this, is either because
they do not take it in hand in reverence, or taking it in hand do not purpose
to keep it, or keeping it, do fall by despair for some particular defect.

Thus we see how the man of God shows his earnestnes and his affection to the
law of God, teaching us, why many do not so love the word, as to make it a
lantern to their feet, either because they have not such vehement affection,
or else they be not so permanent: and therefore we are to pray both against our
coldness to the law, and our inconstancy.

It might seem strange to some, that he should swear to keep Gods
judgments: but we must know, that this keeping is not so much in outward show
as in inward virtue. Again we see, that as in making this holy oath Gods
children do not exclude, but include the forgiveness of sins: so they do it
not, but first presupposing the grace of God, by prayer to be obtained for the
keeping of it. Besides, no particular or accessorie covenant can take away the
principal and general, because the one includes the other. But here we must
note, that then no secondarie cause can take away the first, when we sin but
of humane frailty, and not of presumption, and when we so crave for mercy,
that our hearts be set to recover our selves, and we will not be sluggish in
our sins hereafter, because then is the oath broken, and covenant disanulled,
when we make a final breach. We must therefore fight against scrupulositie
herein, knowing that God will spare us as a father does his children, in that
the whole breach of our covenant is a general relinquishing of the same. When
then there arises a fear in our hearts to come so near unto the Lord
(although it may be good) no more to power this precious licour into frail
consciences, than to put new wine into old bottels, and rather appertains to
them of greater graces: yet we must consider, that there were great infirmities
in this man of God, against which he would strive by this mean, and so provoke
himself to come nearer to the Lord. So that as we must not undertake this
thing without advice: so we must not always please our selves in these
beginnings, and when as concerning the time we should be teachers, we Heb. 5.
12.
should need to have the first foundation of religion laid again. Wherefore
we must needs acknowledge, that the cause of our long absence from the Lord,
is our want of the defiance of sin, and love to the word, as the Prophet had;
neither must we ever, when occasion wall be given, neglect this mean, which
may keep us from sliding back. And here we are to observe, that wicked or
foolish vows, which hinder Christian religion, and those wicked vows of
wicked religion, as the ridiculous vows of chastity, or such as may hinder us
in our callings (as that a man should never eat flesh, or should not wear
some kind of apparel) are to be avoided; because they have not their warrant
out of the word To vow against drunkenness.
of God. And though wine makes drunkards, being immoderately taken; yet it is
no reason, seeing it makes glad the heart of man in it own nature, why others
should not use it, which have weak bodies: yet thus much will I grant, that if
a man that has been drunk by too immoderate drinking of wine, does vow for a
time to relinquish it, this is not unadvised, seeing we are commanded, if our
eye offend us, to pull it out, and if our foot does hurt us, to cut it off.
Again, if a man given to concupiscence shall solemnly vow to refrain the
familiarity of wanton women, and will not come in place where light To vow
against whordome.
women frequent, but with Job shall make a covenant with his eyes, we see this
by the word also to be warrantable. And thus much for means to avoid evil:
now for means to do good.

If a man feel himself dull, and slow in reading the word, or slack in
prayer, shall to the provoking himself the more make a covenant daily to read
some portion of the word, and to bestow some time of the day in prayer; if this
be taken up in the wisdom of the Spirit, to cast off sluggishnesse, and
provoke alacrity herein, we see, because at morning, noone-tide, and evening
some of Gods children have used it, he may set himself a task, and thereby
may make a stay for his wavering mind. Howbeit these things must not be
perpetual, as it is in other covenants. For a man may abstain from women and
wine for a time, and yet not for ever, because it must be done for some
certain ends and causes, as also with some holy conditions. As for example, if
a man has taken a time of the day to pray in, and at that time he shall have
some special cause of setting forth Gods glory, or if his particular calling
requiring an whole man, shall call him away; then if he omit it, there is no
breach, because the thing which he is about to do, is according to Gods law.
This is needful to be considered with a godly care, that we double that some
other day, when we shall be more at liberty, which we have for the same causes
pretermitted the day before. If then there be just occasion offered of this
remission (for otherwise we must not be remiss) we know that the covenant is
not broken, in that we made it with a condition, that we would use it so far
forth, as it might not hinder Gods glory, our duty to our brethren, nor our
several calling, because in such a case, to obey is better than sacrifice. But
if there be no just cause of pretermitting this purpose, then is there just
cause of sorrowing for breaking the covenant. But here we see an help, we
have not done this task to day, because of idleness: what then? We must return
to the assurance of forgiveness of sins, and must redeem that with double
diligence, which we have lost through wilful negligence.

In these vows then taken up of our selves, as means to avoid sin, or to
do good; we must first take heed that they be made within the compass of
the word. Secondly, that they be but for a time, and not continual. Thirdly,
that they be ever made with wife and discreet considerations, least being
broken, our consciences be troubled. Fourthly, if there be any fault, that it
be recompensed by double duty and diligence afterward.

Thus we see, how either for to prick us to good, or stay us from some evil,
we may make a covenant upon condition, in a desire of Gods glory, and in
craving Gods grace. And thus much of his care and conscience to Gods
judgments: now let us come to the third argument, which is his affliction.

Verse. 107. I am very sore afflicted: O Lord quicken me according to thy word.
IN that the man of God uses this as a reason before his prayer, it seems
he was not meanly troubled* but sorely vexed, as we may see in joining that
which he says in the verse following: My soul is continually in mine hand,
yet do I not forget thy law. Wherein carrying his soul in his hand, he means
that he has no assurance of his life, but is in continual danger of it, as
we count those things which be in our hand, to be hardly sure, and Verse. 107.
110. My soul is in my hand.
in peril to slip from us, as we may see by other places of the word. As in
the book of Judges, Iephtha says, I carried my life in mine own hand, that
is, I did hazard my life. 1. Sam. 28* 21. where the Pythonisse says, I have
put my soul in my hand. which is all one, as if she should say, I have
ventured my life, or I was at deaths door. Job. 13. 14. Wherefore do I tear
my flesh with my teeth, and put my soul in my hand? As if he should say, Why
do I put my life in danger? For even as water lying in our hand is soon slipped
out; so our soul being in our hand, is said to be at deaths door.

Besides, he confesses that he had many snares, and pestilent devices of his
enemies laid against him, so that at his least going astray, he was laid for,
and ready to be taken. In that he needed thus to pray, we may see how
reason might have moved him to the contrary. Flesh and blood might have taught
Daniel, that in such narrow search he might have shut his window when he
prayed, or have conveyed himself into some secret chamber, and so to have used
some policy, and provided means to have saved himself, had not the spirit of
God mightily prevailed in him against all such temptations: So when by reason
of some imminent danger, we are at our wits end, satan would have us go in
bypath, and not to make the word of God a lantorne to our feet. Saul, when
he could hear nothing from the Lord, was driven thus by his extreme danger,
to go to the witches. We see then how necessary it is for Gods children, in
the time of trial, to pray for their direction in the right ways. Again,
because when we are hardly dealt with, we are ready to revenge with policy,
we see how he prays to keep himself aright.

It was undoubtedly the great mercy of God to David then to pray, that no
affection of Against desire of revenge.
revenge might enter into him. Oh how needful then is it for us, when the
wicked shall deal with us unreasonably, to pray to the Lord to be kept in
judgment from policy, and in affection from revenging, and that we may stay
our judgment on Gods promises, and our affections on his dealings?

Thirdly, if all means be wanting to us, then will the devil move us to
despair, and therefore great need have we to pray, that we may be delivered
from the darkness of despair, by the lantern of Gods word. We see how
necessarily the man of God prayed: not to be tempted above his strength, and
that the rod of the wicked should not fall on his lot, least he should put his
hand unto wickedness; and therefore craved wisdom in Gods word, faith in his
promises, and patience in his goodness. We see then the plain meaning of the
man of God in this verse, if we call to mind in this word very sore afflicted,
that which we have heard before, that his eyes failed, his heart fainted, his
spirit panted, his natural powers melted, and to be brief, that he was an
image of death. As a man cannot abide great prosperity, no more can he abide
great adversity. For as we are puffed up with the one, so we are cast down with
the other, by mistrust in Gods providence, and despair of his promises.
Experience teaches us, that as a little prosperity makes us to forget God,
so many inconveniences by affliction may befall us, as either dullness, deadnes,
blockishnes, or wicked shifts, or ungodly doubts. Wherefore the man of God here
teaches us, that if he used such remedies in the greater troubles, the^ how
much more should we use them in the less. We are here besides to accuse our
unbelief, bewrayed in small things, seeing the Prophet in so great extremities
exercised his faith, against all the reasons of flesh and blood. As the Lord
gives not so great graces unto us, as to him; so he will not press us with so
great temptations, as he did him. And if the Lord did help his Saints in great
afflictions, surely he will also help us, if we likewise strive against
mistrust. We may see, the Saints of God were never so delicately brought up,
that they never wanted; so that if the Lord has so dealt with his most
excellent and faithful servants, what will he do to us unfaithful ones? if he
did so to the^ which were under the law, to whom were made greater promises of
outward things; what will he do to us, to whom are promises made of spiritual
things under the Gospel, as of the forgiveness of sins, of the renewing our
hearts, The promises of God to his people under the Gospel.
of spiritual joys, of the kingdom of heaven? If the Lord then lay on us
such troubles, as he laid on our forefathers, how much more should we suffer
them, seeing we may profit by their example, who were under the Law, who were
in the dawning of the day, or rather in the night in respect of us, unto whom
Christ is crucified and risen again. We must then be ashamed of our womanish
nature, who will shrink at so little trial, and think that the Lord should
deal more gently with us, than with them. They were in the shadow of the Law;
we in the bright Sun of the Gospel, which if we see, we shall accuse our
selves of the wants of Gods graces in us* seeing he dealt thus with his dearest
Saints.

In that he adds, quicken me according vnt^ thy word, he shows, that he
meant not to escape by natural means, although as he would use them, so he
stayed not in them: he used these as accessaries, but the word of God as
principal. For his principal was to be quickened by the word, and his
accessory was the using of ordinary means.

Then in all afflictions let us crave of God, that we may not use vnl^wfull
means, but rather the promises of God, as our chiefest strength, and feeling
them with Gods favor in us, then may we use the other to these. For then will
the Lord give success and blessing to natural and secondary means, when our
hearts being chiefly stayed on the promises of God (as our chiefest strength,
and feeling them with Gods favor in us) in the forgiveness of our sins, and
renewing of our minds, we crave a blessing on the creatures, as on the second
means Besides, he acknowledges in this word ( quicken) the Lord to be the
author of life, and that without his word, he was as dead. This life indeed is
the shadow of death, common with the reprobates and bruit beasts, and our life
is only in Christ Jesus. So Adam was called dead, what is that? surely, in that
his soul had not^ing to do with God; and although God gave him a natural
life, yet spiritually he was dead.

Thus the Saints of God thought they were at the last cast, and ready for the
buriers, when Feeling.
they could not feel Gods presence and promises. According to thy Word, that
is, according to thy promises, for we have none assurance to come to GOD,
unless his word be given unto us. What, had he especial or peculiar promises
working in him? The diverse places of this Psalm will she we no such thing,
because this Psalm is an image of Regeneration. They were general promises,
as are other in many places of the Scripture, Rejoice This Pslame is an image
of regeneration.
O Syon for thy redeemer comes. Every man might apply this to himself: as
is also that place, Esaias, 66. 2. I that dwell in heaven will look cuen to him
that is poor, and of a contrite heart, and trembles at my words. These
promises are general, and therefore we must look to be quickened by them. For
the Lord says, that though Eternity be his place, yet will he come to them
that be of a contrite heart: so that since the Lord has made this promise, we
must by Faith use it: Come unto me, says Christ, all that labor and are
laden. Behold another general promise, which we must apply to ourselves by
Faith, making this argument without selves; Lord thou have promised this,
whosoever is weary and heavy laden, shall of thee be refreshed. Lord I am
weary and heavy laden, Lord therefore help me according to thy promise. I
came not, says our Savior in another place, to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. We see that these general precepts must be believed,
and we must crave Gods spirit, that we may be quickened and receive life by
them. For though they be general to all, yet we must understand, that every
man is to apply them severally unto himself. Howbeit we must first believe
the general promises, and then by prayer, we are to crave a special use of
them, as of them wherein we believe.

Verse. 108. O Lord I beseech thee accept the free offering of my mouth, and
teach me thy judgments.
NOw the Prophet prays for the clearer understanding of Gods word. This is
then his principal: which here is set down more plain. The meaning therefore
of this verse is: that I may thus be quickened, clear my judgment, that I may
see how thou dealest with thy servants, that I may have comfort in thy
promises. As the air being troubled, Simile. The mind distempered.
the weather is darkened; so the mind of man being troubled with ignorance,
storms, mists, and clouds of temptations, is much distempered. Wherefore he
prays against these port. 17. 7. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy
servant, and teach me thy statutes. Where we may see how afflictions had hidden
as it were the ccuntenance of God; showing also, that the face and favor of
God appears in nothing so much, as in the true understanding of his word. And
port. 8. 8. The earth O Lord is full of thy mercies, teach me thy statutes.
Port 2. verse: 4. Blessed art thou O Lord, teach me thy statutes. Whereas God
is good, he reuealeth it in nothing more then in this pure understanding.

Teach me thy judgments, etc. As if the man of God should say, This is one
thing, whereunto I will give over my self, even to see how thou do punish
the wicked, and conductest Note. Pray that thou may see how God proceeds
with his children, in the work of their salvation.
thy children. So that we must learn, that as it is necessary to understand
the law and the Gospel, so is it requisite to discern Gods judgments. For as
we cannot learn the one without observing of Gods mercy; so we cannot
attain to the other, without marking his vengeance. We must see always by the
peculiar teaching of Gods spirit, how the Lord punishes in justice, and yet in
mercy; in wrath, and yet in love; in rigor and hatred of our sin, humbling
us with one hand; in pity and compassion to our salvation, comforting us with
the other hand. We see then how the Prophet prays, both to see them, and to
mark them: we need teach this often, because we dream so much of fatal
necessity, and of the connexions of natural causes, or else because we cannot
discern between the crosses of the godly and the ungodly: so that as the wise
man says, Eccl: 9. 2. All things come alike to all men: and the same condition
is to the just and to the wicked: to the good, and to the pure, and to the
polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is
the good, so is the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears or
reuerenceth an oath. This is then a singular gift of God to discern, how by
the selfsame means the Lord both humbles the good, and overthrows the
wicked.

The meaning then of the man of God briefly is: O Lord give me a right
judgment in thy judgments, that I may see how thou sauest thy children, and
punishest thine enemies, otherwise I shall never discerue this. Accept the free
offerings, etc.

We must mark how these things are joined together, this is the thing, for
which I sacrifice, Prayer and thanks giving best sacrifices
the thing I wish, I desire and pray for, and therefore O Lord accept it. The
man of God alludeth here to sacrifices, and shows, that the Lord is delighted
with no sacrifice more, than with prayer and thanksgiving. For all other
sacrifices in the time of the law, as the slaying of goats, and killing of
bullocks, tended to these two, as appears. Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God
praise, and pay thy vow to the most high: and in the 22. verse. He that
offers unto me praise. shall glorify me, etc. In which places the Lord
shows, that he had ordained the other sacrifices, as temporal means to the
eternal use of thanksgiving: for so the Lord dealt with them, as with
children, leading them as it were by the hand, by temporal things to eternal.
Psalm. 14 1. 2. the Prophet says: Let my prayer be directed in thy sight, as
incense, and the lifting up of mine hand, as an evening sacrifice. Where he
shows, alluding to the sacrifices, that as a sweet smell is pleasant unto
man: so is the sacrifice of prayer fragrant unto the Lord. This is the
sacrifice every day to be offered, mentioned in Malachie, 1. 11 where the
Prophet, or rather the Lord, rebuking the Priests for their corrupt offerings,
says: From the rising up of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my Name
is great among the Gentiles, and in every place, incense shall be offered unto my
Name, and a pure offering, etc. Here by the Altar and sacrifice, the Prophet
means the spiritual service of God, which should be under the gospel, when
an end should be made to all the legal ceremonies, by Christ's only sacrifice.
Therefore Heb. 13. 15. Let us by him offer the sacrifice of praise always to
God, that is, the fruit of our lips, which confess his Name, etc. It is good
to note this praise and thanksgiving, which as it is the end of sacrifices,
which being joined with doing good, is the only offering left to Christians,
and only is pleasing unto God. For as our fathers might know, that their
sacrifices were not accepted, but as the Lord showed favor; so our prayer is
not accepted, but as the Lord in free mercy does graciously receive it.
Wherefore it is said, Genesis 4. The Lord has regard to Abel and his oblation,
that is, he accepted favorably the sacrifice of Abel. Thus we also use to
deal in our suites to noble persons, if it please you to accept my service, or
if you will vouchsafe to receive my suite, and to consider of my supplication:
so here the man of God says in effect; Look upon this my prayer with a
pitiful eye, and a merciful countenance, How Papists follow Peter.
We are then to know, how we by our prayers, get no credit with the Lord; but
the Lord gives credit to our prayers. If then God be not delighted with our
prayers, which are our best things, how much less then will he be pleased with
other things? The Papists then are carnal, and as our Savior Christ said of
Peter, whom they follow in faults, and not in graces) they savor not of the
things of the spirit* Well we are to learn, that if God so deals in our
prayers, he will so deal in all other things, which are the better by them.

The free will offering, etc. We are here also taught, to give unto the Lord a
free offering, for he loves a cheerful giver, and cannot abide us to come
unto him by constraint. The Lord in the old time would have the fattest of the
flocks, and the purest, and why? because he would thereby try his people,
whether his people would offer cheerfully and willingly or Abels offering. Heb.
11.4.5
no; and by so much it was unto him more acceptable, by how much it was offered
more freely. So Abel, Gen: 4 offered of the fat of the flock, that is, of the
best. A man's sacrifice may be refused, because of his corruption in him, and
there is no grace in man, without Faith in Christ, which may stand him in
steed, to make his sacrifice acceptable before God. We must the^ pray unto God,
that we may offer our prayers freely, that they may not be customable, but that
there may be in us a lust, a spirit, a desire to pray, remembering this saying
of the Prophet, accept the free will offering of my lips. His meaning then of
his words briefly, is this Prayer.
much, I do not this O Lord constrainedly, or against my will, but with a free
good will, and cheerful heart, I make my prayer unto thee. We see then our
dulnes and wearines in our prayer, which we must bewail in our selves, as that
which hinders us from the favor of God. Would we deal so with a Prince, as
to offer unto him the evil things, as says Malachie, chapt: 1. 8. And if ye
offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame, and
sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Prince, will he be content with
thee, or accept thy person? says the Lord of hosts. If we had a supplication
to our Prince, would we come so sluggishly, so irreverently, so carelessly, as
we come to pray? not remembering his Majesty, neither ^ostirre up ourselves in
prayer.
feeling our wants, nor desiring our requests, nor fearing the repulse, would
we not shake off all this sluggishnesse, and deadnes? then let us translate
this to the seeing of GOD by Faith, and coming before his presence by prayer,
do we come before his Majesty, as pricked with a fear thereof? are we
pressed with feeling our wants? do we fear the repulse? Oh let us crave by
prayer, that we may not come in fashion, but in fear, not on custom, but of
conscience, and with a free spirit. If the spirit make us free (says John)
then Spirit of faith.
are we free indeed* we are so captiuated of our selves, that we cannot be
free, but by the spirit. When then we see us in this dulnes, and custom in
hearing, reading, or praying, we must pray with David, Psalm: 51. 10. Create in
me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit Zach. 12. 10.
within me. 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with
thy free spirit. Where he having lost as it were, the freedom of the spirit,
the cleannes of his heart, and the joy of his mind, prays to have them all
restored again. And thus much for our admonition. To offer up our prayers to
God, albeit in perplexity of spirit we know not how to pray.
Now for our comforts.

I am sore afflicted, accept my free offerings. How could he before afflicted,
and yet free? when he desired to be quickened, he felt not this freedom:
Nevertheless, he ceased not to offer his sacrifice: whereby we are taught to
offer our prayers to God, although through perplexity of the spirit, we know
not how to pray, nor what to say, but speak sighing and groaning; for this is
a sacrifice acceptable to the Lord. For though we cannot pray with comfort,
yet we must crave of the Lord, even by mourning and complaining of our own
estate, and bewailing our case, this also is an acceptable sacrifice. For a
sacrifice of sacrifices, is a contrite heart, says the Prophet. And as we
said before out of the last of Esaias, to an humble heart will I look, says the
Lord.

When we cannot then find free joy, let us come with free sorrow, and when we
know Romans 8. 26. 27
not how to pray, Gods Spirit will teach us how to crave, how to sigh, and how
to pray, and the Lord will know the meaning of his own Spirit crying in us.
The meaning of the man of God in effect is, I power out my prayer in the
abundance of my grief, and from a full heart; we see when a man wants a
thing, though he cannot entreat his friend to obtain it of him, yet he may
freely mourn and lament his estate. Let us then, when Simile.
we cannot pray, not cease to mourn and to make a noise, as Ezechias, who
chattered like a Crane or Swallow: wherein he shows, that he was so pressed
with sorrow, that he could do nothing but sigh and groan. When we grow
therefore in languishing grieses, this is not the thing which pleases the
Lord, but it nourishes still in us mistrust We may see in the word of God,
the imperfect speeches of Gods children, and dearest Saints, uttering in their
grief their patheticall affections. For what was the remedy in this
confusion, but even to power out freely before the Lord their griefs and in
opening them to their friends; yea, and when they could do neither of both,
yet would they reveal their sorrows to the trees of the field.

His offering we see were his griefs. The Lord is God, and not an Idol, he
will hear Confession of sin.
thee, when thou criest unto him. It may be thou art ashamed to confess thy
faults before man, thou need not be ashamed to confess thy sin before
God. Man may cast thee in the teeth with thine infirmities, the Lord will never
vpbraide thee. Man will not keep counsel, neither can give thee counsel: the
Lord will both keep, and give thee counsel. Man may prescribe some means of
deliverance: but the Lord will both tell thee the means of thy deliverance and
will deliver thee. So the Prophet in his own example, Psalm. 42. 3. offers
his grief unto the Lord in tears, for when one wave went over another, and
his reason and his soul had made a tumult within himself, yet he said, Why
art thou cast down my soul, and unquiet within me? wait on GOD, etc. Let us
then consider of the promise made Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it
self makes request for us, with sighs, which cannot be expressed. Let us
then, though we know not how to pray in freedom of joy, pray in freedom of
sorrow. Let us begin Freedom of joy, and freedom of sorrow.
to offer in sorrow, and in time we shall offer in joy. For Psalm 30. 5. Though
weeping may abide at evening, yet joy comes in the morning. And Psalm. 126. 5.
Though we shall sow in tears, yet we shall reap in joy.

Verse. 109. M^ soul is continually in mine hand: yet do I not forget thy law.
Verse. 110: The nicked have l^ida snare for me: but I swarued not from thy
precepts.
BY this phrase is meant that he was at the point of death, as it may be
seen by other places of the Scriptures: as when the Ephramites were angry
with Iephtha because he went to war without them, he answered, I put my life
in my hand, etc. The Witch likewise which spoke to Saul, uses the same speech,
and I have put my soul in my hand, etc. And Job says, why should I rent my
flesh with my teeth, or carry my soul thus in my hand, etc. Where he means
that he was at deaths door. My soul sainteth, mine eyes fail, I wither like
a bottle, and such speeches declare his misery.

This great danger wherein he is, he uses as a third reason, to move the
Lord to hear his prayer: for by this means it came to pass that his prayer
was more earnest. The greatness of his grief he amplifieth in the 109. and 110.
verses.

And in this extremity of grief, we shall see that he had good cause to pray
earnestly, if we do consider the reasons which flesh and blood would put in to
his mind. For first when he saw that he was in such streights, that he could
not see means or ways to be delivered, then his reason would persuade him to
leave the light of the word, as a thing that in this case showed no light, and
to use policy for to help himself. This is a great temptation, and if God
had not assisted him, he might have fallen hereby. For we see that Saul, when
the Lord gave him no answer, by Vrim and Thummim, nor other ordinary means,
he thought good in policy to ask counsel of a Witch; which he before time
had punished with death. Thus would corrupted judgment have carried him to use
policy and unlawful means, and to have forsaken the lantern of the word, if
the Lord had not stayed him: and therefore this was one cause to move him most
earnestly to pray.

Secondly, if he looked to his affections, he should find them as corrupt: for
they would have carried him to revenge, when he saw himself to be
unreasonably and unconscionably dealt withal: and therefore to restrain the
headstrong affection of revenge, it was very needful that he should pray
fervently. For we see that when Nabal dealt churlishly and discourteously with
him, because he wanted this help of prayer to keep under his affection,
therefore he straightwayes swear he would kill him, and would have done so,
had not Abigail stayed him, and pacified his wrath: whereas at other times,
when Saul dealt injuriously with him, and the Lord might seem to have given
him into David's hand, yet because he had prepared his heart by prayer, he
abstained from revenge, and committed vengeance to the Lord. This then might
be a second reason to move him to pray.

Thirdly, when he saw all means taken away, that he must use no means of his
own, neither yet revenge himself: then would the devil be busy to drive
him to despair of help and safety: therefore great need he had to pray that
the lantern of the word might light him against the darkness of despair.

As man cannot bear too much prosperity, so he cannot bear too much
adversity: and not only extreme prosperity and adversity; but even some
little affliction, or prospetitie, will cause our corruption to break out. We
are then to accuse ourselves of unbelief, that do break out in little
things, more than this man in his great troubles. And to remedy this, we must
set this and such examples before us, to strengthen us, that as God helped
others, so he will help us.

If God dealt so with them, that had not such spiritual promises as we, nor
so clear light of the Gospel as we; and they so many ways pleased God, and
we have so many ways sinned; and they had so plentiful promises of this
life, and we have spiritual: then we must not think to escape troubles, but
must correct our womanish affection.

Verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are
the joy of mine heart.
THis is the amplifying of the first verse. This is a true sign that he loved
the word, because he loved it as well in trouble as in prosperity. This is a
rare sign of faith: for many are like Jobs wife, who in trouble forg^t the
commandments and slided from them: but the contrary was in Job.

We shall not then have a sure trial of our faith, before our troubles try
us, yea and sore troubles, that our soul is in our hand. But if in the
greatest we can say the Lord is our strength, our faith is strong: but if
little troubles make us fail, our strength is weak. Therefore we must meditate
of these things before they come, that we may stand when they come. If this man
in trouble forsook not Gods word, how ought we to be ashamed, ^^^ in
prosperity cannot stand steadfast? yea we may fear his judgments because
that* seeing we be led away with vanity now, when trouble comes we shall
fail away. For the continuance of sin does either brawne the hearts, or work
sore grief to them that have it.

Then must we look to the benefits we have received: for they are not
otherwise good but as they are sanctified by the word, prayer, etc. and when we
seek the glory of God, and the profit of our brethren. He first protests
his love to the word, in that he makes it his inheritance, which he proves
because his heart is set on it: for where the heart is, there is his treasure.

By testimonies is meant the covenant between God, and his people; wherein he
binds himself to them, and them to him. Some think that the excellency of
the word is here set out by many names: but we must look to the propriety of
every word: as before by judgments, so by this word testimonies, is meant the
covenant: not the commandments, because they cannot be our inheritance, for
they cannot comfort us, because we cannot fulfill them, but fail in them; and
cannot therefore take comfort, but it is rather a killing letter. It is the
Gospel that brings peace and comfort. The law when it is taken generally,
contains all the word; particularly, the commandments: so the word generally
both law and Gospel: but particularly, the promises: as Romans 10. So likewise
by the testimonies, when they are opposed to the law, is meant the promises of
the covenant: as Esaias. 8. and this testimony is confirmed to us by the
Sacraments, as to them by sacrifices.

The covenant is called an inheritance. First, because it is excellent.
Secondly, because it is proper to them. Thirdly, because it cannot be lost, but
by their own default.

It is his: first, because God has promised to write his law in his heart.
Secondly, because he has promised to him life by it. Thirdly, because God will
perform his promise.

This covenant is excellent, because hereby we are made the sons of God, and
having 1
our sins for given us, we shall be enabled in some measure to keep the law,
and that God with his providence will watch over us.
trouble and grief where with many are destroyed, yet shall turn to our good.
Again, it is excellent, because it is permanent, 1. Pet. 1. where it is called
incorruptible.

All things compared with this, are vile: I count all things but dung, says
Paul* Men will in danger make shipwreck of all, that they may save their
lives* so Paul did even willingly part with all things, and counted them but
dung for this, Phil. 3* 8. 9.

We must examine whether we make this account of our salvation, and of the
word, which is called milk, meat, silver, and all things, that we should
seek all things in it.

This inheritance is proper to the elect; as Iam. 4 Romans 12 and John says,
that This is our 2
priuileage to be the sons of God. For riches are common to the good and
evil, so is glory, etc. for both have these things, therefore they are no
true inheritance, because they are common to many: and these things cannot get
us heaven, nor deliver us from hell.

It cannot be lost but by our own default: for that, that some lose their
inheritance without default, is the corruption of the world; but forgiveness of
sins, and such like, 3
which are our inheritance, cannot be lost: for though Princes may be driven
from their kingdoms, yet cannot the gates of hell prevail against us; so
that, though the mighty can take away our life, yet they cannot take away the
love, providence and good will of God.

The things, and inheritance are most esteemed, which are of longest
continuance and Similie.
have longest endured; as to esteem leases better than to be tenants at will,
copies better than leases, heritages better than copies, because there is no
collusion and cavil of law can take it from us. This is most excellent: and
such is our inheritance: for we were elected thereto before all worlds, and
look to go the same way, that all the faithful before us have gone: and have
it confirmed with the Law, Prophets, and Gospel, and with the godly death and
holy life of his servants. This word brings to us the things that eye cannot
see, etc.

This is the chiefest of all, that it cannot be taken from us: for all
heresies and sects are discerned by the word truly understood, by this, I say,
that the word truly understood, gives faith, whereby we are surely persuaded
of the life to come and of the resurrection, Paul says, Act. 20. that without
faith in the resurrection there is no religion: so Ioh. 6. and Phil. 2.

Therefore Heresy, Papistrie, and Paganism can give no true inheritance,
because they cannot assure us of our salvation. Again, the truth gives us not
imaginary good things, but good things in truth; and assures us truly that
we shall be saved, and they have not these, they therefore have no true
inheritance.

He does not only confess that he made the Lord his inheritance; but also he
says that he makes the testimonies of God his inheritance; both because they
are the means whereby we come to have inheritance in heaven, and also because
they are assurances of the same. For the word is, as it were, the deed of
gift, and the Sacraments are as it were seals of the same.

Almost all men will confess that the word is to be had in this singular
account: but yet few do attribute this dignity to the Sacraments. And yet as
the indenture, when the seal is taken away, is nothing worth; so if we take
power from the Sacraments, then can we not have our assurance good. If we
cannot come to make this account of the word and Sacraments, yet as David did,
let us be sorry that we cannot. He when he was driven out of his kingdom, and
banished from the Temple, said, this will I require, that I may behold the
fair beauty of the Lord, etc. He had now lost his kingdom, wife, children,
and all, yet these if they might be restored, could not satisfy him, unless he
might also be in the house of the Lord. Then let us labor to have this desire,
that if we cannot with joy find it, we may with sorrow labor after it.

Verse. 112. I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even unto
the end.
IN the former verse he showed his faith, and his joy which came thereof; now
he shows that here in this joy he will keep the commandments: whereby he
shows that this was a true joy, because it wrought a care to do good. For if
we believe the promises truly, then we also love the commandments, otherwise
faith is vain; a care to live a godly life, nourishes faith in Gods promises.
Here is the cause then why many regard not the word and Sacraments; or if they
do a little, it is to no purpose, because they labor not to keep the
commandments. For unless they have care to do this, the word of God to them
cannot be profitable, nor the Sacraments sacred.

He further shows that this was a true care, in that it began at his heart:
for here is the beginning of al goodness, here is the root of religion, and
here the foundation of our faith must be laid. It is not the refraining from
outward actions, it is not the restraining of the outward man: but it is the
heart that we must travel about, and take care for. Hereof it came to pass,
that many of the Kings and people in the books of Chronicles continued in
godliness, and kept an even and equal course, because they prepared their
hearts; as Ezechias, Josias, and others: and hereof it came to pass that many
fell from the faith, because they sought not God in their hearts; as the
Scribes and Pharisees, which cleansed the outward actions only It must then be
our lesson which we must study on, to take care to our hearts above al things,
and to make the beginning there. For the cleannes of that pleases God, and the
filth of that displeases him.

But when he says, I have inclined, does he mean that of himself he could
apply his heart as he listed? No, no, he meant nothing less. For he was
conceived in sin; and how then were the preparations of his heart in his own
hand* Again, he prays, portion 5. Incline mine heart unto, etc. where he
does plainly show, that it was God that turned his heart at his good pleasure.
And no marvel truly, for the heart of man can no further be tried out, or
spied, than the Lord does gage and open it, that we may see thereinto, Ierem.
17. 9. And again, the hardness of man's heart is such, that it will sooner
break than bend; and may sooner be applied unto any thing, than unto goodness.
Where in the folly of Papists, and other heretics is more than manifest,
which by this and such like places, would prove the freewill of man, and that
he can incline himself to goodness; s^eing that here is nothing else meant,
than that men do then incline their hearts, when God does incline them; so
that the Lord he works all, and yet is it attributed to men, when they
receive and pursue the working of God: so the heart is free if God makes it
free, not else. If we presume of our free will, when we have it not, we shall
purpose, and God will otherwise dispose: for hereof comes it that so many
fall from their purposes.

God is not pleased, but with voluntary offering, therefore he applies his
heart; and we must beware of servile service.

The constantnes of his purpose to continue in this obedience, he shows, when
he says, he will do it for ever and ever, and that at al times, not only at
a communion, or at a fast, or in sickness, but at all times.

PORTION. 15. SAMECH.
Verse. 113. I hate vain inventions: but thy law do I love.
HE showed in the last words of the former part, that he means to be
constant to the end; now he shows four reasons thereof: the first reason
is the hatred that he had of all wickedness, in this first verse He has
used many arguments to prove to his heart that he loved God, and to commend it
to others by his example, as Paul does. This was one, the love that he had to
Gods law: secondly, his trust in the word: thirdly, his care to keep it, etc.
and therefore he often prays for it. He shows his love of it, in that he
prefers it to all other things: as in the eight portion, The earth is full
of thy goodness, teach me thy statutes; he makes it sweeter than honey, and
better and more precious than silver His desire that he had to keep it, and
the prayers that he makes for it, are to be seen almost in every portion.
Here he uses a proof, drawn from the contraries, which is a true and
sensible kind of reason; he loves the law, because he hated all the ways
of false hood, either in doctrine or life. Our reason will teach us, that there
is no agreement between fire and water, between light and darkness; and so if
we go through all the course of nature, we shall see that there is no
agreement between contraries.

This argument is often used in the Scriptures, as Psalm. 145. Do not I hate
them, etc. Zachar. 2. Tit. 2. 1. and most plainly 1. Cor. 6, What fellowship is
between light and darkness: etc.

This is needful for men to know, that they learn to hate superstition and
heresy, and to root it out, least whilst with Saul they spare wicked Agag,
they persecute righteous David.

If a man hate false religion, he shall never be infected with it: for if they
be persuaded that it will hurt them, then they will keep themselves far from
it. A man when he sees a toade, or any other hurtful beast, he will be sure
to keep him far from it: neither will we ever receive for meat that we know
to be poison: so if we believe that Popery and Heresy are poison, then we
will not receive them.

But if men think favorably of Heretics, and call them honest men, and well
dealing men, then it is very easy to entangle such a one.

Herein does the coldness of the love of Gods law in us appear, in that we do
so coldly hate the false.

Because love sets the price on things, and hatred makes us far from them,
therefore if we will continue in the truth, we must love it: and if we will
avoid the false, we must hate it.

And we must not be deceived by the outward show of an honest life, for if
comparison Note well: affliction soon tries godly and godless.
be made between Gods children and Heretics when they are both in prosperity,
or both in adversity, then we shall see the difference between them: for
otherwise, there is no comparison to be made, when they are one in prosperity,
and another under the cross. When the children of God are in trouble, and in
affliction, the graces of God do manifestly appear in them: for first they
have such spiritual wisdom, and understanding, that even poor and simple
souls in the country are able to answer the great and learned men of the
University: so that they be not able to withstand the Spirit that speaks in
them. Again, their boldness and courage in the truth is such, as that they be
not ashamed to speak, even before Kings, and the mightiest of their enemies.
But Heretics how far are they from this wisdom, when they come to answer,
they either say nothing at all, or else their reasons are so blockish, and
without sense, that a child would marvel at their folly: and though they set
some face and show upon them, yet if they be unripped, and then referred to
their heads, they are but vanity. As for their boldness and courage, it is
nothing: for if they speak to some simple man, or in some secret place, then
will they be bold to speak their pleasure: but call the^ to the place of
judgment, or before them that are able to call The wicked are but cowards
under the cross.
them to accounts, then their answers are to seek. And here of it comes,
that they are perjured, unfaithful, not men of their word, but dastards and
cowards, and such as will not stand to the truth.

In suffering there is a great diversity between them: for if the child of
God come to suffer, he is neither effeminate to account the pain too painful,
neither yet blockish without sense and feeling in suffering: but he feels the
smart and bitterness of it, and yet feeling Gods favor he overcomes it. And
this is true patience indeed, when men feel the pain to be grievous, and yet
through the hope and feeling of Gods favor do overcome it: and in suffering
they can pray for their persecutors, and can be contented to shed their blood
for the conversion of those that seek their subversion and overthrow. Deal
Heretics thus? or do they not clean contrary? Yes: for in their suffering
they are either as men without sense, bereaved of their wits; so they are
rather blocks and stones, than men, and their suffering is blockishnes, and
not patience: or else they are effeminate and womanish, to howl and cry out
in their pains, and to die with cursing and banning and all kind of railing.
Thus they deal. This experience have we seen of both, even within our days.

If you compare them together when they are both of them in prosperity, and if
you then consider their lives, you shall also see that there is great
difference. For the children of God, whilst they love the word, the
Sacraments, and discipline, they cannot long lie and continue in any sin: for
the word will rebuke them, the Sacraments will admonish them, and discipline
will also help to bring them from it: but the wicked live and lie as in a dead
sleep in sin in prosperity, and will not be wakened.

He does not only speak of corruption in doctrine, but also in manners: as in
every commandment, we cannot love the good, but we must also hate the
contrary: as in lust, adultery, etc. as Joseph hated his Mistress, when he
once perceived that she was unclean. Then whilst men are given to vanity on
the Sabbath, they love not the Sabbath: for if they did, they would either take
heed of such; or if they fell into them, they would recover themselves. Then
we cannot love the Sabbath, unless we delight in it, and hate the contrary.
Then if we will try whether we love the word, let us try it by the hatred of
naughtines in us, and this if we feel, we may be comforted, for God will work
by this.

The word ( thoughts) is a metaphor from the crooked boughs of a tree, and
signifies, that as the trees have their boughs spread abroad crookedly, so do
thoughts grow out of men. And his meaning is, that he hated these overthwart
thoughts. Therefore he labored not only for the outward hatred, but even the
imaginations that are contrary thereto, as the thoughts of idolatry,
uncleanness, etc. and to these all he bids battle, that he may love the law.
This is a good thing for us: for though we come not to idolatry, murder,
adultery, etc. yet the evil thoughts come into our minds; and these we must
not suffer to be settled, but at the first we must hate them, and drive them out.

Thoughts are not free, therefore neither it is enough to love in show, but we
must also love in thought: for if we favor them, we may by little and little
be carried away. For hereof it comes that men are brought to revenge, and
other evils, because they make not conscience of the thoughts. Thus we see that
men have thoughts of herefie, anger. etc. and yet they are not at defiance with
them, and therefore they fall into the sin. Hereof men fall into adultery,
become enemies to God, his Ministers, and religion: for whilst they make no
conscience of thoughts, they fall into the sins. It is true then, that we
must first fight against reason, when we will fight against sin, as a man
fights not against swearing, because not against anger; and not against
anger, because not against reason.

Verse. 114. Thou art my refuge and shield, and I trust in thy word.
BEcause the Prophet could not persuade himself of any other safety, than of
the safe^^^^ which he had under the Lord, he shows that so long as he put his
trust in Gods (...)s, he feared nothing. And surely this ought to be the
principal thing among Christians* to look for none other defense, than that
which is to be looked for out of the promises of God. For what is the cause,
why when we are in danger, in poverty, in any distress, we have so many
bypath, and can invent unlawful means and shifts so for our deliverance,
but only because the Lord and his word is not our refuge and our shield? For
if we were once persuaded, that God were our tower to defend us, and our shield
to cover us, we should be stayed. If we then call on God in our need, we
must know, that Psalm. 33. verse. 18. The eye of the Lord is upon them, that
fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercies. And that Psalm. 145. 18. He
will fulfill the desire of them, that fear him, he also will hear their
cry, and will save them. And our cause being good, we need not to doubt of
him: for Christ's temptations. Matthew. 4.
he has promised to be our shield and buckler. So our Savior Christ being
tempted of Satan to turn the stones into bread, was moved by him to distrust
Gods providence: What (says he) do thou think, that if thou were the Son
of God, thou should be left in such wants? make some shift therefore for
thy self. But Christ knowing God to be the author of his need, was assured
that he would secretly nourish him, until he had received ordinary means
again, and so strengthened himself in Gods promises. Likewise, when we are in
need or in peril, Satan will cause us to use one shift or other: but we must
answer him, The Lord is my shield and tower, I am sure enough; and therefore I
hate all ill inventions; I put my trust in the Lord.

We acknowledge this with our tongue, yet it is a hard thing to be practiced,
to put our Hard to trust and rest on Gods promises.
trust in Gods word. For howsoever we will grant indeed, that we must put
our trust in God; yet we hardly yield unto this, that we must trust in his
word: but we must here correct this unbelief, and learn that if we seek for
help at God, we must trust in his word. Does Gods word threaten his justice,
and can we find in our lives, that if we use evil means, we shall be
punished? Does Gods word assure us, that God is merciful, and do we believe
that Jesus Christ came to save sinners, although we were the greatest, and that
he came to call sinners, and not the righteous to repentance, and that Jesus
Christ came to save that which was lost, and to refresh all that are weary and
heavy laden? Thus the man of God says, portion 8. 1. O Lord, thou art my
portion, I have determined to keep thy law. And portion 14. 6. Thy testimonies
have I taken, as an heritage for ever, for they are the very joy of my heart.
Thus he shows, that we must seek for that in Gods word, which we seek for
of Sim^ ^.
him. For his word is a conduit or waterpipe, whereby the Lord conueying his
mercies unto us; will have them run through unto us. Do we believe then the
promises that God will provide for us? then let us beware of al wicked shifts,
and trust only in his word. For if we believe God to be our tower, we must
look to Gods word. The Heathen men and the profane worldlings, will speak
gloriously of the goodness, of the strength, and of the mercy of God: but when
they come to see it in the word, they will err altogether out of the way;
whereby they show how they utter more in their tongues, than they perform in
truth. For the Lord has laid that help on his word, which he would have us
to seek for at his hand: so Christ by the word put the devil to flight, with
these words in effect, Thou would have me, Satan, to mistrust my Fathers
providence, and to give my self to be taught of thee: but I know he will keep
me in all my necessities, and why? because he has said, Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: the
Lord has provided ordinary means to nourish me, and has not commanded that
stones should be made bread, and why then should I use unlawful means?
Wherefore I will stay my self upon my Fathers providence. We see, he might
have said, that God is almighty and strong, or that by his mighty power he
might have put off Satan; but he recites the words of Moses, which he used,
when the Lord so wonderfully had preserved his people the Israelites in the
wilderness, without ordinary means. We must in like manner, when Satan
shall set upon us in time of need, say, it is written, The Lord is just and
true in all his promises. It is written, The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their cry, nothing wants to them that
fear him. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they which seek the
Lord, shall want nothing which is good. It is written, Romans 8. verse. 35. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? When we are tempted
then with doubting in our selves, that we shall not escape, we must know that
it is written, Romans 8. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against us? 32.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death: how shall he
not with him give us all things also? If we be tempted to steal, we must say,
as it is written, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God, knowing that God is able to preserve us
without ordinary means.

Verse. 115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my
God.
THe cause why the man of God could not so stay himself on the Lord, was,
because what way soever he turned himself, he could see no man that would
help him. He had no help of the world, every man provided for himself, some
shifted this way, another that way, he could see no good example of any, which
either believed Gods promises to be true, or were ready to obey his
commandments. Wherefore it is manifest, that they were impediments rather
than furtherances unto him. For else why should he say, Away from me ye wicked*
etc?

Were there so many impediments in his days, and shall we think there are not
so many in ours? or was that age wherein he lived more wicked, than the age
wherein we live? First, we are nothing like him in good things, he had greater
graces of God than we have, he had gone further in holiness than we; we live
in more wicked days than he did. For whom shall we have to follow? Some follow
this religion, some follow that; some give Few men truly fearing.
themselves to this shift, some to that: so that we have no examples to build
us upon, but a multitude to bring us from the right way. Seeing then we are
far worse than the Prophet, and our days worse than his times let us say,
Away from me ye wicked: that is, seeing we cannot avoid our dwelling and
living among the wicked; yet Lord, let us be kept from the corrupt example of
the wicked, and grant that we may eschew all familiarity with them. And as in
harvest, if in every place of the lands, where we reap or mow, were Simile.
Snakes, we would be very wary least we were stung or impoysoned: so had we
need in these dangerous and plentiful days of sin, to be circumspect, least
we be either impoysoned To be poisoned with false doctrine, or stung with an
evil conscience.
with false doctrine, or stung with an evil conscience. And as a man being a
mere stranger in goodness, living in the company of godly men, hearing them,
seeing them, and conferring with them in good things, would by Gods grace so be
converted: so a good man falling into the familiarity, and like affections,
speeches, and actions of the wicked, shall easily be corrupted. We shall see
sooner that we are infected and hurt, than we shall epsy how we are infected
and hurt, and though presently we see it not, yet hereafter we shall. And as
it is the mercy of God to be good by the communion of Saints: so it is the
just judgment of God to be wicked, with the company of the ungodly. Neither
must we think, that here is meant to go out of the world, to avoid the evil
(for we live all under one Sun, which is above us, we tread all on one earth
which is under us, we use all one water for our necessities, we have like
callings with them, we join in the same towns with them, yea and often dwell
in one house with them) but we must beware we have no fellowship with them in
their sin, we must away with their devices to mistrust Gods mercy, No
familiarity with the wicked.
we must hate their imaginations, wherewith they displease God, we must not
draw in their yoke with them.

If then thou have a wicked father, or if thou have a wicked son, or ungodly
servant, or an evil companion, thou must not have familiarity, or draw in a
line with them, thou must not be a fellow or a companion in sin with them,
so shall we keep our selves unspotted. For as the evil men, if they purpose
to be obstinate in sin, will take no profit by the company of the godly: so
the good men, if they will fear and suspect the ungodliness of the wicked, and
look unto their ways, shall by the Lord be preserved from their evil. For
we see, that as the evil men are not the better for the godly, with whom they
are joined in the same town or house with them, because they are so shie of
goodness; so, if we be as shie of their wickedness, we shall be freed from
much ungodliness. Wherefore we must not be like affected, we must not think as
they think, speak as they speak, do as they do, nor use their calling as
they do. Otherwise we see, that as the evil by the godly are bettered, so
the good are made worse by the ungodly. Thus we have heard, that as the man of
God in the first showed himself to have an hatred to the secret devices of
man's imaginations: so in the second he sets down a reason of the same,
where we declared, that we could never be brought to the true hatred of evil
inventions, until we be thoroughly persuaded of Gods providence; whereof when we
be once truly persuaded, we shall not need to swerve this way or that way,
because in all assaults we have a sufficient refuge in God.

In that he puts his trust in Gods word, we must learn, that we must never
sever faith and Gods promises, whereby we must be stayed, and lean to his
providence: otherwise we shall have but vain speculations of his providence,
until we know out of the word, to whom the promises do appertain, and what
he requires of them, to whom they are made. On which word of God, whilst we
take hold, even as a shield safegardeth us from the blow of the adversary, so
the promises of God are a sufficient buckler to defend us from the darts of our
enemy. So that, if we have the Lord for our tower against Satan, if we be in
poverty, we shall see the Lord our shield and wealth; if we be in sickness*
he shall be our castle and health. The Israelites had proof hereof, who, so
long, as they made the Lord their shield and refuge, were not once touched of
their enemies. If this faith be in us, then shall we be persuaded, that the
hearing of the word, and time which we spend in prayer to the Lord, will not
hinder our calling, nor hurt our profit* but so long as we walk in our ways,
joining with our calling the hearing of Gods word, and prayer, he will be our
defense and tower, and either save us from damage, or turn all our evils to
our good. We must see all this out of the word of God. For our Savior Christ
(as we said before) did not rest in the omnipotency of God to put away Satan
being an evil spirit, and therefore having nothing to do with him, but
withstood him with this, It is written, still alleging the word of God:
showing, that whilst he had bread: he should use it as an How the faith of
Gods children suffers from the vane imaginations of unbelievers. Simile.
ordinary mean, and when he had none, ^e should not make bread of stones, but
stay upon the blessing of God which is above all means. Thus we see how the
promises of God in his word did stay him.

And here see how the faith of Gods children differs from the loose
imaginations of the wicked, who, though they give great titles to the Lord of
his mercy, justice, love, and providence, never look for this in his word.
But if we will obey the Lord, and wait upon his promises, we must do it by
the word, which is as a pipe, through which do flow Gods graces toward us,
and as a chariot to bring his will unto us. We are not then to look into the
air, or elsewhere for Gods will, than in his word; but trusting still on God,
we must look for help in his promises.

That the man of God might do this the better, he severed himself from the
wicked, giving us to understand, that he could not go forward, in that he saw
so few examples of good, and so many examples of evil, whereby so many by
paths are ministered unto him to step out of the right way, in seeing the
corruptions of that generation. When we see then out of the word how we should
believe, what we should do, what we should eschew, and look into the world,
we shall find so many wicked ones, that which way soever a man would turn
himself, although he would search the world with a candle, he shall find
many evil to corrupt him, but few good to guide him. And seeing our times are
worse, than the times wherein the Prophet lived, and we are easier and readier
to take harm by evil examples, than he was; we must know, that whosoever will
be truly taught to hate vain inventions, and love the word of God, he must
learn that which is written in the first Psalm, that is, that we walk not in
the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners. Away then with
them that say, the Preacher indeed speaks well, and teaches the truth
aright, but who does it? and rather let us bid the evil away from us, let us
follow them that do well, so far as they follow Christ and his word, let us
be heedfull to look to our ways, and be the more careful, because in former
ages the Lord has set before us so many examples of falling. We may
communicate with them in our calling, we may be knit to them by consanguinitie
we may be joined with them in affinity, and as neighbors dwell together, we
cannot in these things be well free from them: yet we must not deal with them
as they be wicked, we must not draw in the yoke with them, we must not be
given to the like studies, to the like endeavors, and enterprises with them.
Concerning their calling in the world, we may use them, but not according to
their corrupt dealing with the world. We see the Prophet his meaning is, Away
from me ye wicked, ye weaken my faith in Gods promises by your inventions, you
inkindle mistrust in me, I will not yield to you, I will not consent to you,
nor take part in any of your inventions: for I trust in my God, he is my
shield, and my refuge.

Here we may also learn, how to discern between their persons, wherein they
bear Difference between persons, and callings, and lives.
the image of God and their callings, which are the ordinance of God, and
between their lives, which are full of corruptions. If we look but into the
first commandment, we shall see how hard a thing it is to keep Gods law,
unless we sequester ourselves from the society of sin How shall we believe
among unbelievers, or pray to the Lord among profane persons, or trust in the
Lord among such shifters? For as evil men continuing in the company of godly
men, shall suddenly at one time or other be colored with their good things:
so the godly abiding in the meetings of the wicked, unless they be very
circumspect, Note. Note well the society of the wicked.
and suspect their own weakness, will suddenly be taken. We know that Joseph
being in Pharaohs Court, began to be colored with the Egyptians corruptions.
If then we have any just cause of meeting with the wicked, we must not avoid
their company; but we must mislike their manners, we must rebuke, reprove, and
cry against their sins; we must fear our selves, and in every thing suspect
them. But let us see how dangerous a thing it is to be with the wicked, and
what means there be with them for our destruction: Whether we be friends, and
in league with them, or foes and at defiance with them, all is one. For if we
be at defiance with them, how will they bring our persons in contempt, and
raise many calumnious speeches against us, and affray us with injuries? If we
be in friendship with them, in what danger are we least they should inueagle
us, allure us, and take us slily away from a good conscience. If we be at
defiance with them, they will dismay us with threatenings: Note.
if we be in friendship with them, we cannot deal so roughly against their
sins, we can hardly gainesay them in their wickedness, we are drawn away
by them, and wax cold by little and little in those things wherein we have
been zealous. Oh here then appears the wonderful and unspeakable mercy of
God to his children in this world to keep them as sheep among wolves, and to
save them from the infection of sin, in the midst of a wicked and sinful
generation.

It follows in this verse, That I may keep the commandments of my God. As
if he should have said, he is not your God, because you put not your trust in
him, but follow your own inventions: he is my God I love him; I fear him, I
put my trust in him; I love his word, because his promises are sweet to me; I
fear to sin, because his threatenings prove true; I trust in him, because of
his word: he is none of your God, neither can you assure your selves of him.
For as Portion 20.3 Salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not
thy statutes. No, no, God is grieved and displeased with you, though for a
while he spare you, he shall one day punish you, he is my protector and
defender.

This is a notable thing, and worthy to be observed. The man of God recouereth
himself, because God has promised in his word, that he will defend his as
with a shield, but he will put to flight the armies of their adversaries. He
reasons therefore thus with himself. The Lord has promised to be a tower
and buckler for them, that put their trust in him, and believe his word: I
believe this to be true, I see it shall come to pass according to his word:
therefore he is my God, my shield, and my refuge.

Let us learn in time of trouble, thus to recover our selves. For do we not
see, how now adays some take this way, and some take that way, some use this
shift, and some have that policy, do their dealings show, that God is on
their side, or that he will take their part? nay rather that he is far from
the^. We must every one frame this reason, which the Prophet uses, that every
man may say, I trust in Gods word, I hate the vain shifts of the wicked, God
is my God. My God: we must here mark, that we give not God sufficient
honor, To love God only as we be taught in his word.
until we cleave wholly unto him, as he requires of us in his first
commandment. For we then have him to be our only God when we only fear
him, when we only love him, when we only obey him, when we put our trust in
him alone. So that we deny him his honor, until we leaving all other fetches
and devises of loving, fearing, obeying and trusting in him; and love, fear,
obey, and trust in him, as we are only and wholly taught in his word. Excellent
is that place of the Prophet, Psalm 73. where the man of God, seeing the evil
men in number many, in power great; and good men in number few, and ability
weak, began to be in a dangerous estate, in thinking almost wickedly of Gods
providence, and began to be moved, and to dispute as it were with God about the
prosperity of the wicked, and poverty of the godly, until he came to look
into the glass of Gods word, where he found, that though the wicked seemed to
have an happy time for a while, yet through Gods secret curse, they had a
fearful end, and though Gods children were tried with many troubles, yet
through Gods secret blessings they had happy issues.

Thus says he, Was I so foolish and ignorant, and as a beast before thee,
whiles by mine own wit and reason I would go about to search out thy secret
judgments. Yet says he, I was always with thee, thou have holden me by my
right hand, and howsoever it went with the wicked, my faith in thy providence
did assure me, that thou did watch over me, and would not finally
forsake me* Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I have desired none in the
earth but thee. Though my flesh should pine away, and I should consume, yet am
I persuaded that thou will not forsake me, they go a whoring, and thou
destroiest them; but as for me, it is good that I trust in thee: that is, let
all the world fall from thee, yet I see their end shall be fearful, and
therefore I will still trust, and stay on thee. Mark what word he uses to
Similie. To trust only in God.
paint forth mistrust in God, he calls it to go a whoring; we know what a
grievous thing it is for a woman to prostitute herself to a baude; so
monstrous a thing it is to give our trust to any but to God. Wherefore we must
fight against the corruptions of the world, not by the sight of reason, but by
looking into the glass of Gods word.

Let us search then, which be the promises of God, to stir us up to do good,
which be his threatenings to make us afraid of sin, what examples we have of
good men, that we may follow them, what examples of evil to avoid them. For
here be the pictures of good men, here be the lively anatomies of the godly,
here we may take delight in beholding them. Let us discern by the word who
are true worshippers, who are Idolaters. Let us look what rules the Lord does
give in his word, to know the truth, and in whom it is; to discern heresies,
and in whom they be. Then we shall see, that this man is sound in religion,
and careful of a good life, the Lord is his God, this man is void of true
knowledge, and breaks the law of the Lord, therefore undoubtedly God is far
from him. This man though his knowledge be imperfect, yet he loves to learn
the truth, this man is a good companion for me; that man is an unbeliever, and
trusts not in God, I will not therefore meddle with him. Well now we have
learned, that we never cleave wholly unto God, until all the corruptions of the
world be not able to dismay us, but rather being stayed and established on the
word of God we know assuredly, that the Lord will not be among the wicked. We
have bin taught that if we will truly believe in God, we must believe in him
according to his word, otherwise he is but an Idol unto us, or a false God
framed unto us after the imagination of our own hearts. And if we will truly
discern between good men and evil, we must not judge them by our own
reason, the common opinion of men, or according to their prosperity and
adversity: for so the world cannot perceive who be Gods children, because the
wicked often flourish, and Gods children are vexed: but we must look into the
word and see there, how God sets himself against the wicked, and promises
to be near at hand to his saints.

This may commend unto us what a necessary thing the study of the Scriptures
is, which teach us to know God and his true worshippers: for otherwise we shall
judge heretics to be true worshippers, and count wicked men honest.

Verse. 116. Stablish me according to thy free promise, that I may live, and
let me not be disappointed of mine hope.
HEre the man of God desires, that the Lord would keep him safe and sure, and
that he would confirm him and strengthen him in his word: where we see he
prays for a thing mentioned before. Faith is not a sleeping thing, lying dead
in us, but it is quick The godly often troubled with unbelief.
and is nourished by the word. For Gods children do not so believe, but that
they are often troubled with unbelief: yea the Lord does often suffer them to
see their unbelief in themselves to strive against it.

We see here, how the man of God felt some wavering in himself, he was not
always in one estate, his faith was not ever at one stay, his belief had some
unbelief with it, and believing he was afraid of himself. Thus we know, Gods
children are such, as do not presume, but they suspect themselves, and think
humbly of themselves, which makes them often to pray, that they may be
confirmed to persevere. For when we begin to be secure, and to think too well
of our selves, then we cast off prayer, and lay aside all trust in Gods word,
so that God casts us off for our pride, and Satan is ready to beguile us.
We must not then satisfy our selves, if we believe, but our faith must make us
to grow in fear, and to be more careful to please, and more grieved to
displease God; we must desire of God to have his promises confirmed and
ratified in us, because we are in a very slippery estate. For as a man walking
on slippery ice, and not heedfull to his steps, nor fearing himself, is most
ready to fall; so we in this world, unless we look very circumspectly to our
selves, are in great danger of sliding down. So fickle and frail is the world,
that in every place we may take a fall: and as they which are on an high hill
and steep, are in peril of falling down; so in the world, which has such a
downfall, unless we be very wary, and stay our selves on Gods word, we are
most ready to slip.

We may see in former times, how the dear Saints of God have fallen through
security, and for want of this fear of themselves. Noah though a man
preserved from the corruptions of the old world, was beguiled of Satan for
presuming in his own strength. Lot also through his corruption and Satan's
policy, was deceived, not suspecting himself. When David had not this fear,
but hoped that he was sure as he thought, Psalm. 30. he should never be
removed, he fell foully, and yet so deceitful, that he could not see his
fall in the space of an whole year. We see then how hard a thing it is to
keep on our course in this world, and that it is the mighty power of God, as
witnesses Peter in his former Epistle, that we are kept in the faith. We are
not our own guardians, we are not able to take the government of our selves;
nay, our Savior Christ said, that if it were possible, the very elect should
be deceived; so great is the power of the world, the subtlety of the flesh,
and guilesulnesse of the devil. But, because they be humble, they fear
themselves, they seek the Lord by prayer, and are desirous to be established
in the promises of God, they are as strong as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but remains for ever, Psalm 125.1. Though then we be weak, yet our
Christ is strong, though we have many enemies, yet the Lord has promised to be
our stay against them all. Let us know Perseverance
that perseverance is as well the gift of God, as to come at first to God. We
know what a free gift of God it was, that we came to him. He sought us, when
we desired him not; he found us, when we sought him not. We see how before our
calling, we closed our eyes, and would not see him, we stopped our ears, and
would not hear him, we drew back, and refused to go to him, and the Lord was
feign to draw us out; so that our beginning came of God, who reformed our
judgments, and renewed our affections: now to be established in seeing,
hearing, and willingly drawing near unto God, is his only gift also. Well, we
must be afraid of our selves, and suspect our selves. For why do we slip
often into such gross sins? why are we carried away with our own
affections? why do so many good motions die and perish in us, but only because
of our security, we are not careful to please God, we are not afraid to
offend God? Well, if we see that security has been the cause of our woe, let
us labor to be careful, which is the cause of our good: if security has
been the cause we feared not, let us now be careful, that we may be afraid of
our frailty, and trust in Gods word. Otherwise if we be quiet with our selves,
and yield to presumption, God will suffer us to fall. This is the cause, why
our sins break out often to Gods dishonor, and to the grief of our own
consciences, because we do not more carefully to look our thoughts, and watch
over our words.

It is added in this verse, that I may live. So he says, Portion 10.4. Let thy
tender mercies come unto me, that I may live. We see here, that the children
of God think they have no life, if they live not in Gods life. For, if we
think we are alive, because we see, so do the bruit beasts; if we think we
are alive, because we hear, so do the cattle; if we think we are alive,
because we eat and drink, or sleep, so do beasts; if we think we live,
because we do reason and confer, so do the Heathen. The life of Gods
children, is the death of sin; for where sin is alive, there that part is
dead unto God. Art thou then given to malice, to swearing, to cursing, to
breaking of the Sabbath, to adultery, to filthiness, to stealing, or slandring?
surely then art thou dead, and if God should take away thy life from thee
whilst thou art in this estate, thy soul should go sooner to hell, than thy
body to the grave. We now see, that Gods children, finding themselves dull and
slow to good things, when they cannot either rejoice in the promises of God,
or find their inward man delighted with the law of God, think themselves to
be dead.

The Prophets meaning is this: I am even as a lump of flesh, I am like an
image, or like an idol of Gods child, I bear the face of his child, but I
am as dead, and as a block, or a stock, or an idol. For as an idol has
eyes and sees not; ears, and hears not; mouth and speaks not; feet and
goes not: even so have I eyes, but I see not the glory of my God; I have
ears, but I hear not the word of God; I have a mouth, but I show not forth
the judgments of God; I have feet, but I walk not in the law of my God. The
just shall live by faith, Hab. 2. Romans 1. Now I live no more, but Christ lives
in me, says the Apostle. Oh that men would consider this, that they are dead
otherwise than their life is hidden in the promise, and they have no life but
in Christ, and from his spirit. If the Prophet said this of himself, where is
the faith of our protestants, where is the life of the godly, where is their
hope of a better life, where is their practice of repentance, where is the
peace of conscience, that passes all understanding, where is the joy of
Christians, where is the care of mortification, where is the quickness of
sanctification; where are all these become? They are sewe and dead to good
works, they live in sin, they be but Christians in name, they are very
idols: There is no life but in the word, which we must find by experience in
our selves. When Gods children find this life of God in them, then are they
merry and glad; but when they feel, that God withdraws his spirit from
them, then they see how they are dead, dull, and careless, as they were wont
to be before they were regenerate. Shall not this make us more careful and
zealous of good works, and to be more jealous of our selves? Let us consider
this, that it is a joy to have a life: and that even the life of God, the life
of Angels, the life of Christ, when we contemn this life: when we are zealous
of good works, when we feel spiritual joys, when we look for a crown of
glory, when we labor to be renewed to the image of Christ. This is an
heavenly life, and though we will sweat, and eat, and drink, this is common
with the beasts of the field, and having no experience of faith in us, we are
either dangerously sick, or altogether dead. If we think it an hard matter,
to restore nature in a consumption, how hard a thing is it to restore Simile.
grace and salvation in a consumption of the soul? If we are without hope,
when a man is in a languishing disease, when he has no delight to eat, when
he cannot brook The co^sumption of the soul.
his meat, and his sleep is gone from him, he cannot labor, and Physicians
dare not meddle with him: what hope is there when we are in such a consumption,
that the wo^d which we hear does us no good, the Sacraments which we receive
do us no comfort, prayer does us no good, and when we cannot abide to labor
in good works? surely it is a token we are almost languished to death, if we
be not already dead we are in extreme danger. The Lord indeed is gracious
and would not our death, but if we be consuming and see it not, if Gods life
be going from us, and Satan's life is coming to us, if Gods graces be
languishing in us, surely we are as dead. Let us then search our own
corruptione, that we may see how near we are to life, or how near we are to
death, whether we grow or consume, whether for the one we are to fear and
pray to God, or for the other to rejoice and praise God.

Thus we have heard, that the faith of Gods children are not so sirme, as that
it is never shaken, they are not always in the tenor, and as the Lord gives
them of his grace in measure, so he gives them at sometimes more, at
sometimes less: he often humbles How Gods saints have many changes in this
life and wherefore.
them with incredulity, to exercise them in prayer, and to confirm them the
more by his Spirit, whereof they have had a pledge in his word. We have
learned, that the Prophet thought himself to have no life, but as he had the
feeling of the life of the Son of God, to be conveyed to him by the spirit of
God, through the working of the word of God: and that as we breathe, eat,
play, and labor, we have nothing differing from brute beasts; as we have
five wits to discourse of things, we have nothing more than the heathen, than
the Turks, than the ungodly infidels. The Scriptures show that all that live
in ignorance Ignorance
and sin are dead: for they that live in ignorance, sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, as it is in the song of Zachary: and if we live in sin,
the Apostle witnesses, we are but dead, Ephesians: 2.1. The death of sin, is the
life of a man: and the life of sin, is the Romans 6. 2.
death of a man; sin then I mean to live in us, when we give over our
selves to sin with pleasure, and lie in our sin with delight.

And yet here is a further thing, for the man of God speaks of the experience
of Gods children, who when they feel delight in prayer, and their inward man
delighted with the word of God, they think they are alive, and that so long
they walk in the land of the living; but when they fall into some sin, and
become unthankful or pensive, there comes a dulnes and deadnes of heart, they
are not able to see any difference between themselves and the reprobates, and
finding in themselves such an heap of ill inclinations, they think themselves
to be dead.

It follows in the verse: And disappoint me not of mine hope. As if he should
say: O Lord, even as I trust in thy word, so my hope is that thy word shall be
accomplished. As faith is Hope*
the mother of hope, so hope is the daughter and nurse of faith: for faith
breeds hope, and hope nourishes faith: faith assures us of the truth of
Gods word, hope waits for the accomplishment of it. His meaning then is: Lord
as I trust in thy word, so strengthen my faith and disappoint me not of my
hope, for howsoever the wicked continue for a while, I believe that I shall
have a glorious end, I believe it is not lost labor to serve the Lord, O Lord
I hope to see them trodden down, that break thy statutes. Thus we see how Gods
children fear their unbelief, and nourish their faith with prayer: so the
true Minister of God cannot but be zealous to stir up his people to fervent
and frequent prayer. We see the one half of this Psalm to be prayer; and
that in every portion, two or three or four verses be prayers. And the man of
God, being willing to bring his knowledge to feeling, has still this prayer,
Stay m^e in thy word: teach me thy statutes: disappoint me not of Feeling and
knowledge how confirmed.
my hope: establish thy promises to thy servant. For as reading, hearing, and
conferring, do more increase knowledge than feeling; so meditating, praying,
and singing do more nourish feeling than knowledge. Had he that had such a
faith in Gods word, such joy, such delight, such life in the spirit, need so
often and fervently to pray? then I beseech you let us pray, pray, pray.

Verse. 117. Stay thou me, and I shall be safe, and I will delight continually
in thy statutes.
THis agrees with that in the verse going before, stablish me according to
thy promise. Had thou need David to be stayed? did thou waver? oh how need
we to be stayed, and to pray against our wavering? he means here thus much:
although I am well minded, and delight in thy law, yet I am so brittle and so
slipperie, that if thou stay me not, I shall sall, I am gone. Oh man of God,
feeling his own wants and infirmities! I shall be safe, that is, If I be not
stayed by thine hand I shall be at the last cast. Psalm. 30. 6 he said, he
should never be removed: here is another spirit, where he says, he should be
safe. But here woeful experience taught him, that he durst not be stayed on
himself: whereby he declares, that as without Gods word, he could not be
safe: so come what come would, befall what danger could befall, in the Lords
word he was stayed sufficiently. Then we are to learn, that the promises of
God must engender in us a care and fear of our selves; for if we begin once to
be quiet with our selves, when we begin to be secure and presumptuous, let us
assure our selves, that we are not far from sin. But if we fear that we
are staggering and reeling persons, and that we are very slipperie, is there
not cause of humbling, that this humblenes should breed carfulness;
carfulness should cause watchfulness; watchfulness should use the means;
and the means should be sanctified by prayer? Then come hell, come the devil,
come the world, come the flesh, if the Lord stay us, we shall live and not die,
we shall surely not miscarie. And I will delight continually in thy statutes.
We see here that there is no free will, for he prays likewise Port. 5. 1.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes. Neither did he promise of himself
before, but did hope in the Lord. Such brittlenes is in the world, such
sleights in the flesh, such slinesse in Satan, such corrupt examples in the
world, that unless the Lord stay us, we are so far off from delight in good,
that we are ready to fall into great sins. Every man therefore is to search
his own heart, and by the cause we may come to the effects, and by the tree
may conjecture of the fruit: so by the effects we may judge of the cause, and
by the fruit we may judge of the tree. Where is now this delight, when we
hear the word, we hear it with such coldness? therefore it is a manifest
proof we are not sta^ed in the Lord. For whosoever does not delight in the
word, he may deceive his own soul: but surely as yet he is not stayed on God.
If we are not delighted, then are we st^ied on our own selves, but if the Lord
work in us, then shall we feel delight. This is a grief of my soul, that I
see no delight in the Lords day, all things are done for Wherefore the Lord does
no more bless public exercises.
fashion, but the power of godliness is not among us. The cause is the want of
private exercises; the want of private reading, and praying, and this brings
a secret curse of public exercises, and therefore I cannot but so often v^ge
private prayer, and meditation.

Verse. 118. Thou have trodden down all them, that depart from thy statutes, for
their deceit is vain.
AMong all things to be spoken of, I think nothing more necessary tha^ this,
that God will one day come a righteous judge to men, that are so slow to keep
a good conscience. All men are at quiet with themselves, and cry peace, peace,
our long enjoying of the Gospel, our tranquillity and peace, our abundance of
the things of the earth, make us drunken with the love of this life, and cause
every man to think thus with himself: I am none of the worst, when troubles
arise, I hope to shift for one: but in whom (I pray you) is the Lord delighted?
even in him that has a contrite heart, Esaias 66. and in such as tremble at his
word. The Prophet says in the verse following a little after, that he tre^bled
for fear Verse. ^0.
of Gods judgments, what had he a more tormented conscience than others* no,
he had such a continual feeling of his own corruptions, that it made him
afraid For as the best flesh Simile. Good conference.
is most tender, and where it is most corrupt, there it is most hard; and where
the flesh is nearest to healing, there it will more speedily, and more freshly
bleed: so the nearer we are to God, the more fearful we are; the more
precious our consciences be, the more tender they are; and those things which
being used in greater measure, will nothing fray a wicked man being urged, but
a little will dismay the conscience of the godly. The mind of the prophet is
this, thou have done away the wicked, thou have trodden them down, and swept
them away, I am as brit^le as they, and as ready to fall unless thou uphold me
Portion 16. 6. he says, It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have
destroyed thy law: where he complains as it were, that the Lord deferreth his
judgments, because the wicked had brought all things to such a confusion. And
in the 7* portion 4. verse he says: I remembered thy judgments of old O Lord,
and have been comforted, as if be should say, though thy children be had in
contempt, though thy Church be kept under, and the wicked are set aloft; yet I
remember how in old time thou have been a just judge, and have punished sin.
This comfort me, both because of thy mercy, which thou will show to me, and
because of thy justice whereby thou welt confound the wicked, and also make
me to fear my self: for both thou can do as thou have done, and thou will
do as thou can do. We must learn then in these two verses, thus much.
That what judgment soever the Lord has written down in hi^ word, and we
have either credibly heard reported the like with our ears, or seen them with
our eyes, they ought to be unto us examples, and ratify to us the truth of
Gods judgments, that as he has promised to punish, and indeed has punished
such and such sins; so he would do it in us for the like, and as sometime
he has even enwrapped his children in the like judgments, though not to that
end, for which he punished the wicked; but as they have been partakers of the
sin in part, so they have sustained the punishment in part: so we must know
that he will punish the same sins, even Note the goodness of the Lord to his
children when he plagueth the wicked.
in us, or spare us, if we be without them. Howbeit, the godly shall not have
the like judgment with the ungodly. He will not consume us as dross, but
will try us as silver, he will not trample us under his feet, bu^ humble us
under his hand. Wherefore as in the sweet promises of God, there is a reverent
fear: so in our infirmities, we must learn with David to fear much more.
Genes. 10. We read, how God trod down the pride of them, that built the
tower of Babel. When Pharaoh was advancing himself over the people of God, the
Lord tr^mpled him down with ten plagues, and trod him under foot in the red
Sea. Exodus 14 when Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram rebelled against God, and rose so
insolently against Mo^ses and A^ron his ministers; the Lord trod them down,
even into the earth, which opened her mouth and swallowed them up quick. The
whole world for their ripenes of sin, did he destroy from the face of the
earth, and scoured it with a purging water. The Lord pursued the land of the
Sodomites, until it lay at his foot, which before was as a Paradise* The Lord
swept away the Israelites, that they could not come to that plentiful and
promised land. How often do the histories record, how God trod down many
with wars, and swept away others with plagues? For as the Goldsmith purges
the dross from the gold, and the potter treads the unprofitable clay to
mi^e; even so the Lord purges and treads down his enemies. This must make us
to fear, for many men dangerously pervert their souls, and Satan beguileth
them with many shifts. But heretics and profane men say, The judgments of
God indeed in times past have been great, but what is that to us? we confess
they were wonderful in the time of the Law; but we hear not of them in the
new Testament, what appertain they then unto us? But Christ has taught us
this general doctrine, Luke 13. 1. where certain men came to our Savior
Christ, and showed him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with
their own sacrifices: but Christ answered them on this sort, Suppose ye that
these Galileans were greater sinners than the other Galileans, because they
have suffered such things? I tell you, ^o: but unless ye repent your lives,
you shall all likewise perish. Thus he also spoke of them, unto these Jews,
which took occasion to condemn those men for their punishments, upon whom the
tower in Siloam fell. Every man will yield to this, that the plagues are great,
but no man will apply them to himself. But our Savior Christ before teaches
us, rather to fear and suspect our own estates, than to condemn others.
Indeed all punishment shall not fall upon one man, nor one punishment shall
light upon all. Though the flood sweepeth them not away, though Serpents
devour them not, though they be not deprived of the promised land, yet surely
the Son of God Jesus Christ has spoken it, and though heaven and earth
pass, yet one ^ote of his word shall not pass, that unless we repent, we
shall all perish: if not in these, yet in some of these; if not in some of
these, yet in some other like to these. For the Lord has many and diverse
judgments, whereby he would tread down his enemies. Beside the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3. 6. speaking of fornicators, covetous me^, adulterers,
idolaters, and wantons* Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for such
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. This is
spoken to Gods children, that they should not mock at the menaces and
judgments of God: for if they will not obey, the judgments of God undoubtedly
will fall; but if they will tremble at Gods word, they shall be children of
obedience, and not be subject to this wrath of God. Thus Christ also reasons*
Matthew. 24* ^7. Luke 17. 18. As the days of Noah were, so likewise shall the
coming of the Son of man be. 38. For as in the days before the flood, they
did eat and drink, marry and gave in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the Arc. 39. And knew nothing till the flood came, and took all
away: so shall the coming of the Son of man be. Luke 17. 28. Likewise also
it was in the days of Lot, when in Sodom the Sun shined in the morning, and
all was well, even then came the wrath of God from heaven. When the old world
was making mirth, and thought of nothing less than of drowning, until Noah
went into the Arc, suddenly the waters came upon them. Likewise is our estate,
we know nothing now, we see the world is as it was, we provide for our
posterity. Thus we see our Savior Christ reasoned much like to David. In the
peculiar judgment, it shall be like with us as with Sodom, that City was
destroyed suddenly, and so shall we be. In the general Judgment, it shall be
as in the days of Noe, the water swept them away at unawares; so the fire
shall purge us when we think not of it.

Thou have (says David) trodden down in times past, thou will tread down
again. 2. Pet. 2. 4. If God spared not his Angels that had sinned, but cast
them down into hell, nor the old world, nor Sodom. etc. Thus our Savior
Christ, and with him his Apostles, teach by precepts and confirm by examples,
and so must all the godly Ministers approve and teach this doctrine, that the
godly may have their faith established in Gods promises, and to leave the
wicked excuse less against the day of judgment. They have left us a president
to follow, whereby we must be awaked from slum bring, that Gods children may
stoop, and the rest be committed to the righteous judgment of God. We see how
we may profit by examining several judgments for several sins, has not
God appointed in his word, and Several punishments for several sins.
executed from heaven a several punishment for several sins? Does God say
that Idolaters, Heretics, and profane professors should be swept away with
plagues and wars, and has he not swept away the Egyptians in the red sea,
Exodus 14? Did the Lord threaten the breach of the Sabbath with death? And did
he not strike the man, that did but in that day gather sticks, Numb. 15? Whose
sin though men spared on earth, yet the Lord punished it from heaven.
Nehemiah taught his people this doctrine, saying, Did not the wrath of God fall
on our fathers for our example? Yet there is to be noted, that evermore the
Lord has done, and does fatherly correct and admonish, before he utterly
sweepeth away. Shall we think that the Lord is altered? His long suffering did
not presently punish, neither after he had threatened, but he gave term to
repent: he has dealt so graciously with countries, nations, and people, that
he has not so trodden them down, as they have trodden down his glory, but by
benefits has allured them, by chastisements driven them, and by examples
persuaded them to repent before his plague came. The Lord has appointed for
disobedient children death, Deuteronomy. 21. 18. If any man has a son stubborn and
disobedient, which will not hearken unto the voice of his Father, nor the voice
of his Mother, and they have chastened him, and he would not obey them, and
after complaint made to the Elders of the City, all the men of the City shall
stone him with stones unto death. And Prou. 20. 20. He that curses his father
or his mother, his light shall be put out in obscure darkness. There is among
other, one wicked generation, even a generation that curses his father, and
blesses not his mother; but of such a one, let the Eagle put out his eyes.
Has God so threatened, and will he not punish? 2. King. 2. Little children, who
for their age, we would think to be spared, for mocking the Prophet of God
Elisha, who cried for vengeance by the secret motion of Scorners.
Gods spirit, were by two Bears devoured. Did the Lord punish scorners then,
and will he spare them now? For fornication we know twenty four thousand fell
on one day, and were Fornication.
swept away with the plague, and shall fornication now be unpunished? We stand
but by grace, we are but petitioners, we must fear least living in these and
such like sins, we be swept away with these and such like judgments. This
must make us to fear our selves, to love and believe the word, to grow in
repentance, and make our schooling in the judgments of God, some in one, and
some in another. We have heard now, how the cause of the Prophets prayer, was
the sight of his infirmities: this must stir us up also to private prayer.
For though we have received never so many and excellent graces of God, yet
Prayer.
without prayer shall we not be able to stir up our selves by them. We must
see how the man of God, seeing the severe judgments of God, was moved to
prayer, that he should not be trodden down and swept away with the wicked. We
are likewise to swear to this practice, both to make us cleave faster to the
word, and also to make us the more to fear our A visible judgment of God.
selves. For it is a visible judgment of God, when we see the judgments of
God, and are not stayed in fixed faith in the Lord, and a reverent fear of our
selves. We have bin taught, because we are given to think that the judgments
of God appertain not to us, that the long suffering of the Lord, is to leave
the wicked inexcusable, and not to have one of his vnsaued, and still calls
some, and does not execute his judgments, until the measure of sin be
fulfilled to the brimme, Genet* 6. So that he spares to call his to
repentance, to leave the wicked without excuse, who would neither be moved with
his promises, nor feared with his judgments. And although it seem an easy
doctrine, that God will by one way or other punish sin, and think that we
have learned this before it be taught: yet we shall find our selves ignorant
of the practice of it, which if we knew, it would be a key of the whole
Scriptures unto us. And thus much of the general doctrine, now of the
particular; For their deceit is vain. As if the Prophet should say,
notwithstanding all their high imaginations All vanity both of life and
religion is but deceit.
thou have destroyed them, for they have but deceived themselves in false
religion and vanity of life. Thus then let us consider of it, that whether our
vanity be in religion or life, it is but deceit. Heresy and Idolatry carry
a great sway, under a color of godly life: but when Gods judgments sweep
them away, they seem vain, that neither their Idols can help them, nor their
opinions comfort them.

This then may commend unto us the word of God, that it only makes us safe,
and The word of God only never deceives us.
staieth us in all troubles, wherefore it is said, port. 12. 4. Except thy law
had been my delight, I should have perished in mine affliction. So the Prophet
Jonah has a notable sentence worthy to be written in letters of gold, and of
all men to be remembered, Jonah. 2. 18. They that wait upon lying vanities,
forsake their own mercy. Whereby he shows that they which depend on any
thing, save on God alone, refuse their own felicity, and that goodness,
which otherwise they should receive of God. So that the Prophet himself in not
going to Niniuie waited on vanity, and could find no comfort in himself. We
may for a time trust to Idolatry or ungodliness, but when the touchstone and
trial of Gods law comes, they cannot stay us, nor save us, for they will
deceive all users of them, as false and vain* 1. Sam. 12. 21. Samuel exhorting
the people to repentance wills them to follow the Lord, and not to turn
back, saying also, If ye turn back, that should be after vain things, which
cannot profit you, nor deliver you, for they are but vanity. Where he teaches
us, that when miseries come, our delights are but vain, and therefore cannot
help us. The Scriptures also apply this to ill manners, as Ephesians. 5. the
Apostle setting down a bedrow of many sins adds this, Let no man deceive
you, etc. where because some think, that for such sins God would be
entreated, he says, nay not so, be not deceived, unless ye repent, God will
not be entreated. Likewise Gal. 5. the Apostle having taught them to provide
temporal things for them, that minister spiritual, says, be not deceived,
where he has this sense: ye may have many reasons with your selves, against
this doctrine, but when God comes to tread down the wicked; then your
reasons will not stand before his majesty, for the truth only there
prevails; do not deceive your selves, your hope will abuse you. And here all
flattering of our selves in sin will prove deceivable, we walk in a
net, and deceive our own consciences, but this must make us fear, we must
not reckon without our host, nor make our account without our auditour: for if
we do, we will beguile our selves, or flatter our selves.

Let every man therefore look to the fleights of sin in himself, and to the
deceit of his own conscience, and he shall see that all the ways of man are
evil, but the Lord is for ever true.

We must thus examine our selves: Good Lord, will this thing stay me in the
day of trouble, will this thing comfort me in the hour of death? then it is a
sure thing, then it is comfortable, otherwise it is vain and cannot stay me,
it is deceitful, and will not comfort me. Now if we trust in the word, we
shall in death know that it is no imagination, howsoever the world would now
persuade us that we live too precisely, and Satan lies to get us at a bay, we
shall then know our labor was not lost, and when the Lord comes to
judgment, if we have laid a good foundation, when the tempests arise, the
winds arise, and the rain fall, we shall be sure, and not beguile our selves,
that we shall be on the rock of Gods word, and built in faith, we shall be
sure as mount Sion, and safe as Jerusalem, when the floods of vengeance come.

Verse. 119 Thou have taken away all the wicked of the earth like dross:
therefore I love thy testimonies.
Mark the propriety of the word, he says not thy statutes do I love, but
thy testimonies, Testimonies.
he says here thus much: seeing O God, thou have summoned the wicked, I will
embrace more joyfully the record and covenant of my salvation, made unto me in
thy word. For when we see Gods judgments on the ungodly, this ought
wonderfully to commend Gods mercy in free saving us from the like, that
whereas we were in the like condition of sin, he might have measured the
like to us, and yet vouchsafed to make his covenant in force unto us. Was it
not a great mercy to save Noah and his, when all the world besides was washed
away with water? Did it not wonderfully commend the goodness of God, that in
the great destruction of Sodom he should deliver Lot? What a thing is this,
that the Lord will make a covenant with us as with Noah, that if we shall
trust in Christ, we shall never be confounded? Again, when the man of God
sees the wicked deceived, because they trusted not in the word, this makes
him to love the word, and assures him, that there is an end of all perfection,
but the law of God is exceeding large, that it never fails in trouble, nor
deceives any in death. Wherefore this must make us to love it also. And if we
compared this word with other vanities of the world, and felt in it such joys,
and most specially in death and in troubles, and that when all fails, this
does minister sufficient comfort; surely the persuasion hereof would move us
pathetically to express our minds, and say with the Prophet, Oh how love I
thy law it is my meditation continually.

Then when our strength shall fail, our breath draw short, our friends depart,
our goods, country, and life shall forsake us; the word will be so sweet, so
dear, and so precious, that when all these are gone, this will yield us great
comfort. We have also learned here a further thing in the mind of the Prophet,
who reasons thus: Seeing thou have trodden down the wicked as earth, and
scoured them as dross, therefore will I embrace thy covenants, and records of
thy judgments, therefore the evidence of thy covenant which thou have made to
me, is most holy and precious. For when the judgments of God were so severe
against others, was it not the great mercy of God to make a covenant with him?
Was it not a wonderful grace of God, that being conceived and borne in sin
like unto the other, he should escape Gods judgment? Was not it a great
mercy, that when all flesh should perish, Noah and his family should escape?
Was it not the great goodness of God, when Sodom was consumed, to save Lot?
When the Lord had left all to ignorance, was it not his great mercy to
preserve Abraham? When the Lord ouerthrewe the Egyptians, The rich mercy of God
to the faithful in opening their eyes, when so many millions are left in
darkness and misery.
was it not free mercy to save the Israelites? Was it not the great grace of
God to lead forward Caleb and Joshua into the promised land, when to so many he
had denied it? Our Savior Christ gave thanks to his Father, as for a special
mercy of God, that he had revealed those things to babes and little ones, which
he had concealed from many mighty of the world. If we consider how many are
left in ignorance, given over to superstition, and remain under the heavy
hand of God, what a mercy of God is it to give us his truth, to enrich us with
his Gospel, and to bless us with such abundance of temporal things? Oh that
this were known of us! oh that every man would say: Oh Lord, what am I that
thou should show me such mercy? to give me the enjoying of thy word and
Gospel more than any other, and giving it to me, make me to understand it
above many: oh what am I that thou should offer to me this goodness! I was
borne and conceived in sin, I have multiplied and enlarged my corruptions
both before and since my calling, my unthankfulness is great, my unworthiness
therefore greater, and yet thou have not ceased to prefer me in mercies
before many. If we consider the fearful judgments of God in consuming all
hypocrites, who will not say, that many have been called, and few chosen? When
we shall see (I say) in the day of the Lord, his severe judgments to tread
down these hypocrites, and cause them to go from his presence to hell, oh how
will we esteem that we are in Christ, and say, Oh how love I thy law! For I see
thy judgments are equal, and thou dealest not with me in justice, but in
mercy; not in anger, but in love; not in wrath, but in pity: therefore they
covenant is sweet, because I have deserved thy judgments, and thou have
spared me.

Verse. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments.
HEre may seem at the first to be some contrariety between fear and love,
since love causes not, but casts out fear. For he had said in the verse
going before, that he loved the testimonies of the Lord; and here he says,
that his flesh trembled for fear. Wherefore at the first sight here is some
show of contrariety, but indeed there is none. For he says, My flesh
trembles, etc. whereby he shows, that as he loved the law of God in his
inward man, and with his part regenerate: so it is the outward and old man,
and the part vnrenued, which is full of corruption, that did fear. So that as
he had Gods spirit to renew his mind, he had this witness in him, that he
did love the promises of God: but because his flesh rebelleth against the
Spirit, and he found many corruptions of nature remaining in him, and
threatening him, that after he was like to fall again, if the Lord, yea but a
little should leave him: he says, I am afraid, least for my unthankfulness, and
unworthy refusing of thy mercy, thou should leave me to my self, and so
should make a way to thy judgments. Thus there is an harmony in the
Prophet: for because as the flesh has a trembling fear, so the spirit
rejoices.

Thus, as we have often heard, Gods children find to their comfort in
themselves faith in Gods promises, and a delight in his word, and sometime they
are grieved for the absence of this sweetness of faith in the same. For as the
presence of Gods spirit brings joy, so the absence thereof fear; as faith
breeds a love of Gods promises, so infidelity makes us afraid of his
judgments. Although Noah had great cause to love the promises of God for his
wonderful deliverance: so he had great cause to fear himself, that he might
have fallen afterward. Lot also having good cause to believe and embrace the
covenant of God for his safeguard, had just occasion also to have suspected
himself, that he was subject to falling. It is said, Prou. 28. 14. Blessed is
the man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart shall fall into
evil For where fear is not, there is security; security breeds hardness
of heart, and hardness of heart brings Gods wrath. Wherefore the Apostle
writing to the Philippians, showing that God works in us both the will and
the deed of doing good, least hereby they should draw to themselves security,
adds, that they must fill the course of their salvation, in fear and
trembling. For if we do only well by Gods grace working in us, we are much
to fear the absence of it. Wherefore we see how the man of God did justly
fear his part unregenerate.

This fear of Gods children differs much from the fear of the wicked: for
it brings us to the Lord, and drives us not from the Lord; it helps, and
hinders not our prayers; it hurts not, but furthereth our duties. For it
makes us to fear least we should lose Gods grace, it causes us to wait
more and more to have it, and having it, moves us by prayer to continue it.
When Noah had Gods favor he feared, and being warned of God (as Heb: 11. 7.)
of the things which were as yet not seen, moved with reverence prepared the
Arc* etc So Habacuk hearing of the judgment of God, which should fall upon
the faithful by the Chaldeans, says, H^b. 3. 16. My belly trembled, my lips
shook at the voice: rottennes entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self
Paul said he preached with fear and trembling* Thus we see how the good
Saints of God did fear, because they knew, that if the Lord should enter into
judgment with us, no flesh should be saved, and that there was nothing in
them, but of mercy: and therefore they acknowledge their weakness,
unworthiness, and wretchedness.

We see also that Gods children have diverse affects, according to their diverse
estates, and though sometimes they are quickened through faith, other times
they are most ready to sin, if they do not sin. No marvel then though the
children of God fear, when they see that God restrains their will, and the
greater their feelings are, yet are they mixed with a reverent fear of Gods
majesty, and sight of their own corruptions, least they should not abide his
glory, and least they should not continue in their good things

We see moreover that this fear humbled Noah* that the Prophets and Apostles
spoke in fear, which the Lord gave unto them, either to prepare them to some
grace which they should receive, or else more zealously to keep some grace
which already they have received. And where it might be objected, that love
casts out fear, we must understand, of Excessive fear.
that servile and excessive fear, which drives us away from God. And seeing
though we feel Gods love by faith, we will fear, then much more had we
need so to do, when by infidelity we feel not this love. So we must have
both fear to prepare us to grace, and we must have love to continue us in
this grace. And surely only they, with whom this thing has been familiar, do
know how love and fear do dwell together. For as blessed experienc^ has
taught some, that by this fear they have attained to special graces, and
continued in them by the same: so also by woeful experience some have found,
that for want. ^f this, they either have not t^sted of the grace of God, or
else not continued in the same.

PORTION. 15. AYN.
Verse. 1^1. I have executed judgment and justice: leave me not to mine
oppressors.
THe Prophet goes on, praying for the increase and continuance of Gods favor,
using two arguments: the first, by showing his afflictions, which he suffered:
the second, by declaring his affection to the word; whereunto is added a
reason drawn from the nature of GOD, that it is his time to help in
affliction. His general desire then is, to have a further love of Gods word,
to this end he shows his miseries and afflictions, and with what affection
he longed for help, trusting that God would now come to do right. His prayer
is, that the Lord would not suffer him to be overcome with overmuch
afflictions, but that as it is Psalm. 125. 3. that the rod of the wicked shall
not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put their hands unto
wickedness, and They may look to be protected that have a good cause, and de
ohandle that cause well.
that the hands of the oppressors should not prevail. God then gives us this
liberty, that we may pray against our and his enemies, but we must withal
consider these two reasons.

I have executed, As if the Prophet said, Thou have promised to help all them,
that hold causes and maintain them well through thy grace; I have used a good
cause well; perform therefore, oh Lord, thy promise in me. So the Prophet
prays, Psalm. 41. Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness, etc. where
he shows, that as God does promise to help in afflictions, so he requires
of our parts, that we should suffer as weldoers, and as doing well in a good
cause, as if he had expressed his mind in these words: O God, the cause which
I maintain is just, and I have maintained it well, let them fall then that
have an ill cause against me, who having so righteous a cause.

As we have to learn, that we shall not be without oppressors, if we do well:
so must we learn how to behave our selves therein. It seems monstrous to
some, that we should by weldoing purchase such enemies, as if when ye do well,
ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently* this is acceptable to God: 1. Pet. 3.
13. Who is it that will harm you, if you follow that which is good? Yet it is
a thing in the secret judgment of God, either to the trial of the faith of
his children, or the fulfilling of the sins of the wicked. Who would think a
man should have enemies, but by desert. True it is, if the world were aright:
but because we live in such a world, wherein Christ himself executing
judgment and righteousness did suffer, because it hated him, much more must we
look for it, as Christ himself has also fore warned, because the servant
must not be above his master; and because we labor and cease not to hinder
the kingdom of Satan, he enarmeth the world with hatred against us also. We
must not think that we can be here quiet. For although we be sometimes troubled
because we have not done somewhat, which we ought: yet often we must be
oppressed as righteous doers, although not so, as our enemies finally shall
prevail against us.

We see the Prophet desires God to be the patron of a righteous cause, and of
a righteous cause rightly handled; we must then, if we will assure our selves
of Gods protection, first consider if our cause be just, and having such a
cause, whether we have rightly dealt in it. Let us therefore when we are
oppressed, search our cause; if we feel that our conscience be guilty, then
no marvel though we suffer, because the Lord corrects either our evil
cause, or our ill handling of a good cause. We must see that in the equity of
our request, our cause be just and true, and being good, that our dealing
therein be also just and right. Let us see this now in particulars.

Our Savior Christ says, he came to put dissension between the father and
the son, the mother and the daughter, and that the father in law should be
against his son in law, and the son in law against his father in law. True it
is, if it be for the Gospels sake, and we withal have done our duties and
obedience, which nature and our callings require, that we be hated; yet must we
not be dismayed, although we have the enemies of our own family, of them which
by nature are joined to us, we are not to be discouraged, if it be
righteousness, which we must maintain, and unrighteousness which they maintain:
if the^ our cause being good: we use all obedience, love, and duty, and yet be
grieved, we must recover our selves with that which Christ has said: but if
our cause be ill, or being right, we showed not our selves humble and
dutiful in the defense of it; then we have deserved justly to be evil
entreated of them. If we shall observe this to happen either among Magistrates
to their subjects, or Landlords to their tenants, or any other governors to
their inferiors, when they shall deal ill with us in debts, fines, and
exactions, we must consider, that if we have done righteously, we have the
liberty to comfort our souls in prayer: Lord, I have done the part of a
faithful subject, or the duty of a good tenant; Lord, help me against this
man, which oppresses me wrongfully. But if we have discouraged their hearts
either simply by ill doing* or in a good thing by ill dealing, we must know,
that the Lord by them does take some good thing from us, who from them did take
some good duties. We must see then whether we have done our duties in love or
not, this will keep us from fuming, and will make us rest in prayer.

The ignorance of this doctrine makes us fret and fume, who never consider
whether our cause be good, or whether in a good cause we have used good
dealing or no. If Gods children look thus into their consciences, it will
humble them: as surely I did not well to him, God suffers him to do the like
to me again, and meateth out unto me the like measure with mine own
meat-yeard. Where we must learn that Gods children never deal so earnestly
with their enemies, as with their God. And as this holds in superiors so
must we mark this doctrine in all troubles with our inferiors or equals. Now
if our servants or our children do not deal dutifully with us, we must enter
into our selves on this sort: Lord, I have brought up these sons or servants
in thy nurture and fear, I have instructed them, and prayed for them, I have
used all means whereby I might bring them to good: yet for all this, they deal
ill with me, and in this case we must know that God will hear our prayers.
But if we have not done our parts in clothing, feeding, or teaching them, or
in praying for them, it is the judgment of God, in that we have not done the
duty of godly parents, and Christian householders in making them the children
of God, and servants of the Lord: neither can we say, Lord release me in this
case. Wherefore Job said, chap. 31. 13. that if he did contemn the judgment
of his servant, or of his maid, when they did think them selves evil
entreated by him, What shall I do when God stands up? and when he shall
visit me, what shall I answer? He that made me in the womb, has he not made
him, has he not alone fashioned us in the womb?

Verse. 122. Answer for thy servant in that which is good, and let not the
proud oppress me.
Answer: that is, be surety for me. So, though his cause was good, yet he
thought himself not so wise as to answer his enemies, nor so strong as to
prevail against them in that which is good: he knew that God would not take
his part in any evil cause, which must make us, if we look for God to be our
help, to provide that our cause be good. His mind then is: if my cause Lord
were evil, I durst not crave thy help, but it is good: therefore speak for
me. We therefore, if our cause be ill, are rather to crave of God, to have our
sin pardoned, because the righteous God is not a defender of an unrighteous
cause. Again, though our cause be good, we must not therefore think that we
our selves can answer it, because the man of God says, portion 20. 2. Plead
my cause and deliver me: that is, Lord put an answer into my mouth, take my
cause into thine own hand, mine enemies are too wise and strong for me.

Thus the Saints of God having good causes, would not trust in them. What is
then the cause why oftentimes in good causes we prevail no more? even because
we would shoulder them out with our own strength, and say not, Lord put
wisdom into my mouth, Lord put a weapon into my hand. Then our good causes
must never be severed from our God, for otherwise we shall never have good
issue of them. So we must beware, that we make not God a revenger of our
affections, but pray that we may be harnessed with a righteous cause, and
with a right handling of it from God.

True it is then, that in trouble we may pray not to be overcome, yet we see
the man of God confessed, how he behaved himself well in affliction, and as
by the fire the gold is both tried good, and purged from the dross; so the
Lord proved in him the gold of his graces, and scoured him from corrupt
affections; he scoured him from the love of this world, to stir up in him the
love of the world to come; he scoured him from the works of the flesh, and
quickened in him the works of the Spirit; he stirred up his gifts to serve
Gods glory, and scoured him from the love of himself. So by his fatherly
chastisements, the Lord quickens us in good things, and delivers us from
evil. So we have heard also how in our defense we must pray for Gods graces,
because for want of wisdom and patience we cannot answer our own cause. For
as in our suites at law, we get pleaders and Proctors to speak for us; so we
must know that in the court of heaven, we cannot plead for our selves, but
must open our suites to Christ, which must plead it for us. Now in that he
says, Let not the proud oppress me: he notes that they were such as did
flatter themselves for graces received, as though they should be controllers
unto him. No marvel then, though we reproach men, when we reproach Gods mercy
and majesty. We may learn here, that we can never deal mercifully with men,
which will not deal mercifully with our selves. For our sins must humble us
before God, before we will be humbled with man, otherwise we shall grow so
proud, that we shall not be far from oppression.

Verse. 123. Mine eyes have failed in waiting for thy salvation, and for thy
just promise.
HEre is a further thing that the man of God requires, not looking to be
helped at the Perseverance.
first brunt, but never to leave off his suite unto the very failing of his
eyes, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 3. 10. If any man long after
life, etc. 11. Let him eschew evil and do good, let him seek peace, and
follow after it. So this man of God had long endured trouble, which many will
be content happily to sustain for a while: but if it be any thing long, they
fall from judgment and justice. We must not think then to deal ill with
them, that deal ill with us: neither must we deal well but for a time,
because we must persevere. For when we slip too much, we never show, that we
did truly execute judgment and justice.

If the man of God here so resisted the devil and wicked men, which are as the
instruments of Satan, breathing for our destruction; we must also fight
against them after his example, although his soul fainted, his eyes failed,
his flesh parched, his natural powers melted. This we may also see, how the
Saints of God mourned in their prayer. Away then with this common saying, which
proceeds from inconstancy: I have borne injuries long, I have taken much at
his hand, and put up many wrongs, should I suffer him still to abuse me, and
let my self be undone? Surely even to the failing of our eyes the Prophet
shows us, we must maintain a good cause, and seeing the Lord has the
issues of all things in his hand, and helps desperate cases, he will
undoubtedly help us, if we leave not our case. Then we see, though he had
devoured many evils, yet he executed judgment and justice: so we must swallow
up many injuries, and yet neither depart from the Lord, nor cease from our
cause.

And though we would cry in our prayers, to be heard to the clouds, and send
forth Prayer.
loud shrikes, though we would roar as a cannon gunne, yet what is it that
seasoneth our prayers; even the mourning of our hearts, the failing of our
eyes, and when we pray with unspeakable sighs, which cannot be expressed. For
they be not loud, eloquent, and well set prayers, which are acceptable to the
Lord, but our staying our selves on the Lord, and our continuing in well doing,
and our maintaining of a good cause to the utmost; so that a man might sooner
pull the eyes out of our heads, and the heart out of our Constancy in a good
cause.
bodies, and bereave us of our lives, than make us leave righteousness; and
though troubles shall come, we will still follow our cause to the failing of
our eyes, fainting of our hearts, and melting of our powers.

Herein then appeared the true virtue of the faith of this man of God; because,
whilst no wickedness is offered, many will do well; but after often trial
with injuries, they execute neither judgment nor justice; so that where this
faith wants, there is no true love of judgment and justice: besides here we
are to mark, that that is a true prayer, which comes from the true feeling,
and deep sense of his heart; and without this, well set, long, and loud
prayers prevail not. For such prayers cry loud in the Lords ears, which make
a noise with the feeling of our wants, and when, though they continue to the
failing Feeling of wants.
of our eyes, yet we mistrust not God. For many either pray coldly, or praying
zealously, they become so dull, that they cease to put their trust in the Lord.
So that the corruption of our nature, is either not to feel our wants, or if
we feel them, to despair.

For thy just promise: Here we see how the Prophet prays, not according to
his own fantasy, but according to the will of God revealed in his word. When
we desire any thing of God, we must do it according to his promise. For when
we pray not according to the promise of the Lord, we wait upon our own
fantasies, and seek after our own imaginations. Many break in their prayers
into headie and rash conceits, who have not in the mean time the word in their
hearts; but they obtain nothing: neither shall we obtain, if we be like
affected unto them. Ye know, says S. John, ye shall obtain, if ye ask
according to the will of God.

And whereas he says, I waited for thy just promise, he shows that the Lord
is no more liberal in promising, than faithful in performing: for if we wait
for his promise, surely he will perform it. Every man will peradventure
confess this to be a truth at the first, but the self same thing being in
this Psalm so often repeated, bewrateth our incredulity and hardness of
belief of it. We can allege indeed generally, that Gods promises be true, but
we will fall in the particular applying of them to our selves, in saying, They
are true unto me, I have felt the truth of them by experience in my self.

The Prophet uses often to give this Epithet to Gods word, as verse. 106. I will
keep thy righteous judgments. 137. Righteous art thou o Lord, and just are
thy judgments. 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting. Why
would the spirit of God repeat this one Hard to believe the word.
word so often, but because it is a singular work of faith to believe the
word, and a thing much incident to our nature, not to believe. Wherefore Paul
uses often this Preface as a prerogative: This is a true saying, and of all
men worthy to be received, or this is a faithful saying. So that the holy
Ghost prepares such words to purchase credit to the word of God, because flesh
and blood is so ready to mistrust, and Satan so subtle to discredit the
truth. This may happily soon seem true: but put case a man being troubled had
prayed, til his eyes failed, his heart fainted, and his flesh were parched, and
still trusts to Gods promises; this man indeed has a true faith. This then
commends the Prophet, that when he was at the last cast, he continued in his
strength. His sense and meaning is this, although I be not as yet helped, yet I
shall be in Gods good time; which thing if we also could truly say, we should
never be overcome of temptation.

Verse. 124. Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thy
statutes.
HEre the Prophet is desirous to be further taught in the word. Here we see the
man of God complains not of the word, though as yet the promise was not
performed, but of his own faith. Here is then a difference between the faith
of the godly, and the The trial of our faith, when God delays to perform his
promises.
presumption of the ungodly, that, when the Lord suspendeth his truth for a
while, the godly suspect not the truth of the word, but the unbelief of
themselves, and pray against the same. If then when Gods promises are
suspended, we be through Satan's policy and our frailty tempted to mistrust,
we can say, Thy word o Lord does not fail; but we are dull in faith, we are
wavering, we are full of unbelief, good Lord, increase our faith, take from us
these mists and clouds of mistrust, by shining upon us with the bright beams
of thy spirit, and though Satan would weaken our hope to discredit thy truth,
yet strengthen us: and though we have failed in many particular points of thy
commandments, yet we beseech thee to forgive the secret errors of our life:
we have believed thy word, but if we failed in faith, then reveal thy
covenants unto us, that we may recover.

Two things, as we have often heard, sustain Gods children in trouble, the one
is the testimony Two things sustain us in troubles.
of a good conscience; the other is faith in Gods promises, both which are
here set down in the verses going before; for in that he executed judgment
and justice, he had the testimony of a good conscience; in that his eyes
failed by waiting on the promises of God, his faith most plainly appears.
This faith breeds a good conscience, and this good conscience does nourish
faith. For whosoever will execute judgment and justice, must believe the
promises of God, and that the covenant of Christ is a sure covenant ratified in
their hearts, which when they feel, they are urged by love to keep a good
conscience. For the place to lay up the treasure of faith in is a good
conscience. Here then the man of God prays for both these things, and if we
will seek still after knowledge without feeling, we will judge this prayer to
be barren: but if we will look into our own incredulity, and enter with a
single eye into our own hearts (for such Christians are we, as we then shall
be found to be) and shall enter into the particular troubles of body and
soul, we shall find our mass of unbelief, and we shall see, that we may
labor often in the meditation of this Psalm, and find sufficient matter all
our life long.

For the man of God said before, I have executed judgment and justice; and yet
here he says, teach me judgment and justice: he meant not, that he had
judgment and justice fully, perfitly, and absolutely, but that it was
according to the grace which he had received, yet he thought not himself
therefore justified, though he was not conscious in himself.

His meaning then is: Lord thou searchest the heart, corrupt is my heart, and
blind is my mind; if I have fallen, Lord grant me to recover my self; if I
fail in unbelief, Lord increase my faith, that I may daily grow in executing
judgment and justice* So far off was he from being weary in upright dealing,
that he prayed still for the continuance of it.

Then if we be not weary in our calling, and could come to say with this man
of God, and with the Apostle Paul, that we are not conscious in our selves, yet
we must further proceed and say, that we are not hereby justified; because the
largenes of the law cannot be concluded in the narrow compass of our brain,
we must pray for the increase both of our knowledge and faith.

According to thy mercy. He says not give judgment, because I have done
well, but deal with thy servant according to thy mercy. He does not mean
here as the Papists, he assures himself of nothing of desert, but though he
showed mercy unto others, yet with God he sueth for mercy, and not for merit.
If then he had failed in nothing, he would not Merit.
have pleaded so for mercy, as Paul reasons in the fourth to the Romans,
verse 4. To him that works, the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt.
And here we see that he does not glory, that his executing of judgment and
justice was his own work, but acknowledges it to be the gift of God, and
bringing nothing of his own, he craves pardon. It is an hard matter, when we
have thus done, not to have our patience broken, and to do the things which we
have done before. For, for this cause, in that the wicked loaded him with such
evils, and they oppressed, and set themselves both against his cause, and his
person, and his corruption was great, he prayed for perseverance.

And teach me thy statutes. That is, if thou will show this favor upon thy
servant, so it is; if not, in the mean time, Lord teach me the true
understanding of thy word. We crave often Gods mercy and help, but we think
not, that his mercy of all other were the greatest, as the Prophet says, I
desire thy favor; but this is my greatest desire, even to be instructed
further in thy word. Let us then look on this man, who being in trouble,
desires nothing more than the word, and wishes not so much the ease of the
flesh, as he desired to be delivered from unbelief. We must therefore above
all pray for this. As in the greatest harvest we lose none occasion, but if we
want opportunity we crave it by prayer, and strive the more by labor to
recompense the loss of time passed; then in our spiritual harvest, which so
far passes the other, as the soul the body, how much need have we to see,
whether we have this carking care to pretermit none occasion of Gods word, and
to recompense that at one time, which we lose at another. And though he says,
Deal with thy servant; he does not here boast of his service, but pleads for
mercy. If a Nobleman Simile.
should take us as vagabonds and rogues, or should rescue us out of prison,
when we had any suite, we would crave mercy and favor, and not speak of our
service, here is no presumption: so likewise, we being taken as stray sheep,
and rescued from the prison of hell, if we cry, Lord deal with thy servant
according to thy mercy, we do show no presumption, but plead for mercy, and
say, Seeing thou have vouchsafed Lord to take me to thy service, consider with
what enemies I have been oppressed, though I am not in all things a skillful
servant, yet I am faithful to thee in affection, Lord therefore help me. The
Papists then are destitute of Gods Spirit, they see not this metaphor, that it
is of such servants, who when they have done all things they can, yet think
themselves unprofitable servants. His meaning then is: O Lord defend me from
mine enemies, for my cause is in thy service.

Verse 125 I am thy servant: grant me therefore understanding, that I may know
thy testimonies.
WE see the Prophet of God never calls into question the promises of GOD,
although they were long suspended, but rather his own incredulity and
unbelief, because he either did not so execute justice and judgment, as he
ought to have done; or else believed not so thoroughly the covenants of God, and
therefore desires he to be taught in the statutes of the Lord, that he may
further believe his covenants. For albeit he had executed judgment and
justice, yet he was oppressed; though he waited on Gods promises, yet they
were not fulfilled: therefore he might have shrinked, had not the Lord taught
him his statutes to strengthen his obedience, and exercised him in his
covenants to confirm his faith.

His prayer is the selfsame, which in effect Christ taught his Disciples,
commanding them to pray, Lord increase our faith; that is, Lord increase our
faith in the assurance of our justification, according to thy statutes, in the
feeling of our sanctification: according to thy covenants. So we see now, that
as the man of God prayed before, for a further understanding of the statutes of
the Lord, so here he prays for a further understanding of his testimonies.
The Saints of God did never so brag of their gifts of knowledge and faith, but
that The Saints ever bewail the remnants of ignorance and incredulity.
Perseverance
they still acknowledged and lamented in themselves the remnants of ignorance
and incredulity, and desired the remedy of them by prayer.

This ought to be for our instruction, that though we be not conscious in our
selves of any gross disobedience, or palpable unbelief; yet we must pray for
a further sight of the law, and finding our unbelief, we must crave of God
that we may be more stayed in his promises. Perseverance is an excellent thing,
especially when Gods promises are delaied, and we in greatest danger, then is
the sure trial both of our knowledge and faith. We are also taught here, that
whatsoever good things we have, we have them not, as to lock them up in our
possession, but seeing we may shrink away and make shipwreck both of faith
and a good conscience, we must pray to have a greater knowledge of the statutes
of the Lord, and a greater faith in his promises. And here is to be noted, how
the Prophet desiring a greater knowledge of Gods testimonies: he does not so
much desire any corporal relief against his enemies, as spiritual resistance
against his unbelief, teaching us, that in peril we should especially crave
the true understanding of Gods will, that having gotten that, we may have all
other things, as it shall please the Lord. Here we see a great difference
Difference between the faith of Gods children, and presumption of the wicked
betwixt the faith of Gods children, and the presumption of the wicked: flesh
and blood after long trial either cast off all weldoing, and perseuering in
obedience, or else labor to weaken our faith; but in God his children it must
not so prevail, either to the staying of their obedience, or hindering of their
faith. For flesh and blood in all troubles seek to be released from them, but
Gods children are taught to possess their souls in patience, and above all,
crave that faith, which pleases God, and that obedience, which is most
acceptable unto him.

This then is a token of a reverent faith in the testimonies of our God, when
we call into question rather our obedience and faith, than Gods promises and
statutes, and when our consciences tell us, that we do not so much desire to
be rid from our troubles, as that the rod of the wicked may not light upon us,
either in rebelling against Gods law, or in mistrusting his covenants. For as
we have said, flesh and blood would rather be exempted from outward miseries,
than to feel the comfort of Gods promises. But we must have a jealousy of our
selves, and suspect our want of care herein, as they do, who never can content
themselves in carking and caring, when they are to bring in the fruits of the
whole Decaies of faith, must make us repeat our petitions often. A godly
jealousy over our selves, a thing most necessary. Hic and deinceps.
year in their harvest.

Many would think, that this prayer of the man of God is superfluous, but if
they truly knew their own decaies of faith, and shrinking in obedience, they
would not suspect this Psalm of any needless repetition, but would
acknowledge, that it is the wonderful wisdom and goodness of Gods Spirit,
so to provide for our unbelief and disobedience. And as the holy ghost does
here set down the glass of regeneration, and teaches us how to pray for the
continuance of our obedience, and strength of faith: so we must so behold our
corruptions therein, as from henceforth we may have a greater jealousy of our
selves in them both.

We learned in these two prayers, how contrary to the doctrine of the
Sophisters, he craved knowledge not of desert or merit, but of grace and
mercy. Where we are to remember, that when we are to crave of God any new
mercy to be received, or perseverance in some mercy already received, we must
say with the man of God, Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy.

Now in that he doubled (as we may see) his request, he shows the great
necessity of it, and that the mystery of faith is great. This is a thing that
much deceives many, when we think that we have eyes, and can see into matters
as far as other men; we have ears, and can hear as much as another man can
do; we have as good wits and reason; we can conceive and judge of a thing as
soon and as well as other men commonly do; Here is a great judgment of God,
that we cannot acknowledge our dulnes and deadnes, and that we cannot attain
unto the mighty power of the word as we ought to do; for wan^ of this we
become so fruitless in reading, and in hearing, because we cannot truly
understand what we read or hear; we gather one thing here, and another thing
there; we gather many things falsely, and often find fault with the delivery
of the word, when the fault is in our selves, in that we never suspect our
selves, our reason, nor judgment. The children of God must be jealous over
their own affections, and must know that there is no such natural thing in
them, but that all is the gift of God. We are here then to learn continually
to pray, that our judgment may be enlightened with the true understanding of
the word, and our affections renewed into the due obedience of the same. If we
should see in how many things our reason erreth, and our affections waver in
us, we should surely acknowledge, No superfluity in this Psalm.
that there are no superfluities in this Psalm. For until we be fully
acquainted with the dullness of our hearts, we shall not see our necessity in
using the like prayers: but he that sees the blindness of his mind, and
corruptions of his heart, and desires nothing more than to become a new man in
Jesus Christ, and to learn nothing more than Jesus Christ crucified, howsoever
others persuade themselves of more mystical knowledge, (without this, in
truth, knowing nothing) he will count all other knowledge but loathsome, and as
dung, in respect of the doctrine of regeneration: whereby he is become a new
man in Christ. For it is a greater blessing where this knowledge does abound,
and other gifts are in less measure, than where this is but small, though in
many other gifts we do abound. For every man must not be learned, every man is
not to travel in the profound mysteries of the Scriptures, but every one had
need to be humbled; and we being all destitute of grace, had need to be
taught of God as children, that being spiritual we may judge our selves, that
the Lord will not judge us; and howsoever we think of our selves now, when the
Lord shall take from us the darkness of our hearts, and the mists of our
affections, we shall epsy our dulnes and blindness to be very great.

Verse. 126. It is time for thee Lord to work: for they have destroyed thy law.
AFter the man of God in the verses going before had prayed for himself, now
he comes to pray against his enemies, and after he had prayed for ease of his
trouble, which he had amongst his enemies, when he himself in the mean time
had deserved well of them, and had prayed that his knowledge might be ratified
both in the law and Gospel of God; he now comes, and shows a reason why he
would the Lord should so do with him, even because of the general flood of
iniquity, and universal corruption both in religion and manners, as knowing
that it was now high time to keep, and to be taught the statutes and
testimonies of the Lord, to be confirmed both in obedience and faith, because
happy were they that now could believe the law, and keep the covenants, when on
no side one might find examples of the one or of the other. His meaning then
briefly is this: O Lord, seeing there is no further place left for prayer for
them, seeing I have executed judgment and justice Coherence to be noted.
even to the failing of mine eyes, seeing for all that I can do or say, they
wax worse and worse, and whereas before they had some reverence of thy
judgments, and now they are grown to the contempt and confounding of thy law,
seeing mercy will not prevail with them, but the longer thou bear with
them, the more they are hardened, but judgment must be used, it is time O Lord,
to put to thy helping hand. The man of God we see breaks not out suddenly
into this prayer, but upon the great need which urged him thereunto.

We are here to learn first, that though at all seasons it be needful to
pray, to be guided Simile. Constancy in the faith in general backesliding.
in the true understanding, and due obedience of Gods word: yet then
especially, when through the general floods of iniquity all without yt
especial grace of God, all are like to be carried away. For as common and
universal floods sweep all away before them with their swift and violent
course: so in the common floods of corrupt religion and manners, every man
thinks that the best religion, which most men do hold, and that those things
are most lawful, which are most usual. But this is a peculiar and special
grace of God, to be exempted from that general corruption, as was Enoch, who
was preserved to walk before the Lord in that corrupt age; Noah reserved, when
all flesh had corrupted his ways; and Lot who lived a just man even among the
filthy Sodomites. If then we shall be preserved from corrupt religion, when
religion is used but of custom, and not of conscience, when it is used coldly,
and there is no heat in it; if when men's manners are generally become corrupt,
so that there is no humility, no mercy, no pity, no chastity, no purity,
no righteousness, no true dealing, no care of our neighbors credit; we can
walk in the love of God, and obedience of his will, doubtless this is a
special grace of God. In this sense the Prophet prayed on this sort: Therefore
have I doubled my prayer, because I see so little help among men. I cannot see
any good example to edify me, Lord help me: It is time for thee O Lord to
work, for men have destroyed thy law. We see then how well this depends on
that which goes before For in the beginning of this Portion he prayed, that he
might not be oppressed of his enemies, now he prays that his enemies might be
suppressed.

At the first sight this would seem not to be a charitable kind of dealing, to
pray against enemies, because love requires that we should pray for our
enemies: how then does this agree with the rule of love? or shall we think
that the man of God did any thing here against How to pray against enemies.
the law of charity? We have showed, that the children of God were never
inkindled with wrath for their own cause, but for the breach of the law of
God: so this man of God had no respect of himself, but of Gods law: his cause
was good, his persecutors cause was evil, he hurt them not, but labored by
all means to overcome them with good, he did not for a while, but continued
long in it; he was not weary of his well doing, but went forward, even to the
very failing of his eyes, yea his eyes, as he says in the last verse of Port.
7. gush out with tears, because their sins were so great; he sought peace, and
ensued it, and yet he saw no amendment, but that they were worse and worse:
wherefore, seeing their sin was past recovery, and that there was no
ordinary help on earth, he prays God to deal with them from heaven. Neither
does he pray here for their confusion and utter perdition, as some may falsely
think, but rather shows, that it is now time, that the Lord should use some
chastisement, that they may know that there was a God, and that they had broken
the laws of God, that they might come to a sight and feeling of their sins,
that they might be punished, if it were so the will of God, to their conversion,
or at the least, that they might Note.
be no more a plague to the world, and a reproach to the word.

When our affections are mingled with our cause, we are to suspect our selves;
but otherwise when we have a good cause, and see that we have perseuered in
executing judgment and justice, and yet the iniquity of our adversaries
lays it self so open, that it grows desperate, then we may desire the Lord
to take his cause into his own hand.

And here we are to observe, the Prophet says, They have etc. where he notes
not any particular person, nor makes mention of the destruction of any
singular man, but uses a general rule; wherefore for our instruction, these
rules are more diligently to be observed. First, we are to look that our cause
be good, and our adversaries cause be evil. Secondly, Rules for prayer against
enemies.
that we be not incensed with anger, because we are contemned, but because Gods
word is despised, that is, that the cause why we pray against them be Gods, and
not ours. Thirdly, that we keep our selves in well doing, and thereby heap
coals of fire upon their head, that we bear them, even to the breaking of our
backs. Fourthly, then, when we 1
have used courteous admonitions, and by the ministry of the word, or
Magistracy, if the 2
matter so require, and may be obtained, have sought to turn them. Fifthly,
when we have 3
prayed for their amendment, and wept for their sins, and yet all these
things will not 4
serve, we may say as in a last refuge, Lord take the rod into thine hand,
spare them not; always 5
providing this, that we pray not against any particular person, but leave them
to Gods secret judgment. Thus we see here is no breach of charity.

But now adays we may hereby see, men revenge rather their own affections,
than defend Gods glory. Wherefore when we have prayed ill against them, for
whom we never Some prayed with the zeal of the flesh.
prayed for good, I say to them, tremble and fear: for this is not the zeal
of Eliah; this is not the zeal of David; it is a zeal of the flesh and not of
the spirit, it will work their singular woe, unless they repent.

It is time. That man of God here teaches Gods children, that when Gods law is
destroyed, it is time for the Lord to wake. This every man may confess: but
blessed are they that can say in a good conscience, I have lived justly, I have
used no ill against mine enemies, I have prayed for them, I have devoured many
injuries at their hands, I never revenged.

Secondly, we are here to learn, that when the law of God is once brought into
contempt, When men proceed to the utter contempt of the word, God will rise
against the^.
whether it be in a nation, in a country, in a city, or particular person,
let that nation, country, city, or particular person know, that the wrath of
God is not far off either to their amendment, or to their further and more
speedy destruction. If we go through the doctrine of the Prophets, we shall
see this to be true As first we may see in the first, second, third, sixth,
seventh, and eight of Esaias, the Prophet of God threatens the Israelites, that
because they came to worship of a custom, but lay still in their sins,
because they were rebellious, given to pleasure, and contemners of the word,
they should be led captive of the Assyrians, and denounces many plagues
against them, which all came to pass in the days of Ahaz, they were carried
away captive, and were no more a people of seventy years after, as may
appear Esaias 6. And although Gods children have their infirmities, and even
they which are Gods children by calling, may fall into gross sins: yet
because there is in them no general falling from honesty, but they have in
them a special care and fear of Gods word, so that they love nothing more,
they fear and tremble at nothing more than at it, though it may be in the
mean time they fall into sin, yet they will not fall from sin to sin;
surely the Lord will in time draw them out of their sins, and spare them from
the common destruction, as he did here David, who though not this general
contempt of the word, yet some sin he had. This is then in the children of
God truly called, that although sometime more carnal than spiritual, and
slide into many wants and infirmities, yet they fall not from one sin to
another sin; but they tremble being rebuked by the word, they esteem
reverently of the prayers of the faithful, they think highly of the
Sacraments used in the congregation, and are obedient to all discipline of the
Church: in these there is great hope that they shall be reclaimed from sin,
and exempted from the punishment of the same. But when we join sin with
sin, and draw sin to us as it were with cart-ropes, when we contemn true
religion, when we pray in custom, and care not for the Sacraments, when we
make no account of the discipline of the Church, then the Lord will surely
punish us.

Let us now look into particular examples: we shall see in many places of the
Scriptures, General plagues for the contempt of the word.
that the Lord renders this reason of his coming to vengeance, even because
his word was forlorn. As Genes. 6. where we may see that after they had begun
to corrupt religion, as in the last verse of the fourth chapter of Genesis
appears, and thereby they begun to mix themselves in corrupt marriage, and
after sin had grown to such perfection, when not a few, but almost all men;
not in a few things, but in all things; not at one time, but at all times, even
then in this general flood of iniquity, the Lord threatened to send a general
flood of destruction. And as this is apparent in the whole world, now let us
see it in more particular places and persons. The Lord complains, Genesis 18.
that the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah cried out to heaven for judgment, where
sin was so high, that there was no difference between Magistrate and
subject, like people like priest, all were defiled, then came fire and
brimstone from heaven.

To come yet to more particular judgments, if we look into the commonwealths
of Judah and Israel, whether when they lived under their Judges, or under their
Kings, we shall find that before they were punished, mention is made either of
their idolatry and corrupting of religion, or of their unthankfulness and like
corrupt manners. When the land was divided into Judah and Israel, we shall
read, 2. King. 17. that notwithstanding the Lord testified to Judah and to
Israel, by all the Prophets, and by all the Seers, that they should turn from
their Idolatry, and keep his statutes, they, for the contempt of the word,
were taken prisoners of the Assyrians. Likewise 2. Chron. 36. 17. we may read,
that though Israel fell, yet Judah was not amended, and though the Lord showed
compassion upon it in sending his Prophets, yet Judah contemned their
admonitions, and when there could be no remedy, the wrath of the Lord waxed
hot against them, and they were carried captive to Babell: so that we see ere
the Lord purposes a general sweeping away, he sets not down simple
sins, one or two sins, but lincked and chained sins, the contempt of his
religion, the mocking of his Prophets and Preachers. As this is true in the
destruction of societies, so is it also true in the overthrow of private
persons. And although Contempt of the word in private persons.
we may see out of the word several denunciations of several plagues to
several persons, yet we may learn it even in our common proverb; There is no
goodness in him, he will come to naught; he is a common malefactor, he will come
to some shame; he is so common and usual a sinner, that there will some plague
light on him. The servants of Nabal told Abigail their Mistres that he railed
on them, and they added, that evil luck would come upon their master, and
upon all his family: for he was so wicked that a man could not speak to him,
and indeed he lived not long after. So if we look into Pharaoh, or into Saul,
1. Chron. 10. we shall see the pride of their sins went before the height of
their punishments.

This doctrine is seen easily in other men and confessed of all, but in the
mean time, Use of the doctrine.
few profit little by it in themselves. We have great eyes to see other men's
sins, but we scarce will see our own at all. We have many eyes to spy an
hole in another man's coat, but we can hardly have an eye to see them in our
own. We can see the moate in another man's eyes, but we leave beams in our
own: we make mountains of other men's faults, but we think our own scarsely
to be molehils. But Gods children are most studious in judging themselves,
although all the world besides lay nothing to their charge: but this thing much
deceives us, we think we are not the worse kind of people, and think there
are worse than we are, because as yet we are unspied and spared. But shall we
think that the whole world, that Sodom, Judah and Israel, that Saul and
Pharaoh were at the first at the height of their sins, but that rather they
grew by little and little as by degrees, and after one sin followed many
sins, and after few sins a great number of sins, which being joined with
the rest moved the Lord to vengeance. This then deceives us, that we compare
our selves with the worst, and herein appears our madness, and we show our
selves to be brainsicke, that we do not perceive our sins at the first, but
by falling from one sin to many, from small to great, at the length we become
hardened. It may be thou do not dispraise the word of God: but thou
esteemest not so reverently of it, as thou should do: thou will not speak
ill of the Sacraments, but thou have little care whether thou use them or no:
thou will not despise the Prayers of the Church, but thou make no conscience
of them: thou dare not speak against discipline, but thou do lightly
esteem it: thou art not yet at the height of sin, but thou can commit one
sin after another, and yet not be grieved. But let us know, that they were
not at the first in the highest degree of sin, but stepped from few sins to
make no conscience of many sins, and from petty sins, they brast out into
gross sins: Wherefore Gods children judge themselves severely, and secretly;
they have rather particular sins than universal; they strive against their
sins, they love religion, and maintain the favorers of it; they hope to
recover themselves by grace in Christ. But if by security the love of Gods
word, the liking of prayer, the delighting in the Sacraments, the care of
discipline be stolen out of our hearts; if we can now swear, that could
sometimes not suffer an oath; if we can now be content to hear the word with
sleeping, which were wont to receive it with tears; if we can now profane the
Sabbath, which could not abide to break it: if these degrees creep into us,
let us fear our selves, sin will deceive us, and deceiving us will harden
us; sin will make fat our hearts that we shall not perceive it, it will blind
our minds, that we cannot see it. This is then the wisdom of Gods children,
not to tarry whilst their sins The wisdom of Gods children to prevent sin.
be great, but to strive against the least, to esteem of the word as of the
ordinance of God to salvation, to think of the house of God as of their
paradise or inheritance, which if we could feel, undoubtedly the Lord would
give greater blessings upon the preachers, and greater graces to the hearers.
But if we pray of custom, without a feeling of our wants, and sorrow of our
sins, if we have no love of the Sacraments, no care of discipline, if our
hearts be hardened, all is not well either some judgment of God is at hand, or
else we are to fear to be cast into some heresy or such like evil.

I find that after Esaias had prophesied a long time, The Lord God who would not
have his name plasphemed, seeing no amendment in his people comes with a
greater majesty, and bids the prophet Esaias. 6. to tell them that they should
hear, but not understand, they should plainly see, but not perceive: he
commands him moreover, to make their hearts s^t, to make their ears heavy,
and to shut their eyes, least they should see with their eyes, hear with their
ears and understand with their hearts: And because they would not make the
word of God the savor of life unto life, it should be unto them the savor of
death unto death. As this is especially meant of the ungodly: yet surely the
godly escaped not but by repentance. It is the wisdom of God to use all
means, and then to use destruction when his word will not serve. We may be
comforted even at this day: that the Lord yet gives a scattering of his
people, and gives us some good ministers and magistrates: but if we consider
of the Lords long suffering of us, of the peace, abundance and many other
graces bestowed on us, and yet so small amendment; we trust for the remnants
sake, that the general judgment of God shall not as yet come upon us: yet
this sore saying should make us afraid, it is time for thee Lord, to put to
thine hand, etc. This may be much for the comfort of Gods children, and for the
discomfort of the wicked.

Verse. 127. Therefore love I thy commandments above gold, yea, above most fine
gold.
Mark here the spirit of the man of God. Do we not see that this is a common
rate, A singular grace to love religion, when it is most commonly despised.
the less religion is esteemed, the less it is of the most regarded; the
greater the corruption of manners is, the greater is the folly: then this is a
rare blessing of God, when religion is in every place hated, even then to love
religion; when manners are every where corrupted, even then to be of good
conversation. When in our time then we see so many kinds of religion, as
papistrie, the sect of the Jesuits, the family of love, Anabaptists and such
like, it is a singular grace of God, to be established in the love of true
religion: When we look into their manners, whether we turn us to Magistrates
or subjects, we shall neither find zealous government, nor faithful
obedience. If we lived in a heaven among Angels, or in a paradise with Saints,
and would defile our selves with sin, we were worthy to be cast out of
Paradise with Adam, and out of the Church with Cain. But to live with Noah
uprightly, and to walk before God with him, when all flesh has corrupted his
ways; or to live justly with Lot in the midst of filthy Sodomits; or to
keep a pure religion or worship of God with Elias, when not one can be found
that has not bowed to Baal* or to live in keeping judgment and justice with
David, where are so many oppressors of the truth* to have in this case an heart
upright both in religion and manners, o^ consider this to be an especial work
of grace.

This we may also see both by natural and civil reason: we see the more
general and contagious a disease is, the greater care we use to watch over our
health; and the greater mercy of God we count it if we be not infected with
the rest: and shall we not judge the same in spiritual and more heavenly
matters, that the more hot sin grows to be, and like to ouerrun all, shall
we not grow the more zealous of the salvation of our souls, and think it the
rarer grace of God, if we being subject to the common sins are preserved
from them? In civil matters do we not see, that now deceit in buying and
selling, unfaithfulness in bargaining is so great, every man is circumspect to
discern ill dealings, every man almost is become a lawyer, no man is ignorant
of the common shifts of the world; yet this makes not men therefore to give
over their deeds, but they make their deeds more sure: neither does
deceitful dealing keep them the more from markets and faires, but men are
more careful in their bargayning. Do we love the Church the^, though there be
so many corruptions of religion, and so many corruptions of manners? Let us be
more afraid of our selves, and more careful of the word, and heedie in our
lives, than we have been: let us listen to the word, before the Lord has
sealed up the prophecy, least the wicked prevail, and the just man make
himself a pray. Now is the time to repent, it may be that the Lord will
mitigate his judgments, when they fall, and will make his punishment particular
and easier. For then we truly fear the public judgments of God, when we
fear the cause of them in our selves, when we carry not for the height of
sin, but submit our selves with reverence to all means of true religion and
godly life, and speedily judge our selves for not looking to the least occasion
of sin, watching over our souls, that we become not remiss, or with looser
conscience of prayer, the word, sacraments, or discipline. And as it is a
secret judgment of God to pass from one sin to another, without any remorse
of conscience, until we come to the contempt of the word: so it is a special
grace of God to be grieved with sin in the beginning. And surely that so many
are given to ill works and so few to good, it is a manifest token, seeing the
word will not move us to be zealous that the Lord will shortly send a judgment
upon us, if not general, yet at the least particular.

This then is worthy noting in the man of God; that the more religion decayed,
the We may not love that best which the world esteems best.
more religious was he; the more godliness departed, the more godly was he:
which is a thing far contrary to our practices, who allow that which most
do; and love that least, which most do like, making other men's examples
placards for our sins. For many will say: how I pray, lives such a man, how
does he? does not he live an honest life? can I follow a better man? we must
not do as other men do, but as the Lord commands by his word.

Let this then be a sure rule whereby every man may examine himself: if the
more religion A good rule.
and manners decay, thou art the more religious and godly, thou shall not be
carried away with the common destruction: but if thy zeal and care of godliness
be the less, then fear, unless thou repent, as thou art wrapped in the
common sin, thou shall also be taken in the common reward of sin.

Now that corruptions may not prevail against us, we must think there is as
great contrariety between us and others, as is between light and darkness,
God and the devil. But if we begin to be in mammering of Religion, and
know not what to hold, but waver in all, it is to be doubted, that we shall
be partakers of the common punishment.

Let us learn then to shut up our faith within the compass of Noah his Arc,
and not commit it to the broad waters of the wicked world. To this end said
our Savior Christ, When the Son of man shall come, where shall he find
faith in the earth? as though he should say, it would be an hard matter to
find faith amongst men. We see in this man of God, if we will esteem aright
of the law of God, we must love it above gold.

Verse. 128. I esteem all thy precepts most just, and hate all false ways.
HE shows, that there is no sound love of good things, where there is not an
hatred of evil. We shall see this by experience, he that loves to keep the
Sabbath, he will hate a profane breaker of the Sabbath: he that loves
chastity will abhor adultery; he that loves true dealing, hates all
unrighteousness; and surely if we do not in truth love good and hate evil, but
be found to halte in hypocrisy, we shall in time be discovered, and one day
taken in a trip. In that he uses emphatically, I esteem all thy precepts, he
declares that he loved not one or two, but all the commandments. His meaning
then is this: O Lord, there is not one of the least of thy commandments, but
I esteem it: there is not one way of falsehoode but I abhor it. Now we are
to learn not to esteem well of one commandment, which our nature best
likes, and to dispense with another, but true christianity esteems all
alike, and even that most, which by nature we are most ready to break.

PORTION. 17. TETH.
Verse. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them.
THe self same argument is here continued, which he used before. For he
partly prays for graces, and partly shows what graces he has received: in
the first, second, third and last verses of this Portion, he shows his
graces, in the other he prays for graces. As we see the self same argument,
so we see a new reason. Thy testimonies (says he) are wonderful; that ^^, thy
law has in it such mysteries, as natural men cannot reach them, and
therefore lone^ thy law. As if he should have said: Lord, what is* the cause,
that men do so basely esteem of the greatness of thy covenants, why do men so
little regard it? because they never tasted the excellency of it, they never
felt the wonderful and powerful majesty thereof. Why do ^lay them up as my
soul? because in my soul I have felt by thy word su^ wisdom ^s eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, nor reason able to conceive And why I pray you, in
our times do so few conceive, or conceiving, do keep and so esteem of the
word of God? because the wise men of the world think it a thing very easy*
and they can conceive (...) they list, and the more common sort of people make
^o more account of i^, ^han to give it the hearing, and that with their
natural wit, and reason only.

Some men may t^in^^ (...) t^^u^^ against men's wits, but all men may see, that
that is a mystery which cann^^ (...) by reason, and that if it be a thing
which by wit and reason may be conceiue^ and (...), that it is no mystery.
This is the reason why coming to the word, we must have new eyes to see
spiritually, new ears to discern, new hearts to conceive.

Verse. 130. The entrance into thy word shows light, and gives understanding
to the simple.
THis is no painted wisdom, yet the simplicity of the word is of more glory
and Depth of mystery in plainnes of words.
pomp, than all the wisdom of the world besides. Wherefore Paul, Ephesians. 3.
prayed that the Ephesians might according to the riches of Gods glory, receive
strength by his spirit in the inner man, to comprehend the breadth and height
and length and depth of this our Savior Christ speaking to Peter of this
mystery attained to by faith, says, Flesh and blood has not (...) this unto
thee, but the Spirit. And in Matthew. 13 11. where our Savior Christ spoke in
Parables, he ^^^^e, Because it is given to you to know the secrets of the
kingdom of ^^^^^n* but to ^h^m it is not given. Many may have the word of God
strike their ears* they may have an humane conceiving of it, but few have the
right and spiritual understanding of it.

When we come then in fear and trembling to hear the word, as knowing that of
our selves we can never understand the word, but must crave of God by prayer,
to be given us by his holy Spirit, who as he was the author in giving it, so
he is also the causer of conceiving it, we are sure we shall understand.
There is an hearing of the letter and an hearing of the Spirit. Why then have
we so little judgment and cold affections in hearing and reading, but because
we hear and read so malapertly, and are not thoroughly and truly persuaded of
the majesty thereof? The Lord is delighted with the soul that is humbled, and
refuses the purpose of the proud. For what is the cause that so many run
into heresy; but because they are proud in their own conceits? On the
contrary, if we had this humbled mind, we should not be so senseless in
conceiving, nor so soon carried away with the floods and tempests of corrupt
doctrine.

In that he says, My soul does keep them, his meaning is, that therefore he
laid up the precepts of God in his heart, that he might have them in a
readiness when he should practice them, as he says portion 2. 3. I have hid
thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.

The soul is the seat of affections, for he says, that he had the statutes
of the Lord in Heart seat of divinity.
his affections. The seat of divinity is the heart, wherefore the Scriptures
use so often to say, the heart of man is corrupt, the Lord searches the heart,
the foolish man has said in his heart. For though the Philosophers said, that
the mind was the seat of knowledge, yet they could never see, that the heart
is the seat of Christian religion. Which if it were in our mind, we should
surely be puffed up with it, as we are with knowledge. Here is then Trial of
heart.
a trial of our hearts. I see many labor after knowledge, but few after
affections. This in temptation will not help, until both knowledge and
affections be on our sides to resist, so that which we have in knowledge, may
also be in affections. For though we may learn it, and commend it for a
while; yet surely we shall have no profit by it in temptation. Note.
When we have none other seat for divinity, but our heart, and do not place
it in our brain, and when we have thoroughly set our affections on it, our life
though it should be taken from us, yet our soul would stick to the thing
whereon our affections are so earnestly set. So Ionathans heart was said to
be knit to David: wherefore let us labor to say with the Virgin Mary, My
soul does magnify the Lord, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

Thy testimonies are wonderful: Hereof say the Papists that the word of God
being mystical, should not be taught to the common sort of people, and the
common people say themselves: what will ye have us do with the word of God?
what should simple men meddle with it? we are not like the learned, it is for
you, it is for you that are learned, not for us. The holy ghost here most fitly
provides against the Papists and the common people Let us know then this, that
a simple man of the country, though at the first he be not so capable, yet
offering and submitting his heart and whole reason to the Lord, and his word,
he shall afterward attain to great knowledge.

They are wonderful then to humane wit, and reason not sanctified, and the
more wise men wander in the skies, and houer aloft in vain conceits, and yet
have not learned Christ Jesus crucified, have nothing in them, when as poor
simple people desirous to be taught, do understand wonderful things. The
Prophet says, Psalm. 78. Hear my word O my people, etc. I will open my mouth
in a parable etc. and he adds afterward, we will not hide them from their
children. He calls them high speeches, and dark sentences to man's capacity;
but Gods people can understand them: they are hidden to them that trust too
much to their own reason and are revealed unto them that renounce their own
reason.

Mark here he says: the (...) into thy statutes. Will then the beginning give
understanding? what will it do to them that are gone forward in it? what
hinders us, why we go forward no more? but even the too much trusting to our
own wits. What? have we such wits in outward matters, and are so gross in
matters concerning our salvation? Oh hypocrites says our Savior Christ, you
can discern the outward seasons, etc. What means then this dulnes and
deadness in heavenly things, but that men deceive their own souls. For if
their wits were sanctified, they would as well conceive spiritual things, as
corporal. To do ill, says ^eremie, this people is wise, but to do good they
have no wit. What a curse of God upon our wits is this, that we are so quick
in worldly things, and so dull in heavenly things? surely, it is the punishment
of the Lord, for the pride of man's reason.

The meaning then of this place is not, that they which are altogether bereaved
of discretion, have such a light in the word; but it is understood of them,
who being lowly in their own eyes, abase their pride of wit to the pure
wisdom of Gods spirit; so that neither the simplicity of the baser sort is
any hinderance to the gospel, neither the wisdom of the mighty any thing
avails thereunto, unless it be sanctified, howsoever men brag of an holy
foolishnes. For Joseph, Job, David and Daniel had good wits, but sanctified,
and subject by Gods spirit to the word.

We are then to learn by the things which we have spoken, that no man hates
sin with a godly zeal in another, but he first hated it in himself: we must
cast the first stone at ourselves. True it is, that we cannot avoid all ill
ways, yet we must hate one evil way as well as another, and though we cannot
do all good things, yet we must love one commandment as well as another.
This then is that which the Lord requires, even to hear ^l his commandments
alike.

Again, so much we profit by the word the more, when we must esteem of those
things, against which our reason does most resist, and our affections most
fight. We showed also out of the 129. verse, that the Prophets meaning was not,
that there were some profound mysteries in the word; but that all were
mysteries, what thing soever therein contained. We showed that the man of God
did not place the word in his understanding only, but also in his heart and
affections. We must labor to join judgment and affection, for in ^oble, if
affection be not joined with judgment, judgment will not help, because
affections rebel, and we shall find such a conflict, that we will say we
have lab(...) much in judgment, and too little in affections. When then in
temptation we shall not only have judgment, but also affection on ourside, we
shall be able the better to ^^^^ unter with (...) things commanded a special
mean to embrace them is, to travail as well with affection ^s with judgment:
in things forbidden these two joined together, will make us the better to
avoid them. Wherefore it is good for a man thus to ^rie himself: Lord give
me a sight of my former estate, why did I not according to knowledge? why did
I so little profit, either in particular duties, or in particular troubles?
surely I* ever labored Note.
so after my affections, as after judgments, I laid up thy word more in my
mind, than in my heart.

Verse. 131. I opened my mouth and panted because I loved thy commendements
SOme would think this zeal to be madness, because they had never such
feelings nor affections. But what says this man of God more of himself? he
says, that with his feet he walked in the law of God, his eyes look to it,
his hands were lift up, his spirit panted, and as a man being weary gapeth to
take breath, and swalloweth up the air: so the Prophet in the weariness of
his troubles, swallowed up the word of God. O hungry soul which the Lord did
^atisfie, and with his word alone could comfort. The metapher is taken from
wearied and panting Hinds, which after long pursuing and chasing was very dry
through hea^e, and desire nothing more than the water b^ookes. So that as he
chased Heart longs after the waters, so his thirsty soul desired nothing
more than to be satisfied with the word.

This Psalm is given us by Gods blessing to remove us from our dullness, and
to teach us that we should not labor more after knowledge, that after
affection; why then profit we no more in the word? there is little hunger in
us; much (...) does (...) us, we examine not ourselves at midnight, we are not
humbled, we thust not, we pant not. All Gods prom^ies are chiefly made to them
that hunger after them it is said, Pro. 2. 4. It thou seek knowledge as
silver, and sear^hest for her as for treasure 5 Th^^^ shall thou understand the
fear of the Lord, etc. Here we see the holy ghost calls (...) word a
^reasure, that is ^id and shows how we must seek and search for it Awakethe
your affections, awake your affections, Affections.
behold here the blessing of God, he will bless ^ts, and satisfy the hungry
souls. The Lord requires nothing of us, but to mistrust our reason: and to
suspect our affections but to be teachable in spirit, to hunger in heart, and
thirstingly to long after his word, which if we shall do, we shall receive
increase of knowledge, and amendment of life For to them, Note.
that as meek scholars will be taught of Gods spirit, and submit their reason
to the simplic^t^e of the word, the Lord says, Matthew. 5. Blessed an^ the poor
in spirit, for their^s is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst for righteousness for they shall be filled.

But here may seem to man's reason a great repugnance, to the verse aforegoing.
The entrance into thy word shows light and gives understanding to the
simile. For he had showed in the verse going before, that the testimonies of
the Lord were wonderful, not in part; ^^^ meaning that all therein was
mystical: and here he says that the very entrance into Gods word gives
light, and understanding to the simple. We answer that the law, or especially
the second table of it may be conceived by reason: but it is nothing so in
Popish doctors of reason.
^^^ doctrine of faith, which is here meant in this word testimonies, which we
showed to be taken for the covenants of God. The doctors of reason, I mean
the papists, say the word is not to be taught to the common people, because it
is mystical; but they never knew, not by good experience felt, that the
Scriptures of God were easy to them, that would submit themselves to them, and
use them familiarly. Others indeed may read, see, and hear them: but they
shall be as Parables and enigmaticall unto them. If then we did see this
aright, that that which the wisest man cannot conceive, the simplest souls may
attain to, if they will be taught of God, would it not take up our affections?
This made our Savior Christ say: I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, that thou have hia these things from the ^^^^ and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes: even so O Father, was it thy good will and pleasure:
As if our Savior Christ should have said, O Lord, I see the wise men have
great conceiuings, and yet they attain not to thy word; yet to them that are
humble and poor of spirit* I see thou make it known. Did our Savior Christ
give thanks for this thing, and shall not we for whose example these things
were done? We can give thanks for our wits, A wit not humbled hinders us in
godliness.
and for our memories: but what is that to the purpose: our wit may rather
hinder us, than further us in the true knowledge of the Lord, unless it be
humbled and subject to Gods spirit. But here is a great cause of
thankfulness, that the simple shall understand these mysteries, not as we
showed before, such as have no conceiving at all, but such as acknowledge their
simplicity, and hunger after the word: even as we also grant, that wisemen
shall have this understanding, if they will deny their reason, and stir up
affection. For as all wise men shall not be debarred from this privilege; so
all simple men shall not be preferred thereunto* For neither wisdom in it
self, nor simplicity in it own nature, do either further or hinder hereunto
But alas, I see how loath men would be, to lose their worldly wit, and how
they seek after praise and commendation for the same; but few, either with
like affection desire spiritual understanding; or sorrow, in any like measure,
when they have it not. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. That is your understanding and wisdom in
the sight of the people says A Moses, That the Lord permits you so near to
approach to him, and to be taught his ordinances and laws. What then mean
these speeches of them, that hunt so much after worldly wit? Why, do you
think I am a fool? Do you think I am an ass, and have no wit to conceive
what things be, as well as other men? Do you count me but a dull head? Surely
they are too proud, and too much blinded in their own conceits. Wherefore the
Prophet does show us, that as the mysteries of Gods word are revealed to them
that are simple of understanding; so are they to the^ that are zealous in
affection. The cause then why we do no more profit by the word, is because we
do not deny our reason, we have not affections that hunger after it, nor
love to make us pant for it, which things if we did, we should surely be
satisfied.

Indeed the Lord gives understanding to whom he pleases, and where he
purposes to bestow so great a blessing, he gives grace also more abundantly
to suboue their reason. And as simplicitio cannot of it self be a cause of
spiritual understanding, but as it sooner brings us to a sight of our wants,
and makes us the more to long after Gods word; so wisdom is no cause of
hinderance, but as we resting too much in the fear of reason, cannot easily
be brought to the simplicity of Gods word. And if the entrance, rudiments and
principles of religion give such knowledge, and the very catechismes yield such
understanding, what is to be hoped for, when we attain to riper knowledge,
when we have more understanding, when we have more affections? well, let us
then examine our own hearts herein: when we begun, were we delighted with
understanding, and did our understanding move in us such affections, and in our
proceedings, is our understanding less, and our affections fewer, or do we
not think still of our ignorance, and desire to have our judgment clearer? we
are in a dangerous estate, we must suspect our selves. Satan will bewitch us,
and tell us that this is a paradoxe, that after so long hearing and reading we
should still be ignorant, and that still we have need to hunger after the
word. It is therefore the great mercy of God, that to the receiving of so
singular a benefit, he requires nothing of us, but the acknowleding of our
ignorance, and bewayling of our wants. He would, that we should still put our
selves in mind of this one thing, that though we have not this understanding
in the highest degree, or in an hundred fold; yet we must have it in some
degrees, either in threescore fold, or in thirty fold: we must vex, grieve
and trouble our selves for this affection. For where it is, the heart is a
liberal and free ruler of our affections; and where it is not, we must learn
to lay violent hands even on our affections. We are to show that which we
omitted in the latter end of the verse going before; Because I loved thy law,
etc. Here the prophet shows, that the love which he did bear to Gods law,
was so great, that it could not satisfy him, but still he thirsted after it,
and thirsting, did pant.

Love, as we say, always sets a price of things, nothing is too dear, no
travail is too Love.
much, no pain seems too great, for the thing which we love; we set a great
price on things which are loved.

So then, if we make our love of the word, and make our price on it, we shall
think no pains sufficient, no travel enough to attain unto it: and on the
contrary, if our love be little and small to the word, we shall find it to be
the cause, why we set so little a price on it. For if our love be in any
measure, it will draw on our affections; but when we have lost our love, no
marvel though we have so barren feelings. If then we will have any true trial
of our love, let us see, if with the man of God, we can open our mouth and
pant. Now, if we think, that in others it is reproueable, that they have lost
their former heat, and broken their first love; and we see the holy Ghost
reprehendeth the Nicolaitans, and that they be fault worthy, who neither be
hot nor cold, whom the Lord protests to spue out of his mouth, as he
threatens the Laodiceans; and shall we think the self same things not too
reproueable, or blame worthy in our selves? Wherefore when we feel such
coldness in affection, such luke-warmenes in love, we must earnestly strive and
labor in prayer against them. For where there is no feruencie, there is no
love in truth: and if we do any thing drowsily, it is an argument our love is
cooled, and we are to suspect the deadnes and dulnes of our affections. So that
this may be the brief sense of the man of God; Because I desired to have my
love satisfied, I panted.

If we look into that heavenly and spiritual Song of Solomon, wherein is set
down both Canticles.
the pure love of Christ to his Church, and the ardent affection of the Church
to Christ her spouse, we shall be ashamed of the want of our affections, the
want whereof does breed the want of love.

Verse. 132. Look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou use to do unto
those that love thy name.
HEre the man of God continues to show his love, in that nothing can satisfy
him, in making his petitions, saying: O Lord regard me, look upon me thy
servant, not according to thy justice, but in dealing mercifully with thy
servant. We are peradventure accustomed to this prayer, and we sometime happily
have this affection, yet we do it not with the Prophet, to the panting of our
hearts, or opening of our mouths. We desire the Lord to be good and merciful
to us, because we are in some misery and distress, not that we have any
desire to see the glory of God advanced, in the accomplishment of his promises
Let us see then whether we have this affection of the Prophet in us or no. Why
do we pray for favor and mercy at the hand of God? because of his promise.
This is something; but we ought to do it, because we love the word: If our
prayers, as we have said before, could pierce the skies with their shrilnesse,
if they were so eloquent, as all men were delighted with them; yet they find
no grace nor favor before the throne of God, unless they being grounded on
the promises of God, grow from a love of his word. Thus we see, how first he
proved his love to the word, in that he opened his mouth and panted, and after
he desires, that his love might be satisfied.

We must first see this in judgment, and after be ashamed of our selves. We
marvel why we go on in love and affection so little; why we pray so much, and
obtain so little; we think, we persuade our selves, to have asked much of the
Lord; yea, but not aright. For we must so crave of the Lord to look upon us,
that if he should look from us, we should hold our selves to be most
miserable. The young Ravens crave of the Lord when they are hungry, the Lions
yell and roar for food, and both the croking of the Ravens, and yelling of
the Lions is satisfied with meat. If the Lord so deals with these, which are
more inferior creatures than man, much more will he do it to us, if we with
like affection shall crave it. If the Lord then look not on us, and be
merciful unto us, we are gone, and then we are to show our longing to his
mercy, and to ease our hearts with prayer, according to the example prescribed
unto us of the Prophet.

When then we have griefs, we languish away with them, and martyr our selves;
we Griefs.
bite upon the hard bridle; but here we must have our remedy, even by laying
our selves open, in God his bosom: we are not to pine and consume away with
them, but to lay them down in the lap of the Lord.

Why do so few good motions come unto us? or when they come, why fleet they
so Motions.
soon away? even because we cherish them not, nor give them good
entertainment, because we change not our motions into prayer, but put them to
silence, and smother them by other rouing cogitations.

And be merciful unto me: We see the man of God still desires mercy. This is
all that he esteems of, this is the thing which we must always covet, and
coveting this, we may leave all other things according to Gods pleasure.

As to them that love thy name, etc. It might seem that he had merited, and
by desert might have challenged the grant of his prayer: but he still cried
for mercy, and craves nothing of merits. We see then the papists are carnal
having proud spirits, for although the Prophet had executed judgment and
justice, he sueth for mercy. He desires the Lord to renew his graces in him,
that he might also renew his mercy toward him.

This doctrine is manifest in the second commandment, where the Lord says; I
will have Mercy.
mercy upon thousands of them that love m^, and keep my commandments: Mark,
he says not, that he will reward them that are truly zealous in the worshipping
of him, but he says, that he will show mercy unto them. For it is both the
mercy of God, that we have grace to do the will of God in our first
beginnings; it is the mercy of God, that we have grace to continue in doing
his will in our after proceedings.

This is a comfortable doctrine, when we remember that the rarest and dearest
servants of God did renew the mercies of the Lord toward the^, by craving that
his graces might be renewed in them. Mercy it is that moves God, to begin any
grace in us, it is mercy to continue us in grace, it is mercy that he
crowns his gifts in us. When the Lord then will bestow any merciful thing
upon us* he preuenteth us by bestowing also some grace upon us. For if we
respect our selves, we are so far from any right challenging of any new grace
or mercy to be given us, that we are most worthy to be deprived of the old
graces already received.

As thou vs^st to do to them that love thy name, etc. The words in their
proper tongue signify thus much: According to thy in lgements, which thou
do^st execute to them that love thy name, according to that in the fourth verse
of the seventh portion. I remember thy judgments of old o Lord, and have been
comforted. His meaning therefore in these former words, is not fully expressed*
Here we may learn, the necessary use of this word, and how needfu^l a thing
it is, and how special a gift it is of God his wisdom, rightly to discern
and distinguish the words.

Judgments as we have often fore showed, is taken either for executing the
threatenings (...)nts (...) they (...). (...)c^p* 7 7. (...) true sense.
of the Lord denounced in wrath and in desert: or else for the performance of
his promises, made in compassion and of mercy. His meaning briefly is: be
merciful in judging me, as thou art wont to judge thy servants, let me have
judgment in mercy, and enter not into the judgment of my sins, for no
flesh then shall be saved, and deal with me, as with thy dear servant. If we
be guilty of our own crosses, we must acknowledge our sins, as the just
causes thereof, for never any of the children of God obtained mercy without
this. We are then in trouble to look to the promises of God, if we by faith
can find the like testimony of a good conscience: but when we see our sins
to be the cause of our troubles, or that it is the Lord his hand of justice
upon us, we cannot in truth use this prayer of the Prophet. There is a
judgment in righteousness, and there is a judgment in mercy. Of the first
the man of God speaks when he says, Enter not into judgment, A two fold
judgment: the one in righteousness, another in mercy.
etc. the judgment in righteousness: of the second the Prophet Jeremy
speaks, Correct me, O Lord, yet in judgment. that is, in the judgment of
mercy and fatherly correction. And because we fail for the most part, either
in our outward actions or inward affections, we had need to pray, that the
Lord would deal with us according to his merciful judgment. True it is, that
the Saints of God do say, O God of my righteousness, O God of my salvation:
but that is to be understood in respect of men, and not in respect of God: but
they that come with their case to be judged and pleaded before God, must needs
say* Lord be merciful to thy servants. We must never draw near then in prayer
before the Lord, without this clause, that the Lord would accept us, in Christ
hi^ obedience, and that we doubt not of mercy, when the Lord judges us in his
Christ.

Here we are to observe, how the Prophet makes an experience of the Lord his
dealing, and thus reasons with him: I see thou Lord dealest mercifully with
them that love thee: but I love thee: therefore Lord deal mercifully with me.
This deceives many: we read not the We are to follow the holy Prophets etc.
in their holy affections.
word of God for imitation, or as thinking that those affections which we read
to have been in the children of God are to be required in and of us also; but
let us know, that whatsoever have been the strangest and rarest affections of
God his children, they are for us to follow. For though we cannot attain to
them in the like measure that this man of God, because we will not deny, that
he had a greater measure of Gods spirit than we have; yet we must by using the
like means attain to some measure, if not an hundred fold, yet threescore and
thirty fold. Now we see, that he having obtained the like graces with God his
people, craves here the like mercies with the^ For his sense is evident: as
thou did not make a covenant with thy servants after their sins, but
according to thy mercy, even so Lord deal with me. Here is no special thing
mentioned, but he sets down that, which has been, and may be in the
children of God. He prays no^ for any special mercy then, but for that
mercy, which by experience he has seen ratified in others: likewise he
speaks not here of any extraordinary graces of God his holy spirit, but of
the^ which are ordinary and incident to any one of God his children as to
another, although not in like measure. And surely we have not the like mercies
with them, because we have not the like graces that they had. To love the word
of God as gold, to gape after it, to breath and Note.
^^nt for it, are singular gifts of God, but given to none in that time, with
such special prerogative, as they may not in some measure be given to the
Saints of God in our time, if we soloued the Lord. For that which the Apostle
Peter said of them, that feared the Lord, to wit the Lord has no respect of
persons, but they that feared the Lord are accepted: the same the Prophet
speaks here in effect of them that love the Lord. For when the promises are
general in pronouncing, we must make them particular by a several applying of
the^ to our s^lues. Let us then be ashamed of our selves for our wants of love.
The Lord has not granted unto others, nor denied unto us any special
privileges, as they thought among the Papists, who in their readings had wont
to admire much at the Saints of God, and to follow them but little. The Lords
hand is not shortened, that he can less help us, than he has in times past
our forefathers; neither is his mercy less, that he will not help us: for his
is the kingdom, his is the power, his is the glory for ever: but our sins,
as says the Prophet, have made a partition, and a diuorcement between the
Lord and us, our love is less, our sins are greater, than they were in our
forefathers. Let this comfort us, the man of God here prays not for any
extraordinary mercy. For as the love of God to us ward is common with other of
his children, in like manner our love to Gods word must be common with them,
and if we have the like graces with them we shall obtain the like mercies with
them. For in the substance of salvation, if we have faith, the Lord will deal
with us according as he dealt with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with the Prophets
and Apostles. Wherefore the Lord, as we said a little before, has set down
his promises i^ general words, which we must derive by faith, as particular
and proper to our selves. Now if we had this sealed in our hearts, that they
were never confounded nor deceived which put their trust in the Lord, we should
be assured, that his arm is not shortened, he is as able to reach it out unto
us as ever he was before, if only, we will believe and say with the Prophet of
God, Amen.

We must take ^eede, that we suffer not as ill doers, and that the Lord find
us not lying in some sins: for then we cannot in truth use the Prophets prayer
for the like mercies, in that we have not with the Prophet the like graces. If
we then fall in unbelief, or in time of trouble possess not our souls in
patience, let us not hope for this mercy: but if in Note.
a right cause, we have walked uprightly under hope of the like grace, we may
pray for the like mercy.

That love thy name. Whatsoever love he had to God, he would not express it by
showing it to the Lord, but by testifying it to his word. The name of every
person or thing serves The name of the Lord.
especially as we know, to make them known to us, and to discern them from
other in that kind. So is it in the name of the Lord, whose name is set down
to us Exodus 33. and 34. by the Lord himself speaking to Moses, The Lord passed
before his face, and cried, the Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and gracious,
etc. We see what is the name of the Lord, the eternity, wisdom, power,
strength, and goodness of the Lord: for all these things abide in him, and
spring from him to his creatures as from a fountain.

Now, in that these things cannot be known but by the word, whatsoever love we
show to God, we must testify it by obedience to his word. For in that he is in
all these things so infinite, he shows us in the second Commandment, that no
Idol can express his wisdom, power, love and justice, but his word alone,
which is the glass wherein alone whilst The word, the only glass to see and
know the Lord.
we are in this life we see the face of the Lord. Seeing then the word does
make his name so known unto us, we then love his name when we love his word,
which shows us his love, power, eternity, and goodness. Wherefore the Prophet
in this same Psalm says: Thy testimonies are mine heritage for ever,
expressing by the word his love to the Lord: according to that Psalm. 16. 5. The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance. Then he said he loved the Lord, when
he loves his law.

Here then we see that Heretics love not the Lord, brag they thereof never
so much, and call themselves the Family of love, because they love not the
word. We must then try our love to God by our love to his word, and since the
love of God is not pure in Heretics, John. 14. 23.
let us love the word, which is a sound trial of our love of God: for look
what love he would have done to him, he requires to have it showed to his word.

Thus we see they love Gods name, which love his mercy, justice, strength and
power: but because we cannot know them, nor be endued with them, but as the
Lord by the ministry of his word, and working of his Spirit communicates them
unto us, we must show that love to the word, which we would show to the Lord.
As we therefore are desirous of the reading, hearing, and meditating of the
word of God, as we delight to be conferring of it, as we rejoice when we see it
observed and kept in our selves, and in others, as we are grieved to see this
broken in our selves and others; even such is our love to God his word.

Verse. 133. Direct my steps in thy word, and let none iniquity have dominion
ever me.
When the man of God said before, that he opened his mouth and panted, and
that he saw the word of God was wonderful, and that the very entrance into it
gave light and understanding unto the simple, he now prays for continuance in
this his love. The end then of this his prayer is perseverance, and shows,
that though he loved the word, yet he is still ready to go out of the way, and
so unless the Lord stay and establish him, iniquity should get the upper
hand, Thus we see how he feared and suspected himself: for had he not feared;
this had been an unnecessary prayer. The man of God had not that opinion of
himself, which men have now adays, in thinking so highly of their own
strength, but prays to the Lord that he may not go astray: which thing he
thought he might of himself easily do, and that if it were so that he slipped
somewhat awrie, yet that he might not go too far, least that iniquity
should have the upper hand of him. Thus we see that in this Psalm is set down
unto us a myrrour of godliness, wherein a man may come Psalm. 119. A mirror of
godliness.
to the sight of his corruptions, and to a feeling of his need, in having his
steps numbered, and his paths guided by the word. If we were truly persuaded
of this same, it would pull us on our knees, and humble us, it would make us
make much of the means, whereby we might help these infirmities. But we
suspect no such danger, and therefore we are not so careful in our singular
actions to watch over our selves, and that by degrees we may fall away, and
start out of the way or ere we beware.

In that this follows so immediately his former prayer, that God would look
upon him, and be merciful to him, he shows that there was never any man but
he was in danger and most ready to fall, unless God looked on him, and were
the more merciful unto him. So that with the gift of perseverance he prays
for mercy, declaring that unless the Lord would bestow such grace on him, he
was not able to continue.

This must stay the pestilent doctrine of the Papists, who foolishly dream,
that a man having freewill, may hold forth his course in the right way, and may
promise to himself safe Freewill.
passage. True it is, Gods children may assure themselves of strength, because
the Lord is on their right hand, but so, as they are still to fear their own
frailenes, and to pray for final perseverance. This verse is all one in effect
with the first verse, portion 14. Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a
light unto my paths. In both which places he shows, that as he that goes
in a dark place or in the night, cannot go on right step, but as he
receives light from the lantern to see his way, and when he is in never so
little darkness, he is in danger and ready to stumble: so we, if we march
forward in ignorance and darkness, cannot guide our selves one step to the
kingdom of heaven, but as we may have light from the lantern of Gods word,
to beware how we tread, and when we swerve never so little from this light,
we are in danger of making our conscience to stumble. This borrowed speech
goes then thus far: As he that is in darkness can go no further safely, than
he is within the compass of the light of the candle: so according to the
measure of our knowledge of Gods word are we able to direct our affections
happily, and no further.

In that he says, Direct my steps, he notes, that although we have the light
of the word Albeit we have the light of the word, yet the Lord must open our
eyes before we can see.
before us, yet unless the Lord open our eyes, it shall be as unprofitable
and unable to guide us, as the light of a candle is to direct a man that is
blind. Now therefore he teaches us to pray, that though we have the word, yet
the Lord would inlighten our vnderstandding and affections by his Spirit, which
may guide us in our journey. And seeing the man of God has used this prayer
before us, we are to learn, that in reading, hearing, meditating, and
receiving of the word we are altogether unprofitable, until the Lord shall
take the government of our steps into his own hand, and shall direct us by his
Spirit.

My steps. Lo he prays here for affection and not for judgment, as he does
in a verse following, where he says, Show the light of thy countenance upon
me, and teach me thy statutes. Here the Prophet instructs us as well to pray
for affection to be moved by the word of Affection.
God, as for judgment to understand it. For if this were not needful, then
were this prayer but a vain babbling, and often repeating of one and the
selfsame thing, contrary to that rule of our Savior Christ, Mat. 6. 7* When
ye pray, use no vain repetitions, as the Heathen: for they think to be heard
for their much babbling. Why does this man then use this repetition? Surely
because it is another matter greater than we think of* He saw there was much
blindness in our minds, there is much rebellion in our affections, and great
sluggishnes in our hearts, that without light we cannot tread in the right
path; yea though we be delivered from bypath, if the candle be obscured,
and our way darkened, yet we return to them again. For as a man being in the
dark, may easily go out of the way, and being out, cannot easily come in
again, but is feign to wander in unknown and uncertain places: so if God
guide us not by his word and Spirit, we shall hardly find the right way of
knowledge, and if we find it, we can hardly continue in it, but may easily go
out of it, and being out, we can hardly recover it again. Wherefore hitherto
appertains the saying of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 7 13 Enter in at the
straight gate, etc. because the gate is straight, and the way narrow, that
leads unto life: wherein as it is hard to continue; so to go on either side
out of it, is most easy. We see then how he prays, that his paces might be
guided by the word, and that the spirit of God might carry this lantern of
the word before him, without whose guiding we cannot go three steps but we
shall miss of our way, and leese the path, and being once out we may easily
err, and once erring we shall not return aright. Many would think this
ridiculous, but Gods children know by experience that there is a necessary use
of these things by reason of the blindness of our mind, and that it is a
special grace of God to be guided by his spiritual grace.

That no iniquity have dominion over me. The simple sense of this verse is
this: Lord, if thou do not order my goings, surely iniquity will have
dominion over me The end of his request (as we touched before) is, that he
might not misca^^^e in his way He acknowledges, that a man being out of the
way, may be enforced to wander, and after wand^ing can hardly recover himself.
Wherefore he prays to this effect: Lord, so keep me, that though I ^rre, yet
I may return: so ^uide me, that though I go out a little, ye^ suffer me not
to wa^der altogether, least iniquity over run me. Thus we see God^ children
fear themselves: and why? because though the raging reign of sin be taken
f^^m them, ^et the massi^ lump of natural corruption dwells in them, and
the very dangerous of sin are very dangerous. Wherefore our Savior Christ
^aught us ^o pray, L^a^^ us not into temptation: the meaning whereof is here of
the Prophet plainly set down, which is, that though we cannot au^ide the
causes of temptation, which is ou^ corrupt nature, yet that every man must
resist, and no^ yield in willing consent unto sin, that it should get the
dominion over us. It every Saint of God ^ee commanded to say this in ^^u^h and
not in hypocrisy of heart; ^^^ every Saint has need of this prayer: for
every man is subject ^o temptation and iniquity in him may have the upper hand.

True it is, there are many weaknesses and infirmities in Gods ^^i^^ren,
as^r^th and anger; yet by how much they be the more and the greater, the more
and the oftener they Anger.
are to watch over themselves. Shall they then give place and (...) themselves
in anger? Some man will say, we are full of corruption, we cannot but often
f^ll. We answer, we must be the more watie of our selves: for it is one thing
to be tempted, and another thing to nourish and foster a temptation: for if a
man being p^o^o^^^ to anger, and let the Sun go down in his wrath, can fall
asleep in his anger, and can be angry still when he awaketh again, the
spirit of God there has not the chief rule, but iniquity has dominion over
him. Wherefore when temptation arises, let us learn by prayer to prevent the
raging of it. As thus: Lord, I will not thus much trust myself, that I can
match with sin, Lord I have corruption in me, but cleanse thou me from my
sin, and let it not utterly prevail against me.

The Saints of God dare not tarry until the dead blow comes but they
suspect the first strokes of sin* they ^arrie not to be stung to death, but
they fear the least b^zzing of sin, because they may easily be carried out
of the way, through the deceiuablenes of sin, and the deceitfulness of sin
may bring hardness of heart. Wherefore the Apostle (Hebr 3) exhorts them to
apply one another with exhortations whilst it is called to day, least any of
them should be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. And the holy Ghost
says, Psalm 95 verse. 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Wherefore the Saint of God thus prays, that if he should give a
little room and s^^ll liberty to his affections, Gods grace could not
continue in him. Neither can the children of God being out of the way, easily
recover themselves, as we may see in David, who thought himself after that he
had sinned to be cast from the presence of God, to be for sake^ of his holy
Spirit* and unless the Lord would cast him into the womb again, unless the
Lord would cast him into a new mould, there was no hope that he should recover
himself. The violence of sin is so impetuous, that a man may soon slip and
easily fall, but hardly rise again. Wherefore the Wiseman says, Prou 28. 14.
Blessed is the man that ^e^^th always: but he that hardens his heart shall
f^ll into evil: that is, blessed is he that in every action examineth his
heart, that he fall not.

Not without cause then have I this jealousy, that when men are ready to
deceive themselves they are in danger of being hardened, because the man of God
here so joins both together, that he should have ^is steps directed, least
that iniquity should have the dominion over him: for I take the whole verse to
be but one request. The sooner we meet with temptation the better we shall
over match it; the longer we continue and let it al^ne, the longer will be our
conflict. If we begin betimes we shall easily conquer it; if we let it alone,
we shall easily be conquered. For it will either get ground of us, ouerreach
us, and get the vantage, or else we must get ground and vantage of it: if it
overcome us, we shall hardly recover our paces.

This is then the wisdom of God his spirit in his children, which men call
precisenes, Watchfulnes
to set a wary and heedy watch over every affection that we think, over every
word which we speak, over every deed we do, least we be deceived, and
through deceit be hardened, and so iniquity get the dominion over us. Thus
we see the Prophet desires the gift of perseverance, acknowledging, that to
continue is Gods gift, as well as to begin. And in that he desires special
mercy to persevere, he declares that many begin well; but afterward iniquity
gets the upper hand, and they fall away: so that it is a peculi^r mercy of
God to preserve his to the end. And in praying as well here for the (...)
affections, as he did before for the direction of his judgment, he gives us to
understand, that if we purpose to persevere, we must no less look to our
affections, than to our judgment This then is a double grace of God on
whomsoever* first to have our judgment enlightened, and then to have our
affections touched.

Direct my feet, etc. As our feet carry our bodies, so our affections support
our actions. It is a good thing to stay our affections, when our outward
actions are rightly ordered; and for this cause mention is made so often in the
book of God of lifting up our eyes, of holding up our hands, of walking with
our feet. As then we will have our affections truly touched: for we must not
contemn this outward government.

Now, whereas he prays, that the secret mass of corruption which lies in
him, may not break out in him, he notes, that they who are careless of their
final perseverance, make little conscience of their former corruptions But
such are greatly to fear, least that in the latter end of their regeneration,
they be cast our of Paradise with Adam, and thrown out of the Church with
Cain. For if Adam sinned in Paradise, whilst as yet he was perfect, how easily
may we fall, which are in the days wherein iniquity does reign, and are full
of imperfections? Again as we touched briefly before, God his children do not
tarry so long as to labor for life, and strive for breath in temptations: but
in the beginning they epsy their errors; whereby they see how they might sail
further, were it not that Gods spirit mightily did preserve them. And surely
every man by experience shall find, that the sooner we begin to (...) the more
speedily and easily we shall prevail against it; whether it be that we are
tempted to leave good things undone, or to do things not to be done. For let a
man once leave the searching of his heart, and upon some great necessity cease
from the ransacking and rifling of his conscience, when he has not happily
slipped notoriously: we may see, we may find our recovery to our exercises
again: But if we have omitted these exercises a long time and often, when we
should come to practice them, and put them in ure again; what a strange thing
will this seem to us? how hardly shall we get our hearts to yield to it? our
flesh is unwilling, this thing is so vncome unto us, that we are feign to
sweat again, for those practices of prayer and private examination, which by
using we had with ease; and by not using we had almost lost.

Wherefore as proof makes evident; like as in a tree though the roots be
somewhat Simile.
mangled, yet there will sprout buds, which with a small instrument, by daily
resorting to them, and keeping under, may be kept from much growing, and yet
afterward by negligence and permission, as with a hatchet they will hardly be
hewn down; And as in a great To meet with temptations before sin be
perfected.
concourse of waters, though the fountain be stopped, yet the rivers remain
open, which being taken in time with a floud-gate, may be stayed, and leesing
long opportunity, by great banks from ouerflowing cannot be restrained: even
so a man in the beginning of his temptation, whilst as yet it is but in the
sprout, and having a little course is unable to make any great breach, by
prayer and the spirit of God may be kept under and stayed: but if it be left
alone, not looked to as before, the extraordinary spirit of the Preacher, or
the extraordinary travel of a man in prayer and fasting, will not be able to
remedy it.

Well many there be, that charm the charmer never so wisely, they will not
hear, that they might prevent the rage of sin. If when we shall use all
means to subdue sin, all is too Simile.
little, if we give it any liberty, how great is the danger? If a man in
using a sparing diet, moderate apparel, and little sleep, shall still find
in himself a self-love and liking of sin; how much more when he frames
himself to all the guises and fashions of the world, shall he see self-love
prevail against him? when we are justified in Christ, and ingraffed into him
by faith, and yet have not the roots of sin thoroughly pulled out, not Godly
fear.
the rivers of iniquity dried up, but only the spring* head is stayed. I know
there be many, who think it a preciseness, to be so much afraid of our own
weakness, and to be watchful and wary of our own affections; yea, and
oftentimes in those things, which to judgment are lawful, yet abstaineth in
life and in our practice: but blessed be that fear, and happy is that
preciseness, which is so careful over our own infirmities, and so much
suspecteth our own wants and weakness. Wherefore the man of God still
prays for perseverance.

In thy word: In that he makes the word of God his means of perseuering, he
teaches us, that though we have profited never so much, yet unless the word
of God enlighten our judgments, and reform our affections, we may easily err
out of the way. We know but in part, our heart is reformed but in part, our
knowledge is bettered but in* part; and that which we have, is given of God by
the preaching of the word, and working of his spirit: and that we may yet be
delivered from those affections which in us remain corrupt, we had need to
pray for the use of the word.

Again, in that he would be grieved by the word, the man of God shows us,
that unless the Lord teach us, it is unprofitable. We must join to the
ministry of the word, the direction of Gods spirit. What is the cause, why we
have a general liking of the word, and yet have not a particular misliking of
our deserts? even because we have not the particular guiding and government of
Gods spirit.

Mark here, the Prophet prays not the Lord to direct him, either by
fantastical revelations, whereof heretics dream so much, nor by vain
superstitions, which blind the Papists, nor by civil policies, wherein wicked
worldlings so abound, but only by his word* N^^^^^r in truth is there any
thing that can purify our hearts, or cleanse our affections, but only the
word; which also is unfruitful, unless the Lord guide us For it is an hard
thing to get in to the way, but it is harder being once in the way, to
continue in it, and hardest of all, when we are out of the way, to come in
again. For seeing the way to be so strict, that sometimes we go on this hand,
and sometimes on that, it is a grace of graces, either to be kept in the way,
or being out, quickly to be brought in again.

And let none iniquity have dominion over me, etc. Iniquity, as we taught
before, has dominion The dominion of sin.
over them, where it breaks out without controlement, and in whom it bears
a sway with delight, to the hinderance of Gods glory, to the breaking the peace
of their own consciences, and to the evil example of others.

He prays not we see, to be without sin, for that he know he could not be
in this life; but that (...) might not rule and reign in him. No more does our
Savior Christ teach us to pray, that we might be without sin, but that our
sins might be for given; not that we Romans 6. 12.
should be void of all temptations, ( for of all temptations, not to be
tempte^ is the greatest) but not to be overcome of temptations; not to be freed
from all sins, but that Satan Not to be tempted.
the author of evil might not prevail against us. Wherefore the Prophet says,
Psalm. 19. 13. Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not reign
over me: Where he means, Let not the errors which are so rife in me, grow
too presumptuous; but give thy servant grace to epsy and foresee them, which
agrees with his sense in this place: Lord, though I see this heap of
corruption is still in me, and lurketh still in my body, and is buried in my
flesh; yet let it not break out to thy dishonor, or to the grief of mine
own soul. Now as we are indeed to beware of the great security and
carelessness of many professors in our time, so must we beware of the
presumptuous pride of heretics. For if either Gods commandment or promises
had permitted him to pray for a full deliverance from Heretics.
sin, then he had been remiss or flacke in so doing, he should have showed
himself not to have believed the promise of God, but disobedient to his Law,
and to have flattered himself in sin, and to have had some love* liking
thereof.

Seeing then the scriptures of God allow this kind of prayer, that seeing we
know not the manifold errors of this life, we might ^r^^e that we break not
(...) pre^^ (...) marua^^e though the fanta^^^e ^ll heretics be blowness high,
that they (...) cannot sin. If Adam in his perfection and in paradise, sinned
against the (...) who an hundred years continued a just man, ^ell in the Arc;
^f Moses (...) (...) ^0.
earth, was overcome by ^^p^^ienc^e; if David a man after Gods (...) days
began to* (...) his people; ^^ Ezechias a good ruler of the (...) did break
out to v^^^glorie, in showing of his treasure; if (...)n all things was wo^^ to
ask counsel of the Lord, did no^ ^^ke (...) was to fight against the King of
Egypt, though ^i^^ne ^id n^uer (...)mon over any of them, and yet after
abundance of Gods graces (...), sin took hold on them: then what ^^ hell^^h
pride of (...) of such perfection? And again, here we must beware of the
conu(...)* that we g^ue not our selves to much liberty. For though for Gods
children, which t^rou^^ infirmities have ^l^ded, this is a ^o^o^t, yet for them
that give the bridle to ^in^^ ^^o l^ade them as it lists, it is nothing
app^^taining* For it is easier to slip w^^^ Gods ^^il^ren, then when we have
slipped to recover our selves with them ^^ame; ^^ ^^ easier to fall, ^^^^ to
rise again with them* and man^e have their sins, which have ^e^t^er their
repentance, Note.
^or the rem^ssion of sins with them* It is said, Ezech. 18 14. ^^ the
^ig^t^^us turn away from his righteousness, and co^^it iniquity, and does
according to all the abbomi^^ti^^s, that the wicked do: sh^l^ he live? all
the righteousness that he has done shall not be menti^ned* but in his
transgress^^ns that ^e ^a^^ committed* and in his sin* that he has sinned,
in them shall he di^. We must not think he speaks here of ^nie particular
breach, but of general backslidings, when iniquity has gotten the upper
hand.

But here is a common objection now a days, used almost in every man's mouth:
what sir? what do you tell us of sin? and make so much ado about it? is
there not sin in you as well as there is in me? why speak you so much of
sin? is it not in other preachers, and in other hearers, as it is in me? why
do you change me so sir? we answer, is there no difference between dimnes of
sight and blindness* is there no difference between numnes and sensl^snes?
between slumbring and dead sleeping? between a little sl^p and a dead Simile.
fall? if there be a distinction to be made of these things, shall we not also
put difference between infirmities, and leaving of some good things? and
gross sins, and ^u^^ing headlong to ungodliness? Is there no difference
between the error and ignorance which is i^ The blindness of sins.
Gods children, with grief and with a desire to be freed from them; and the
errors and ignorance of the wicked, wherein they gladly he still, and where o^
^^^^ have no care to be ^id? No difference between the frail^^e and
infirmity of Gods children, ^^^ the sin and iniquity of the wicked? is
there no difference between i^fi^^^t^ and presumptuous* fra^ltie, and
rebellion? between motion and action? is there no difference between two
steps of a long ladder to the skies, and two steps at the bottom? ^^^
between him Simile.
that trauaileth, though he attaineth not to the highest steps, and him that
still tarrieth at the ladders foot? Thus we see, they are willingly blind.

Where Gods children step into some one sin, and being admonished are
therefore sorrowful, and labor to recover themselves, and the wicked wall^w
in so many sins, and by no admonition can be brought either to a go^ly
sorrowing, o^ forsaking of their sin: is there no difference between these?
Judas and Peter sinned both, and both against their Master: was there no
difference, or like danger ^^ their sins? Is it not one thing for a man to
betray his own Master for covetousness of a little money, and another for
fear and infirmity to deny him? Is it not one thing to purpos^ well doing,
and yet to f^ll for fear, and another thing willingly to suffer the d^^ ^^^^
to carry him from action to action, to have the purse delivered him, to be
forewarned of it, to take the soppe of him whom he should betray, and yet to
persevere in his wickedness? Is there no difference betwixt him, who when he
had sinned, wept and ^ined away for sorrow; and another, that after he had
sinned, having an hell^^h desperation, took vengeance of himself? Thus we
see, that there is a manifest difference between the sins of the godly, and
of the wicked; the sin of the one, was not a purposed sin; the sin of the
other wa^ forepurposed; the one when he heard of his sin, striued to get out
of it, the other being admonished was careless. Finally, the one renewed
himself by Faith in Jesus Christ: the other having sinned, utterly de^pai^ed.
For says the Lord. 2. King. 15. 5. David did right, etc: save only in the
matter of (...) the Hitti^: did not David else sin? we know he numbered his
people; ^e would have killed Note the loving mercy of the Lord covering our
manifold infirmities.
Nabal; he had conceived an evil of M^^^bosheth; howbeit the holy Ghost
counts not as it were of these sins, as being done of infirmity, but says
the spirit of God, this was a soul sin. For the other sins the Lord would
not deal with them, but passed them over as it were; but this sin must needs
be punished. And wherein did this sin become so great above the rest? did he
not first sin with his eye, wherewith he had before almost made a covenant?
was he not an hypocrite in desiring to hide his sin? when this could not be
done, he still was deceived by Satan, and when he saw the fact must needs out,
and should come to light, when it should now be known, and the woman must be
examined, what did he then? although he had neither hatred to the man Vriah,
who had deserved well of him, nor earnest love to the woman: yet sends he a
Captain with his letters: and whereas in the wars they use to set for lorne
persons in the forefront of the first hand, he had appointed Vriah to be the
man in that battle, and still he persuaded himself, that he killed him not;
and after, to avoid public infamy, he took home the woman to him. Thus was
David deceived of Satan, both subtillie and dangerously: and yet not so; but
that there is a difference betwixt him and another, that should make an
occupation of adultery, and still bathe himself in filthy love. But the
Prophet Nathan comes no sooner to him, and tells him but closely and
slenderly of his sin; but see, he is s^^icken to the heart; he controlles
him not though he were a King: but he admits him unto him, and receives him
humbly. He had sinned before, but he did not see it before: we see here no
presumption, for he flatly accused, and not excused himself, saving: I have
sinned against the Lord. Where are they now, that will make the sins of
others placard^ for their sins? where are they that will make such gross
presidences for sinning, because there are some infirmities and ignorances in
Gods children? let them consider rightly of these differences of sins. We see
then the plain meaning of the man of God: he prays not to have no sin
within him, but that he might no^^ly in sin.

There is then a difference between affectate ignorance and devilish
presumption, and the weak ignorance and infirmities of God his children; there
is a diff^rence between sinning in few things, and sinning in many; between
sin committed and repented of* and sin committed without any repentance:
between infirmities and presumptions. Wherefore the Apostle says: Let not
sin reign in your mortal bodies: and yet the same man says, To 7. that
sin dwelt in him, and that he was sold unto sin. There is a difference
between permitting a Prince as our lawful governor to rule and reign over
us, and to yield obedience to him willingly, and a griuous Tyrant whom we
resist, and perform Simile.
no obedience to him, because he comes with usurped authority, who would
enforce us whether we will or no, and caryeth us violently to prison. So the
meaning of the Apostle when he says, let not sin reign, is this:
acknowledge not sin to be your King, delight not in it, and if he do come,
let him come like a tyrant, and as one that would hale you into prison, and
that you may show your selves not to be willingly drawn into his servitude:
cry out, Oh mortal man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin
and death? Is there not then a difference between him, who when he has
sinned, is afraid to pray to God, trembles to come before God, fears even to
go on the earth: and another, who when he has sinned, is merry, and pleases
himself in it, and makes but a delight, a pastime, and an occupation of it?
Is there not a difference between him that fights boldly, and him that will
not fight at all against sin? Wherefore though Gods children have such
infirmities, yet they use all means to resist them, and account much of
hearing, praying, meditating, and conferring of the word, that thereby
iniquity might not have the upper hand of them.

Thus we see, how the children of God are violently haled to sin: the wicked
are voluntarily carried headlong into sin: the godly recover themselves; the
wicked fall from sin to sin: the godly yield to admonitions, the ungodly
thereby are worse and worse.

Verse. 134. Deliver me from the oppression of men, and I will keep ^hy
precepts.
AS we have often declared, it is the lot of Gods children to be troubled with
the ungodly, and therefore this man sets himself down as a pattern
therein, and seeing the Lord Jesus has made himself a chief example in the
house of example, who is our head; it is mere that we who are his members
should also suffer troubles, that we may be made like unto him. What is the
cause then, why we are so much at quiet with our selves, both Minister and
Magistrate, people and subject; but because we do not so much resist Satan,
fight against the world, and strive against our selves. For we beginning to
rebuke the world The Christian warfare.
of sin, the world cannot away with us; and when we stir up our selves
against the devil, he sets himself and all his impes against us, and when
we check and control our selves, we can never find quiet. True it is, that
sometimes we shall have quiet; but this is but a breathing time; yet that must
be fulfilled in the members, which was begun in the head, that we being like
to him in suffering, may also be like to him in glory, remembering always that
which is in Psalm 125. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the
righteous. So that the man of God prays here, that his affliction might not
hinder his glory. And no marvel, for his enemies first labored to daunt his
faith, then they went about to load him with injuries, either subtly to
circumuent him, or openly to oppress him: when these things would not serve,
they striued to bring his person to contempt, and his cause to discredit, as
also they went about to bring themselves into estimation, and their cause into
credit. No marvel then though he thus prayed, least that they resisting him
too long, he should be ouermatched. Wherein we are to learn, that we must
not overcome ill with ill, subtlety with subtlety, violence by violence, but
by prayer. And seeing the Lords ears are open to the prayers of the just, and
his eyes upon them that fear him, seeing his ears are shut to the wicked, and
he will not look upon them in mercy, but his face is set against them, the
Lord undoubtedly will hear us, and look upon us, and will confonud our
enemies.

And I will keep thy testimonies. Behold, the man of God promises
thankefulnes, and if it pleases the Lord to free him from these evils, he
would keep his law, not that we must think, that he before did break them:
but though the proud had him exceedingly in derision, Psalm. 51. though the
bands of the wicked had robbed him, 61. though the proud had imagined a lie
against him, 69. though they had dealt wickedly and falsely with him, 78.
though they had almost consumed him upon the earth, 87. and he was like the
bottle in the smoke; so that he was wonderfully distracted in his calling: yet
if the Lord would vouchsafe to free him from these evils, as before in part; so
now in whole, he would bestow his life on the Lord.

We are then to learn, that in trouble we are to desire to none other end to
be delivered, The end of all deliverances.
than the better and more freely to serve the Lord, and that when we have made
so solemn a promise to the Lord, we thoroughly purpose in truth to perform
it. For though affliction of it self helps us nothing unto godliness, but
is rather some hindrance why in our calling we are less profitable; yet as it
is sanctified in Christ, and receives a blessing from God to work in us, it
keeps us from evil, and provoke us the more to do good. But we, if we be
in adversity, if we have trouble or loss of goods, or loss of friends,
oppression of enemies, or such like, make large vows and plentiful promises,
and cry: Oh if I might be delivered from this sickness, if I might be freed
from this trouble, if I might be unburdened of this evil; I would surely
serve the Lord, I would become a new man, I would change my life, and enter the
ways of repentance: but we look not to performance.

This thankfulness of heart made the Prophet, Psalm. 116. 12. to cry out, What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup
of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: I will pay my vows unto the
Lord, even now in the sight of all his people: Where we Thankfulness
see, that it was the custom of Gods people, to stir up themselves after
their deliverance unto thankfulness. We shall see now by examining our selves
how it is so in us. Oh (say we) that I were recovered of my health; oh that the
Lord would restore those things to me again which I have lost; then doubtless
would I wholly give my self to the Lord. But let us see if in all these things
we be not vow-breakers, and are rather grown worse than we were: so greatly
are we to fear our selves. God has delivered us from our enemies, freed us
from war^es, saved us from scarcity, penury, poverty, plagues and sickness,
and has blessed us with peace, abundance, plenty, health, and all other
blessings, let us see how we use these things. We know the times have been
such, when we could not have this liberty, to read and hear the word of God;
but we are now freed from such misery, and set in great liberty; whether do
we use this time to Gods glory, and increase of our knowledge, and building
up of our faith, or not? We know that there is a vicissitude in all things, and
one thing succeeedeth another; and as the Lord has long time vexed other
nations with trouble, and granted to us a long time of liberty and quietness:
so our course must come by the order and change of things to be vexed with
troubles, and others shall be set at some liberty. Are we the better then for
this benefit? If we be, all is well: if not, will it not, think we, be
laid to our charge, that what time the Lord had given us, wherein we might
reform our selves, we have abused in being so little reformed, what our time
has been to set forth Gods glory, how little glory the Lord has gained by
us.

We have often heard, that our two principal props in trouble are faith in the
promises Two principal props in trouble.
of God, and a testimony of a good conscience, which we see often to be in
this Prophet. Wherefore what does fasten and comfort faith? even a good
conscience: what does make it wither and waver? even because we have been
fruitles, and have not done good works. This then must be our comfort in
trouble, that we suffer not as ill doers, that we may look for Gods promises.
But if our sins accuse us, and we suffer as ill doers, we shall not be able
to feel any comfort in God his promises.

Then let us see the fruit of this prayer. The Saints of God and dear Martyrs
of Christ made this prayer before us, the fruit and effect whereof is grown
unto us. For their sufferings were our prosperity, their loss our gain,
their imprisonment our liberty, their death our life: as true as old is that
saying proved, The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. For their
blood h^th cried up to heaven, with the blood of Abel, for our comfort, and
brought down vengeance on our enemies, and obtained mercy for us. They did
sow in tears, and we have entered into their harvest with joy, let us beware
least we sow evil to our selves, and for others: they sowed comfort for their
posterity, let us take heed that we sow not discomfort for them that shall
come after us. And as their death has stayed the wrath of God from heaven,
that it is not fallen upon the vine, and seeing many years he has planted
among us a vineyard, seeing he has hedged it, and gathered out the stones Esaias
5.
of it, and has planted it with the best plants, and has built a tower in the
midst thereof, and made a wine press therein, and has looked it should
bring forth grapes, but it has brought forth wild grapes: so our sins so
inkindle the wrath of God, that he will take away the hedge thereof, and his
vineyard shall be eaten up; he will break the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down; he will lay it waste, and the wild bores shall enter into it.
What a thing is this, that the dear Saints and Martyrs of God should deserve
so well of us, and we should deserve so ill of our selves and of our
posterities? Seeing then Gods mercy has been showed by so many blessings, and
we eat of their sweet of the harvest, who never have tasted of the cold of
the winter, nor heat of the summer; let us fear, least for our unthankfulness,
the Lord does come to punish us, and both for our want of religion, and ungodly
life cause the Lord to remove the candlestick, take away the Gospel, and
bereave us of our talents. Wherefore we have great need to pray to be
reformed in our judgment, and renewed in our affections, that our thankfulness
may appear in love of sound religion, and obedience of godly life to the glory
of our good God.

Thus we see it is not a strange thing for Gods children to suffer in this
world, although God gives us sometime a breathing time, and makes us as
children of the wedding; who, so long as the Bridegroom is with them, do not
lament nor mourn. And seeing every one that will live godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer persecution, and for a good conscience, Minister, Magistrate, and
master of an household shall find trouble in his own flesh, hatred of the
world, and persecution of Satan; it is certain that we often purchase too
much quietness to our selves, because we do not so labor for the mortifying of
our flesh, for reproouing of sin, and the beating down of the kingdom of
Satan, as we ought to do. Thus we see, the Prophet groundeth himself on Gods
promises, who has said, that the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot
of the godly: showing us that no temptation shall come to us, but we shall have
either strength to bear it, or else the Lord will remove the force of it: so
that if he remove the violent force of it, we shall need but little strength
to bear it; if our trouble be great, the Lord will give us great strength.
Neither (as some do) does the man of God use forgerie for forgerie, and deceit
for deceit, but staieth himself only and wholly upon prayer. For Gods children
have no such spirit as the worldlings have, who for the most part requite evil
for evil, subtlety with subtlety, evil language with evil language: but by
prayer only they labor for help at Gods hand.

We have heard, that insomuch as he protests to keep the testimonies of the
Lord, he means that he will more thoroughly keep them than before. We have
further learned, that it is our corruption to be godly in time of trouble, but
afterward the case with us is altered. Wherefore our godliness then is to be
suspected, and he is very ungodly, that at such Godliness.
times will not be godly. But herein is the difference between the regenerate
and unregenerate, that the regenerate after their visitations are more godly,
after sickness they have a greater zeal, after their deliverance a further care
of glorifying God, which is nothing with the unregenerate. Now, seeing the Lord
has heaped benefit upon benefit, year after year, mercy upon mercy, whether
has God won some special glory, or our br^thren some special benefit by
us or no? And as the Lord heard the mones of his Martyrs, their tears and
their blood, and gave them mercy: so let us fear, least our sins cry for
vengeance unto him. All afflictions of themselves are tags of Gods vengeance,
yet being sanctified Afflictions.
in Christ to God his children, they be turned into blessings, as all outward
blessings, not blessed of God, are turned to curses to the wicked. For as
sickness and adversity, by the Lord sanctifying them, are turned to blessings
to Gods children: so health, peace, and prosperity, are turned to ill to the
ungodly, because of their abuse.

Verse. 135. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me
thy statutes.
Until his deliverance came, the Prophet of God prays to be taught in the
statutes of the Lord, whereby he might learn to behave himself well in the
time of trouble. For affliction is so violent a storm, and carries away a man
so headlong, that unless the Lord guide us, we may soon take hurt. But what
desire we most? If we in sickness delight most in the sweet face and gracious
countenance of the Lord, it is happiness: if not, we are truly in misery.
For this is the cause why many go from evil to worse in their trouble, and
become so dull, because they never pray to see the cause of their affliction,
and that they might profit thereby.

The sense of the man of God is: If Lord, thou will deliver me, I shall obey
thee more; if not, Lord give me strength to glorify thee by patience. Away
then with the violence of flesh and blood, which makes us to some out these
and such like speeches: Who could away with such pangs as I suffer? who could
suffer such pains as I am in? Surely even they that pray to God to profit by
them, they have Gods spirit: as for the wicked they cannot profit thereby. If
then we be delivered out of adversity, we must obey the word; if not, we must
crave wisdom to see the will of God, constancy to abide in it, patience
meekely and thankfully to suffer whatsoever the Lord shall lay upon us. I care
not (says the man of God) so much for my liberty, as I might thereby praise
thy name, and obey thy commandments. This is an usual thing in the book of
God, to pray for the Lords countenance: Psalm. 4 6. Many say, who will show us
any good? but Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. And
Psalm. 67. 1. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of
his countenance, and be merciful unto us. And Psalm. 80. 3. 7. 19 Turn us
again, O God, and cause thy face to shine, that we may be saved.

This verse is read three times in this Psalm, which shows v^ that this
ought to be the sum, the heap, and the chief of all our requests, namely,
that in what estate soever we are, we may be assured that we have the
testimony of Gods favor; if we be in affliction, that the Lord is not angry
with us; if we be in prosperity (because the Sun shines on the just and
unjust) that we may see withal the mercies of God, and his loving favor in
Christ given unto us. We see where Gods spirit is, there we are thankful in
prosperity and patient in adversity: where God his spirit is not, there we
are proud in prosperity, and murmurers in adversity. Many (says the Prophet,
Psalm. 4. 6.) say, who will show us any good? See how the man of God sets
down the terms of his companions, and shows how he coueted only Gods
loving countenance. The sick desire health, the imprisoned liberty, the poor
desire riches: but few desire Gods countenance in the forgiveness of sin, Gods
countenance.
in the beholding of us in Christ, in giving the graces of his holy spirit,
which are the pledges of his love.

Many worlds are nothing worth: it is a good heart which the Lord requires.
Sanctification, holiness, and the blessing of Gods spirit are true riches, which
we must crave and obtain with sighs, groans, and tears. For if we can sigh,
if we can groan, if we can sorrow, Godly sorrow.
when we are but in sickness of body, or some outward calamity; what a shame is
it, if we cannot sigh, sorrow, and groan for the inward wants and necessities
of the soul? But if men knew what it were to have the inward peace of
conscience, which passes all understanding, they would surely desire it more.

That I might keep thy statutes. So, many would have Gods favor to shine unto
them in liberty, in health, or in riches: but he craves God his favor in his
word, which if we can get, let the Lord deal with other things, which concern
us, as pleases him best, Will we know then when we have a true love to God his
word? It is when we especially desire Love to Gods word. Simile.
it, and nothing above it. For as the greatest light that ever came to the
world is the light of the Sun: so the most precious thing that can come to
the world, is the light of Gods word, that we may see the light in God his
light, and behold the countenance of the Lord: Otherwise, if we be in
prosperity, we will think our selves to be well; when we are in adversity,
we think our selves ill Here we may see, that as there is cleerenes when the
Sun shines, and that there is darkness in the mists and cloudinesse; so
there is a vicissitude of Gods children, whilst sometime their understanding
is cleared by the comfort of the word, other sometimes it is darkened by the
mists of ignorance; which comes to pass, that we might the more reverently
and lovingly esteem the word. For as the Lord has the dispensation of the
Sun in heaven, so has he the disposing of his countenance to us on earth.

Verse. 136. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because they keep not thy
Law.
MIne eyes gush out with water: He does here show a cause why he did so
earnestly pray for Gods loving countenance in his word; for he was greatly
grieved, and sore afflicted, and trouble compassed him on every side. The
speech is not a false or fained speech, but such as shows the greatness of his
grief, by that which is greater: and it is as much as if he had said, I weep
bitterly and often, because men keep not thy Law. And this is the note of true
zeal, which eases it self with tears, and not with revenge or anger: and
this is godly zeal, when we cannot help a thing, then by tears to commit it
to God, who alone is able to save men.

This was not for private injury, but because Gods law is broken. This then is
true zeal, when we can devour private injuries, and be zealous in Gods cause:
for fleshly men are hot in their own causes, and cold in the cause of the
Lord. A man cannot thus be sorrowful for another, unless he be sorrowful for
himself; and then are we truly sorrowful for our selves, when we can mourn
for others. As Marie loved much, and therefore wept much, because much was
forgiven her. And hereof it comes, that most notorious sinners, being
converted, are most truly zealous, and have greatest compassion over sinners;
for they have felt Gods goodness so greatly to them, that they desire that
others should be partakers thereof. As Panl more zealous than the rest, because
more notorious than the rest of the Apostles.

PORTION. 18. TSADDE.
Verse. 137. Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.
AS in the latter end of the former Portion, the Prophet showed, that his eyes
gusht out with rivers of waters, because of the general backsliding and
falling to iniquity; so here he shows, that he had almost pined away, and
consumed to nothing, to see the ripenes of iniquities in them, which were his
enemies. And whereas this might have been a great temptation, that
notwithstanding there were made so many promises to the godly, and such
judgments threatened to the wicked; yet the godly sustained so hard things, and
the wicked were in so good a case, he confirms his faith, by staying his
whole confidence on God, and trusts in God, because he is righteous, and
acknowledges him to be a righteous God, because every part of his word is
righteous, and whatsoever the Lord has said, either concerning his promises to
his servants, or threatenings to his enemies, is most just and true.

The self same must also stay us, when we are in the like temptations, when we
shall be counted as precise fools, and unquiet spirits, because we weep and
lament for the sins of others; or when we, seeing the wicked live in such
pleasures, begin to marvel how it comes to pass, that the godly are so ill
dealt withal, and when the godly live with tears, and the ungodly pass their
time in joy.

Wherefore the man of God raises up himself with this meditation: howsoever
those God just in his providence.
things seem to be confounded and cast together, yet thou o Lord, art God, and
gouernest all: thou art a righteous God, and thy judgments are righteous; yea
every word of thy word o Lord is righteous and true; thy promises which in time
thou shall perform, will not fall away; nor thy judgments which thou will one
day execute, shall not fail. Behold how we also must strengthen our faith in
the like assaults. This was a notable example of faith, which so yielded to the
due obedience of the word of God, for our instruction: when we are in such
distress, our eyes must not be set on any visible or earthly things, but only
on things invisible and heavenly, even on the word of God, on his promises,
which he will perform; on his justice, which he will execute: we must I say
have our eyes lifted up further than the scope of heaven, and the circuites of
the Sun; we must look to heaven, where Gods promises shall be fully
performed and accomplished; we must look to hell, where his judgments shall
be finished and fully executed. For though both Gods promises may on earth be
performed, and his vengeance may here be executed; yet all his promises are not
showed to any, nor many of them showed to all, but there may be some wanting of
them; and the wicked may have a great torment of mind, and hell of conscience,
Note.
and yet all have them not, neither have any all, because many are glorious in
their life, and pompous in their death. What then shall we say to this, but
with the Prophet, Righteous art thou o Lord, and righteous are thy judgments.

Although then the promises of God are not at all times by and by performed,
nor his judgments presently executed; but the godly do often groan under
miseries, and the ungodly wallow in their delights; yet the Lord after death
will show, that he is righteous, when he will erect and magnify his justice
before his glorious throne. This thing appears to be manifest, by that
history Luke 16. of the rich man and Lazarus, who (that the Lord Dives and
Lazarus.
might make known his justice (died both together: but as their life was
altogether diverse, so their death did altogether differ. For the rich man lived
delicately, and fared daintily; but Lazarus lying sore and hungry at his gate,
found more courtesy at his dogs, which licked him, than at his hands which
should have relieved him. Well, when they were both dead, it is said, that the
rich man being in hell in torments, lifting up his eyes, and seeing Lazarus a
far often in Abraham's bosom, cried, Father Abraham, send Lazarus, that he may
dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool his tongue: but Abraham answered,
Thou art far deceived and disappointed, my son, the places are far distant
between thee and us, so that the inhabitants must keep their places. And my
son, consider of the equity of Gods justice herein, for thou in thy life time
did live in health, in pleasure and prosperity, and did not glorify God
thereby, therefore it is meet and right with God, that thou should now have
pain and torments; and this man having poverty, sickness and misery,
desired Gods glory: wherefore it stands with the righteous promise of the
Lord, that he should now receive joy and comfort. So Christ also teaches us,
though at the first, the Lord regards not all good at the (...), yet he that
rewards one, will reward all; and he that punishes one, will surely in time
punish all, either here or in some other; place either now or at some other
time. We must then be content to have our lives hidden in Christ, that it may
appear with Christ at his coming. Now as this doctrine seems profitable for
comfort, so is it necessary also for terror. For if a man shall lie in sin,
and yet through impunitie, because neither the hand of God is upon him, nor the
authority of the Magistrate takes hold on him, shall not repent: and because
as the wise man says, Eccles. 8. 11. Sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in
them to do evil; as we may see in profane persons, in abusers of the name of
God, in breakers of the Sabbath, in disobedient persons, murderers, adulterers,
thieves, and back biters: let him beware, and not flatter himself in
iniquity; and though God does not, at the very instant, when sin is
committed, punish all, nor the Magistrate presently apprehend all; if a man
begin to be hot, and would have all men like himself, and is offended because
there is no present execution of judgment, yet God is righteous, he will not
justify the sinner, but he has his fierce wrath, vengeance and indignation
laid up in store to fall suddenly and fearfully upon the ungodly. For assure
thy self, o man, whosoever thou art, he that has said, that no whoremonger,
nor adulterer, nor covetous person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, and
he that has promised in this life, to try those that be his, will surely, if
thou be the child of God, punish thee here, that thou may not be condemned
with the wicked; if thou be not, he will both in this life, and in the world to
come plague thee eternally.

If thou art not presently punished for thy sins, the Lord calls thee to
repentance; if that will not serve, the Lord will undoubtedly break thy neck,
and press thee down with further judgments.

Thus we see, how needful it is to urge this doctrine to the abusers of the
Lords long suffering, and contemners of his righteous judgments. Psalm. 89. the
man of God shows, that albeit the Lord had made a covenant of mercy with his
people, yet if their children did forsake his laws, and walk not in his
judgments, if they did break his statutes, and kept not his commandments; he
would 32. visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes. And surely, if we will not be removed by the word calling us from our
security, we shall taste indeed of the Lords heavy scourges and fearful
strokes. Wherefore in time let us humble our selves under the loving hand of
God, and learn to deny our selves.

Verse. 138. Thou have commanded justice by thy testimonies and truth
especially.
HE shows that in all the holy writings, the Lord had set down special
mercies and special judgments, and that the justice and truth which the Lord
has taught in his word is a special justice, and a special truth, and every
part thereof is just and true, yea and if there could be degrees therein, they
are most just and most true according to that Psalm. 19. 9. The judgments of
the Lord are true and righteous altogether. So that without Matthew. 5.
exception, all the threatenings of the Lord are just, and all his promises true.

Sure it is then, that he will perform his wrath threatened, and fulfill his
covenants promised, for there is nothing in the word, which is not truth and
justice it self.

Thus we must learn when we are in trouble, to look to God his word, and to
know that every title thereof is righteous and true, and though heaven and
earth do pass, yet not one io^ of it shall fail. This is necessary for us
to believe, for from hence springs faith. Wherefore the Prophet seeing that
this would hardly be believed, and that even Gods children sometime, are slack
in faith, hope and love, and are not so soon persuaded that every man must
perform this, but rather that it was a special thing: the Prophet (I say)
recites this word five times in the compass of eight verses, being but one
portion. Incredulity in Gods children.
So much does he show incredulity to reign in Gods children, and declares it
the more vehemently because the wicked will not be brought to believe this. For
what is the cause of sin, either in failing of doing those things which are
to be done, or in failing to do those things, which ought not to be done, in
omitting of good things or committing of evil, but only incredulity? Could
we believe the word of God? Oh happy were we! Believing the word.
can we not believe? oh cursed are we! We shall see, as the wicked in all
things, so Gods children in many things discredit the word of God: as the
wicked believe not at all; so the godly believe but in part, and see but in a
glass. And doubtless they want the comfort which they should have, in that
although they consent generally to the truth, yet when they come to
particulars, they reason this with themselves: How can this be? by what means
possible should this be so? and therefore the Lord suffers them to miscarrie
in judgment, and punishes them in their affections.

Thus we see, how the man of God does strengthen him and us by faith, in
believing that God is righteous, and his judgments to be righteous, and that
every part of them is most righteous, just, and true: wherefore our Savior
Christ in his holy Gospel uses so often, Do thou believe? believe and thou
shall be made whole: according to thy faith be it done unto thee: which he does
to show us our incredulity. Wherefore we must pray, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief: Lord increase my faith, that believing thy judgments, I may fear
thee; believing thy mercies and promises, I may be comforted; believing the
things thou command, I may do them; believing the things which thou
forbiddest, I may avoid them.

Verse. 139. My zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have
forgotten thy word.
LEt us here try our faith, which persuade our selves to have such faith,
behold here is a trial. True it is, that to all is not given the like measure
of faith: unto some are given ten talents, unto some five, unto some two:
neither have all grounds like measure of seed, nor render again like measure
of increase: for some ground according as it has received, brings fourth one
an hundredth fold, some sixty, some thirty fold, according to the good will and
wisdom of our God. Neither must we think that it is required of us, that we
cannot otherwise be faithful and zealous, unless we even consume away, or our
eyes gush out with rivers of waters: for we must not think that it was so in
the Prophet himself, as though rivers of tears were in his head, or that he
was utterly pined away: but rather they are figurative speeches, to show some
rare zeal, and notable kind of sorrowing in him.

Now whatsoever exhortation is to be drawn from hence, it will little avail
us, unless we believe that there is no one thing here in this Psalm, but in
some measure it is to be performed of every Christian. For politic men cannot
profit by such things, because they do not think that it contains any
general doctrine, but rather that it is a particular doctrine. But seeing this
Psalm is the type and image of a regenerate man, and no one treatise so fully
and wholly (though peradventure some whole book may do it) expresses the
same; and yet so, that neither the man of God as with a trumpet does blow forth
his own praise, nor womanishly painteth fourth his own miseries by moanes and
complaints; but aduanceth Gods glory, and puts us in mind, what graces of
God should be in us, and humbles himself and shows us what infirmities
reign in us. What then (will some say) mean these speeches? My soul
faints, mine eyes failed, mine heart breaks, That the 119. Psalm concerns
all the regenerate.
my soul cleaves to the ground; my soul melts, mine eyes gush out with
rivers of water. What (say they) appertains it to us, that he says: Seven
times a day do I praise thee, I prevented the morning light and cried: mine
eyes prevented the night watches: I opened my mouth and panted: how sweet are
thy promises to my mouth; yea more than honey unto my mouth: I am like a bottle
in the smoke, I have remembered thy name in the night: the law of thy (...)
better unto me, than thousands of gold and silver; I have had as great delight
in thy ^estim^^i^s as in all manner of riches; I love thy commundements above
gold, yea above most fine gold: ^ r^^oyce at thy word, as one that finds a
great spoil: These were extraordinary things, and we have not to deal with
them. To answer these we may see the same doctrine in other persons, and in
other places of the book of God. Job. 33. Elihu there declares, that the Lord
speaks diverse times unto men, but they see it not; if they profit not by the
word, he sends them afflictions; if they profit not thereby, he will send one
among a thousand to show his mercies unto them. Psalm. 14. God speaks once or
twice and one sees it not, etc. 23. If there be a messenger with him or an
interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto m^n his righteousness, then will
he have mercy upon him, and will say, Deliver him, that he go not down into
the pit; for I have received a reconciliation, then shall his flesh be as fresh
as a child's, and shall return as in the days of his youth. And though the
Lord punished not gross sins in Job, Jobs sins.
yet he punished incredulity, impatience, self-love and vain glory in him;
for though Job were a good man, yet he stood in some need of greater
mortification. The Apostle Paul shows, that the wrath of God should fall on
the Corinthians, if they presumed without due examination of themselves to eat
the body and blood of Christ, and that from thence came sudden deaths, and
unnatural deaths, languishing and pining diseases. 1. Cor. 11. For this cause
(says the Apostle) many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep, for if
we would judge our selves we should not be judged: So he speaks this of the
Corinthians, which were learned men; who had great knowledge and excelled in
many good gifts, as he himself reports of them, and yet he shows them this
truth. Neither do these things especially and only come for sin, but more
particularly for the trying of faith, proving and perfecting of patience,
although afterward it may be, for punishing of sins by degrees (for even in the
trial of faith, and proving of patience, is also a secret punishing of sin.)
Wherefore we must not suffer for a while, but even to the shedding of our blood
and spending of our lives, as witnesses the author to the Heb. chap. 12. where
the Apostle having set down in the chapter going before a register of the
fathers in the old Church, and of their works, (whereof some may also seem to
be extraordinary, although indeed they be alleged but as fruits of their
faith) infers in the 12. chapter this exhortation, Heb. 12 1. Wherefore let
us also, seeing that we are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast
away every thing that presses down, let us run with patience the race that
is set before us; 2. looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith:
Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame, etc. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin, and
ye have forgotten the consolation, which speaks unto you as unto children,
etc.

Here the Lord shows the faith and gifts of his Saints, declaring that he
would bestow on us the like graces according to that proportion which he
thinks good In that they are called witnesses, it was because they gave
witness to the truth of Gods promises, and to show how the Lord would enable
sinful flesh, thus to believe, and thus to do. And mark here the wisdom of
the spirit of God, setting down the strength of his Saints; for flesh and blood
might have objected: what tell you us of these extraordinary and privileged
men? but behold, he calls them (as we said before) witnesses, testifying that
if we would call for, and crave the like graces, we should receive them
sufficiently: then he bids us to look to Christ the author and finisher of
our faith. For what were they? this is he from whom all the Fathers received
their strength. Strive (says he) death is not yet come, ye have not resisted
unto blood. What? must every man be a m^rtyr? no, the meaning of the holy Ghost
is, that though we have suffered the scoffing of the wicked, the hissing, the
nodding of the head, the mocking of the people; yet it is not sufficient, if
the Lord will have us also for his sake imprisoned, our blood shed, and though
he give us no remission, yet we must not faint herein, but even offer our lives
to the Lords pleasure also. What can seem more rare in this man of God his
faith, than his notable diligence and delight which he had in the word, in that
(as we showed before) he prevented the morning light, and the evening watches
with his meditations? But shall we not find this commended unto us in other
places of the Scriptures? that we might also in some measure seek these
practices in our selves. Look Prouer. 2 1. My son, if thou wi^t receive my
(...), and hide my commandments ^it^^^ t^^e, etc. 4. If th^se seek
wisdom, ^^ sil^^^, ^^^ se^r^h^^^ for her as for treasure, 5. Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. And Psalm
19. 10. The iudg^^e^t^ of the Lord are more to be desired than gold, y^a than
much fine gold: what do we now see here in this man of God, which the
Scriptures do not teach us in other places? So that here is set down but a
pattern of practice of things taught in the word; and why does Note.
the man of God set down himself here as a type to be followed? surely to
show that like as he was a man subject to the like affections that we are: so
we may labor for the like graces as he had. And if we will be like unto him in
his sins, why should we not be like unto him in his graces? And as albeit we
are not like unto him in his greatest sins, and yet in some sins; so must we
though no^ in the highest measure of his graces, yet in some proportion of his
graces be like also unto him. It may also seem extraordinary in him, that he
was wiser than his enemies, wiser than his teachers, wiser than the aged: but
we must know this also appertains to us, because in showing his reason, how
he obtained this grace, he alleges not the cause to be any extraordinary or
new revelations, but that he attained through the word: for he was wiser than
his enemies, in that he opposed not subtlety with subtlety, craft with craft,
forgerie with forgerie, and in all his assaires asked not counsel of flesh and
blood, but of the word, as he also testifies of himself, Port. 3. 7. 8. verse.
Princes also ^id sit and speak against me, but thy servant did moditate in thy
statutes: Also, thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors. As if he
should say, when the mighty states used their policy and wisdom against me,
though I had an heau^e heart, yet I asked counsel of thy word. Likewise,
Port. 21. 1. Princes have persecuted me without cause, but mine heart stood in
awe of thy word: That is, the great men persecuted me, I durst not strive with
them in policy, for so I was afraid I should have sinned against thee; but
rested in thy word, and then I gate as great victory, as they which get
spoils. We see now, whosoever (as Saint James exhorts us) shall ask
wisdom, when he wants it, of the Lord and of his word, shall with David be
wiser than his enemies; not that we must imagine him so to be in all his
particular actions, but that he excelled them in as great measure as might be,
by giving himself to be governed by the word. Is this then proper to the
dearest Saints of God alone? No, for Moses the man of God faith, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
Only this people is wise, and of understanding. He speaks not of the rarest
Jews, and of the Magistrates alone, but of the common people, and tells
them, if they wanted wisdom, the Lord was at hand to teach them. And so the
meanest people by the word of God were wiser than the mighty Princes, and the
great Princes were more doltish than the common people, when they asked not
counsel of the Lord. The promise which our Savior Christ uses, Matthew. 10. 19.
When they deliver you up, take no thought how not what ye shall speak, for it
shall be given you in that hour what ye shall say. This promise is not made
only to the Evangelists, Apostles, Disciples, Doctors or Magistrates; but to
all whomsoever the Lord shall call, to give such testimony of his name. And we
know by experience, how this was not only performed in the Primitive Church,
but also in the dear Saints and Marryrs of God of late memory in Queen
Mary's reign, who did strive against sin, to the shedding of their blood;
who all as we see, were wiser than their enemies. Neither was there any other
cause, why he was wiser than his teachers, but that by meditation he not
resting in the book cases and general doctrine of his teachers, applied their
general rules to his particular state. Likewise we, if we do not stay our
selves in the general things, which we hear or read; but bring the general
things into particulars, singulars and practices, shall be wiser, though
happily not learneder, than our teachers. Thirdly, he was wiser than the
ancient, in that they made shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience,
notwithstanding their knowledge: whereas he labored to bring his good learning
to good living, and his knowledge to a good conscience. We see at this day, how
old ancient Protestants grow not in spiritual understanding, because they put
not in practice the things which they have known. On the other side, we are
not to go far, but may observe in our age, how young men, unto whom the Lord
has made old men as glasses and examples of our infirmities least they fall,
coming with (...) and ^el^^e to practice that which they ^^^te, are (...) and
are more able to i^^truct the ignorant, and to comfort them that (...) the
age^* W^^^o^er then will labor to bring the rules into life which h^e (...)y
p^ec^^ts he shall be at the l^a^t wi^er, if not more learned, than the ancient
(...)es.

M^z al^ ^^th ^uen co^^um^^ me, etc. This among the rest ^ight (...) more
proper and peculiar to the Prophet: but it is (is we have declared) an ex
(...) much used of the learned to express some matter of importance, and ^he
(...) in a false or light matter, may be an intolerable lie. As then is meant
by (...) of (...) gu^^ing out of his eyes, a ^^edding of many tears, and his
co^s^ming ^^^^ with (...)* his earnest affection: so we must labor to find
these exerc^ses in ^^ according to that measure and proportion, which the Lord
for his glory shall vouch(...) us. We read also Psalm. 69. ^* The zeal of
thine house has even me, a^^ (...) rebuked th^e, are fallen upon ^^. The
Prophet here shows, how he was ^^ much tormented for these things, whereby
Gods glory was e^p^yre^, as if he had been ^a^en with infam^^ himself. This
we see makes as wel^ for our imitation as for our instruction.

The self same thing is repeated Romans 15. The rebuke of them that rebuked
th^e, etc. where the Apostle infers this exhortation, Let the same mind* be
in you which ^as i^ C^r^^* etc. as if he should ^^^; you must know, that the
selfsame affection, though not in the selfsame measure* ^r^u^^ ^e in you,
which was in Christ or in Da^i^: for as Christ had ^^^^ ^^fi^^te measure, and
David in great abundance, that must you also have in ^o^e measure. This ^as
^^d^e^ ^ered^^arie to Jesus Christ, and to David ^ene^iciarie, and that which
David speaks of actiuely, as well done of himself or of Christ, that the
Apostle speaks of passiuely* as ^e requires ^t to be done of others. For as
David did suffer t^^ ^^i^^ies, reproaches, and ^g^o^in^es which came to Gods
name, as his own: so Paul speaks passiuely, wishes that we should suffer
these things with Christ, even as though we our selves had done the injuries*
^e^ciue^ the reproaches, or were guilty of the igno^i^es. But we must always
show our selves gu^^t^e^^* in using all means to set forth Gods glory, and
in be(...) of the people with t^ares and with prayer.

Notable is that place, Ezech. 9. 4* where the Lord speaks to the man clothed
with linen, ^^^en had the writers in^khorne, saying: Go through the ^^^^ of
the (...)en through the most of Jerusalem and ^^^^ mark upon the f^^e^ e^a^s
o^ th^^ that (...) and are sorrowful for all the abominations that are done in
the m^ast thereof. But the other was commanded to follow after, and to destroy
every mothers son of them which mourned not. This then is no st^^^ge thing
when Gods glory and image is defaced, to be grieved as much as if it were for
ourselves. 1. Cor. 5 the Apostle rebukes the Co^^nt^ians, because they rested
and rejoiced at the sin committed amongst them, contrary to the rule of
love, which wills us not ^o^^i^ y^e i^ inu^^^^^, and tells them that they
had not mourned, and shows how they had ^a^^hed at him, when they should
rather have mourned. Where he declares in his own example, who was so
grieved, that where he had preached the Gospel, one should fall into so great a
sin, how all faithful Ministers, godly Magistrates, and Christian
householders may and ought to mourn, when some of the change co^^ite^ to them,
fall into some ^^torious sin. And though for a while he was sorrowful that he
had made them so heavy, yet afterward 2. Cor 7. he tells them that he was
not sorry: For (faith he) though I mad* you sorrowful, I repent not: for
behold this thing, that y^ ^aue been godly sorrowful, what great t^are it
has wrought in you? yea what ^l^a^ing of our selves? yea, what indignation?
yea what fear? yea what great desire? yea what a zeal? yea w^a^ p^^ishm^nt?
In all thing you have showed yourselues* that ye are pure in this matter. As
if he^ should say; Before ye reioiced* and then were ye guilty of his blood:
but now that ye have ^ourne^ and prayed for him, it shall not be laid to your
charge. Thus we see the Church was not clear, until they had mourned for this
one man's sin; no more was the whole ar^ie of the Israelites, until they had
humbled themselves in prayer and fasting for the sin of A ^^^. Wherefore
every man must labor in some measure, to find the same affection in himself
which was in Christ, that we may differ from the hypocrites, who esteem their
own credit more than the credit of the word. So that we always remember this
to be a property of true zeal, that as we are zealous against the sin, so
we must have a comm^tation A true property of zeal. Galath. 6. 1.
of the person, as knowing that we our selves may fall into the like offense.

Well, to go forward, we see how this verse is inferred after them that go
before. For having showed that the Lord was righteous, and that his judgments
were righteous, and that every part of his testimonies contained special
Truths, this was the thing that made him so to love the word, and loving it to
have so fervent a zeal unto it. His meaning then is thus much: Seeing the word
of God has in it such exquisite goodness, such wonderful truth, such rare
perfection, such Eternity, such efficacy, that in the time of trouble, when
all other comforts forsake a man, this will be a special comfort to him, and
gives even Zeal for the contempt of the Word.
life to a man half dead, and without it I see a man is but as a beast. I
cannot but love, and bear an hearty zeal unto it, and when I enter into the
consideration hereof, I am even pined away, and grief even eats me up, when
I see it is not esteemed, and that the word of God can have no more honor.
And seeing the word of God was so exquisite, so unchangeable, so glorious, and
so comfortable, what a grief was it to the man of God, that men should be so
carried away, some to the pleasures of the flesh, some to the profit of the
world, some to vain superstitions, and in the mean time the Word little
regarded. This was it that pricked him at the heart, this touched him at the
quick. He teaches us then thus much: If the glory of God be dear to us, the
contempt of it will surely grieve us: if the salvation of our brethren be
precious to us, we will be grieved for the contrary. Now let us see what true
zeal is.

I find here the Tractate of Zeal, 2. part was last to be enlarged, and
therefore (good Reader) I would not deprive thee of this benefit.

Hebr. 10. 27 The nature of it is set down, where the Apostle heavily
threatens them, Of Zeal.
that willingly give over themselves to sin, and there is named in the proper
tongue, the zeal of fire. For as fire is not without it heat, but often
bursteth forth into a flame: so zeal is hot, and cannot long be held in. It
is described also by contraries, Revel* 3. where the holy Ghost reproves the
church of Laodicea, because they were neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, such
as the Lord would spue out of his mouth: and afterward is added, be zealous
and amend. Where we see how zeal is opposed to luke-warmnes, which is too
temperate a warmenes for the profession of the Gospel. We must not then only
renounce coldness far from us, and put away lukewarmnes, but we must be very
hot and fervent in the profession of the truth.

Again, 1. Cor. 14. 1. that which our common translation has, Follow after
love, and covet gifts, but especially prophecy: the natural Text has, be
zealous after the more excellent gifts* And Romans 12. Be fervent to the spirit,
that is, let Gods spirit inkindle in you a fire, which may cause you to flame
with a zeal of Gods glory, and with a love of mankind.

Now there are diverse kinds of zeal: there is a zeal of the world, there is a
zeal of the Diverse kinds of zeal.
flesh; there is a zeal of false religion; there is a zeal of heresy, and
there is a zeal of the true word of God. First, we see the zeal of the world
makes men to labor day and 1
night to get a transitory thing. The zeal of the flesh tormenteth men's minds
early and 2
late for a momentarie pleasure. The zeal of heresy makes men travail and
compass 3
Sea and Land, for the maintaining and increasing of these opinion. Thus we
see every man is eaten with some kind of zeal. The drunkard is consumed with
drunkenness, the whoremonger is spent with his whoredom, the Heretic is eaten
with heresies: oh how ought this to make us ashamed, who are so little eaten,
spent, and consumed, with the zeal of the word! And so much the rather,
because godly zeal leaves in us an advantage, and a recompense, which the
worldly and carnally zealous men have not. For when they have spent all the
strength of their bodies, and powers of their mind, they have no gain, nor
comfort left, but torment of conscience; and when they are outwardly spent,
they are inwardly never the better: whereas the godly being consumed for a good
thing, and eaten up with the zeal of Gods glory, have this notable privilege
and profit, that howsoever their outward man perishes and decays, yet their
inward man is still refreshed and nourished to everlasting life. Oh what a
benefit it is to be eaten with the love and zeal of a good thing.

Leaving now the carnal and worldly zeal, we know how zealous Idolaters
were, that they would even offer their children in the fire. We know the zeal
of the Jews, Math. 13. who would compass Sea and Land to make a man a
Proselyte. Heretics, as we see, spare no labor, and let not for a^^e cost to
maintain their Heresies: but these are not good. The true zeal is that
whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 11. I am jealous over you with an holy
jealousy. Rom: 10. the Apostle ^aith, the Jews had the zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

Wherefore to show some properties of true zeal, whereby we may try our
selves, let us first know that our zeal must be grounded on knowledge: for
otherwise it will carry The first property of true zeal.
us further to destruction, as it did them who oppre^^ed the truth, and
persecuted the dear servants of God, and yet thought that they did well.
Wherefore in true zeal it is requisite, to have knowledge going before. We
see the zeal of the Prophet did arise here of the contempt of the law of God.
For seeing it to be ^o exquisite, perfect, everlasting, powerful, and
comfortable, it is a manifest argument that he was well grounded on the word.
This zeal then (that we may the less be deceived with the contrary) has
these few rules: first, as we have already said, it must be agreeable wholly
with the word of God, to begin where it begins to end, where it ends.
Therefore we may thus try our true zeal: If first, and especially, we make
conscience of the principal matters of the word, as of prayer, of the
Sacraments, of discipline, of charity: and then of the less things that are
commanded, The first rule of true zeal
if we will do them; if any be forbidden, we also avoid them, yet ever
tollerating through love, little things, as they that would not trouble the
Church of God* Wherefore the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11. 1. 10. If any man lust
to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God: as if
he should say, If any man will strive about matters Toleration of many things
for the peace of the church
of less importance, we, according to the order of the Church, will not
strive with them, but rather will bear many things in love, and yet so, as
still we use this caveat, That we account nothing small or little which is Gods
word.

This doctrine may be manifested by familiar examples. If a man shall steal
things of great weight, or some great sum of money, which deserves hanging,
and the cutting off of life, we will abhor him: but when it comes out that
they may ^eale less things, as wood, and corn, and that not of necessity,
but even of greediness of mind, thinking it not to be subject to so high a
punishment, they will make no conscience of it. But if Adam was cast out of
Paradise for the biting of an apple, we must not think any thing that the
word commands or forbids to be little, or that the doing or not doing is
but a trifling sin, least that through the just judgments of God, we falling
by little and little by degrees, fall into great and monstrous sins. And as
this is in life, so is it much more in the worship of God. It is a great fault
that we will make a scruple in matters of small importance, and will not
stick to be dissolute in things of greater weight. Indeed it must needs be
confessed, that our grand zeal must be in great things, and yet we must not
lightly esteem of any thing in the glorious word of God.

The second rule of true zeal is, that we must look to the things which are
within, as well as to the things which are without. This also our Savior
Christ teaches us by reprehending The second rule of true zeal.
the Pharisees, in telling them that they made clean the outside of the
platters, but left the inside foul: showing, that their lives outwardly was
without reproof, but inwardly they were full of secret pride, disdain,
self-love and hatred. Our zeal must begin within, and in time appear
outwardly: and as we will not sin outwardly, so we must be as loath to sin
inwardly.

Wherefore here also are two things to be observed: the first is, that we fear
no more to do ill before men, then we do by our selves. For we be given to be
loath to be accounted Two observations.
ill, and yet make no such conscience to be ill: we see thieves, whores, and
ill-do^rs are loath to be so accounted, and yet in the mean season, if they
can do this secretly, they make no care of it. We outwardly are careful to
maintain our credit, and to travail with our selves, yet secretly we can
commit sin greedily. What is this but to be painted sepulchers, and dishes
clean without, but foul within? Wherefore we are to beware of this, and so
much the rather, because the Lord has plagued them that in outward show have
borne a great countenance of religion, whose lives privily were filthy, whose
cases and vizards when the Lord has taken from them, and has revealed their
corruptions, they have appeared hypocrites.

The second observation is, that we look to the privy corruptions of nature
lurking in The second* observation.
our hearts, which contain such a bottomless pit of corruption, that it is
the special grace of Gods spirit, to gage them to the depth. We must therefore
learn to search our hearts, for it is the fearful judgment of God, when we
make no conscience of sin secretly, to have our sin break forth publicly.
As when we have no care to pilfer secretly, we shall be brought to steal
openly by the secret wrath of God: whereby also secret lusts, malice and Simile.
hatred, nourished in the heart and affections are permitted to break out in
time even into our outward actions. This is a plague to them, who rather would
seem to be, than in truth desire to be godly. Covetous men have this
property, that they rather would be rich than be accounted rich: such ought
our affections to be, that we should indeed rather be godly, than desire to
be so accounted of. Let us labor to do well secretly, howsoever for a while
it be hidden from the world, that God which sees our doing in secret, will
reward it openly, and in his good time will give us grace to do well publicly.

But peradventure the wicked will say: what ground? what intent? what cause
have you to labor so much about the disclosing of the secret corruptions of
our heart? But yet alas they are ignorant of this, that because they know not
the secret corruptions, they fall the Conscience of thoughts.
more violently to gross sins, and every man shall try this to be true in
himself, that he that makes conscience of his thoughts, will undoubtedly make
conscience of his words, and deeds; and he that makes no conscience of his
thoughts, he may come to make no conscience of his words and deeds. Besides,
he that begins to reform his heart, has this promise in the word, that he
shall not be confounded, as Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be confounded when
I have respect to all thy commandments. And Port. 10. 8. Let my heart be
upright in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. Wherefore if we will be truly
zealous, we may add another rule, that we have none other end of our zeal,
than how we may glorify our God; whether it be in prosperity, or adversity.

This then is the third rule, that we keep a right course and tenor of zeal
in both estates. The third rule of zeal.
We must especially look to that, whereunto we are most ready, that is, whether
we be more zealous in prosperity, and fall away in adversity; or whether we
are more fervent in affliction, and overwhelmed in abundance: whether by the
one we are not puffed up with security and secret pride; or whether with the
other we be not too far humbled and abased. For many in time of peace are
religious, who seeing persecution to follow the Gospel, slide back and fly
from it. Jobs wife whiles her husband was in prosperity could worship God, and
show her self in outward things as zealous as Job himself: but when
affliction came, she was ready to curse God. We know in prosperous times, many
were very forward in religion, who in time of trouble shrinked from the truth:
some so long as they may have credit by giving countenance to the Gospel, go
far; but when discredit comes they will leave all. But the Prophet says, I
am small and despised, yet do I not forget thy word. O ther'on the contrary
part, so long as God exercises them with any cross, are zealous professors,
who being set aloft and coming once above, begin to be secure. We see many in
time ^f their misery to be much humbled; and whilst they want livings and
preferments, we see both preachers and people very godly, who when they have
gotten them some living, and obtained that which they sought for, have their
zeal choked. Do not many pray for the continuance of the peace of the Gospel,
that they themselves might continue in peace and prosperity? Do not many
mourn in the adversity of the Gospel, because they mourn for their own
adversity? Oh great corruption of our hearts! Oh bottomless pit of hypocrisy!
If we were ashamed that we are no more grounded on the word, and that we can
be no more holy and upright in our hearts, surely the Lord would so govern us,
that he would not suffer either prosperity to quench and carry away our
zeal, to be buried in the grave of security; or adversity too much to
dismay and discourage us.

This is then our trial herein: if when we are in greatest prosperity, we can
mourn with them that mourn in the Lord, and when we are in greatest
adversity, if we can rejoice with them that rejoice in Christ. This is a sure
token we love not the Gospel, nor favor the word, because we have a love to
prosperity; neither are zealous to see the word conremned, because we have an
hatred of adversity.

Daniel concerning outward things was an happy man as being near to the
Crown: and yet when he saw the God of Israel his glory to be defaced, and an
abominable Idol to be erected, he could content himself with nothing so
much, as with weeping, fasting, and prayer. And Paul being in bonds for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, and concerning his outward man in a miserable case,
rejoiced greatly, and as it were revived, when he heard that the Gospel
prospered; and howsoever he was in bands, he never felt them grievous unto
him, for the joy which he had, that the Gospel was at liberty. If this zeal
were in us, that the word of God were so exact, pure, and holy in our eyes,
that when we are most aloft, we could be sorrowful, if the word of God has
a fall; and when we were in our greatest downefull, yet we could be glad that
the word of God were set aloft: then surely we would labor to sanctify the
creatures of God which we use, with the word and by prayer, and at the least
give the tenth part of the day to the worship of the Lord. But if we cannot
bestow on him the tithe, it is a token that we labor more for the body than
for the soul. And if our souls be far more precious than our bodies, and
it is an harder thing to provide well for the soul than for the body, we must
divide our times the better, that daily we may bestow some part of our time in
the word and prayer: if we would truly epsy our thriuings and proceedings in
our several callings, and take a diligent view of our selves in our vocations,
we should undoubtedly see the plentiful blessing of God, when in truth we use
the word and prayer, and his fearful curse to be upon it, when we use it not.

The fourth rule is, that if we will labor for true zeal, we must be patient
in our own The fourth rule of zeal.
causes, and devour many private injuries, that the Lords cause may be the
better provided for, and that his glory may go the better forward. For we
see, how soon and how grievously we are moved for our own causes, and how
soon we are cold in defending Gods cause. This then is true Christian zeal,
to deny our own reason and private commodities, and especially to seek Gods
glory, though it be with our danger. This would so stop the mouth of the
adversary, that howsoever for a while he thinks us to be cholerike and mad
men, and esteems of us as reuengers of our own affections; yet one day he
will confess, that we did not seek either our own commodity or our own
revenge, but that whatsoever we did, we did it for Gods glory and in the
defense of a good cause.

The seeking to revenge our private evils does much hurt, and brings great
injury to this godly zeal: for if we could speak with the tongues of Angels,
and could speak never so gloriously to the delight of all men, and have not
love, even to our very enemies, all were nothing, all were abomination in the
sight of the Lord. Contrariwise, if we can be content to forsake our selves,
and to be accounted as nothing, we shall be more acceptable to the Lord, and
find less trouble to our selves.

True it is, that God his children even in their best actions are troubled,
whiles they suruay their inward affections, and gage their hearts before the
Lord, whether they have not done their things in self-love rather than for
love of God: whether in vain glory, rather Trial of our obedience.
than for the glory of God: without which exercise we shall never see, whether
our actions be pure, or whether they be vnpure, or whether they be mixed;
whether they be in respect of God, or in respect of our selves. Many can
rejoice at good things in themselves, and repine to see them in others: many
can be grieved with evils in themselves, which will rejoice to see it in
others. Wherefore we are greatly to suspect our selves and our zeal, when we
are thus affected, because it is a manifest token, that we are not pleased with
that which is good for Gods glory, but for self-love; neither do we repine
for Gods dishonor, but at our own discredit.

But we are to learn, howsoever the good is done, to rejoice; and howsoever
evil is committed, to be sorrowful. We see the Prophet here was not grieved
so much because they were his enemies, as because they were the enemies of God.
For if he had thought the^ to have bin Gods children, whatsoever private
injury he had received, he could have swallowed it up, and more have rejoiced
in them, as they had been the children of God, than have been griued because
they injured him.

Here then we must learn to bear with the infirmities one with another, but
especially To hear with the frailties of Gods children.
with the frailties of the children of God: neither are we so hainously to be
offended with the infirmities of the godly, as with the presumptuous sins of
the ungodly and obstinate. True it is indeed, that our zeal must cause us most
to be grieved for the sins of the godly, by how much they were come nearer to
the image of God, than others. Howbeit it must always be with a fellow feeling
and pitiful sympathy toward them, as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 15. that
the same mind should be in us, which was in Christ Jesus, of which place we
have spoken often before.

Wherefore we must make Gods friends our friends, without any respect of
persons, howsoever they be otherwise far distant from us, either by place, or
familiarity, or nature, or howsoever: and on the contrary, whosoever is Gods
enemy, must also be ours, howsoever we are joined together, yea, though we lie
both together in one womb.

This would seem an hard doctrine to flesh and blood, and yet our Savior
Christ has manifestly and plainly taught it us, Matthew. 10. 37. and 16 14. Luke
14 26. If amy man come to me and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life, he cannot be my
disciple: What? would he have us to cast off all natural affection? and so the
Scripture should repugne; whereas it is set as a note of them that should come
in the last perilous times, 2. Tim. 3. 3. That they should be void of
natural love and affection: and might be contrary to that Exodus 20. Honor
thy father and thy mother, etc. No, he means nothing less; but he means,
that we should so be joined in natural love, as he speaks of himself, Who
is my mother? who is my brother? even he that hears the word. So that though
we be never so far asunder, we must love them that love God; and though that
we be never so near, we must hate them that hate God: yea, and so far as our
friends would pull us from God and from his truth, we must shake off all
natural affections; not because they be joined to us in the flesh, but because
by no means they will be joined with us in the spirit.

Yet in the mean time we must remember, that we do all duties of love, and
obedience Duties of love even to Gods children.
to them, as in admonishing them, in praying for them, and mourning for them:
and then if nothing will serve, but we must either cleave to them and forsake
God, or forsake them and cl^^ue to God; we must separate our selves from their
corruptions, knowing always, that we must obey the first Table before the
second, and piety must go before charity, and we must serve God before we
serve man, and nature must give place to godliness.

The fifth rule is, that we must be stricter to our selves, than to any others
in some things, The fifth rule of zeal.
and we must offer more liberty to others than to our selves: If we complain
of sin, let us be at most defiance with our own corruptions; so when we
fight against the corruptions of others, we shall not fight against their
persons, but against their sins.

This is the doctrine which our Savior Christ also taught us, that if we would
see well to pull out the more of sin in another man, we should first labor
to take away the beam of sins in our selves. Why calls he it a beam in
us, and more in others? because our own corruptions are or ought to be far
better known to us, than the corruptions of other men, we should be best
acquainted with our own infirmities, and know that there is in us a
bottomless pit of corruptions. Which Paul saw when he said, that of all
sinners, he was the chiefest: that is, he had the greatest light of his own
wants, and was most familiar with his own corruptions.

Wherefore we must first judge our selves, and cast the first stone at our
selves, we must labor to remove this mountain of sin in our selves: so
finding how ougly a thing sin is, and that by experience in our selves, we
shall neither flatter others in their sin, nor yet rebuke them too
rigorously. For he that does so travail with his own heart, shall love that
good thing in another which he likes in himself, and shall be grieved for
that sin in another, which he has found grieuing before in himself. For as
we having been in sickness and are recovered, can by the smart which we have
felt, pity the smart of mother, and can tell how comfortable health is to
another, which we have found comfortable to us: even so we can show compassion
to them, which are stung with sin, as feeling the burden thereof in our
selves, and can rejoice at the liberty of conscience and peace of mind in
others, which we have rejoiced at in our selves, because in suffering misery,
we have learned to offer mercy: let us see this doctrine more plainly.

We shall see some very wary in using a ceremony, and peradventure not
without cause, because it is not necessary to edification in the Church of
God: and although it may be that they think it lawful in respect of the
thing, and in respect of themselves; yet because it is not expedient they
willingly refuse it, and will not meddle with it: and then if others do not
so, but think it lawful to be worn, and therefore use it, here through love
the matter being about a thing indifferent, they must learn to bear with
them. Others there be who unwilling to use it themselves, judge straight all
others as heinous offenders, that use it.

Let us learn this of Abraham, who refused to take so much of the Egyptians
himself, as a shooe-latcher; and yet to others that would take, he would not
deny the law of arms. He confesses that he refused for his nephews sake, and
therefore gave liberty to others to do as they would. See this good father
was more straight to himself, than to others; and gave more liberty to
others, than to himself. So Paul seeing that in some places he could not so
conveniently live of other men's charges, as at Corinth, and Thessalonica,
although at Colossos he received somewhat, where they were more able to bestow
on him, refused to take any thing; would he that all men should be tied to his
example to do the Sufficiency for the ministry.
like? surely no, for what one thing does he labor about more than this, that
Ministers ought sufficiently to be provided for? For we see he was strict to
himself in many things, yet evermore he left liberty unto others: as we may
see Romans 14 1 Cor 8. and 10 where he entreats of the use of things
indifferent* Wherefore he would have Christians of this mind, that they might
say thus with themselves: I can do this by Christian liberty, but if it be
any hindrance or offense to my brother or any slander to the Gospel, I will
not do it: if they do it not, so they make conscience of other good things, I
will not in this wage war with them, I will not oppose battle against them,
but to join with them in greater and better matters, through love I will
pardon the less. We must now most straightly deal with our selves, both for
these reasons alleged, as also because we know what mercies of God we have
received more than others: we must give liberty unto others, because we know
not whether they have received the like gifts, graces, and mercies of God, as
we have. If this had been used long ago, what unity had there been
established in the Church of God: for want of this, what troubles have risen
therein? Here we must beware that we flatter not a man, no not in the least
sin, that is far from the nature of love whereof we speak; but we must so
tolerate, as we purpose not to let any man lie in sin, but labor to reclaim
it; yet aswaies with the zeal of Gods glory, and the hatred of his sin, and
with the spirit of meeknes, and pity of his person.

Wherefore here does fitly come in the sixth rule, which is, that then we shall
most surely know when our zeal is right; when we are much moved, when God is
much grieved; and The sixth rule ^^ zeal.
we are much grieved, because our brother has so offended.

Here is an excellent and infallible difference between godly zeal and
fleshly anger. When the grief of our brothers falling meets and is mixed
with the anger of his sinning against God, our anger shall not feed it self
upon the party because of our wrath, but of his sin, because of our zeal. In
pure zeal therefore there must be anger for offending God, and grief because
our brother has offended. When our Savior Christ went about to heal the man
that had the withered had, the Pharisees that stood by murmured, because he
would heal on the Sabbath day, it is said that he looked about him angerly,
and yet it is added that he sorrowed for the blindness of their hearts. Mark
here in this notable example, how anger and sorrow meet together. Anger, that
men should have so little knowledge of God and love of their brother: sorrow,
that through ignorance, they were so foully ouerseene. So likewise in zeal of
his father Christ looked on Jerusalem with an hatred to their sin, and yet
with a pity to their misery, which was at hand, he wept over it. Mark this in all the Prophets from time to time, whether it has not bin so in them. Look on
Esaias, on Jeremy, on (...), on Da^^^ ^^ ^^^ (...) of spirit^^ey ^^d not utter
their words; and when they most threatened the people for their sins, they
were most grieved and feared, least they should fall upon them.

This is a blessed temperature, thus to mingle grief with zeal. But that it
is an ouerreaching zeal, where our zeal feeds more of the person, than of
the sin. Wherefore we must crave this special grace at the hand of God by
prayer, to be governed by a right Difference between fretting anger and pining
zeal.
zeal, and that we may truly discern the difference between fretting anger,
and pining zeal. Samuel spares not Saul in his sin, but notwithstanding his
great authority in zeal of Gods glory, he tells him flatly, that he is a
sinner; and yet always was he bent to lament for Saul, and to pray for him. If
we keep this golden mixture, we shall stop the mouth of the adversaries, who
accuse us to be too full of rancor and malice, if we be angry as enemies to
their sin, but are grieved, in that for sin they are become enemies to God.
If then we admonish others, and he angry with them, not as seeking any revenge
of our selves, but as doing it of necessity, because otherwise we shall be
guilty of dishonouring God, and showing our selves to be angry against our
will, and that we do it only for Gods cause, and therewithal remember our
selves to be but men, subject to the same, we shall admonish them with that
affection, wherewith we of them in the like case would Admonition.
be admonished; and yet as we also remember to be admonished of them, as though
we were admonished of God. Do thou love Gods glory? then will thou surely
admonish thy brother of sin. Do thou love thy brother? then will thou
admonish him with compassion. See here is that, which teaches all wisdom.

I must be grieved for sin, because it is that that casts all mankind from
the Lord, because it is such a thing as thrust Adam out of Paradise: it is so
grievous a thing that it overwhelmed the old world with waters; it consumed
Sodom and Gomorrah with fi^e; it crucified Jesus Christ the Son of God; it
is such a thing, as is an enemy to God the Father, an enemy to God the Son,
and an enemy to God the holy Ghost: and therefore I must needs be an enemy
unto it; yet I must be grieved, as putting my self in the like case, that the
offender is. Wherefore many faithful Ministers of God, when they are most hot,
they have most heaviness in their souls, least the curse which they must needs
threaten, do turn to the confusion of the persons whom they threaten. Thus we
see, this zeal will teach us, neither to rebuke sin too coldly, nor yet too
hotly. For we shall not so love God, as we shall abuse man the image of God,
neither shall we so love man, as we shall hinder or impair the glory of God:
for if we be sorrowful that God is offended, and that man has offended, we
shall be sure to make an holy medlie.

Verse. 140. Thy word is proved must pure, and thy servant loves it.
HEre the Prophet showing his love to be the cause of his zeal, repeateth in
effect, that which he said before. It may seem strange why the man of God
should make mention of this so often, that the word of God is true. But we must
know, that he did it to strengthen his faith, in the time of trouble, and that
then he might not faint. We think not, that there is such need of faith,
because we feel not the like temptations. For they that Our unbelief, and
wherefore we see it not. Trial of our zeal.
have no sight of their corruptions, know not their unbelief, and they that
feel not their unbelief, feel not the necessity of this strengthening of
their faith. And as they that know not their unbelief, know nothing: so they
that believe, and see their unbelief, know this to be necessary. They then
that have a true trial of their unbelief, know this faith to be a rare gift
of God. So that the Prophet commends the word of God here of experience: for
he says, Thy word is proved most pure. His meaning is this: This is the cause
why I am so zealous, even because I love thy word; and therefore, O'Lord I love
thy word, because I find it by proof to be so pure.

That we then may make this our rule for examination, why are we so cold in
zeal? even because we are cold in the love of the word. For as our love
increases, so increase also our delight and grief: our delight to see the
thing loved to have happy proceedings; our grief, to see the thing which we
love, to be despised.

This we see to be in every kind of love. For a man that truly loves his
wif^* cannot abide to see his wife contemned and discredited: nor the woman
that truly loves her husband can abide to see him rejected and despised. When
we love our friend, we are grieved to see any contempt offered unto him. This
then we see in the nature of true love, to rejoice to see the person loved,
advanced, or the thing which we love, esteemed; and grieved, to see either the
person or thing so loved, to be cast down and contemned. It was a grief even
to the Heathenish Philosophers to see their doctrine not regarded: were they so
moved for the small regard of that earthly doctrine, which had no exact truth
in it, but was mingled with infinite errors and untruths, and shall not we much
more be moved, to see the word of God, which has so exact a truth, and no
untruth, contemned and little set* by? wherefore when we have not this godly
grief in us, it is a manifest argument, that our love is very cold. For as our
love is the greater, so undoubtedly our grief will be the greater; and so as
our love is the less, so will our grief to see the thing defaced, be also the
less. When we have much delight in any thing, we are much grieved, and who are
more grieved to see the word of God trodden down, than the godly? because of
all other, their delight is most in it. Not without cause then is this love
commended unto us, to be a token of our zeal, and therefore we see Psalm 67.
the Church praises and provoke all the world to praise God, when the word
had free success: such is the love of it to the word of God. O let thy people
praise thee O God, yea let all the people praise thee. Oh let the nations
rejoice and be glad, etc. As then the children of God think themselves in joy
and prosperity, when the word of God is in prosperity; so it being in any
trouble, death is not troublesome to them, so that by their death and suffering
they may any thing confirm the truth, and give countenance to it.

The Prophet of God shows his love to the word, saying: All my springs O Lord
are in it: meaning that all his joy, his delight and affections, were wholly set
on the word of God. Wherefore if there be such joy in having it, there must
needs be great grief in wanting it. We are herein greatly to condemn our
selves, that we are no more thankful; for our unthankfulness brings this
secret curse, that we are no more zealous, and because many can hardly judge
between fleshly anger, and spiritual zeal (such is the rare feeling of this
true zeal) they are ready to imagine, that if one be godly zealous, they are
straightway carnally angry.

How necessary a thing therefore it is to know godly zeal, all men may see: for
as we have said, that the Lord threatens Revel. 3. that unless the Laodiceans
would be more zealous and amend, he would spue them out, that is, he would have
no delight in them. (...) the Lord would as leeue have us of another religion,
as to be so lukewarm in his true religion. For as a stomach is easily
brought to provoke a vomit by receiving somewhat that is lukewarm: so the
Lord spueth as it were out of his stomach luke warm professors, as them whom
by no means he can brook, which is a most fearful thing. We know that the
good father Elie 1. Sam. 3. although otherwise no doubt he was the dear
servant of God, was grieved for the sins of his sons, and mourned when the
Ark of God was taken, was reproved by the holy Ghost, that he should love the
glory of his sons more than the glory of God* because he did not more
severely, and more zealously rebuke his sons, and in that there wanted in him
that feruencie of spirit, whreby he should have cut off his sons from their
office; wherefore the hand of God did cut off his life, and deprived all his
posterity of the Priesthood. Although this good man was offended, and grieved
with the evils of his sons; yet his coldness in zeal brought upon him this
plague.

Elias (whose zeal as much pleased the Lord, as the coldness of Elie displeased
him) was of a fervent spirit; for when the Lord asked him where he had been, he
answered: I have been zealous for the Lord God of Hosts sake, and when he
complained, that he could find none which had not bowed unto Baal, the Lord
vouchsafes to comfort him, and tells him, there be 7000. which never bowed
their knees to him. Well, because he continued zealous in beating down
Idolatry, the Lord came down visibly with a fiery Chariot, and fetched Eliah
from earth to heaven.

We need not here speak of the great zeal of Moses, Phinees, and other of the
servants of God. We see and know the cause of this love in the man of God, was
the pureness of the word. We heard in the first verse, that the judgments of
the Lord were righteous, we have heard in the second verse, that the
testimonies of the Lord contained a special righteousness, we shall hear in
the sixth verse, that the righteousness of the Lord is an everlasting
righteousness, we may see in the seventh verse, that it made him delight in
trouble, and in the eight verse, that the righteousness of the Lord is
everlasting. Wherefore does he this? as we have already said to strengthen
his Faith: for after he had said, that the rivers of tears through zeal and
grief burst out of his eyes, he adds and rehearses these things. What
shall we say, they are vain repititions? Nay, we know the holy Ghost reproves
Our unbelief is showed us in the often repetitions of the commendatious of the
word.
them Math. 6. We see then that in so often commending the word of God, the
Prophet shows to us our unbelief, which he felt so much in himself. When do
idle repetitions so much displease the Lord? Surely, when our tongues walk
idly, and in our prayers we speak we know not what. But when a man's heart is
full of sorrow, and fraught with grief of his sins, or earnestly longs
after a thing, then let us cry, Lord have mercy upon me, then let us power
out our spirits, and say: Son of David have mercy upon me: Lord I believe,
help my unbelief. Thus when the heart is loath to be overcome of unbelief,
and when it desires to show forth his sorrow, or when Gods children would
exercise their Faith, or feel in themselves any rare joy, which they would
gladly express, then they use many repetitions, as we may see both in the
book of Chronicles and the Psalms, Praise ye No idle repetitions in this
Psalm.
the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: where we
shall see in 26. verses this still repeated: for his mercy endures for ever.
What shall we say now, that here is any needless repetition? No: well, we see
here then, that we must not speak simply against repetitions, but in great
wisdom of the Spirit, because the heart of the godly cannot satisfy it self
with Faith and feeling of Gods promises, unless it breaks forth as a fire
into many speeches.

Hereby we know now, that the man of God here expresses his faith, and we are
to learn, that without some lively feeling of faith, of joy, or of grief, we
are not to use often repetitions, unless happily they be used to stir us up
the more to these or such like. So cried the woman of Canaan, O Son of David
have mercy upon me; and being rebuked, she still cried, O Son of David have
mercy upon me. We would think it somewhat strange, and as a great matter, to
see a poor body shoot out so many prayers at once, when they speak out of
the abundance of their heart, which is stuffed with so many griefs and
troubles.

Thy word (says the Prophet) is proved true; it has no changeable goodness,
but has in it an everlasting righteousness, serving for all ages, for all
persons, and for all times. Men's opinions fail, the wisdom, strength and
authority of man in time has an end; but this Word is exceeding large, and
never has end.

Thy word is proved pure. Many would think this to be but a small commendation
for the word of God: but come to a man when his mind is much troubled, and
tell him of the word, and what pureness, what comfort will he find in it?
Surely he will be as one that has no taste in it, and as one that feels no
more sweetness, than a sick man does taste in a chip. And notwithstanding all
that the word shall do to him, he will still follow his own ways, and go on
forward in the devices of his own head. Do men then feel such infinite
comfort in the word? so much is their comfort as is their faith: and so little
is their faith, as little is their comfort.

Look into Gods children, how greatly they lament their unbelief* look into
David, look on Job; look on the late and blessed Martyr of God Bradford, who
almost in all his M. Bradford and holy Martyrs much lamenting ever f^r their
unbelief.
books, and in every meditation complains of his unbelief; notwithstanding
that he was a man so rich in the graces of God, so thoroughly mortified to the
world, so stayed in faith; and yet the nearer he came daily to Christ, the more
he still cries against unbelief. Wherefore Paul seeing this to be a common
disease among all men, says, This is a faithful thing, and worthy of all men
to be remembered, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners: this is
a faithful saying, with such like speeches, which the Apostle uses as
preparatiues to stir up our faith.

The pureness of the word is mentioned of the Prophet, when after he had
lamented the miserable ellate of the godly, and the great decay of godliness,
he cries out to the Lord, speedily to assist his children, saying. Help Lord
(Psalm. 12. 4) for there is not a godly man le^^ etc. and by and by he adds
verse 6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a
furnace of earth fined seven fold. If we should imagine the purest silver, that
is often tried, and serves in the court for Princes, even so pure must we
believe the word of God to be, which not seven times alone, but seventy times
seven times has been tried in the fire of adversity, and still has remained
most pure, and never could any corruption b^ found in it We have seen good
men as it were confounded, and yet comforted, and being tried are found to be
pure.

The meaning of the man of God in that place is, try the word, as you do try
the purest metals, with persecution, with torment, with contempt, or
howsoever, I tell you the word is true, and this is mine only comfort, O Lord,
that though the wicked rage, thy promise for ever is unchangeable.

Proved true. What could deceive it? could the Serpent in Paradise? No. What
could wash it away? could all the flood in the deluge? No. What could consume
it? could all the fiery furnace of Gomorrah, of Egypt and of Babylon? No* Look
from the first father of all, Adam unto this day, and how many servants the
Lord has died and sound pure; so many examples we have of the pureness of the
word. This then we see is a word pure by proof. We esteem greatly of armor
of proof, which neither the spear could pearce, nor the shot of gun batter,
nor dart in any battle could bruise? oh how has the word encountered with
Satan, and with all his adherents? How many darts of the worldlings has it
sustained, and never yielded? but as a sword of proof has not only stricken
off the heads of Satan, and of all heresies and schisms, but also has
mightily prevailed against powers, and authorities, and principalities in
heavenly things. When we have an approved medicine, we think it a thing of
great price, being such a one as never failed; but wheresoever it was laid, it
wrought the feate: so, here is a tried medicine for the soul, which never did
deceive any that use it a right. This is a most rare medicine and sovereign
salve. For never sore was so great in man's soul, never malady so grievous,
never corruption of sin so fare gone, never was there any wound of conscience
so desperate, which either this did not cure being used, or might have cured if
it had been used.

This has been tried, and is approved by all the sick souls that ever were,
since the beginning The word of God a tried friend in troubles. Simile.
of the world to this day, whereof some were delivered from many sores of their
conscience, and many even rescued from the depth of their sorrows. We count
him a tried friend and approved, which in no troubles that ever did befall us
shrunk from us, and failed us, but stood us in all stead possible: but whom, I
pray you, has the Lord ever deceived us, that put their trust in him? or in
whom has the word of the Lord ever failed? which will stick with us to the end,
which will save us from all evils, accompany us in all dangers, recover us in
all infirmities, pity and relieve us in all miseries, which will save us from
hell, and will speak for us before the ludge, and plead our cause, and even
whilst life lasts, will still stand us in stead. Wherefore seeing the word
of God has in it such excellency, that it takes up all the delights of Gods
children, and the contempt thereof takes up all the sorrows of the Saints of
God; seeing for being eaten up with the zeal of Gods word, whatsoever we lose
in the outward man, we gain and are recompensed for it in the inward man;
contrary to the eating zeal in all other things whatsoever, seeing the nearer
we come to God in his word, and the further we go from our selves, though we
were thrown to the ground, we should be reedified; seeing, if we were tried in
the furnace, we should find such an happy exchange, that as the gold we
should lose no weight, but become more pure; seeing it only reneuth us in
trouble, and we cannot more discredit the word of God, than ever to suffer it
to be contemned, or not sufficiently esteemed, as becomes a thing of such
perfection, glory, eternity, and exact righteousness; seeing it is such an
armor of proof, so tried a medicine, so approved a friend: let us crave of
God that he would open our eyes, and clear our understanding, that we loving
it for these causes, may zealously be set on fire, and truly be grieved to see
it contemned.

Thus we see how exact, how pure, how comfortable, how everlasting the word is.
Thy righteousne^ (says the Prophet) is an everlasting righteous^^^* Psalm. 11.
thou ha^^, O Lord, set down a perfect righteousness, which has been, is, and
shall be for ever, one, and most constant, thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory for ever: thy hand is not shortened more than it has been, thy
word never could be accused, only let us say, Lord increase our faith: let us
say, Lord give us the like faith of thy servants, and we shall have like
graces with them, though not in so large measure as they had.

Verse. 141. I am small and despised: yet do I not forget thy precepts.
HIs meaning briefly is this: Lord, seeing thy word is so pure, I love it for
it own cause, though nothing come withal; if thou will bestow any thing else
of thy servant, I thank thee; if not, I love it still; yea though I should
suffer discredit for it, I am content. For I love thy word, because it is a
pure word, and worthy to be loved, with what cross soever it be accompanied.

As the common proverb is; Truth may be blamed, but truth can never be
ashamed, and iniquity may be ocuered for a time, but yet iniquity one day
shall be discovered. It cannot be denied, that it is a singular blessing,
which is said of our Savior Christ, to grow in favor with God and man, and to
be loved of both, as it is reported of Samuel: because as it is, Eccles 7. 3. A
good name is better than a good ointment, and Prou. 22 1. is to be chosen
above great riches, and loving favor is above silver, and above gold: neither
can there come a more grievous cross to a liberal nature and stout person,
than want of it. Howbeit, to search out the cause of discredit, we must
always enter into it, whether our conscience tells us that we suffer as
well doers, not as ill doers. For even the very Heathen said; that a man's
conscience is as a theater in the world. Wherefore if we suffer discredit
justly because of sin, it is to be lamented: but when we have faith in Gods
promises, and a good conscience flowing from our faith, though we never so much
be discredited, it is a small thing. Great is the love of our selves, and
great is the care which we have to maintain our credit. For many will be
content to hazard their lives, which cannot be content to endanger their good
name. For if a man live bereft of his good name, he had almost as live be
bereft of his life. And therefore Heretics, as the Family of love, give in
precept: that they should rather die, than suffer the credit of their sect to
fall. And no marvel: for they see no better life, neither do they feel any
true comfort of God in their prosperity, neither can they truly call upon him
in their trouble. Thus we see how a name is esteemed in the world.

This then is a true argument of zeal, even when we are despised and suffer
discredit, still to bear good affection to the word. For many are lively and
quick, whilst they are contented and well pleased, and whilst things have
that success which they look for, who when they suffer discredit, are utterly
cast down.

We see here the man of God is content to lose his credit, so God be not
dishonored, and is ready to buy glory to the name of God with the loss of
his own name. For he rests in this, that though he may be misdeemed, and of
the world ill judged of, yet he has a warrant in his conscience from the Lord,
that he will depose for him; and howsoever for a time he bears the reproach as
an evil doer, yet the Lord will one day draw out his righteous dealing, and
make it known to all men, Wherefore the Prophet says, Psalm. 37. Fr^t not thy
self, because of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil doers, etc.
And then he adds, verse. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass, 6. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as
a light, and thy judgment as the noone da^. As if he should say, wait still
on the Lord, and possess thy soul in patience, the Lord in time will put away
the clowdie mists of ill reports, and will cause thy righteousness one day to
shine as brightly as the Sun in the midday.

If we should consider the discredit of Noah, how he was accounted as a gazing
stock to the old world; if we should think how Enoch was despised in his
time, or how Lot was discredited among the Sodomites, or what contempt Eliah
suffered among the Idolaters in the age wherein he lived, with many other holy
men, we would think it wonderful. Nay, if we would but consider but how
this man of God David suffered reproach, contempt and discredit, we should
much marvel. First, when he had the rarest gifts of all his brethren, and
excelled them in the gifts of God, he was set to keep sheep in the field,
when the rest were sent to advance themselves in the wars. Then, when he had
slain the Bear, and was come among his brethren, where he saw the
uncircumcised Philistin breathing out blasphemy against the Lord, and his
people, and through Faith in Gods promises and zeal of the spirit, could not
abide him so to blaspheme the living God, marueiling, that his brethren without
great indignation should sustain it, he sets upon the great Goliath, which
when his brethrer saw, in contempt they asked what that princocke could David
against Goliath
do, and tell him, that it were more fit for him to deal with his
sheep-hooke, then to attempt to fight for so noble a victory. Besides, when as
afterward by his singular dexterity which he had, by playing on the Harp, he
had appeased Saul's furious spirit, they could not cease to despise him, and
opprobriously said of him, Is not this the son of Ishai? Then being offered
one of Saul's daughters in marriage, they mocked him, by disappointing her of her
dowry: afterward, when he should have had the second daughter, who had her
dowry appointed and allotted, every clawbacke scorned him; yea Doeg (that was
the heardsman) was suffered to slay the children of God: So David was feign to
^lie for succor to the Heathen kings, his own men contemning and forsaking
him. And yet still he says, I am small and despised, yet do I not forget thy
word. Well, let us see, did not the Lord promote him, after he had thus
continued in patience? we know the Lord made his righteousness glorious, and his
good name to shine abroad, and his innocence to appear to all men after the
death of Saul By faith (says the Apostle, Hebr. 11. 2.) our Elders were well
reported of: whereof some are there said to be tried by mockings and
scourgings, verse. 36. We suppose (says Paul) we are made a gazing stock, and
the offscouring of the world: yet he fainted not, because he knew that
howsoever vile he was in the eyes of the world, yet the Lord delighted in him,
the Angels of God in heaven, the Church of Gods Saints on earth rejoiced in
him, his own conscience felt joy and peace, through that patience wherein he
possessed his soul. Wherefore our Savior Christ said to his Disciples, Matthew
5. Blessed are ye, when men revile you, persccute you, and say all manner of
evil against you for my sake falsely, etc. Wherefore let us learn that we are
to fight daily against self-love, and love of our credit, and let us be as
contented to give our names to the Lord, as we are to give him our goods, our
lives and our countries. Let us offer all that we have to the Lord, of whom we
have received it, and of whom in his good time we shall receive it again.
Abraham gave Isaac his son to the Lord in sacrifice, and yet he received him
again. So let us give our names to the Lord by what means soever he pleases
to receive them. For many would be content to do so, if they might leese their
name, because they have been famous in war, or have come by it by some noble
sufferings: but to suffer discredit wrongfully, and as traitors, or rebels, and
to have most false inditements in the face of the world proceed against us, so
that people clap their hands at us, as notable malefactors or heretics, is a
thing very difficult. But if our Savior Christ be contemned as a destroyer of
the Temple, and S^euen be accused to speak blasphemy against Moses, let us
be content to leese our name as weldoers also, knowing that the Lord in time
will take away the cloud which Satan as a vatle does put before us, who would
persuade us, that when our name is gone, God sees not, nor regards our
righteousness. But he that draws the light to shine out of darkness, he can
also in time deliver our names out of discredit. Do the wicked then think to
obscure the glory of Gods Martyrs? Noah, Lot, Eliah. and all the Saints and
Martyrs of the Lord are most glorious, the Lord has glorified them, we still
praise them, and daily they are commended in the Church of God. Alexander the
great, in all his royalty, nor Pomp^y, nor Caesar, nor Tullie, have ever
received such commendarions in their greatest pomps, as have the dear Martyrs
of God. And although with the Papists, we make them not as half Gods to pray
unto them, or as Angels to praise them, yet we praise God for them. Let us
learn therefore to give our names freely to the Lord. Some men's sins, says
the Apost: go before to judgment, and some men's follow after. Some men's sins
go before, and the godly Magistrate sees them, and punishes them. Some men's
sins come after, and shall be in time remembered and revenged, if they be not
pardoned in the death of Jesus Christ.

Truth is the daughter of time, and in time all shall be revealed, whether it
be good or ill; and all ill either in this world or in the world to come, shall
be remembered, and come to reckoning, unless it be buried in Christ his
passion. All good things either in this life with the Saints of God, or in the
life to come among the Angels, shall have their praise and commendation.

For our trial then this is a true argument, that a man does not love the word
for riches Trial of our love to the word.
sake, because if he were the poorest man in the world, he would love it shall,
and whilst he is rich, thinks the word of God to be his greatest riches.
This is an undoubted token that a man does love the word for liberties sake,
because if he were in captivity and imprisoned, he would still love the
word, as well as if he were in the greatest liberty. This is a sure sign,
^at a man loves not the word, because thereby he has credit, when he can be
content to suffer discredit for the word* and yet love it as dearly, as if he
had the credit and countenance o^ the whole world. We see it come to pass in
all things; the better we mean, the worse we are thought of; yet if we still
continue patient, it is a token that we love the word, because it is the word,
and we love God, because he is God; we love Christ, because he is Christ.
For if we can love the word, though we be in sieknes, though we be in poverty,
and suffer discredit, we love the word for the word his sake, and not for any
thing else whatsoever. If it comes to us alone, it is welcome; if it come
accompanied with other things, it is also welcome: as Eccles. 7. that wisdom
is goo^ with an inheritance, and excellent to them that ^^^ the Sun. For a
man may then have indeed great occasion of well doing; yet wisdom will
deliver the soul, and gives liye to the possessours thereof So as though
riches and inheritance will help well, being ioy^ned with godliness, to give
testimony of a good conscience, yet though the man be an heir, it will not
deliver his soul; this only the word of God can do, all the other things
cannot do it. And therefore this is an unspeakable blessing of the word.

Thus we see how the Prophet loved not the truth for any outward respect, but
for the approved pu^ches of it. We must likewise labor to deny our selves and
our good names, the too much love whereof is a great enemy to godliness.

Wherefore when we are discouraged to continue our love to the word, for fear
of discredit, Trial of our love to the word.
we are greatly to suspect our love. Many Princes and the chief Governors
would follow our Savior Christ, but they were loath ^o lose their credit.
Wherefore if in credit, prosperate and health, we love the word; and forsake
it in discredit in time of adversity and si^^^^es: it is a manifest token we
loved it for our credits sake, for our prosperity, and for our health; no^ for
itself and the pureness of it; which was the only cause, why this man of God
did love it.

Verse 142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is
truth.
THe brief meaning whereof is: Truth it is, that flesh and blood may think,
that when contempt comes for thy names sake, there were sufficient cause to
forsake thy word: but Lord thy righteousness is not changeable, it is not one at
one time, and another at another time, but it has been, is, and shall be one
and the same; and as there is one ^onstant righteousness with thee, so the rule
thereof is set down in thy word, which shows us what righteousness thou
requirest.

Here the man of God teaches us, how to refell our own reason, which is as
ready to be deceived, as Satan is ready to deceive it. For in ^^^^^ble the
diueli will be ready to put this into our heads: this is, think you, the true
righteousness, ^^^ch you do profess? Do you not rather deceive your self?
see how you are in tr^^^^e: (...) what loss ye must sustain by your
profession? Thus he would de^nde us* and make us ^^ them that are in a burning
ague, who having lost their taste, and ^^ (...) troubled, think sweet things
sour, and sour things sweet. For such is the estate of Gods children in
trouble, who in stronger temptations cannot judge, and therefore the devil
troubles and oppresses the weakness of their sense; as seeing reason most
ready to be deceived, and will make them believe, that white is black, and
black white; that sweet is sower, and sower sweet; good ill, and ill good.

Lo, here is then a remedy, in the sense of these words: Thou art not, O
Lord, as man, who upon new occasions, makes new laws; and upon evil
disorders, makes new orders: but thy righteousness is everlasting, which was
with thee from the beginning, which to this time has b^n revealed, and shall
be ever hereafter; therefore I will not yield to this temptation: for though I
suffer for thy truth, yet it is the truth; neither can all the subtilties of
Satan, or violence of man make it mutable. O rare gift of God to believe and
acknowledge our immutable righteousness, and not to depend on men's devises or
shifts, whereby they deceive themselves, as being too shadowish, fading and
momentany. They are, laith the Prophet, plausible, but there is no solid^tie in
them; they ebb and they flow: but thy righteousness (O Lord) is everlasting.
Now whereas the devil himself, the Turk and Pope with other heretics cannot
deny, but will confess and grant, that there is one only righteousness,
constant and everlasting, that herein Christians differ from them, in that they
say with the Prophet, Thy Law is truth. Thou have set down an exact rule of
all righteousness wholly in thy Law, concerning al things that thou command;
and as I believe therefore thy righteousness to be everlasting, so I look for
it in thy word; because that righteousness which is all one with thee, is made
known and revealed to us, in thy written word.

We must then rest in this, that as in substance there is one righteousness; so
God has left his word, against the which heretics cannot prevail; because as
Gods righteousness is pure, everlasting and unchangeable, so his word has set
it down to us; which is as pure, everlasting and unchangeable. This is no small
comfort in temptation, whereby we may be stayed: and whereas it may seem to
some that in accessions and additions there was not one government both of the
Jews and Christians; we must know, that they had one rule of regiment unto
Christ, wherewith ou^ last addition in substance is all one; so that when
Satan and the men of the world will pull us from it, we may say, Thy
righteousness is everlasting; and if they ask us how we know it, we answer,
Thy word is truth.

This is then the thing wherein we differ much from heretics, for though they
give as How Christians differ much from heretics.
great and glorious titles to Gods righteousness as we d^; yet they will not
with us acknowledge that Gods word is truth. For as we see many men, that will
come, and are driven to subscribe to these general speeches. That the
righteousness of the Lord is everlasting, so they will easily be brought to
discredit the word, whereunto they will not stand. For the Turk cleaves to
his dreams, the Pope to his traditions, the heretics to their revelations,
the heathen to their fantasies, the worldlings to their policies.

Thy word is truth 1. As there is one sure and never changing righteousness: so
I will not clime up to heaven to seek for it there, I will not go down to the
low places of the earth to seek it out there, neither will I descend into hell
for it, but I will look for it in thy word, according to that, Deuteronomy. 30 11.
12. 13. 14. This commandment which I command thee this day, is not hid from
thee, neither is it far off: it is not in heaven that thou should say who
should go from us to heaven; neither is it beyond the sea etc. And Romans 10. 6.
Say nos in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven who shall descend into the
depth, etc.

Here then is the difference, between the heretics and Christians: Idolaters
will have Gods word, but joined with their traditions; heretics will have the
word, but with their revelations: But we say, that it is all perfect, it is a
through truth, and all truth, having nothing too much, nor any thing too
little. For it were a disgrace to add or detract from it, to ascribe excess
or defect to it. So the Prophet his sense is this: Seeing I go not to the
right hand or to the left, though I am contemned; yet herein I stay my self,
because thou have one righteousness, which thou have certainly set down in thy
word, how thy children shall be governed by it?

Here we may also see the infinite wisdom and goodness of God, because
otherwise, what misery should we have been in, seeing so many heads, there
would have been so many religions? Wherefore the Lord has set down one perfect
rule to govern all, wherein nothing is either abounding or wanting. Our
Savior Christ says John 17. Father, sanctify them, thy word is truth. Father
sanctify them, and sever them out being thine, with the word; it is true.
Saint James says, We are begotten by the pure word: this is that sword of the
spirit, which heretics cannot abide, and puts Satan to flight, and gives
us Heretics cannot abide the word.
an happy issue, and speedy out-gate in all our troubles and temptations if
we stay upon it.

This doctrine is as necessary also for manners: every wicked man will
confess the word to be true, yet if we come to examine their life they will
fail: for if they were persuaded that the word were truth, how durst they live
so profane, such swearers, such murderers, such adulterers, such thieves, and
such slaunderers? So that we must needs confess that the word for doctrine
preserves us from heresies, and for life saves us from many corruptions. We
must then labor that the word may have a credit in our consciences, that we
may not only confess God to be true, merciful, just and righteous, which
every ofscouring of the world may do, but let us believe, that all is truth,
mercy, justice and righteousness, is sufficiently set down in the word,
which word the Lord has set down for all us to believe and to obey.

Verse. 143. Trouble and anguish are come upon me: yet are thy commandments
my delight.
SEe here is a further thing. The sense then of the words is this. Seeing thy
righteousness ^s constant, and there is one constant rule of it; therefore,
where besides my contemning I feel also trouble. I do not only forget thy
word, but also much delight in it. See a rare gift in the man of God: for this
is a singular gift of God, not only in anguish to be heavily troubled, but
also to be comforted; not to do good heavily, but to do it cheerfully.

In that he uses as it were a doubling of the word trouble and sorrow, he
shows his grief to be the greater. It is ^n hard matter not to forget God
in trouble, but a far greater matter then to have a delight and a pleasure in
the word, yet so it is that if we can come near the one, we shall also come
near the other. Here is our strength, if we forget not the word, and nourish
not unbelief, joy and delight will come after; because it is the mercy of the
Lord inwardly to recompense that which outwardly he detracteth from us.

Thy word is my delight, or my delight is in thy word. This is the same that
the Apostle reports of himself, Romans 7 22. I delight in the law of God
concerning mine inner man. The way to come to this, is to fight against
unbelief, and to believe the word is most pure and holy. It is a singular
comfort to us, though our mind be troubled, when we should do good; yet to
do it, since after we have done it, it leaves a pleasure behind
incontrariwise how sweet soever sin is in committing, the pleasure will
depart, but the sting of sin remains with us still. And surely it is a
great quickening to a man when he does do well. True it is that this quickening
comes from the peace of conscience: But when we cannot only rejoice in the
forgiveness of sins, but feel a special comfort arise when we do well,
this is a double quickening. For what can be more comfortable, then to be
fruitful in good works in time of trouble? When did faith, love, patience,
constancy, meekenes, and boldness, more abundantly flourish in the Church
than in trouble? In prosperity we defer and delay from day to day, from to
morrow to next day to do well; but when the hand of the Lord is upon us, it
sets us forward to the work This then must mitigate our grief in time of
trouble, and make us jealous of our pr^sp^ri^ie, because we are fuller of the
exercise of weldoing in trouble than otherwise. Besides a preacher may better
persuade good things in time of trouble, than in prosperity. Well, as it is a
general rule in all things that a good beginning is as good as half done* so
as it is in all godliness, likewise is it in this part of godliness. What is the
cause, why men cannot come to this joy in trouble, even because in the very
entrance of it, they straight forget the word, and so they either despair, or
use unlawful means. This is a thing needful to be considered of. For if a
man be in trouble, and has nothing to ouermatch it, then his trouble will
ouerquel him. For why do men in trouble lay violent hands on themselves, but
because they have nothing in their minds to comfort them, and therefore they
fall to desperate means, Wherefore Gods children should soon despair, were it
not, that they felt comfort in the remission of sins, and stay themselves on
a godly security in God his promises and providence, and in an holy courage to
be delighted in weldoing. For the godly, whose only stays in trouble, are
faith and a good conscience, are brought by their affliction to a sight of
their sin, to a desire to have them pardoned, to a feeling of God his mercy in
hearing their prayers, to an hatred of their sins. Thus if we can support our
faith in Gods promises, we shall rejoice in trouble. When heretics suffer for
their illusions, and being taught of man, they quickly shrink: but when Satan
deludeth them with strange fantasies, they are ready to suffer much. Do we
know that heretics will suffer for their illusions, and shall not we much
rather suffer for the truth? And yet we see the Lord makes a distinction
between their sufferings and our martyrdomes: For Christians through faith can
sing Psalms in the midst of the flame, heretics by their roaring show they
have no such joy. It stands therefore upon us even now to be jealous of our
prosperity, and to bestow the time which we have, in weldoing, and strive
against sin. For we shall break the first wall by this, and so come with joy
to the other. And as the word is a comfort in trouble, so is it a bridle from
sin in prosperity. For as it does not let us fall in trouble, so also it
bridleth us from sin in prosperity. For to this end we read and hear the
word, that in prosperity it should subdue sin, and in adversity it should
minister comfort. But what is the judgment of God upon them that know not the
word? If they be in health, they seek for nothing but for pleasures, for
profit, and for gain, and think whatsoever they do to be lawful; yea
admonish a man of his covetousness by the word, yet will he not repent, until
either thieves, or fire, or some other judgment of God utterly consume him;
but he will object, why should I not get riches? why should I not maintain my
gain? Admonish a thief at his liberty of his theft, and it prevails no
more then if ye should tell him a story, until woeful experience ^each him the
truth of it by the prison or by the halter.

There is no hope to any profit to persuade the adulterer, until some plague
of God have wrought upon him. So we see, when fire is on our houses, when we
must go to prison, or yield to any other calamity, men wring their hands,
tear their hair, and rent their clothes, crying for woe to themselves and
saying they cannot live, they will not be seen in the world, they are ashamed
to look their friends in the face, and why? because they have no feeling of
the joys of the life to come, they have no stay on Gods providence, they feel
no comfort in his promises; but they curse, they moyle and pine away with
sorrow. If we see then the great mercy of God in staying us from sin in time
of prosperity, and in adversity telling us, that he does not punish us in
wrath, but in love: and as a father does teach us the contempt of this world,
the desire of the world to come, faith in his promises, patience and
repentance: let us reverently esteem the word.

Verse 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting, grant me
understanding, and I shall live.
IN repeating the same again, which he had said before, the man of God here
uses two words, the righteousness of thy testimonies: whereas before he uses
this one word: thy righteousness: so that he means here nothing else, but the
righteousness of God revealed to us in his word. For they be called
testimonies, both in respect that they be records of Gods love toward us, as
also they are testimonials of our obedience toward God. So the words may bear
this sense: true it is Lord, that that part of thy word, where in thou have
comforted us with thy promises, is everlasting; and that part of thy word,
wherein thou have set down our duties, is also everlasting.

And I shall live: That is, what do men desire but life? that I may live
therefore in godly pleasure, Lord teach me to understand thy testimonies. See
the man of God does rest his life in this understanding of the word. They then
that are ignorant are dead in sin, Ephesians 2. They sit in the shadow of death,
Luk* 1. they are bound in the chains of ^^^^^, as Paul witnesses of the
widows that live delicately. For as we call him a man of death, on whom not the
Judge, but the law, or not the law but the fact has already given judgment:
so they are subject to the spiritual death, on whom not God but his word, or
not the word, but the sin has pronounced guilty. What is then life? surely
this was life, the estate wherein Adam lived before he fell, his other life
afterward, which now is common to us, is a death, and we in him are all dead.
For when there was no sin, there was no shame: when there was no shame, there
was no trouble, when no trouble, no death. Wherefore sin brings in shame,
trouble, and death, and has left us dead spiritually, by cutting us off from
God. For as a civil life is when we are obedient to the civil laws; so we
live in God, when we live according to his law. And as he is dead ciuilly,
that by transgressing the laws of the realm, has cut off himself from the
common people: so we are spiritually dead, when sin has cut us off from God.

The Prophet Abacuk says chap. 2. 4. He that lifts up himself, his mind
is not right in him. Where the Prophet shows, that though a man for a time
swel, not having an upright heart, yet afterward he suddenly vanishes away,
as a bubble of water: for as a bladder with the wind is soon drawn out; so
the ungodly with conceit of his reason seems to be puffed up, but all is but
inconstancy.

The just man says the Prophet shall live by faith, not by works (as some
would dream) for all the shift of them that will be righteous in themselves,
will be as a bubble of water; but the just man believing the forgiveness of
sin, looking for everlasting life, staying himself on the promises and
providence of God, has true soundness in him. He shall live, says the
Prophet, noting perpetuity of time. So the man of God his meaning is, I shall
live. i. perpetually and for ever. We see then the great mercy of God, that
comes by the knowledge of the Word, in that we find how he delivers us
from wrath, and takes us into his favor: he rescueth us from sin, and
clotheth us with righteousness: he takes from us death, and restores to us
life. But mark who speaks these words; does this man of God attain to such
an heroical spirit, as to cry, grant me understanding? and shall we think
ourselves sufficiently rich, well sighted, and that we are so well clothed,
that we need no such prayer? We are like the Laodiceans, who hearing the word
were neither hot nor cold: Seeing then we are rather Laodiceans, than David's;
we must cry, Lord give us understanding, that we may live.

Then let us learn by other men's harms, which is a princely and heroical
kind of teaching. For as Princes children are taught themselves in their own
persons, but are not beaten, seeing rather others beaten before them: so the
Lord preaches to our persons, but punishes other persons round about us,
sparing us, that we by their sins and stripes may learn to amend and to
repent in prayer.

There is a winter after harvest, after heat cold, and it is usual with the
Lord to tempe^ his blessings most sweet, with some crossings most sower.
Wherefore let us pray with our Prophet for the understanding of God his word,
not only to be bettered in our minds, but also reformed in our lives. Then no
devil, no hell, no plague, no pestilence, shall hurt us; yea those troublesome
trials, which unto others are testimonies of God his wrath; shall be unto us
seals of his love* which although the world cannot discern, yet by faith we
shall both find it and feel it.

PORTION. 19. COPH.
Verse* 145. I have cried with mine whole heart: hear me, O Lord, and I will
keep thy statutes Verse. 146. I called upon thee: save me, and I will keep
thy testimonies.
IN the last verse of the former part he set down the righteousness of GODS
law, he prayed therefore that he might have understanding and live; and
therefore they that are ignorant have no life in them, because life is only
revealed in the word. Sinners then having not received the word, are dead: for
the life of sin is the death of man. And our first father was dead when he
had sinned, and they who lived in pleasure, and all other sinners are dead;
though they for a while prolong their life on earth, yet at death the soul
goes to hell, and waits there for the body: and this cuise waits on all,
Cursed are all that continue not in all things, etc. and after Gods great
suffering they shall be cut off.

He knew that the beginning of this life was in the word, and he also knew
that the continuance of it, was in the word, by the grace of God; and therefore
he labored to have it increased by the word, because he was convinced by his
infirmity that he might lose it, as Adam did: and therefore he seeks to
finish the course of his salvation with fear.

If David whose zeal had consumed him did yet in this sort pray, how much more
ought we, which for every light trouble are discouraged in our duty.

He prays for the understanding of the word, because the devil will be ready
to allure us from the word, if we be inclined thereto: as he dealt with Christ,
when he laid our scripture against it. And yet he likes not of those that
rest in the literal sense, but he craves the spirit to teach him according
to the word: for the spirit quickens, and flesh and blood does not reveal
these things; and all that are of God, must be taught of God, Isa. 54 yet
always agreeable to the word.

Now in this part he prays that he may have understanding and ease from his
trouble: this request he groundeth on these reasons: first, of his earnestnes,
in the four first verses: secondly, in respect of his enemies, in the sixth
verse: and thirdly, in respect of Gods mercies, in the fifth, seventh and eight
verses.

In the four first verses he sets down his earnest desire and zeal that
he had, and he prays that he may have a good conscience, in the first verse;
and faith in the promises, in the second verse: teaching that these two were all the comfort that he had in trouble, when he suffered for well-doing, and had
his sins forgiven, and had the favor of God.

Then if we will stand in trouble, let us labor to be grounded on the promises
of forgiveness of sins, of a new life, of his fatherly providence; and let
this purge us from sin: and if we can do this, then nothing shall separate us
from God, as Paul says Romans 8. and again he says, there is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ, for they have his spirit to purge them from sin,
and to strengthen their faith.

The want of these causes men to step back, and the weakness of our faith and
the carelesnes of these causes such fear in Gods children, and such
shrinking: for the devil lays their sins to their charge, which they see
not discharged, and their faith is weak, and therefore they are diuing up and
down. And surely trouble must come to all, for so it is ordained, though to
some less than others: and therefore when it comes, we are faint, if we have
not been careful to keep a good conscience, and to strengthen our faith. But
if we have done thus, then shall death be pleasant unto us, for we shall be
blessed, Apoc. 12. and our works shall follow us, that is, our faith and the
fruits of our faith.

Again if we suffer for our sins etc. then we want faith and a good
conscience, and therefore we murmur and cry out, yea and go to witches and
wisards. Yea Gods children, though they come not to this gross sinning, yet
they inwardly grudge, and they have secret murmurings, because they have failed
in strengthening their faith, and keeping a good conscience: but the children
of God that make Christ all in all, they say the Lord gives, and the Lord
takes, this is the patience of Gods children. And Job did not fail, till his
faith failed: and though his three learned adversaries reasoned against him to
prove him an hypocrite, yet his conscience sustained him, and therefore
reckons up his virtues, chapter 28. and 31. And he also confessed his faith,
I know that my Redeemer lives: this was his faith, and this was his conscience
that in his trouble sustained him.

These things have no less fruit in prosperity; for the want of them cause
men to lift up themselves on high, but the word represseth pride, lust, and
love of worldly things; so that they are ^^u^^le in prosperity: for the
worldlings seek after the things of this world, because they never felt the
peace of conscience; they seek their own glory, because they never felt what
the glory of God was, and never seek knowledge; because they know not what the
soul is. Yea the children of God, because they labor not continually to keep
a good conscience, and to strengthen their faith, they are carried away with
the love of earthly things, after the example of the wicked: for prosperity is
as a flood which carries all things with it, and as well good as bad; and
therefore they are often carried away with the love of these outward things.

But the children of God which do diligently labor after these things, they
behave themselves so, as that God may be glorified by their prosperity and
adversity: for in prosperity they chiefly set by the forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting life, and if these be once sure then for other things if they have
them, they take them as overplus of his favor, and confess that wisdom is
good with an inheritance: yet if these things come not, the fear of God and
his word is never the less acceptable, and can be content ^o say with Jacob,
if I may have meat and drink and cloth, then will I be content, as Paul
commands. And if they have abundance, then they are in the house of mourning,
knowing that those things may be taken away, Eccles. 7. And thus we see Job
walked war^ly even in the midst of prosperity. Though men know this, yet
because they do not practice it, therefore it ought to be often repeated, and
this shall take excuse from the wicked, and it is safe for the children of God.

In the four first verses are generally set down his care and zeal: first,
his zeal and feruencie: secondly, his truth without hypocrisy: thirdly that
he desired nothing, but agreeing to Gods will, that he might keep Gods
commandments: fourthly, his perseverance: fifthly, his faith, his patience,
and hope: sixthly, the means to confirm his faith: seventhly, the meditation
of Gods judgments to confirm his faith.

He devoured not his griefs, nor nourished his unbelief, but sought the
remedy thereof by the promises of God. And this often comes to pass that men
have wants, and yet bite on the bridle, and therefore they obtain not, because
they have not faith to pray, I am. 1. as the Israelites did long bite on the
bridle, and at last cried and were helped: therefore it is a great grace, when
we can make our wants known by prayer.

These properties of prayer are necessary, for certain Heretics, which
reason, either God will give, or not give; and if he will, we need not ask; if
he will not, it is vain to ask. But we might answer, that then the prayers
of Gods children in the Scriptures, and the precepts of prayer are not in
vain. Again, the promises of God were in vain, which are made to our
prayers: or else they might be fed without bread, and do other things without
means. But God has appointed us to pray, that he might try our obedience,
and that he might give his blessing to us: so that we must use that, if we will
attain his mercy.

His feruencie is noted by crying, which noted the earnestnes of the affection,
not the loudnes of the voice. The voice is loud when it comes to God, as
Anna and Samuel are said to cry, and yet they speak not: so the blood of
Habel cried Paul Romans 8 teaches what this crying is, namely, the earnest
desire of the heart, which is the prayer in the spirit: Ephesians. 6. and 1. These.
1. he prays for the spirit, as the most secret part of their heart, as Mary:
My soul rejoiced, and my spirit etc. And thus it ought to be, because God is a
spirit. James in the last chapter notes it by feruentnes, which is commended
Romans 12. then we must labor that our most secret parts may be occupied, when
we pray to God. Then he rebukes coldness of prayer: for all men do know that
God in the giver of all things, and therefore all pray, yea Heretics and
wordly men will pray, yet many prayers are customarie and of fashion.

This zeal may be come to, if we crave of God the feeling of our wants; as the
want of meat causes the stomach to desire meat; and hereof comes
feruencie (Romans 8.) and our wants must be considered in respect of our selves,
or of others: and not only in affliction, but also in prosperity, whose
baits have caused Gods children to take as great wounds at Satan, as ever
they did in adversity. And prosperity will make a man careless and proud, and
vaineglorious; as adversity does make a man despair; and a man is in as great
danger in prosperity, as in adversity. Therefore we have as great need to
complain in prosperity, as in adversity. And therefore though some of great
judgment have thought, that O Lord have mercy on us, and make ^^ste to help
us, and such like prayers, being made in the adversity of the church, ought not
to be used now in this prosperity. Yet I dare not discredit the judgment of the
ancient in this respect, seeing that it may at all times be made with profit,
if there be understanding; for there is ever need to make this prayer, ^od
therefore it may with profit be made.

Our wants must be considered either in our selves, or in others: and in our
selves, either in respect of faults in us, or of good things which we want: and
in others, either in respect of the whole state, or of some particular persons.
And for our sins we have ever great need to pray, and the great barrennes
of good things ought to force us unto prayer. And the great wants which we see
in our selves, as the emptines of good things: and again, the great danger of
the temptation of the flesh, the world and the devil. And therefore when
Christ had taught his Disciples to pray for the forgiveness of sins, in the
next words he bids them pray for the deliverance from temptation. Now our
Creed teaches us to believe that our sins are forgiven us; and we have
need to pray, Lead us not into temptation: therefore even after we believe
the forgiveness of sins, we may be tempted to evil: and so Peter, so soon
as he had confessed CHRIST to be the son of God, was tempted to dehort his
Master from suffering; yea, to deny him, as he did indeed. And therefore
whilst they have not looked to this, the children of God, when they have most
flourished, have foulie fallen: as Noah, when he had bin delivered from the
flood by the Arc, yet fell into drunkenness. So Adam, Lot, Peter, and others.
Therefore these manifold infirmities of our souls ought to move us to pray.
And as the soul has in it the root of all sin, so the body has in it the
root of all diseases: and therefore to pray against sudden death, which has
sometime reigned in the Church, though now we be free from it, and manifold
diseases, which now we are subject to; these things seeing they are in our
selves* therefore in respect of our selves we have need to pray.

Again, the manifold necessities and wants of the Church both in spiritual
and temporal graces, the wants of our wives, whom we have received of God, so
we must yield to God again: also the wants of our children, and such like,
ought to move us continually to pray. But those covetous men which live and die
to themselves, shall once see what need they had to pray, and feel the want of
their prayers.

Again, if we had no need at all to pray, yet where is our zeal to Gods
glory? how should we be moved, when we see God dishonored by the wicked lives
of many, and also by the heresies which do greatly flourish?

Also the dullness of our wit, and weakness of memory, and other gifts of
the mind, which are often greatly weakened, and often taken away: these ought
to move us to pray that they may be continued with us.

Also in prosperity, for then the devil does move us to presume, as he
moves to despair in adversity: and he prevails by accusation of sin in
adversity, against none, but those which have presumed in prosperity.

Again, in our goods, the danger of fire, thieves, etc: that we are in. And
if we think that we can by wisdom be wary, then we deceive our selves:
for the most wa^ie have been deceived.

Also in our iourneyes, the danger that we are in: likewise in our names, we
have great cause to be careful: for that an ill name commonly follows the
profession of the Gospel: and therefore in the Psalmist they often pray
against false tongues, especially that God may be glorified by their good names.

Also the want of wives, children, servants, and every man in that calling
wherein he is, as the Minister in his calling, as Paul: who is sorry and I am
not sorry? and the Magistrates in their circuites, when either they are
sluggish themselves, or for want of laws, cannot do what they would.

Also the untowardness of our kindred, whereby we are often discredited.

Likewise, when we have enemies, we have need to pray that we be not
circumuented by them, and also we must pray for them.

Then in the Church we shall see such scarcenes of Preachers, such a company of
Heretics, and other wants, as if the communion of Saints be dear to us, must
needs move us to pray.

The Commonwealth also, being subject to privy conspiracy, and for rain war
whereby it might be overthrown: these, if men be lovers of their country,
will teach them what need they have to pray.

Then if we see these wants, we must pray that God will touch us with the
feeling of them, and also that he would make us thankful for turning so many
judgments from us, and so many mercies to us.

With my whole heart. That is, without hypocrisy he laid it out before the
Lord, that he might receive help from him. And this the Lord requires in our
prayers. For though many do pray and yell, yet because they pray with great
corruption, and have not powered out their heart, therefore they have not been
heard. The heart of man is most unsearchable, and no man can find it out, but
the Lord discloseth it. And therefore neither we, nor others can see it, Ierem.
^7. 9.

This may appear by those that immediately upon the fact, or when punishment is
upon them, will be sorry: but a little after, when the shame and punishment is
past, then are they no more touched with it. So when we are sick, when we
are in danger of any loss, we seem to pray with our whole hearts: yet after
we remember not our vows, which shows that we examined not our hearts.

As the Lord does search the heart, so does his word: for all things are open
to it, and it reuealeth the secret corners and hypocrisy of our hearts, if we
will apply it to us, and not think that the word is spoken to others. As we
cannot see our face but in a glass: so we cannot see our hearts without the
word. And if in the word we will see our hearts, then must we bring them to
the presence of God: for he hates hypocrisy, and will be worshipped in truth,
and therefore we must be true Israelites. For, seeing that we have to do with
God, we must come in fear and truth: for the Angels cover their faces, Esaias 6
and Gods people even when they had joyful messages yet feared, and said they
should dye; because they had seen the Lord; as we see in Daniel, Z^charie,
Mary, etc. at the presence of an Angel, much more of God. A natural subject
fears when he sees his Prince, especially when he has made a fault: so we
if we bring our selves to Gods presence, we shall be greatly humbled; as the
man of God does Psalm. 139. which is most notable for this purpose. And this
counsel gives David to his enemies, Psalm. 4 Tremble and sin not. And 1.
Cor. 5. Paul approoueth himself to God in all things, because all must appear
before God. And Act. 23. he believes that the Lord will come to judge the
quick and dead* and therefore he labors to keep a good conscience. And
surely if we could do this, to set God before us in all our thoughts, words,
and deeds, with fear, as he is a glorious God; and with love, as he is our
God in Christ: we should fly from sin, because if we should sin, it
would be revealed unto us, and we should also be in some measure prepared to
perform the good, and avoid ill.

When he prays that he may keep Gods statutes, he shows that he desires
nothing but that which is agreeable to Gods will. So must we in our prayers
first desire the things that are for the glory of God, and those things that
are good for us; according to his good pleasure, whether it be to receive
mercy, or to have punishment turned from us.

This is the cause why we obtain not, because we ask amiss. Iam. 4. Many
ask things not agreeable to Gods will, and yet have them; as heretics,
idolaters, witches, thieves, etc. yet they obtain not these things in mercy,
but to their further condemnation; which he grants to his children for their
good. Thus he gave quails to the Israelites, yet he sent leannes to their
souls, which turned to their destruction. And thus have heretics, etc. their
evil requests granted. This is the greatest sign of Gods wrath, when by
these things he prepares them to their just destruction. This then is no
argument that we should ask things contrary to his will. As their faith is
evil, so they have according to their faith.

Verse. 147 and 148. I prevented the morning Light and cried, etc. Mine eyes
prevent the night-watches, etc.
We may note his great diligence in resorting often to prayer, and his sundry
times frequenting of it. In which diligence, for our instruction, let us
observe three things. First, often asking. Secondly, Wisdom in this often
asking. Thirdly, cheerefulnes in asking. Good notes for prayer.


First, we know, they that are diligent in prayer, will ask often, and can
hardly satisfy themselves in their desires, as we may note in the Prophet, by
these former and such like speeches: where we must learn thus much. We must
not be content to use one sigh, or one groan, and away, or a few words, and
then think we have prayed well, but we must be importunate with God. 1.
Importunate in prayer with God. Luke 1^. 1. 2


That this holy importunity is to be used, we may see by our Savior Christ's
words, Luk: 21. verse. 36. Watch and pray continually* and by the Apostles
exhortation. 1 Thessalonians. 5* Pray continually; in which places the holy Ghost
commends assiduitie in prayer. Wherefore God often denies us our requests,
because we use not to pursue and prosecute them with seruent prayer. For if we
have prayed twice or thrice for one thing* and yet are not heard, but receive
as it were the repulse, we straitway surcease, and leave off our prayers:
contrary to the practice of this man of God; who would not suffer any repulse,
but still continued his prayer both morning and evening. So that we are to
know, that if we will obtain mercy, God will sometime defer his grant to
try us, whether we ask carefully or no, Wherefore God delays to grant our
requests.
whether we truly and reverently esteem of the thing prayed for, whether we
believe thoroughly his mercies and promises, and whether we will as thankefully
use it, when we have it, as we did carefully pray for it, before we had it.

The Lord cannot away with our cold asking, and when we give but one sigh, and
there comes sometime one tear, which is as the tear of an harlot; he sees
that we feel not our wants thoroughly; we esteem not of his mercies
reverently; we make not our request earnestly; and therefore he sends us
often as empty away as we came.

We must then give the Lord no leisure to be free, but prosecute our prayers
with importunity, as did the Widow mentioned in the Gospel.

But we must remember in our often prayer, to use the wisdom of the spirit,
which was 2. Wisdom of he spirit in prayer.
the second thing observed in diligent prayer.

For some use prayer often, who wanting heavenly discretion, turn it to their
own discommoditie. For some have perverted most wickedly these places before
alleged, through too strict a consideration of the assiduitie of prayer, and
thought that they might give over all their callings in an active and cruil
life, and wholly and continually bestow all time on prayer. But this was too
preposterous a diligence, which that we may avoid, it Our times for prayer.
shall be true wisdom, so to divide the times and seasons, as we may impart
those times on prayer, which most may make for Gods glory, and which best make
for our calling. And for those places of our Savior Christ and the Apostle,
wherein we are commanded to pray continually: the meaning is, that we should
always be ready and affected to pray, in prosperity and adversity, and at
all seasons fit for prayer, that is, when the Lord does call us to it, and our
estate does require it.

This doctrine is easy to be heard, but hard to be practiced. Well; then this
is true wisdom Sabbath.
to choose the Sabbath wholly to be spent in the word and prayer from morning to
night: and so to divide the seasons in the other days of the week, as with
David and Daniel* we may pray at morning, noontide, and evening, and that
therewith we have a special care to bestow the rest of our time in walking in
our calling. For as there is a time of hearing, so there is a time of putting
that in use which we have heard: as there is a Sabbath for Gods own worship;
so there is six days for us to labor in: and as there is a time of praying;
so there is also a time of practicing. Neither would the Lord have us always
reading, hearing, or praying; but after we have read, heard, and prayed, to
show forth the fri^^ of them in our conversation to his glory. And as
heretics in the primitive Church, and since that time Monks and Friars have
labored to teach a continual praying; so even at this day Satan bewitched
the hearts of many with that persuasion; wherefore we must know, that the
Lord will have obedience, rather than sacrifice, and mercy more than burnt
offerings. For why do we hear, but to learn obedience? and why do we pray,
but to put Luke 10. 41. 42
our prayer in practice? or why have we knowledge, but to use it to Gods
glory? Neither does that saying of our Savior Christ to Martha vithstand this
doctrine, although many heretics have both objected and perverted this place,
to make it serve their purpose; who falsely allege the place, saying, Mary
has chosen the better part; whereas the true words are, Mary has chosen the
good part: in which place Martha was not reproved in that she was a good
huswife, or for that she entertained Christ; but for overmuch laboring in her
huswiferie and entertainment, at such time as she should have been better
occupied. Neither was Mary commended for that she did nothing but hear and
pray; but for her wisdom, in hearing Christ carefully at that time when he
preached; and in that she knew, that Christ did less care, and would be better
satisfied, though her p^ou^sion was more slender, than that to more solemn
preparation, they should neglect the doctrine, which was the foo^e of their
souls. Otherwise it must be supposed, that Mary was as careful an huswife as
Martha, for else undoubtedly our Savior Christ would not have so commended her
for wisely discerning the times, especially seeing the holy Scriptures count
them worse than infidels, which will not provide for their families.

But this doctrine is sweet to them that maintain it, that thereby they might
avoid all Callings.
laborious callings, and al crosses which commonly accompany the same. ^or it
is the subtle policy of Satan, when he cannot get us to neglect prayer, to
endeavor to bring us preposterously to use and frequent prayer, by causing us
to lay aside our callings; which according to Gods holy ordinance we had
professed: wherefore let us labor in this wisdom of the spirit wholly to take
up the Sabbath to the Lord, and so d^u^^e our other times, as we may still
persevere in our callings, which if we do, we shall have better motions, and
not incur so dangerous opinions as we should do, if we gave our selves to
continual reading and praying. But shall we speak of this doctrine in this
our age, which rather needs Diligence in hearing and prayer.
a spur than a bridle? wherein many pray but obtain not, because they are
not diligent: many hear but are fruitless, because they use no diligence. For
besides that they want this wisdom of the Sabbath, that that is appointed for
the growing of their souls, is spent in worldly cares. These kind of men have
their souls very barren, who neither use the Sabbath, nor redeem other times
of their callings, to bestow any thing in hearing or praying: or if happily
they do hear, they rather make it a matter to ^arpe at, than to be instructed
by it. These men as they will hear no true things, so they will hear false;
and though they will mark no good things, yet they will mark ill things: not
that there is any thing false or ill in the word; but in that as to an humble
spirited man the Lord makes the word the savor of life unto life: so unto
them that are ill minded, the Lord makes it the savor of death unto death,
and gives them over in the pride of their hearts unto Satan, that he may
delude them; by deceivable colors For many will be ready in hearing to
snatch at this and that, if any thing may make to cloak their licentiousnes;
who as they have itching ears, and greedy minds to hunt after evil: so by
the just judgment of God, they fall into the misunderstanding of the word. And
to speak the truth, do we think that the devil like a roaring Lion
co^passeth us about, the flesh daily rebelleth against the spirit, the world
continuilly sighteth against us, are we truly conscious of that ignorance
which ouerwhelmeth us, and gu^^tie of those manifold temptations which daily
overcome us, and shall we not think that there is great need to use the
means to withstand these, which is the word and prayer? Nay, Gods children
notwithstanding they use prayer fervently, and accustom themselves to the word
diligently, Note.
feel the devil so strong, the flesh so subtle, the world so deceivable,
that they think not the Sabbath sufficient; but redeem all time possible, to
bestow in the means to withstand their assaults. Besides, if we must needs
eat every day to preserve natural life, needs must we give our selves to the
word and prayer every day, to preserve that life which we Sabbath two Sermons.
have in Christ Jesus. Two sermons on the Sabbath are not sufficient for a man
to feed on all the week after, if he be well acquainted with his own wants,
if he truly consider of his dangers.

Our Savior Christ wills us, if we will obtain, to ask earnestly, if we will
find, to seek diligently, if we will enter, to knock continually.
Furthermore, this wisdom of the spirit must teach us to bestow that time in
Gods worship, which is most fit in respect of Gods glory, and our own estate:
wherefore the children of God will not omit the morning, as being the fittest
time for all good things.

Humane wisdom teaches, that in all things, wherein is any commendation and
excellency, the mornings (...) e^es.
the morning time especially is to be spent. The student for his study, the
world^ing for his devising counts this time again. Yea the drunkard, says
the Prophet rises early to be filled with wine. Wherefore if the word and
prayer be our chiefest pleasures; ^f the belly and the meat shall perish in
time, but the word will make our souls co^ti^^^^ for ever, seeing without it
our souls cannot live, and in respect of it all other things are ^^^ ^^ngbyes
and accessories: then true wisdom to attain to it, will make the best choice
of the morning. And if in things which are agreeable to nature, we serve
morning as an help to bring things to pass in, much more had we need to use
such helps in those things which are less agreeable to nature, above nature,
yea contrary to nature; as is prayer, and the spiritual understanding of the
word. Note.


Nature and experience teach us, that our memory is quickest, our senses are
readiest, our natural powers ablest in the morning for meditation, because our
mind is then free from ill, vain, and worldly thoughts; our memory is renewed
and has recovered far greater strength* our senses are not in^eigled with
any outward things; our natural powers being re^^^ed, have then their greatest
liberty. Wherefore seeing by nature we are not capable of the ^^^^; but it
goes with nature as against the dream or against the ^aire: now necessary is
it in the morning that the first thing to come to our eyes should be the temple
of the Lord* the first thing to our ears, his word, and to season our minds
with meditation of the same: so that we may walk with Eliah all the day
after, in the strength of those things, which out of the word of God we have
heard or read. And although no time is unfit for the word and prayer: yet now
we speak not simply what time is fit, but what time rather is most fit herein
to be used.

On the contrary, when we have been travailing in our worldly business* many
things have occupied our senses, and after much travail, we provoke our
appetite to receive ^e^^e; and after much l^bouring, and much eating ^o^ned
^^^^ ea^^^es, much dulnes ^^^^peth upon us, which hardly will admit us with any
good profit to hear the word of God. For even Gods children though they ^i^iue
by all means, that they become not oppressed with meat and drink; and yet
they feel after their ^epa^^, a natural ^ea^ines and dulnes, which makes
them less able and fit to receieue the word with readme and reverence. For to
the receiving of the word and prayer, two things especially are necessary:
Preparation and meditation.
that is, a prepared mind before we begin; and an examination, that meditation
with our selves after we have ended: else, if we come hand over head, as good
never a whit as never the better. True it is indeed, that as a man going
continually in the sun shall in time have a black hew: so in often hearing a man
may attain to some knowledge, but he shall never without this true preparation
and examination of his heart attain to the soundness of judgment Most
needful it is with prepared minds to come to the word and prayer; because
Preparation.
when we hear the word, the Lord comes down into the Church as it were
among us; and when we pray, we mount up as it were to heaven among the Angels:
wherefore w^ ^re not to come to so high a banquet with unwashed ^^nds* not to
draw near to the marriage, without our wedding garment; but we must take heed,
with what foot we enter into the house of the Lord, ^east happily we offer the
sacrifice of fo^^es. For foo^es think they have done well, when they have
given their bodily presence, when they have heard and prayed as others do,
never preparing their hearts, or examining their own wants. But we must
learn truly to search our selves, and according to our nec^ssities we must
The min^s^e^*
pray that the ^i^is^ers mouth may be opened, who i^ preaching is the mouth of
God speaking to us, and in praying is our mouth speaking to God for us.

And surely as for the hearty desire of the godly, even evil men have sometimes
their mouths opened to speak some good things; Even so for want of this
affection in the hearers, the good minister does not speak so plentifully and
fruitfully as were to be wished. Wherefore, stand thou in need to be
comforted? stand thou in need to be humbled? stand thou in need to be
exhorted? pray that thine heart may be prepared to conceive those things which
especially concern thine estate, and that thy pastor may open his mouth to thy
profit. For, for the prayers of the godly, the mouth of the ungodly shall utter
profitable things: Balaam shall bless for Isreal's sake, and the Lord will be
unto Balaams witchcrafe. Number* 23. 22. 23.
them as an Unicorns horn, against Balaams cursing: and Caiphas shall
prophecy good things of Christ. On the contrary, because the people are ill,
David shall number them, and the Lord shall make dry and barren the graces of
God in the minister, when the hearts of the hearers are not prepared. And as
this preparing of our selves is necessary; so also meditation, and applying
that to our selves which we have heard and prayed for, that we may see how the
word belongs to us, and what event our prayers have. For alas, what
Meditation.
precious seed is cast in the high ways side, because by meditation it is not
laid up, but the devil is suffered to come and steal it from us? To what end
is the word, if we hue not according to that which we have learned? If every
man shall enter thus into himself, O Lord, how many sermons have I heard, but
how little have I profited by them? how long have thy ministers preached? but
how slenderly have I practiced? then should he see what comfort he had in the
life of JESUS CHRIST, when so many pearls have been cast to swine, and such
holy things have been given to dogs. Likewise as needful is this examination
of our selves in prayer; if that, after I have prayed I have obtained, mine
heart may The morning: meditation.
be enlarged to thanksgiving: if I have not received, I may search the cause in
mine own conscience, and think, that the Lord would have me still to continue
my prayers unto him. Wherefore, seeing we must thus prepare our minds before,
and examine our hearts after, 1
and we are unapt to hear or pray, after we are refreshed, because our minds
are laden and 2
our bodies are heavy, it shall be good in the morning so soon as we awake, to
meditate of 3
GOD our Creator, to call to mind the glory of the Appearing of CHRIST, to
consider of the day of the Resurrection, and to muse of our rising to
Judgment. Thus doing, we shall see as in a present view, all the graces of
God set as it were before our eyes, and and many comfortable things of Gods
spirit coming to our minds. This we see was the practice of the man of God
in this place, I prevented (says he) the morning light. Note.


Again, if in the night, we will but give a good sigh when we awake,
although I mean not to take away all natural refection, we shall find great
comfort in it. Thus if we spend the morning in the word and prayer, we shall
so walk in the strength of those things 1. Cor. 7.
which we hear and pray for all the day long, as we shall use this World, as
though we used it not; we shall no further use our callings, then they be
helps to a better country: we shall have our direction out of the word, what
to do, and what to leave undone, we shall do all things the better to Gods
glory, and to the possessing of our souls continually in peace and patience.

If yet this doctrine be not sufficient to persuade us, the very Idolaters
will teach us it, who will rise early and break their sleeps to go to the
mass: when Aaron had yielded to the people for making of a calfe, it is said,
The people did rise early in the morning. If then Idolaters for their
superstitions can cut off their sleep that in the morning they might leave in
them the deeper impressions, why should we be slack to bestow this time in
the musing of the word, that we may feel the more effectual operation of it
all the day following? What shall I speak of that, Act. 2. That the holy
Ghost came down on the Apostles in the morning: as may be gathered by the
sermon of Peter, when as he tells them, that it was but the third hour of
the day. Where it may appear, that they before being occupied in prayer and
ministering of the Word, the holy Ghost came down upon them. Thus we see the
fittest time to receive the holy Ghost is in the morning. In every Ierem. 7.
13. Job. 8. 2. Matthew. 21. 18.
place almost of the Prophecyes it is said, the Lord stretched out his Arm
early by the Prophets, to teach us that this should be the aptest time, both
to deliver and to receive the word.

If then students, worldlings, Epicures, and idolaters have made their gain^ of
the morning; if the holy Ghost was then sent down, and the Prophets at that
time would* each: let us with the Prophet of God prevent the Morning light, and
take up the first p^rt of the day, in wisdom of the spirit to the Lords
behalf.

The third thing which we noted was cheerfulnes, whereby we should cherish,
fe^de, and The third point, cheerefulnes in prayer. Spirit of cheerfulnes a
singular grace.
support our diligence, without which we can do nothing diligently long, but
we must also do it painefully. Wherefore the man of God says, Psalm. 42. 4. I
went with the multitude, and led them into the house of God, with the voice of
singing and praise, as (...) keeps a feast. This spirit of cheerefulnes (oh
that it were in us) that we might say one to another when the bell tolleth, as
though the Lord calls us, come, let us go^ to* other ^o the house of God, let
us go cheerfully: for we go to a feast, we go to hear God speak unto us,
and to be partakers of the banquet of his word. Well, there is not any one sin
that will more sit upon the conscience of Gods children, then their negligence
in prayer, and want of cheerefulnes in hearing the word, which is the only
means to make us fruitful in good things, and to withdraw us from evil.

Thus to support diligence, we must use cheerfulness, without the which,
diligence languisheth, faints, and fails. Therefore the Prophet says,
Psalm. 95. Come, let us rejoice, let us sing aloud, let us come before his face
with praise, let us sing aloud unto ^am with Psalms. Neither must women here
shake off their duties, as though they were to excuse themselves from coming:
for in many places of the scriptures we read of the zeal of women, which
ouerpassed the zeal of many men. Luk 8. We read how certain women came and
followed our Savior Christ, and were healed of their infirmities. Mary is
commended for her wisdom, in choosing and discerning the times aright. M^^i^,
and Mary Magdalen are set down in the Gospel, for coming early to the
sepulcher of our Savior Christ, who first appeared unto them, because they
first sought him, Math. 28. we read also, Act. 16. that certain women came to
Philippj, to hear Paul and Timothy and that a certain woman named Lydia, a
seller of purple, attended to the things which Paul spoke, who therefore had
her heart opened before other men. Well, in love there is no lack, in
cheerfulnes Note.
there is no negligence, in good will there is no want. And surely, if we were
more cheerful in these things, we should see such good success, that we
should be grieved with our selves in that we used it not before.

The next thing we observe in prayer was Faith, for that we might thus be
diligent, it is The fourth property in prayer, is Faith.
needful we should believe, and be confident; for as we must be thrown down
with the feeling of our wants, so must we be raised up again, with faith in
the promises; because as need pulls us upon our knees, so Faith brings us to
true prayer, having a sure persuasion thereby, that we shall obtain. This
faith appears here in the man of God, saying, I waited on thy word, which he
did, because he believed, that the Lord would give unto him whatsoever he did
ask. Wherefore our Savior Christ often uses these speeches, Thy Faith has made
thee whole: according to thy faith, be it unto thee. James says, 5. 15. The
prayer of the faithful, shall save the si^ke. Romans 10. How shall they pray to
him in whom they have not beli^ued? I am, 1. 6. Let him that wants wisdom
ask in Faith, and waver not, for he that wandreth, is like a wave of the ^ea,
t^st of the wind and carried away. Neither let that man think he shall receive
any thing of the Lord. So that it is the sure persuasion of Gods mercy toward
us, that lifts us up hands and eyes, even as the feeling of our wants draws
out ^ig^es and groans. So that if we believe, that God feeds the young ravens
that call upon him, and gioeth food to the Lions, we must much more believe
that his ears are open to the prayers of his children, and his eyes are over
the righteous, which call upon him faithfully. Hitherto says CHRIST, have ye
asked nothing of my Father, ask now in my Name, and ye shall obtain. And the
Author to the Hebr. 4 16. exhorts us, saying, Let us go boldly to the Throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy. For nothing more grieueth the Lord than
incredulity, and they that will come to God must believe Gods promises, and
that they shall find him favorable to them. Howbeit, we must always remember
this, that all the pomises of GOD are in CHRIST, yea, and amen. 2. Cor. 2. For
never are the promises effectual without faith, and no Faith without believing
in God, through Jesus Christ.

Now that Faith may be the more strengthened, we must join there unto
patience. For Faith and patience.
that we may be faithful, it is needful to wait on Gods leisure, in tarying
by patience, to have our prayers granted, according to those promises, wherein
by Faith we believed. We see, the man of God his Faith was not here cut off at
the first brunt, as being discouraged or ready to break his faith, for he
says, I wai^e on thy word. Likewise he says, Psalm. 135. I have waited on the
Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his word 6. My soul waits
on the Lord, more then the morning watch watches for the morning. 7. Let
Israel wait on the Lord, etc. Behold, after he made mention of the mercy of
the Lord, he speaks three times of his patience in waiting on him; so that we
see this to be the property of Gods children, first undoubtedly to take hold
of his promises, and then to support their faith by patience, in waiting for
the accomplishment of his promises.

Wherefore it is said, Psalm. 147. 10. The Lord has no pleasure in the
strength of an horse, neither delights he in the legs of man. 11. But the
Lord delights in them that fear him, and attend upon his mercy, that is, on
them that tarry on Gods lessure for their succor. And when our Savior CHRIST
would have us persevere, he says, Apocal. vlt. I come quickly. Whereby, as
he would incite us to attend the more patiently upon his coming: So we must
know, that the cause why he yet comes not, is, because we are not yet
ready to receive him. To conclude, Hab^c: 2. I will stand upon my watch, and
set me upon the Tower, etc. says the Prophet; and the Lord answered him and
said, 2. Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run
that reads it. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the
last it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait, or it shall surely
come, and shall not stay. He will tarry long to the judgment of flesh and
blood, when he seems not to hear us, but he will come quickly; that is,
so soon as we are prepared.

They may see the fruit of this doctrine, which are most given unto prayer.
Now, we are not to prescribe the Lord his time in hearing our prayers, or
granting our requests, that we must tarri^ Gods appointed time, wherein we
shall see the mighty wonders of the Lord. That we may thus be patient and not
fainte, but be constant, we must feed our minds with the meditation of Gods
promises, whereby we have showed, the Prophet of God here supporteth himself,
neither is any thing more necessary then this For when to prove our patience
and try our Faith, there is often a great distance of time between the making
and obtaining of our requests, we must have the Word still recoursing in our
mind, until the promised time come. For want of which meditation, together
with the not observing the event of our prayers, and the want of musing, and
diligent examining our unbelief, we often fail in obtaining our requests,
and fainte in tarying of the Lords leisure.

We see what the man of God his meaning is, when he says, Mine eye prevented
the night watches; in that he declares, that they which watched were not so
diligent in their watching, as he was in tarying to see Gods promises
accomplished.

We see then, dow needful a thing it is, to meditate on Gods promises, at such
time, as our suit hangs still at the Throne of grace, without grant and
effect.

Verse: 149. Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness: O Lord, quicken
me according to thy custom.
THe last property which we are to observe, is, to be acquainted with the
dealings of GOD, either in recompencing his Saints, or revenging his enemies,
either in our selves observed, or in others. Whereof the Prophet makes mention
when he says, quicken me according to thy judgment: that is, according to
thy custom, or as thou art wont to deal with thy people in affliction, and as
thou have done before, both to me, and also to other of thy servants.

That this observation of the judgment of God has been at other times
practiced, we may see, Ps. 22. where, after the man of God had complain! of
his manifold extremities, and had rehearsed his grievous sorrows, wherewith he
was vexed, he recouereth himself, and grows in hope saying. 4 Our fathers
trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou ^^dd^st aeluer them. 5. They called
upon thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were not confoundded.
As if he should have said: Lord thou art w^nt to deal otherwise in time of
old with our forefathers, that feared thy name: wherefore seeing thou art now
the same God, I will not be out of hope, because I trust thou will deal
mercifully also with me. A judgment of mercy and of severity.


We have often showed, how judgment in this Psalm is taken either for the
accomplishment of Gods promises unto his children, or the executing of his
wrath on his enemies; so that there is a judgment of mercy, and there is a
judgment of severity; the first whereof is understood in this place, as we
may gather by the words going before, Hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy
loving kindness: of which covenant of mercy he also makes mention in the next
portion verse. 7. Consider, O Lord, how I love thy precepts, quicken me
according to thy loving kindness. This is that covenant of grace wherein the
Lord has promised to pardon our sins, and to hear our prayers; wherefore
though in respect of Gods wrath and our sins, we dare not appear before his
Majesty, yet in comparing our cause, which is the Lords cause, with the cause
of our adversaries, who are also the adversaries of God, and in respect of his
mercy in defending his own cause, and in preserving them that maintain a good
cause, we may come with boldness unto him, and with an assured hope that our
prayers shall be heard. Thus we may call to mind how God is accustomed to
deal with his people, fearing before him in respect of our selves, but
recovering our selves through hope in his sweet promises, whereon we must ^o
stay our selves, as the remembrance of them may support us: and to do this the
better, we must observe the accomplishment of them both in our selves, and in
others. Thus we may see what a great stay it is in trouble, to know that no
other trouble ouertaketh us, none other temptation has invaded us, than such
as have overtaken and invaded other of Gods children, and wherein they have
found deliverance.

Further, we may herein desire the Lord to afford sentence with us, when our
cause is good though we be not so upright in defending it, as we ought to be,
or when our good cause is well handled; and that not for our selves, but in
respect of our adversaries ill cause, he would deliver us. Wherefore when we
will obtain our requests, we must endeavor as much as in us lies, to offer a
good cause unto the Lord, and well handled.

Verse. 150. They draw near, that follow after malice, and are far from thy
law. Verse. 151. Thou art near, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.
WE showed before, that the man of God to the obtaining of his request uses
three especial arguments: the one drawn from his person in the first four
verses: the other from the person of God in the fifth verse: the third and last
from the person of his adversaries, contained in these two verses. The plain
sense whereof briefly is thus much: They, O Lord, that have an ill cause, are
ready to bring their wickedness to an end; and as they are ready to hurt me,
so they are far from thy law: will thou then maintain such? they being so
near my neck? No, they are no more near to hurt, than thou art near to
deliver me; they are not nearer with malice, than thou art with deliverance.
Thus he draws away his consideration from the judgment of flesh and blood,
and looks down to his watchtower, and to the Lord his sanctuary. O Lord,
says he, I have cried, I have called upon thee, and that with mine whole
heart; I prevented the morning light, and the night-watches; I waited on thy
word, I mediated on thy word; I have observed thy judgments of old: when I am
thus near, will thou forsake me? They are far from thy word, can thou
leave them unpunished? no, thou art near their punishment, and my deliverance.
I know as they depart from thee, so they shall not escape unpunished in the
end, because their sin is come to such ripenes, as thy justice can no longer
suffer them.

It is a great temptation to Gods children, which have walked uprightly and
kept a good conscience, that the wicked should still be near their necks.
Wherefore if any such thing hereafter happen to us, we must not be
discomforted, or think it very strange, seeing we see this man of God was not
without it: it is no new thing, we must be content seeing God has so dealt
aforetimes with many of his children. On what great cause of thanksgiving now
have we, that having much more deserved to have our enemies tramble upon us,
than others of Gods Saints, have notwithstanding so long time been delivered?
And if it come to pass that in time we come to the like temptation, let us
labor to be profitable in the like meditation. For flesh and blood think it
strange, that wicked me^ should flourish in the defending an ill cause, and
that good men should be trodden down for maintaining a good cause. This
troubled Job, David, Jeremy and Habacuk, to see that Gods people should be so
tempted. Wherefore when we see the generation of Gods children condemned, and
the generation of the wicked justified, we must call to mind this or such like
meditations: Seeing thou have borne with mine enemies so long, it is now the
day time to punish. The cause now why the wicked flourish so long, and why the
Lord deferreth to help his children is, that the wicked may either by his long
suffering come to repentance, or else be left excuselesse: Yea after he often
stays to power forth his vengeance, because Note.
their sins are not accomplished, and their iniquity is not come to the full
height, measure and number, and that his children might have their secret
sins punished here, that is, to humble them, to allure them to obedience, to
try their faith, to prove their patience, to work in them a contempt of this
world, and a desire of the world to come: so that that which they suffer
unjustly of men, justly they suffer of God. And when Gods children do not thus
profit, the Lord in mercy will let the rod still tarry upon them, until they
have profited in some good measure.

Thus we see the justice of God will not suffer him to punish, until sin be
come to the full, and the love of God will not leave to correct his, until
there grow some profit; and yet so, as in the mean time the chilren of God
sustain no loss, because whatsoever they outwardly lose, they inwardly gain.
Wherefore seeing the Lord has promised,) that the rod of the wicked shall not
fall on the lot of the righteous: and that our temptation shall not be greater
than we shall be able to bear; we must know, that when the godly once begin
to faint, and the wicked think they are come to their height, even then it is
due time with the Lord to send happy deliverance to the one, and a speedy
overthrow of all the coun^^ls of the other.

The man of God then having these effects in him, was near his deliverance:
but the wicked being in their pride were near Gods vengeance. How necessary
this doctrine is, common practice may admonish us: for thus reasons flesh and
blood in time of adversity: We have thus long kept a good conscience, neither
have we done against the will of God; we have served the Lord this while, yet
this is our gain, our cause is not heard, our enemies cruelty is nothing
diminished, but much increased, as though the Lord either heard us not, or has
forgotten us. But let us learn to reason with the Prophet on the contrary:
Our enemies, O Lord, are near to hurt us: but thou art as near to deliver us:
what do we but obey thee? what do they but disobey thee? will thou then
forsake the godly: and can thou suffer the wicked to prosper? No, thou art
the Judge of the whole world, it cannot be, for thy deliverance and salvation
is ready and near for them, who labor to keep faith, and to join thereunto
a good conscience. We see then when flesh and blood would persuade us, that all
time of deliverance is past, even then faith beholds it to be near at hand:
for when we think that we are at the last cast, then we see salvation and
help is nearest.

As this doctrine serves for our comfort, so we must learn for our
instruction, that if happily we suffer the longer, yet we shall receive for our
temporal evil, a spiritual recompense; remembering always the Apostles
consolation, 1. Pet. 4. who would not have us discouraged when we suffer: for
they which have done us evil, shall be judged of him, who will come to judge
the quick and the dead.

Although we see not this by the judgment of the eye, and by the light of
nature, yet although we should die, suffering as weldoers, cursed are they,
that shall ouerlie us: Blessed shall we be, for we shall rest from our labors.
God is the judge of the whole world, of the quick and of the dead: he will not
forsake his, nor leave his enemies unrevenged.

Well, although we persuade our selves of this truth, yet it is to be
feared, when the abomination of desolation shall be set up, we will
notwithstanding all this, stand in a mammering and doubting, what is truth,
what is untruth; what is good, what is evil. But alas, if Note.
the Lord should be any thing the longer from us in helping, no marvel seeing
we were the longer from him in obeying. Experience will prove, that though we
have never so many outward gifts, never so glorious wisdom, yet unless we
still depend on the word and promise, we shall stagger and falter in the time
of temptation. For this was the only staff that vpheld the man of God, at
what time he was ready to stagger.

They are far from thy Law: that is, as if he should have said; Thou can
not O Lord, but punish them, for thou have long suffered them, to see, if they
will turn; but there is no hope that they will convert: therefore there is no
cause of despair, that thou will not punish them. Oh true faith! O sound
persuasion of Gods mercy most needful in trouble! yea, when the face of all
things shall be changed, and things shall be turned vpside down, we shall know
the use of this doctrine to be above gold and silver. The like were the man of
God his Meditations, as we may see Portion 11. when his eyes failed him, his
heart fainted, his spirit panted, and was as the bottle in the smoke; The proud
says he, dug pi^s for me, which is not after thy Law, all thy
commandments are true, they persecute me falsely. Thus we see he uses two
effectual reasons, the one drawn from his own person, who maintained a good
cause: the other from his adversaries, who defended an ill cause.

Verse. 152. I have known long since, by thy testimonies, that thou have
established them for ever.
I Know O Lord, not of late, but long since, that thou ever have been, and art
the self same God, thou art no changeling, thou do not sometime maintain
the cause of thy children, and some other time forsake them. I know now by the
covenant and records of thy love, that thou do defend thine even unto the
end: I know that from the beginning thou have hated and punished sin, thou
have loved and maintained righteous dealing; I am persuaded that thy judgments
prove not true once or twice alone, but always. We see how needful it is to
us, for us to have knowledge thoroughly of the testimonies of the Lord. For this
was an assured knowledge of the man of God. I have labored (says the Prophet)
in effect, to establish my knowledge; whereby I may know, that hereafter,
which I know now; and that I must know that now, which I must know hereafter:
yea, I have taken great pains to confirm this knowledge in me, not of late
but of long time.

Thus we see how the man of God labors to fetch out many arguments to
strengthen himself in time of temptation; wherein we also must imitate him:
For if we shall store up great plenty of reasons, our enemies may push at us
and shake us, but they shall never overthrow us.

PORTION. 21. RESH.
Verse. 153. Behold mine afflictions and deliver me, for I have not forgotten
thy Law.
THe self same argument and matter is here repeated, which was before, but
after another manner. He says portion 16. 1. I have executed judgment and
justice, leave me not to mine oppressors. The which in sense being all one
with the other, and seeing we have delivered the doctrine at large before, here
is not much to be spoken. Only we may observe this, he here lays his misery
open, and unfolds his estate before the Lord: Behold (says he) O Lord, thine
eyes are upon the righteous, thine ears are open to their Note.
prayers. Thou see my case, let me s^e thy grace, that I may know for a
truth, that thou look on me. The cause then, why we oftentimes are not
helped, is, because we hide our troubles from the Lord.

True it is, that the Lord sees all, although we should hide all; neither
needs he the displaying of our own miseries, but yet in all troubles he
would have us to open and acknowledge our grief unto him, that he might the
better make known to us, that he has help laid up for us.

Wherefore we must beware, least at any time we smoother our estate, or seek
unlawful means, but in all things with prayer and supplication make our
necessity known to the Lord. His reason joined herewith is this: For I have
not forgotten thy Law: that is, although O Lord: there is great want of
obedience in me, and I cannot, and have not exactly kept thy commandments; yet
I am none of them that contemn thy Law; wherefore O Lord help me. Thus we see
still that the man of God suffered as a weldoer, teaching us, that if we suffer
as ill-doers, the rod of correction shall not depart from us, until in some
measure it has wrought in us repentance: but if we suffer with him as
wel-doers, we may boldly use this argument, and with this reason desire the
Lord, that he would take his own cause which we maintain, into his own hand.
And although he was a sinner, which here he does not deny, and did forget many
particular points of the Law; yet he purposes rather to show, how he was no
notorious sinner, or such a one as did foully and gr^ssely forget the Law. So
his meaning is thus much in effect; Although I have offended, yet have I not
cast thy Law behind my back; I find and confess, how of frailty and
infirmity I have offended, ^^^ not maliciously and obstinately.

Wherefore although we cannot be free from all sins, yet we must beware of
presumptuous ^^ ^^* and although we are weak, yet we must not willingly and
wittingly depart from the law. What then is the cause, why often it is so long
ere we be delivered? even because we Secret sins.
lie in some secret sin. For we must plead our cause in a right plea, if we
will plead with God; if we suffer as wel-doers, we may pray to the Lord for
defense: but if we suffer as euill-doers, we must labor to repent. Wherefore
in all discredit, reproaches and ignominies, we must labor to say in the truth
of our hearts: I have not forgotten thy Law.

Verse. 154. Plead my cause and deliver me, quicken me according to thy word.
THis agrees also in the second place with the second verse of the 16 Port*
whereof we spoke before, Answer for thy servant in that which is good. The
children of this world are wiser in their kind, than the children of God, and
the man of God had such enemies, as in subtilties were wiser, in force
stronger, and more valiant than he; which made him enforce his prayer to the
Lord, that he would be his tower against their assaults, and his advocate
against all their policies.

Thus we see he trusts not to the equity of his own cause, but to the Lord:
whereby we may gather, that the cause why our oppressors prevail often against
us, is, because we trust too much in our own wits, and lean too far upon
our own inventions, opposing Note.
subtlety to subtlety, one evil device to another, matching and maintaining
policy by policy, and not commit our cause to the Lord. Wherefore in such a
case, we are to pray to the Lord, to put wisdom into our mouths, that we
may be taught what to speak, and strength into our hands, that we may know
how to fight.

Quicken me according to thy word: whether the Prophet desires to be quickened
corporally or spiritually: whether for that he was ready to be swallowed up
of his adversaries, or for that he needed some inward comfort, or whether it
were for both, it is not greatly material; but I think we may safely take it
in both senses. For if he were quickened in the spirit, he knew that the other
comfort would follow after: So that if we understand it spiritually, he prays
that by faith and quickening grace, he might be encouraged to go on forward,
and that he might no more faint hereafter than he had done heretofore. Without
which grace supporting and renewing him he was like to quail under the burden.
Thus we see Gods children are often at deaths door in body and soul, and
therefore had need to pray to be quickened.

In that he adds, according to thy word: he gives us to wit, that all our
help is in the word of God, and that all our helps which proceed not from
the word and promise of God in the end become vain. Although this doctrine
seems at the first to be a common thing, yet the only cause why we so often
faint under the cross, is, because we forget Gods promises, or el^e we cannot
believe that the truth of them particularly belongs unto us. And this is that
that makes the very children of God, so often to stagger, the want whereof is
great. Suppose ye says our Savior Christ, that the Son of man when he
comm^th shall find faith on the earth? whereby he notes what an hard thing it
is, to have true faith, which so is fixed in God, as nevertheless there is no
faith, but in his word.

Verse. 155. Salvation it far from the wicked* because they seek not thy
statutes.
HE said in the portion going before, they are far from thy law: here he
says, they seek* not thy statutes: in which words he expresses his meaning
more plainly. In the former place he says, they were far from the law; here
he confesses they sought it not at all. His meaning of this verse is thus
much: I see their manners are wicked, I know they cannot prosper in them, for
thou art the judge of the world, therefore they have no interest to salvation.
And why? there is no coherence between wickedness and salvation. If we were in
truth persuaded of this, we would not so ly in sin. For if we did surely
believe that salvation pertains to none, but to them that keep a true faith,
and therewith labor to join a good conscience, how durst we be so bold
Idolaters, so profane swearers, so vnreuerent breakers of the Sabbath? If
blasphemous mouths were thoroughly persuaded of this, would they not tremble
and quake, that now mock and scoff at the ministry, and ministers of the
word? we see then how p^arcing words these are. They that depart from God, by
going to wisards, they that go far from his word by changing his holy
Sabbath, which is as a day of medicine for the soul, into an hurtful day, the
Lord will also depart from them, the Lord will be far from their salvation.
All sins wherein men lie and continue, put them far from salvation. But who
then shall be saved? even they that labor for faith and a good conscience. Who
then shall be damned? they that are far from faith, and seek not Gods law.

As this doctrine is to the terror of the wicked, so it makes for the comfort
of the godly. We see the ungodly prove very courageous, and thrive very notably
in their sin, not being presently punished, because such is our corruption,
that until we taste some outward smart, we become hardened. This declares, in
that we abstain from sin, only for punishments sake, and we would sin at
riot were there no punishing, that we are but Hypocrites, and such from whom
salvation is far off. Well if salvation be far from them, that seek not
Gods law; then may we gather on the contrary, that salvation is near them
that seek his law: for like is the rule of contraries. If we then labor for
faith and a good conscience, we may assure our selves of salvation. Wherefore,
would thou have assurance to be saved? let the word be near thee in thy
mouth, and in thine heart, Rom, 10. 8 Let it dwell plentifully in thee with all
manner of wisdom, Col. 3. 16. Here is also a good rule as we see, whereby we
may discern who be good, and who be evil. Here the Lord has set down one
steadfast order, which is a touchstone to try al men, and howsoever we account
of it, it is always the same, and like to it self, condemning sin,
commending holiness. Oh to what extremities should we be brought in these latter
days of sin and iniquity; wherein heresies have so corrupted doctrine, and
ungodliness has so stained our lives, if we had not this constant rule of Gods
word among us* Oh what a treasure is it whereby we may see heresy and avoid
it: whereby we may see truth and follow it. Which rule of equity, seeing
willingly the wicked depart from, they are worthily plunged and plagued in
their own sins.

Verse. 156. Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord, quicken me according to thy
judgments.
THat is: True it is, I am a sinner, O Lord, but yet I am not a desperate
sinner, as mine enemies are; but such a one, as on whom thou will show thy
mercies: therefore I hope, that thou will help. If thou should simply deal
with me according to my deseruings, I should be condemned: for who can stand in
thy sight justified: but I compare not my self with thee, but with them who
are become mine adversaries.

According to thy judgments. Such is thy fatherly mercy, which forgiueth my
sins, and hears my prayers, that thou will not reward me according to mine
iniquities, but wilt favorably look upon me, according to the multitude of
thy mercies.

Verse. 157. My persecutors and mine oppressors are many: yet do I not swarne
from thy testimonies.
THis sentence is the same in effect with diverse other in diverse portions of
this Psalm. As, The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: the proud have
dug pits for me: the wicked have laid a snare for me, and such like.

Now in that he says, my oppressors are many: he shows that he had not to
do with one man or two, but with many. It is a matter, as we have showed
before, to be godly among the godly. but he is a devil, that is evil among
Angels, and therefore was he worthily cast down into hell: and he is a sinner,
that will sin among Saints, and therefore justly was Adam thrown out of
Paradise. If we live among the godly, what praise is it to be godly? nay, what
an horrible thing were it not to be godly? If the Church discipline were truly
executed, it were a small commendation to do well, and to abstain from sin;
yet now in this want, it is praise-worthie to abstain from sin for fear of
God. But it may be we taste not of such troubles, as the Prophet tasted of,
because we live not so careful of godliness, as he did, which if in truth we
did, we should have troubles as he had. Well, we are in this world as sheep
among wolves, to try us, whether we will be corrupted with the evil examples
of this world, or whether we will swerve from the Lord our God, whilst he
proves us.

Their carnal reasoning comes to nothing, which say, the world is set on
evil, the world was never so wicked, charity was never so cold, a man cannot
now profess without taunts, scoffs, and troubles. For we see here, that the
Prophet, in his time, had many and great persecutors, whom notwithstanding so
manifold corruptions could nothing move. Wherefore we must learn, although
sometime we are slaundered, though sometime we are evil spoken of, taunted and
troubled, our estate is not worse than our forefathers has been, and the
beloved Saints of God have had before us. So long as we are well entreated of
God and man, we will keep the law: but when we suffer reproaches, taunts,
injuries, loss or discredit we then run either to evil means, or to
reuengement, or to despair. Where many injuries have been offered, many have
been rendered again: if they have not requited injury for injury with revenge,
they have used some ill means to escape out of their trouble: if they have not
used ill means, yet they have secretly begun to mistrust God his promises and
providence, and have gone to wisards and witches: if they could do nothing in
malice, they would do something in policy; if they could prevail with
neither, they would fall to despair.

But the Prophet of God uses here no unlawful means, he goes not in his
affliction Witchcraft.
to Sorcerers, he recompenceth not ill for ill, he did not despair in God
his promises, he did not think with himself, that the Lord would defend his
enemies cause, and forsake him; but hoped still in God, his good and appointed
time to receive help: wherein the man of God is set before us for our
imitation, in that neither his faith could be shaken, nor his obedience slaked
nor daunted. And surely this is Satan's last refuge, and most dangerous
assault to persuade us in affliction, that therefore the Lord does plunge us in
misery, because he has no love toward us. But the man of God opposing his
faith to all such temptations; says, I know, O Lord, by the records of thy
law, that thou have laid up help for me, and that thou art my defender. How
sweet and comfortable this is, they which are humbled, and well exercised by
temptations know. What greater assault used the devil to our Savior Christ,
than this: what says he, do thou think if thou werst Gods child, thou
should want bread: it is not like, if thou werst the son of God, that he
would or could suffer thee to be without food? Like are his temptations to us,
art thou, think thou the child of God? then thou should be helped, then
thou should not lie in this case. This was his last dart which he threw at
Christ on the cross, if thou art the child of God, then we doubt there is
nothing, but thou can help thy self. Well, we see here, that the man of God
neither mistrusteth Gods promises, nor forsakes his law. Neither surely is our
faith sound, until we can believe in misery; neither is our obedience pure
unless we continue, even when we are oppressed, not of a few, but of many. For
then we may persuade our selves to have true faith, when it is wrought in
prosperity and tried in adversity, and being void of all help of men, we
still hope for help of God, that we may say: I will not be afraid often
thousands of the people, that should beset me round about, Psalm. 4. 6. Though
I walk through the vallie of the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for
thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff do comfort me, Psalm. 23. 4. I am
persuaded that neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other thing shall be able to separate us from this love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Verse 158. I saw the transgressors and was greiued: because they kept not thy
word.
THis also in substance we had before, where the Prophet says, Mine eyes gush
out with rivers of water, because they kept not thy law: my zeal has even
consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. The Prophets words
in a word have this meaning: Lord, as for mine own things or private injuries,
I am content to put them up, but when I saw they began to break thy law, this
pinched me at the heart. Here we see he was not very nice and delicate, in the
defense of his own case, but when it came to Gods cause he was not Zeal.
smally moved. Whereby we must learn to translate our zeal to Gods cause,
and in defense of his glory, to have our heart blood wax hot, so that even a
godly anger with grief be stirred up in us. For this is the difference,
between a holy and spiritual anger, and profane and carnal anger: holy
anger is with grief of the sin, and without revenge Anger*
of the person: carnal anger is with revenge of the person, and without grief
of the sin. Wherefore if we will have our anger holy, it must be tempered
with grief, as we did speak before of zeal, wherein we taught, that our
anger should feed upon the sin, and compassion should make us bleed with
grief for the persons sinning. Well, we may learn, that if we will not swerve
from Gods law, we must not only be grieved for our sins, but also for the
sins of others. For this is the trial of a godly grief, when we are first
grieved with our own, and then are grieved with the sins of others, because
true grief begins first in our selves, and from our selves it passes truly
unto others.

On the contrary, we much bewray our hypocrisy, if we first wade upon other
men's Hypocrisy.
sins, and suffer our own to grow: and if we can fret angerly at a little
sin in another, and can be no whit displeased with a great sin in our
selves.

This is a preposterous grief, to weep, to sorrow, to sigh for sins in
others; and not to weep for the sins of our own souls: and this is want of
the true love of Gods word, To be grieved when we our selves do sin, and to
be nothing grieved for the sins of others. Note.
Wherefore if we be in place, where we want time and opportunity openly to
rebuke sin and reform it, at the least let us labor to be grieved, which
grief must sit so near our hearts, that when any time or opportunity
serves, we cease not, nor stay to utter it with our mouths. For they that are
thoroughly grieved at the heart, will at one time or other burn, until they
have uttered it with their mouth. Wherefore we must labor, whatsoever sin we
mislike in judgment, to be grieved for the same in affection: for many can
mislike sin, and it is an easy thing; but few are grieved for sin, for it
is an hard matter. If ever we had need to mourn for the sins of others, we
had need at this day, that our grief of sin in time of prosperity may show
us, what faith we shall find in trouble. But no marvel though we be no more
grieved with sins in others, because we are so little grieved with sin in
our selves* For if we were thoroughly and sincerely grieved with sins in our
selves, we should also be grieved with it in others, wheresoever we found it:
Which grief we shall not truly have, until we can devour all private
injuries. And seeing this is the joy of a true Christian, to see the Gospel
have free passage; and this is the sorrow and grief of the child of God, to
see this Gospel hindered: they who rejoice not at the one, nor sorrow for the
other, have either the love of the word cold in them, or altogether none.

And as it is an argument of Gods child, to be grieved more for one breach of
Gods law, than for many private offenses; so it is an argument of self-love,
to take to heart so grievously private evils, and little to be moved as key
cold to see the contempt of Gods glory. Wherefore it follows in the next
verse.

Verse. 159. Consider, O Lord, how I love thy precepts: quicken me according to
thy l^ving kinnesse.
HEre is an argument of true love: Lord, says the man of God, I love thy law
in my Note.
self, I love it also in others; for look what good thing is in me, I wish
the same in others: I hate sin in my self, I am sorry for it in others: For
look what evil I mislike in my self, I am grieved for it in others.

That we may make this a rule, to examine our hearts by: do we love the law of
God? how shall we know it? even when we are as glad, that others do well, and
fare well to their salvation, as we would be for our selves; when we are as
much grieved, when others do ill, as if we our selves had done it. For many
will come so far, as to mislike sin, and to speak vehemently against
sin, but few come to be grieved for sin: wherefore seeing sin is so ripe,
let us so be grieved for it as we may pray against it, and let us crave of God
to have this godly grief stricken into us, that by that means we may be
stir^ed up to prayer, and so we shall in time to come, either rejoice to see
our prayers granted, and our mournings effectual, or else we shall bear the
testimony of a good conscience, and in as much as in us does lie, we shall be
guiltless of their sins. Neither in saying, Consider how I love thy
precepts, does the man of God say out his good deeds, but humbly confesses to
the Lord his own graces received, as may appear by the words following, where
he pleads mercy and not merit. This love wherewith he loved God came from
that Romans ^. 3. 4. 5. Luke 7. 47.
love wherewith God first loved him. For he seeing the great love wherewith God
loved him, he was moved and enforced to love God again: so that his purpose
is thus much: Thou see Lord, that I am an enemy to sin in my self, for I
forget not thy law; thou see I am an enemy to sin in others, for I am
grieved to see them transgress thy law: wherefore O Lord, quicken me, and let
thy loving mercy whereby thou have created me and redeemed me in Christ,
whereby thou have delivered me from so many troubles, and enriched me with so
many, and continual benefits, renew, revive, quicken and restore me.

Thus we see it was not his deserts, but Gods loving kindness, whereof he
speaks: which if we would often meditate of, in seeing how fearfully we are
made, how graciously we are preserved, how mercifully we are redeemed, from how
many sins we are delivered, what fearful judgments we have escaped, we
should provoke our selves the more to the love of God and his word.

Again, in that he says, quicken me, we see he acknowledges no other life,
but that which is from the word, and that we live by faith: and therefore he
teaches us, that we should crave our life both temporal and spiritual of
God. And if without the word we are not able to live in the bodily life, much
less without it are we able to live the spiritual life.

Whereas he repeateth this request three times in this one portion, we may
know, that Dulnes.
he felt great dullness and deadness in himself, which often creeps even on
the dearest Saints of God: but so as they struggle against it still, and
refer themselves to Gods mercy, wherein consists our life both spiritual
and corporal.

Verse. 160. The beginning of thy word is truth, and all the judgments of thy
righteousness endure for ever.
AS if he should say: I believe that thou will thus quicken men, because the
very beginning of thy Word is most just and true; and when thou did first
enter into covenant with me, I did find that thou did not deceive me, nor
beguile me* and when by thy spirit thou made me believe thy covenant, thou
meanest trut^ ^^ I know that ^s thou did promise, thou will perform: for
thou art no more liberal in promising, than faithful and just in performing,
and thy judgment will be as righteous, as thy promise is true; wherefore as
soon as thou speak, truth proceeds from thee; so ^ know that thou will
defend and preserve me, that thy judgments may s^^^e as righteou, in thee.
Esaias. 25. ^.
And as this was particular to him: so is it general to all for where the Lord
does in mercy promise, there in righteousness he will perform: and where the
Lord in w^^^h do^^ threaten, there in judgment he will righteously execute. For
where he (...), he shows himself true; and when he performs, he executes
righteousness and when the Lord threatens, he manifests himself to be just;
and when he executes, he proves himself to be righteous. So the speech of
the man of God contains thus much: Though all men be liars, I know thou, O
Lord, art true; thou do promise that thou w^^t watch over thy children, and
that no temptation shall overcome them; I know this promise is true, and
therefore as thou did promise in truth in the beginning, so will thou
perform in righteousness in the ending. For both in beginning and in ending,
thou ^^^ ^like and true. How injurious then are we to the Lord, who will doubt
of Gods promises, that in prosperity he will renew our hearts, and put into us
a good spirit? And why do we doubt of his providence in adversity, seeing his
promise has ever his issue in truth and verity? and seeing the Lord will not
leave us, until every word that he has spoken come to pass: for heaven and
earth shall pass, but not one word of his mouth shall fail. And as the
consideration hereof does comfort us in his promises, so also must it humble us
in his threatenings. Seeing then he has pronounced, and given out his sentence,
that no unrighteous persons, nor fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adultere^s,
nor wantons, nor buggerers, ^^r thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
^a^lers, nor extortioners, shall inherit then his kingdom: as this is truth,
so it shall surely come to pass in his righteous judgment. So that they that
have done these things, without special grace and singular repentance, shall
surely be damned. For as true as the word of God is, so righteous are his
judgments. He is true of his mouth, when the word passes from him; he is just
in his works, when he is righteous in performing.

Thus we see that to be soundly grounded in faith, we must couple with the
promises of God his performance, with his threatenings his executions. Thus also
must we fight against unbelief: so that if we will not (...) the Lord of
untruth, we must wait for the accomplishme^t of his truth. Whether then
concerning ^^s mercy, his promise be of newnes of life, of forgiveness of
sins, of his providence* or of life everlasting: we must strengthen our faith
with assurance, that as his word is true; so also his executing of it is
righteous. So that the word of God shall certainly have an issue, either to
humble us by profiting, or else to debar us of his kingdom in refusing it.

The sense then of the man of God is plain and evident, in showing whatsoever
the Lord has spoken for good in his promise, he will perform it to his
children. Whatsoever he has threatened for evil, he will execute it upon the
sinners: so that we may be assured of the full accomplishment of his promises,
and of the righteous executing of his judgments.

PORTION. 21. SHIN.
Verse. 161. Princes have persecuted me without cause: but mine heart stood in
awe of thy word.
AS the man of God not long before showed, that he had many persecutors: so
here she shows they were no mean men, nor of the inferior sort, but mighty
Princes; neither Princes of a profane people, but rulers of the chosen of God
the Jews; and that he did not suffer for deserts as an ill doer, but
innocently as one that had ^^^ther presu(...) transgre^s^d against the Majesty
of God, neither disobediently done against th(...).

(...) this was no (...) temptation, in that Princes (who should have taken ^is
part against his ene^^^^, ^^^ whom he should have received countenance in his
cause, being good.) should (...) and go against him. For what (...) ^t to have
the (...) to be our (...), who should ^ee the gouernou^^ of Gods Church, in
that he should be^ (...) to think, that (...) the gou^rnours of the people
we^e ^^^, or that his ^ one ^^^^^ of your head; ^f no^ one (...), (...) less
your body; i^ ^^pp^ly (...), yet not the soul. You s^^ ^^e ^^^^l^ bodies of
feathered fowls, without God ^^s permission, f^ll not into the hands of men,
which are so little in value, that two of them are sold for a penie; how then
can they have power upon your bodies, without leave of the Lord, seeing ye are
far more precious in his sight, and he takes a further care of your bodies?
But if for my glory ye shall lay down your lives, they can revenge
themselves but of your bodies, as for your soul they cannot touch it.

But m^ne heart (...)we of thy word, etc. Here we see the greater fear
overcame the l^^s^. If the faces of Princes be terrible, because their angry
looks threaten evil, and their wrathful words ^enace death, because
whatsoever they will do, they can do, and whatsoever they can do, they dare
do; yet f^are them not (^aith Christ) but fear him who in his wrath (...)
^^ule into hell. They can take and attach the body, but the good e^t ^^ of the
soul can they not (...): but rather fear him who can arrest the body, and
afterward can ^lso atta^h the soul.

The (...)het may be this: I was afraid to displease thee, O Lord, and (...)
no^ to please m^^^ enemies, although they were mightier then I. Thus (...) h^w
he w^^ ^ (...), and that he perseuered in the fear of God, without (...). For
(^^^th h^) though the fear of my mighty adversaries was great; ^et, ^^^ (...)
the fe^re of thee had ^^asoned mine heart, and had left suc^ a deep impression
in to (...) th^^ by infidelity I should mistrust thee, or by disobedience
Fear.
I (...). Wherefore the spiritual fear of thee overcame ^ll corporal fear
of (...).

The r(...) corporal fear are which so much d^unteth the heart, is, to crave
a greater fear of Gods Maiestie^, the strength whereof may ouermatch the (...)
fear. When the Kings of (...) had conspired against the people of God, the
Prophet of God said unto them* Esaias 8. 12. Say ^ee (...), A confed^racie to all
them to wh^me this people ^^ith, a confedera^^^ neither (...)*, nor be afraid
of them* 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and let him be (...) your dr^^^. And
least we should think that this appertains not as well to all Christians as
to the Jews; Let us hear what the Apost^^ Peter ^aith* 1. Per^ 3. 14* Blessed
are y^e if we suffer for righteousness sake: yea, fear not (...)e, neither be
troubled 15. But (...) the Lord in your hearts: and be ready (...) were to
every sin ^n that (...) you a reason, of the ^o^e that is in you. Were the
blessed Apostle shows, that we are not ready to make Confession of our
hope, until we put away this fear, and sanctify the Lord in our hearts,
glorifying his truth in promising, and his (...) in performing. And to apply
this to our selves: if the Magistrate should bring unto the Rack or torture,
to betray the good cause of God, or innocence of our brethren, let us rather
fear to displease God for his threatenings, then man for his punishment.

And in particular example to apply this doctrine, we hear (Ierem. 1. 17.)
what the Lord says to the Prophet: Say not, I am a child, etc. Be not afraid
of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, says the Lord. Here the
Lord adds, ver. 17. Thou therefore (...) up thy loins, and arise, and speak
unto all that I command thee; be not afraid of their faces, least I destroy
thee before them. In which place the Lord sets down a promise to assist
him, and a threatening to punish him: both which did so prevail, that he durst
speak boldly, and provoke the King to wrath. Acts 5. we read, that when the
Priests and Sadduces, being full of indignation, laid hands on the Apostles,
and put them in the common prison, Peter and the rest of the Apostles answered:
We ought rather to obey God then men. Menace us (say they) as much as ye will,
we care not for it, we fear to discredit the blessed promise, and lightly to
pass over the heavy threatenings of our God, and we fear you not. Again,
this fear was written in the heart of Paul, 1. Cor 9. 16. Though I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of: for necessity is laid upon me, and woe
to unto me if I preach not the Gospel, etc. Howsoever we think this easy to
be learned, it is doubtless most hard to be practiced. For, though Princes do
not their duties, yet we must not therefore rebel against them: and though we
be persecuted of rulers without a cause, yet we must stand in awe of Gods word:
and our Savior CHRIST has pronounced, that whosoever strikes with the sword
shall perish with the sword.

If then either our Princes shall be ungodly, or their under officers
unfaithful, we must not thereupon grudge to pay tribute, to give task, and to
yield subsidy: but we must do them even with conscience, as to the ordinance
appointed of God, knowing and acknowledging, that the hand of Gods wrath in
their corrupt Government, is justly laid upon us for some sin. Wherefore the
holy Ghost says, Eccl. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought:
neither curse the Rich in thy bedchamber: for the foul of the heaven shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter. If then
our Princes should use all their tribute to sensuality, or take up all their
taxes for pleasure, withour either fear of God, or love of their
Commonwealth; yet curse not the King, says the Wiseman, no not in thy
bedchamber. So that if flesh and blood should move us to murmr, that we
should be ready to think evil of them that are in authority, the holy Ghost
here warns us that we use no such speeches, and put away such thoughts,
because, both our speeches and thoughts stand at the controlling of God his
judgments: but we must humbly ascribe it to our sin, that he withdraws
his grace from them, and pulls his wrath upon us. Wherefore if we think, as
many worldly men do, that thoughts are free, and are not called into the
Court, and that every man is a King in his privy chamber: the spirit of God
charge our conscience here before the Court of heaven, and tells us, that
our chambers are the Lords chambers also; and therefore as true Israelites,
even in secret we should think no guile, for the Lord will reveal it, and
punish it openly: yea, even the fowls of the air shall bewray our
unfaithfulness.

To come lower to our selves, because we must not think, that this affection
must be in David and not in us, for so shall we make unprofitable whatsoever is
taught: whereas the man of God did fear to offend, even when Princes are
against him; we not only cannot sustain so great a trial in the fear of our
God, but if the loss of any worldly pelf come to us, we are straight void of
all fear, and cannot abide to be taught any good thought; we are unquiet
until we have consulted with wizards and witches, not withstanding in awe of
Consulting with witches
Gods threatenings against that sin. Deu. 18. 10 Let none be found among you
that uses witchcraft. 11. Or that is a charmer, or that counsels with
spirits, or a southsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead. 12. For all that
do such things are abomination to the Lord, etc. where the Lord counts no
otherwise of these things, then of the vp-heape of sin. Again, 1. Chron. 10.
13. it is said, that Saul died for his transgression that he committed against
the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not, in that he
sought and asked counsel of a Familiar spirit, 14. And asked not of the Lord,
etc. where we see, that in reckoning Saul his sin, this is the la^^, and
wrappeth up all the rest, in that he asked not counsel of the Lord, but went
to a witch. So this was the heap of his sin, this filled the just measure of
his iniquities, because when he should have repented of all other sins, he
made this the full heap of his sins, and pulled consequently upon him the
height of Gods judgments, for he was cut off from the kingdom, and
desperately ended his life, Esaias ^8. when the Lord reckoned up the sins of
the people, as their infidelity, their obstinacy, he comes at the last to
their sorceries, saying, 19. When such shall say unto you, enquire of them that
have a spirit of diu^^ation, and at the south sayers, which whisper and
murmr: should not a people enquire at their God? from the living to the dead,
etc. Therefore the Lord denounces plagues and punishments on every side to
fall upon them.

Look into the destruction of the old cities, namely of the Egyptians, of the
Moabites, of the Assyrians, and of the Philistines, and ye shall see how
witcherie was the most especial cause of their destruction. So shall we think
now, that the fear of God does touch Is Gods fear be wanting, there is no
temptation so great, but we fa^^ in^o it
their hearts, who for loss of so small pelf run to wizards? Well, we are
here to learn, that as where the Lords fear does so rule our hearts, that we
sanctify the Lord therein, we are free from the greatest temptations; So,
where this reverent fear of God is wanting, there is no temptation, though
never so vile and gross, but we will yield unto it.

The providence of the Lord being so rich, and his hand so wide and large, we
must not be afraid of so small a loss of worldly goods. We know that
Zedechiah being a Prince, Iere. 37. when the fear of God was gone from him,
feared that the very common people would mock him, so that he could not obey
the Prophet. Again, we know that Jeremiah being the Prophet, having this
reverent fear of God seasoning his heart, was nothing dismayed, with all that
either Zedechiah or any other of the kings could do unto him. Among many
places, excellent is that, Job. 31. where the man of God, partly to stop the
mouths of his adversaries, partly to comfort his own soul, with the record of
a good conscience, and partly to show the secret judgments of God, and that he
did not suffer for his sins, as he was accused, but for some secret cause best
known to the Lord; he testifies how free he was from fornication, from
adultery, from injuries, from unmercifulness, from cruelty with his servants,
and from oppression; and shows the cause why all these things were in him,
because the Lord beheld all his ways, and told all his steps. First, for
fornication, he made a covenant with his eyes, because there is no portion, no
inheritance, from the Almighty, to the wicked, but destruction, and strange
punishments to the workers of iniquity: and as of fornication, so also he
speaks, how he was preserved by the fear of Gods judgments from adultery;
'and afterward coming to show his innocence in not cruelly dealing with his
servants, he says, If I should contemn the judgment of my servant, etc that
then shall I do, when God stands up! and when he shall visit me, what
shall I answer?

Again, he professes, that the cause why he did not oppress nor injury
others, was, not that he refrained for fear of men, but for fear of God. For
says he, If I have lift up mine head against the fatherless, etc. I think my
shoulder bones would go out of their sockets, Gods judgments were fearful
unto me, and I could not be delivered from his Highness, etc. And though he
might by his great countenance which he did bear, have dealt roughly with men,
and might have made afraid a great multitude; Yet (says he) the most
contemptible of the families did not fear me. Yea, though the men were far
less then he, yet he could not hide his sin as Adam, he could not conceal
his iniquity in his bosom.

Whosoever then will be truly religious, and make a conscience of sin in
sincerity, he must thus walk in the fear of God; and though he might so do,
as no man could ever touch him for his outward conversation; though he did not
run into the hand of the Magistrate; and no man though he would, could say,
Black is his eye: he must submit himself to what peril soever, and overcome
all fear of man's power, with fear of Gods punishments. And we must know, that
if there be some sin in us, on which the civil law can take no hold; yet the
fear of the law of God must be in stead unto us of all laws; knowing that
though we escape the court of men, we cannot escape the judgments of God; who
will judge us, not according to the law of man, but according to his own law.
So that the children of God are so far off from flattering themselves in these
sins, where man's laws fail, and which they do not punish, that they labor
the more against them, fearing that God will punish those sins more grievously
in the world to come, which by the law of man in this world he does not
correct: And because by man's punishing we are often brought to repent of those
sins, wherein now often times we die without any repentance. So that we see how
effectual an instrument of God this fear of his law is, against all kinds of
sin whatsoever. For though in politic laws, there be no laws against
swearing, breaking of the Sabbath, or filthy speaking; yet Gods children are
not for that cause such as cast off all fear; but such, as by so much the
rather fear and suspect such sins.

Now in that the man of God says, in awe of thy word: see, the man of God
performs that fear to Gods word, which he owes to God himself. This is
profitably to be considered of us. If any deal now adays with a profane
worldling, in things concerning the true knowledge of God, and the way of
salvation, he will answer: What tell ye me of these things? tell me what you
can; I am sure of this, you can tell me no more than this: Love God above all,
and thy neighbor as thy self, and I trust I shall love God as well as you, or
the best learned. But here is their hypocrisy descried, in that they have so
small love to the word. For our Savior Christ witnesses, John 8. He that is
of God hears Gods word: if ye were of God, ye would love his word: so one may
say to this effect; if we fear God, we stand in awe of his word. Wherefore the
man of God says, Oh, how love I thy law* protesting that love to the law:
which he had to God. And as he says, O Lord thou art my portion: so he says
also, thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage. Thus we must honor God in
Christ, and Christ in his word. For look what honor God would have, he would
have us show unto Christ, and look what honor Christ would have, he would
have it done to his word. Wherefore the Apostles not reuerencing our Savior
Christ only for his person, but also for his word, said: Master, whither
shall we go from thee, thou have the word of spirit and life?

As this corrupt opinion of the fear of God is in the worldlings, so also is
it in heretics, and in the family of love, who persuade themselves to love
God, when they love heresies more than the word: but herein are those
hypocrites and heretics descried, they will generally confess they love and
fear God: but examine them in any particular, either of doctrine or of life,
and they will bewray their want of love by heresy, and their want of fear by
lying in some gross sin.

Here is then a touch stone for them that can say: I trust I fear God, if I
feared not God, how should I hope to prosper, or how should I live? for if
their fear be tried by the word, and their fear of the word be tried by
particular sins, they will soon bewray themselves. Trial of our fear of God.
Again, many there be, who will say they fear God, whilst sickness,
poverty, or some cross lies upon them: but when affliction is past over, and
prosperity comes, let the Lord strike upon their hearts never so hardly, and
they will not fear. Wherefore the Prophet Esaias says, chap. 28. 15. Because ye
have said, we have made a covenant with death, and with hell we are at
agreement, though a scourge run over us, and pass through, it shall not come
at us. And 18. The covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement
with hell shall not stand, when a scourge shall run over you, and pass
through, then shall you be trodden under by it. And though sometimes we fear
with Pharaoh the present tokens of Gods wrath, as the thunder, the lightning,
the earthquake, and such like: yet we make them scarsely as the wonders that
last nine da^es, neither fear we the word of God. In stead of all the plagues
whereof we read in the old Testament, as of the opening of the earth, of the
ouerflowing with waters, of fire coming down from heaven, we hear but one
named in the new Testament, namely, that they that do such things, for which
those plagues did come, shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven; which one
does so terrify Gods children, that they had leauer bear all the afflictions
of Job, and all the plagues of Egypt than that one; for all those are but
forerunners of this one judgment, and this is the full heap of all other
threatenings. In that he says, my heart stands in awe: he shows his fear
was not covertly as in the ungodly. For at one time or other the Lord may shake
the vilest villain in the world with fear of his judgments, and sometimes to
feel terror: but this kind of fear soon vanishes away, and sinketh not
into the heart, how much soever it be stricken into the head. For we see whilst
God lies ^ore upon us by some terrible judgment of thunder, lightnings, or
earthquakes, how every profane man can be content to pray, and for the time
will be very godly and religious, so long as the plague lasts; but when that
is once over, their fear is also over. The most desperate fear; but it
sits not, it dwells not False fear. Simile.
long upon their hearts; but as a flash of Lightning suddenly strikes the
face, and suddenly is gone: So a flashing sight of Gods Majesty strikes their
hearts, and suddenly is departed.

We must not then have an ouer-hearing of Gods threatenings, nor an
ouer-fearing of his judgments. For many will like the word, because they like
it in judgment, or for that it increases their knowledge, but few love it in
heart; because it renueth their affections. For though our judgment he
wrought upon, yet the heart is not wrought on, which is Gods place: wherein if
he by ye ministry of his word once take sure hold, it will forthwith go to the
eye, ear, and hand, and the whole body, and will be effectual. Now what is a
more effectual bridle against sin, then still to think that we are in the
presence of God? For if all men in the world should bid a man do any thing
contrary to the will of God, though in doing he might be next the King, or in
not doing with Daniel have his body given to the Lions, yet would he not do
any thing against Gods laws. Neither did Daniel suffer all this, because he
would not be an Idolater, but for that he would not deny the worship to the
true God, but professed the same openly, in setting open his windows, and
manifesting his true religion for the space of three days. And why did he
thus? even because the fear of God did so touch his heart, that the fear of
man did nothing dismay him: so that neither the gain nor promotion which he
might have had, by the King on the one side, nor the danger and loss which was
laid unto him on the other side, could make him at all to displease God. And as
the fear of God has these effects in God his children, that the poorest
creature shall stand in great courage before the face of a King: so where this
fear of God is wanting, the mighty Prince shall stand in awe of his poorest
subject. 1. Sam. 15. When Saul had a flat commandment from the Lord, who from
a mean stock and base parentage was advanced to the kingdom to destroy the
King, he contrary to the Lords commandment, saves Agag, yea, and a great
while stoutly justifies his sin before Samuel: but when he had straightly
charged his conscience, he added, the fear of the people moved me to do it:
as if he should have said; I was afraid that the people in ^o doing would have
gone from me, and have denied me the honor which they were wont to yield unto
me. Thus we see a poor soul, and with Gods fear, fears not a Prince, and a
mighty King without this fear feared the poor people.

This fear of God also keeps the godly; that in all their distresses they
dare not open their mouths to any foul speech, or corrupt language. When Job
was spoiled of all he had, and wicked men had taken it from him, he says in
the humblenes of spirit, and fear of his God, the Lord gives, and the Lord
takes blessed be the name of the Lord He durst not chase against the
Chaldeans, although he was in this miserable perplexity: for the fear of God
so gaged his heart, that he durst not nourish any evil thoughts, or break out
into evil words to displease the Lord; Contrariwise, where this fear is not,
we shall see great murmuring and grudging, because Leuit. 20. the Lord says:
If any man turn after such, as work with spirits, and after southsayers, then
will I set my face against that person. Let him keep his sin as close as he
will, and hide it as much as he can, yet I the Lord will find it out. In vain
then we see do words fl^e out brutishly from wordly men, who say they fear
and love God, when they neither believe his promises, nor fear his
threatenings, nor love that which he commands, no^ hate that which he
forbids. Well, run they in the last day, whither they will, yell they
never so much, to have the rocks to cover them, and the hills to hide them,
the word will judge those worldlings, heretics, and scorners.

But they will thus say: we ask not counsel of the devil as you charge us:
yea, but Witchcraft.
God his word so says, that he that goes to witches and wizards, goes to
ask counsel of the devil. Again as we said before, for want of this fear,
we see, how impudent sinners are in those things, which civil Laws do not
restrain, fearing even punishment more then Gods judgment. He that fears
God is no thief; why? because man's law says, that he that steals shall be
hanged? no but because Gods Law says, Thou shall not steal. Though the place
be never so secret where he may sin, although i^ be no manifest
unrighteousness, and gross injury, yet if it were but to deny the last
thing, which were right and due, the child of God both fears punishment of
God, if he had done it, or if he have not done it, he trembles to do it. And
Saint James he reasons thus: that he that has commanded one thing has
also commanded another: and he that forbids one thing, has forbidden
another. And surely howsoever man's law punishes one, and dispenses with
another sin, yet the word of God rewards all obedience, and punishes all
disobedience. So that he that has said as well, Thou shall not commit
adultery, as, Thou shall not do murder, has as well pronounced the shutting
of the kingdom of heaven against adulterers, as against murderers, 1. Cor. 6.
which thing Gods children knowing, make as great a conscience of swearing,
banning, cursing, breaking of the Sabbath, drunkenness, adultery and lying,
which in man's law escape scotfree; as of theft, which by Civil law is adjudged
worthy of death: because that God that says, Thou shall not steal; he also
says, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord in vain: thou shall keep holy
the Sabbath, etc. Suppose they that those things are not forbidden by the law
of God, which are not prohibited by the law of man? Then no marvel though
there be so few thieves, and so many Sabbath breakers; why there be so few
murderers, and so many swearers: because men abstain from theft and murder,
for fear of temporal punishment, and men have no care to eschew swearing and
profaning of God his Sabbath; because they fear no external punishment. See
here is men's conscience, here is their religion, this is their devotion. Well,
had thou never su^n gifts outwardly, without this reverent fear of God,
thou shall never enter into God his kingdom. But peradventure, when thou shall
come to answer before the tribunal of God, thou will say, O Lord, I knew not
by man's law that breach of thy Sabbath, or swearing were such great sins:
hear what the Lord will answer: I gave thee my law, whereby thou should
be governed, neither did I give any commandment in more ample and flat words,
than the law of my Sabbath; wherefore seeing thou have manifestly cast my law
behind thee, and made less account of my commandments, and judgments, than
of man's law and threatenings, I adiudge thee to eternal damnation.

Great indeed is the benefit of man's laws, to restrain sin, and to bring to
repentance, yea often the punishment of man, and shame thereof preuenteth the
judgment of God, and shame of hell fire: because we see many have been more
ashamed of sin at the gallows, than others that have died upon their beds.
Howbeit where this law is not executed, and sin severely punished; or where
there be any sins, which come not within the precincts of man's jurisdiction,
it is most certain, they shall not escape the punishment of God. Wherefore we
must otherwise stand in awe of Gods law, than man's law does punish, if we will
with the man of God from our heart stand in fear of his word.

This fear makes servants as faithful in their masters absence, as in their
presence, because it keeps under the most secret sins. For hypocrites fly
sin before men, but sin greedily behind their backs; and they sin not
because man's law will punish them, not because Gods law does forbid them. But
God his children abhor sin, as well privy as manifest, and that because
sin is sin, and not in that it is punishable by man's law. For they
considering that Adam, H^siah, Ezechiah and others were punished for small
things, dare account no sin to be small in the eyes of God. It is the whip, the
rod, and the scourge, that causes the hypocrite, as an ass, a fool, and a
slave, to leave sin: but it is love, conscience, and obedience, that moves
Gods children willingly to abhor it.

Verse. 162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoils.
AS he has spoken of his fear, so now he speaks of his joy. Great is the
joy of them that find spoils: for spoils bring victory, and victory makes
the triumph: so that spoil brings profit, and the victory pleasure, both then
must needs cause great joy. His meaning then is: that what battle soever he
did fight, what town soever he spoiled, his joy was nothing so great, as it
was in taking pleasure in God his word. Here then is a true note to discern
us from hypocrites, when we take comfort in nothing so much as in A true note
of Gods child
the word of God.

But some will say, that this extraordinary joy appertains to the Prophet,
rather than to us: wherefore let us hear what the holy Ghost speaks hereof in
the Gospel, as Romans 5. We have peace toward God, and rejoice under the hope of
the glory of God. And Philip 4 he calls it, The peace of God which passes
all understanding: and the Apostle 1. Pet. 1. showing how in the mercy of God
we are begotten again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, to an inheritance immortal and undefiled, reserved in heaven
for us, bids us to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. And Paul 1.
Cor. 2. 9. shows what cause we have to rejoice, because the things which eye
has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are,
which God has prepared for them that love him. These things we see are such as
are common to all: why then do Gods children so much rejoice in the word?
First, in consideration of their own vile and miserable estates; then in
consideration of God his love and Christ his merits for them. For they
considering with themselves, that by nature they are nothing but vassal of
sin, the bondslaues of the devil, the enemies of God, and firebrarnds of
hell, and that by Christ they are freed from their sins, set at liberty from
Satan, ransomed from hell, and reconciled unto God, and that he will bring
unto them the fruit of his death, and benefit of his resurrection, by killing
sin in them, and quickening them unto righteousness, and remembering (Colos. 2.
14.) that Christ has taken away the handwriting, and fastened it unto his
cross, and that every member, through him, has spoiled the principalities and
powers, and led captive the world, the flesh and the devil, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same cross, feel
such a joy as never any earthly conquerors felt the like. For look how far
greater the victory of sin and Satan is, above the victory of men: so far
greater is the joy, The true joy of the faithful, howfor it ex^^^des all
carnal joy.
and more glorious is the triumph of Christians, than of earthly Captains. And
as far as the robes of Christ his righteousness are richer than the royal
arms of Princes: so far does the joy of Gods children exceed all the joy of
the Princes of this world. Whosoever then have not this joy, by so much they
show themselves as yet to be more carnal, more worldly, and more subject to
Satan.

At thy word. Still we must observe this, that what affections soever we
pretend to God, they must be tried by his blessed word, whether it be of love,
or of fear, or of joy. Whosoever then will say, they are merry in God, as they
hope, when their mirth is not in the word, Trial of our joy.
and they can rejoice in Christ as well as others, and yet they rejoice in
vanity and worldly things, they deceive themselves: yea, although they did not
rejoice in ill things, yet they cannot rejoice in prayer, they cannot rejoice
in the word, they have no joy in the Sacraments, whereby notwithstanding they
attain all precious things, and an inheritance which fades not away. But alas,
how can men joy? how can they sp^^rt? how can they laugh so earnestly at vain
things, and take so little comfort and solace in Gods word? and why does the
word of God make us so dull? why does prayer make us so heavy? why does
meditation cause us to be so sad? Even because we are so carnal and earthly
minded. Well, the Prophet Esaias shows, chap 58. what is the joy of Gods
children: 13. (...)hou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath* from do^^^ thy
will in mine holy day (...) ^^ll the ab^^^^ a delight, to consecrate it as
glorious to the Lord, etc. And the Prophet David, Psalm 63. Thy loving
kindness is better then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. And Psalm.
84. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house they will ever praise thee. 10.
A day in thy Court is better then a thousand other where: I had rather be a
doore-keeper in the house of m^ God th^n to dwell in the tabernacle of
wickedness. Psalm. 42 4. I went with the multitude, and led them into the house
of God, with the voice of singing and praise, as a multitude that keeps a
Feast. This is the joy of God his children, this joy will never leave us, no
not in the grave, it will accompany us to the judgment seat of God.

If we will rejoice in GOD his word, God will rejoice in us. But alas! do not
all men rejoice in vanities? and yet they shall perish with men, and men shall
perish with the abuse of them Whereas that joy so far excels this; how is
it that this is so far preferred before that? Do we not think him to be a
foolish man, who will make the day of Simile.
his pleasure in playing and sporting, whereas he should make it the day of
his profit in buying and selling? Would we not account him a mad man, who might
be encouraged to go into the field, with a promise to carry away the
victory, and to triumph over his enemies, if he linger the time until the
occasion be past, by the incurse of his enemies, and so he willingly leese the
victory, and make his adversaries to triumph over him? How foolish then are
they to pass the Sabbath, which is the market day of the soul, and wherein
the Lord calls us to come buy honey, wine, milk and oil, and that without
penny or penyworth, in vain pleasures willingly, to leese such spiritual and
heavenly profits? And how mad are they that on this day may receive both
counsel for policy, and furniture for strength, to encounter against the
world, the flesh and the devil, and run rather to ^^^thie pleasures,
suffering themselves willingly to be a pray for the devil, to be seduced by
sin, to be overcome of the flesh, and trodden down of the world? True it is,
that we have Sabbath.
many bickerings, and fight many skirmishes in the week days: but on the
Lords Sabbath especially we fall to the maine battle, and we come as it were
to hand-strokes, and buckle with our enemies hand to hand. Do we not think
this a dangerous thing then, when the Lord does offer as it were into our
hands the spoil of sin, Satan, the world, and the flesh, and we willingly
and unthankfully will suffer our selves, and offer our selves to be spoiled of
them? Where is now our joy in the word? where is our spoil wherein we should
triumph? Well, if men rejoice so much when they give the foil to their
enemies, and pray upon the spoils, we may easily conjecture how greatly they
sorrow, that take the foil at their adversaries hand, and are become a pray
and a spoil before them. For the same is the reason of contraries. And to
apply this same to us: if we truly rejoice, when we have subdued our
affections, murdered our temptations, and put to flight the world, the flesh
and the devil, making a show of them through Christ; how much must we be
grieved, when our affections have carried us captive, our temptations have
slain the soul, and our enemies have taken the spoil of all those spiritual
graces which before we possessed. This then must try our repentance whether
we have this sorrow or no, when the rage of sin has spoiled us of God his
grace. This affection we see was in the Prophet David, Psalm. 51. who cries,
Have mercy upon me, according to thy loving kindness, make me hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: Create in me a
clean heart, O God, renew a right spirit within me: Cast me not away from thy
presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me. Where David complains, that
his heart was hardened, blind was his understanding, troubled was his mind,
and his soul in bondage of sin, and in danger to lose Gods spirit. Thus we
see how he felt himself spoiled of all the graces of God.

When then we shall see the flesh or the world has taken from us all comfort in
the word Dullness in prayer and other holy exercises.
and in prayer, and that we begin to be dull in good things, we must know for
a truth, that either Satan, the flesh or the world have given us some ^oyle,
and that they have taken rich spoils from us. Wherefore we are not after
sin to be too quiet with our selves, as we use to be, if we truly consider
of this: for our joy should not be so great in one, but our sorrow should be
as great in the other: and as we rejoice when we have gotten the victory; so
must we sorrow when we have lost, and they have gotten the spoils. For if
we find joy of conscience, to make a show of our enemies, because we have
spoiled them* even so when they shall spoil us, that our understanding be
blind, our hearts made dull, when we cannot with comfort call God our Father;
when we can get no power of our sins; when we are wavering in our
perseverance; if there be in us any regard of our glory, or any respect of our
dignity and our kingdom, when Satan has so spoiled us, great should be our
sorrow.

But this is the cause, why we do not sooner recover our selves in fighting,
because we feel not the loss of our spoils, and therefore no marvel if in
Christ we feel not our strength renewed It is no small dignity, to be a
companion with the Angels, to be the children of God, fellow heirs with God;
it is no little prerogative, to be royal Priests before the Lord; it is no
small honor to be counted Prophets; it is no little pre-eminence, to wait for a
kingdom: but shall we look to be the members of Christ, and fellow heirs
with him, and shall we not sever our selves from the world, the flesh and the
devil? nay, as he offers to us the one, so he forbids to us the other. If
we were redeemed, not with gold and silver, but with the most precious blood of
the immaculate Lamb, how thankful should we be in all manner of obedience? If
we were called to an holy conversation, and not to the lusts of the flesh, how
holily should we walk? Wherefore if the Lord so call us to the banquet, and
allure us to such rich spoils on the Sabbath day, if any shall say, I cannot
come, I must marry a wife; I must go see my farm; I must go about my
business: Oh how unworthy guests shall we be! and how worthy to be trampled
under the feet of our adversaries? But here may arise a question: how can
fear and joy dwell in a man at once? that he should truly fear Gods word, and
heartily rejoice in the same, when as notwithstanding in the holy Scriptures,
we may often observe this thing, as Psalm. 5. 7. I will Fear and joy tempered
together.
come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I
worship toward thy holy Temple. And in Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice in trembling: and in this Octonarie which we here have in hand, I
stood in awe at thy word: and I rejoiced at thy word. We answer, we must know
what kind of fear this is, it is not that fear which is of the judgments of
God alone, but a fear joined with his mercies. For there is a fear of his
judgments alone, which hinders the certainty of faith: and there is a fear
of his judgments, tempered with a fear of his mercies, which beats down
the security of the flesh; of which the man of God speaks, Psalm. 130 4.
Mercy is with thee, therefore thou shall be feared: that is, Therefore are
thine afraid to displease thee, because they have tasted of thy goodness, and
because thou of nature art merciful. He speaks then of that fear, which is
assured of Gods mercies, as of his judgments. Wherefore as there is a
difference between the fear of servants and the fear of sons; because
servants do their business more unwillingly; and sons do their duties more
cheerfully: so there is a difference between the obedience of the godly,
proceeding from a childish fear to obey their Father, and the grudging obeying
of the wicked, in a servile and slavish fear of punishment.

Verse. 163. I hate falsehood and abhor it, but thy law do I love.
THe mean, how the man of God came to this joy of the word, was, in that his
heart was well purged of the things contrary unto it, wherein he shows, that it
is not possible for us truly to rejoice in the word, until we be brought to the
perfect hatred of the corruptions.

By falsehood, he means not that breach of charity, which is forbidden in
the ninth Commandment, but whatsoever is opposite to the true word of God. In
this sense we did also take it, Port. 4. and 5. Take from me the way of lying,
and grant me graciously thy law. Where lying is nothing else, but that which
is contrary to the word, either in doctrine or in life. Likewise Port. 15. 2.
I hate vain inventions, but thy law do I love: In this meaning, Satan is
said to be the father of lies, and we use to say, God only is true, and man is
a liar: that is, as God is good, so is he true; as man is evil of himself, so
is he false. His meaning then is, that he hated that, which was contrary to
the word.

I hate and abhor, etc This shows that he had no light hatred, but a through
hatred of it, which is also showed, Psalm. 139. 21. Do I not hate them O Lord
that hate thee? And do not I earnestly contend with those that rise up against
thee? I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine utter enemies.
Prou. 29. 27. A wicked man is an abomination to the just, and he that is
upright in his cause, is an abomination to the wicked. True hatred has this
nature, to abhor the thing hated, as a dainty woman abhors to touch a
toad. And we express this thing in our affections, breaking often into these
speeches: I abhor it, I cannot abide to hear of it, I quake, I shake, I am
the worse when I hear it.

We are here taught then, that as love being cold will soon fail, so our
hatred being Love to good things and hatred of evil things may not slak^ in us.
cold, will soon slake; and as love must be hot, if we will have it
continual, so hatred must be with abhorring, if we will have it permanent.
Wherefore we see, where our first love waxes cold to prayer, and the not
abhorring of the want of prayer is, there we fall into a carelessness of
prayer: and where our zeal is not hot against sin, and sinners, and we make
but a ^est of it, when we should make war against them, to the spending of
the heart Prayer.
blood, we are often ready to fall into sin. And although we be not
maintainers of sin, (for that were the highest degree of sin) yet if we be
not abhor^ers of sin, we may for a time keep in, yet in the e^d we shall
bewray our selves And thus when we are too smooth and too gentle (although I
reprchend not that loving rebuking and admonishing of Admonition.
Christians) we shall be taught to be zealous. We see, that we cannot say, that
we truly rejoice in the word, until we have a perfect hatred of falsehood.

No marvel then, though we rejoice no more in God, seeing we do not so
abhor our sin as we should do. Neither do we thoroughly abhor sin,
because we never felt the inestimable and unspeakable treasures of the peace of
conscience. Wherefore as we must not only love God, but love exceedingly; so
we must not only hate ill, but abhor it Relapse.
zealously. For when abhorring of sin falls ^o hating; and hating of sin
falls to misliking, and misliking comes little to esteem of sin, we are in
a relapse. We cannot then love God too much, nor hate ill too much. We must
also labor to have our love and hatred proportionable to the things loved and
hated, and our affections must be answerable, either in liking the things which
are commanded, or in misliking the things which are forbidden.

If our first love decay, it will first come to be cold, and then to be none.
Wherefore the holy Ghost does exhort men in the book of the Proverbs, that
their love should be wholly set on their wives, and so they should not covet any
other. And Isaac, who is said to love his wife Rebecca dearly, never fell into
the sin of Polygamie or concubines: So our love Polygamie.
to the word, must be so through a love, that it take up all our affections,
and so may shut out all that comes in the way, which either might empaire part
of our love, or spoil us of the whole. We see in them, that are
irreconciliable, what hatred is in them. We may see, how many having found
sometimes terror of conscience, have fallen from the hatred of sin to the
like of it, and so have made relapse either into old sins, from which they were
delivered, or else into some new sins, where with before they were not
acquainted. Wherefore we must pray, that our love to good things, and hatred to
evil, may daily be growing. For if we stand at a stay we shall come to less
and less, yea in the end we shall shake hands Heresy or prof^^^nesse like to
follow our security.
with sin again. For many are so cold in the pursuit of sin, that it is
to be feared, that the Lord will plague us, either with heresy or with
profaneness. For whereof comes our commending of Papists and heretics, that
we can say, Surely he is an honest man, it is pity he is a Papist, I knew
never any ill by him; it is to be feared, we shall come to be such Papists, for
want of more fervent hatred against them.

Verse. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous
judgments.
AS before the man of God spoke of his joy, fear, and hatred; so now he
shows his love, which therefore seems to be no cold love, because it made
him seven times a day to praise the Lord. As the children of God cannot
satisfy themselves in the hatred of sin, no more can they satisfy
themselves in the love of the Lord. And as for their true hatred of sin, they
abhor it not only in themselves but in others; so for the true love of the
Lord, they love it not only in themselves but in others, wheresoever they find
it. The meaning of the man of God briefly is thus much: because I see, O Lord,
that thou performest thy promise unto thy children, and executest thy
threatenings on the wicked, I praise thee, and when I consider the examples of
thy judgments and see thy truth so just, I delight in praising thee.

The cause then why we have no more pleasure in praising God, is because we
observe no more diligently Gods mercy, and truth fulfilled and executed in our
selves, or in others.

Seven times a day. If this be used on any day, doubtless on the Sabbath day,
because in respect of our callings, other days are full of distractions,
neither are the minds at such liberty as they are at other times. The Apostle
Ephesians. 5. 16. says, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be ye
fulfilled in the spirit; 29. speaking unto your selves in psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs, etc: as if he should say, whereas other men cannot be merry,
unless they be mad, and they can find no solace, without their own conceits;
yet it is good for you in your most mirth to be plentiful in the spirit and in
good affections. The same thing is urged Colos. 3. 16 Let the word of God dwell
plentifully in you in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves
in Psalms, etc. What shall now become of them? who think they do God great
good service, to come twice on the Lord his day to the Church, and think it a
sufficient discharge for them, seeing the Prophet protests, that he came
seven times a day to praise God: that is, Often he resorted to this sacrifice:
for this phrase of speech is usual in the word to set down a certain number
to express an uncertain thing. These remember not the often frequenting of
private prayer, thanksgiving, conference, admonition, preparation, visiting of
the sick, alms giving, which be duties of love, annexed with the former
public duties of religion, and as well to be used in the Lords day as the
other. If this then be not to be done on the Sabbath day, when should we do it?
True it is, that with the good servants of God David and Daniel, we take up
every day at morning, noonetide and evening to praise the Lord, but especially
we must remember to speak of these wonderful works of the Lord in the
Sabbath: as that 92 Psalm, which is a Psalm of the Sabbath, does teach us.
Thus see, how the Sabbath should wholly from morning to night be spent in these
exercises, and therefore is it set apart from all other days, because that
worship of God which we do but in part on other days, may now wholly be spent
on the Lord.

We see in time of Popery, how holy men would be at their solemn feasts, as
at Christ his tide, Easter, Candlemasse as they call it, Holy thursday and
Al-saints day. Were they so superstitious in ill, and shall we be cold in good
things? were they so fervent in idolatry? and shall we be so zealeles in the
Lord his days, wherein we have all things? does not this day teach us the
benefits of Christ's birth, the profit of his Passion, the fruit of his
Resurrection, the glory of his Ascension, the joy of the coming of the holy
Ghost? does it not teach us, how in this world, we may praise God with his
Angels, and how hereafter we shall be occupied in heaven? Wherefore let us pray
often in that day, let us examine our hearts what sins we have done, what
benefits we have received; let us prepare our selves before the congregation is
gathered, when they are assembled let us so pray and hear, that after the
departure we may examine our hearing by meditating, applying, and conferring
the prayers by the effects of them. Thus in private and public exercises in
matters of religion and practices of love, we are to spend the whole Sabbath.
Alas, how far are they now from praising God, now seven times in the day, who
pass it over in pleasures, and so end it in their own delights? who no
marvel must needs slip in common life, who fall so deeply into God his
course.

Do I praise thee? By naming one part of the exercise of God his worship, he
comprehends many: for it is not like that he contented himself with praising
of God; but that he also prayed, heard, meditated, and conferred of the word,
and setting down by name that, whereunto we are most unapt, and most hardly
drawn; he includes those things, which more willingly, and easily we are
brought unto. If any have occasion seven times and often to praise the Lord; it
is our age, who from the abundance of God his blessings, should not only have
our hearts enlarged: but also from our abundance of the heart, our mouths
with praises should be filled.

Because of thy righteous judgments: This is not the only thing in the word;
but there are promises and threatenings: but the judgments of God comprehend
all, in that they are seen as we have showed, in fulfilling his promises, and
executing his threatenings. True it is, we must praise him for the creation of
the world, for his loving promises made unto us: but we can never see truly the
^rration, until we observe his providence, neither can we effectually praise
him for his promises, until we diligently observe his judgments. For then we
truly praise God for his promises and threatenings, when we praise him for his
executing of them. This therefore requires an experimental faith, and
therefore we shall see in all the Psalms of Moses, Deborah, Ezechiah, David,
and Esaias, that it was usual to them then to make them, when either they had
received some notable deliverance, or their enemies had some notable overthrow,
or the Church obtained some special benefit: As after the deliverance by the
read sea, after they had safely passed through the wilderness, and had put to
flight the army of the al^^^^s. ^^^ what else does the History, which is (...)*
of things p^^t, ^^ach us; but to praise God by ^^eing God to be such ^ (...) he
is in his p^^^is^s?

Look what the law generally speaks of, (...) concerning these (...) to be
done, or l^f undone; either of p^^^^es or (...) of the Prophets, the things
done which were com^^unded* (...) to them, which did according to Gods (...),
the (...) forbidden, or else the threatenings executed on them which did ^o
(...)mandeme^t This we shall see wonderfully to increase our faith if we (...)
of the Prophets with the time of the law. If we compare our (...) our Savior
Christ, Matthew 24. 24. that there (...) Christ's* and (...) to fear, that they
which would not learn of the truth* shall learn of (...). We may call to
mind, how many earnest professors in king Edward (...) papists in Queen Mary's
days, and how many heretofore christians ^^ Queen Mary's days, are now
become zealelesse worldlings, and they that were ^^en (...), ^^ ^^^t height
they are grown, and we shall see sufficient matter to praise God his
righteous judgments. Again if we consider the great mercy of God, (...) our
country men, who were in banishment, we shall have great cause to be thankful.

Verse. 165 They that ^^^e thy law shall have a great p^^^^^ritie: or rather,
shall have no m^^^^r of offense, or occasion of st^mbl^^g, and they shall have
no hurt.
TH^se in sense agree with that which the man of God s^i^l, Port 65. I (...)
liberty for I seek thy (...). In which places the Prophet shows, (...) they
(...) ^^aue peace in mind* and shall walk at liberty, and not be entangled,
they (...) ^^ue no manner of offense, neither shall any stumbling blocks be
l^^^ in their ways, which carefully seek to obey the will of God.

This is the benefit of them, that know and receive the word in love, that they
shall escape dangers, doubts, in streights and plagues: so that in all th^se
they shall find happy issues, and wholesome out g^^e in what streights or
troubles they a^^ (...). They then ^^t walk in this knowledge and love of God
his law* shall ^^u^ this grace* and no man shall be able to take it from them:
seeing then it is (...) in vs^l, to be careful of nothing more then to be
directed in our plagues, ^et most of us fa^l^ in ^^^ (...) to ^^^^, by
following too much their own devises, and not the prescript rule of the wor^.
Here (...) is described the happy estate of God his children, that by faith
and love shall (...)* and continually have the blessing of God, watching over
them in all (...) ^o^^gs, and whatsoever tumult come on them, yet they shall
possess their souls in patience* and not be plunged and overwhelmed in these
miseries as other men are. O most sin^ul^r commendation of the word in working
such peace, in promising such success, in our affairs, and in delivering us
from all ill things?

That love thy ^^^. We see here is required that faith which works by love:
for many The true faith works by love
will say that they believe who bewray their want of faith, by want of love* It
is then, that says which works by love, that makes us so to delight in the
law of the Lord. Herehence comes so much disquietnes, and so many cross
blows in our at^^mp^s* because our faith is so small, and our love to the word
^o little. When we sh^l (...) then the destruction of our minds, so many
ditches, hedges, walls, g^ins and snares, we must consider the chief cause,
to be our want of love to the word, not that it always so appears ^^ flesh
and blood, but that to faith it is apparent, which learneth out of the word,
John 17 In the world John. 17.
^^^^ shall have troubl^^* but ^^ me they shall have p^ace: as if our Savior
should have said: howsoever flesh and blood think* and others judge over us,
heaven and earth shall pass; but his pro(...)le. Ye shall have peace in
trouble: for God that has ^^oken it is no more liberal in promising, than
faithful in performing* if the^ we have trou^les, it is for want of faith and
love of the word. And as here is a plentiful comfort for them who love the
word: so is there a fearful threatening to the wicked, which the Prophet Esaias in
his 47 and 48. chapters speaks: there is no peace says the Lord) unto the
wicked, but the wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. In which place after the Prophet had promised this good
success to God his people, he adds, that the wicked shall not be partakers
of it. For as the Sea hoysteth up, and is stirred more vehemently with the
tempest and wind, and being once moved, one wave fights with another: so
that in that continual conflict, much froth and filthy scumme is cast and
spued out: so, so soon as any tempest of temptation has stirred up a wicked
man's mind, and one temptation begins to fight with another, many foming and
corrupt affections are spued out which disturb the peace of the mind and
offend all the beholders.

God his children seeing those troubles to help them, which hurt the world,
find only the truth of this doctrine, howsoever in time of prosperity the
wicked would seem to be in as great quietness as the other. But as the deep
sea in a calm day seems to be as still as other waters, until by the
tempest of winds the raging of the one make a plain difference from the
other: so the wicked do seem to have as great peace as the godly, whilst no
trouble blows upon them: but so soon as the storm of temptation arises,
then the hellish waves of their fearful torments yield a manifest distinction
between their rage and the estate of the godly.

The very Heathen had a taste of these unquiet brunts and anguishes of spirit,
which they termed Furies, which toss a man's conscience with such continual
accusations, as neither Furies.
eating nor drinking, nor sleeping nor waking, nor speaking, nor keeping
silence they can find any quiet. Neither is there any greater plague than
this, as testifies the Wiseman in the book of the Proverbs: Give me any
plague, saving the plague of the heart, etc. No marvel: for when our reason
and appetite fight one with another, and there is an hurly burly within us, we
shall find nothing to be more precious than the peace of conscience, which so
commends us to God, that we shall find in trouble peace, in banishment our
country, in imprisonment liberty, in death life. What madness then is it to
put this peace from us, and to hale toward us as with cart ropes these direful
plagues of the spirit, which so torment us in this life, and without repentance
in death will bring us to hell. If then by the grace of God his spirit, we
would often set before us some serious meditation of death, and think earnestly
of our departure from hence, even as our deliverance out of the flesh were then
at hand, doubtless we should find by that an approved trial of the image of
that estate which we should have, if death indeed were present. And if in the
quietness of our minds on our beds at midnight, we would without hypocrisy
present our selves before God his judgment seat, as if Christ in that
instance did appear in the clouds, we would redeem this benefit and peace of
conscience with all the goods in the world. Wherefore as the Prophet exhorts
us, it is good thus to examine our selves, and not to tarry the trial of our
hearts, until affliction comes upon us, but in the calm of our minds to use
this practice in trembling. Let us pray then that this may still sound in our
ears, that unto them that love God, all things shall turn to the best, as we
may see Josh. 1. Psalm. 1. Romans 8. And as to them that love, all things counted
ill, do turn to the best: so to the wicked all things that are counted good
do turn to the worst: so that when a man's conscience does boil with finne,
all his pleasures, profits and glory will the further feed on him to his
grief, and awake the more the troubles of his mind. Contrariwise, the godly
in the death of Christ shall have all their troubles so sanctified, that reason
would wonder to see their happy issues out of so fearful dangers. Yet we see
God his promise will bring it to pass.

Well, we see how this verse follows of experience the verse going before, as
if the Prophet had said: I see, O Lord, that they that love the law have good
success, and whatsoever befalls to flesh and blood most contrary, it is
turned to their salvation: contrariwise in them that fear thee not, I observe
thus much, how they are plagued here and there, and how in their chief
felicity they are subject to thy curse. For as for the^ that are delighted
with thy law, if they be rich, they swell not; if they abound, they are not
puffed up; if they prosper in name, body and goods, they are not proud, but
use this world as though they used it not: if thou call them to a contrary
estate, they are thankful; and if they want, or fall into sickness, or infamy,
they fret not, they despair not; they are not so appalled in their spirits,
but still they believe on thee, they call on thee, they glorify thee, even
until their deaths.

We shall not only see the truth of this in the Patriarchs and Prophets, and
Apostles, and in the Primitive Church, but also in the Saints of God of late
memory in King Edward his days, who used their time as though they used it
not, when affliction came, they neither feared, nor forswore themselves, but
quietly suffered imprisonment, banishment, torment and martyrdom, as the dear
children of God. We may call now to mind how the blessed man David behaved
himself in all his miseries, and how Saul plunged himself in disobedience,
who thinking in time of God his judgment to follow his own wi^, fell from
sin to sin, until he fell into a fury, when he began to ask counsel
of the devil, and afterward by the justice of God had a miserable death. The
like we may see in the Egyptians, Babylonians, Caldeans and Israelites, when
they forsook the Lord. In comparing these things together, we shall mark the
works of God, and how they that love not the truth in love, are plagued of the
Lord with anguish, distractions, and terrors of mind, some ending their lives
in treasons, some in prophanenes, some in heresies, some in shame, and some
otherwise.

They that love thy law, etc Romans 8. 28* We know that all things work together
for the best unto them that love God, etc. This is a thing worthy of
observation, that he says, They that love thy law. For it is an easy matter
to say, that we love God, as Heretics, Atheists, and the Family of love will
brag, but they love not with the man of God the word, which is the true and
only touch stone to t^ie us, whether we love God or no. Wherefore the Apostle
John says* 1 Ioh. 5 3 This is the love of God if we keep his commandments.
This then must be remembered, whatsoever love we pretend to God, we must bear
it to his word; and look how little our love is to the word, so little in
truth is our love to God. And this is that which discerns the fervent love
of the godly, from the cold love of the wicked. Wherefore as the Prophet says,
Psalm. 16. 5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance: so he says Psalm
119. 111. Thy test montes have I taken as mine heritage for ever. We must
think then that this doctrine stands in need of our meditation and prayer,
to try ourselves, if we f^^re the Lord, how we fear his threatenings; if we
love the Lord, how we are affected to his promises, and to that which he
commands. So shall we see that the godly have the Angels of God continually
waiting on them, least they should hurt their foot against a stone; and though
they have many troubles, yet they take no offense at them. If we diligently
consider how David prospered, whilst he continued in the love of God, what
distress in his affairs disquietnes of mind, streights in his kingdom* and
punishments in his children be felt, when he began to love carnally, we shall
have a sufficient truth of this doctrine. And for our example we have seen,
how they that loved God, either died well, as they lived well; or else by their
martyrdom glorified God, and edified others, who never sought great things in
prosperity, nor were impatient in adversity. If we fear with Baruch, Iere.
45. the woeful troubles at hand, we are unfit to purchase glory to the Lord:
but if we be of Jeremiah his mind, as considering how God has always
assisted his, and that if we bear the cross patiently with his children, who
were justified, sanctified and blessed, we also shall be justified,
sanctified, and blessed, and shall have our faith strengthened, whereby we may
the better glorify him. For as the curse causeless shall fly away, and do
no harm: so heaven and earth shall pass, but not one word of the Lord shall
fail.

Verse. 166 Lord, I have trusted in thy salvation, and have done thy
testimonies.
HEre the man of God particularly applies that to himself, which generally
before he had spoken: whose meaning is thus much: I have seen that they that
labor to keep a good conscience, shall have peace: therefore I labor to
keep a good conscience, in hope that the same will come to me.

Now let us first carry away the lesson, namely, to apply that particularly to
ourselves, Application.
which we hear, read, or receiud of others generally. And as he seeing the
peace of the godly generally, labored to feel the same in himself
particularly: even so we are not to satisfy our selves with the general
threatenings of the law, and promises of the Gospel, but to make them several
and particular to our selves. We see whatsoever the law teaches generally; the
prophecies inculcate particularly, whether it be in threatenings or promises, in
things commanded or forbidden. Wherefore let every man desire of God that he
may be a Prophet to himself, by laying the line of the word to his own
conscience, in this or such like manner: This thing the Lord commanded,
therefore I must do it, for he commands me; this thing the word forbids,
therefore I must avoid it, for it is forbidden me: this the Lord threatens to
such a sinner, if I lie in that sin, I am to fear it: this the Gospel
promises to them that repent; then I hope upon repentance to feel the comfort
of it. For this is the true use of hearing, when by this mean we are either
comforted and encouraged to do well, or terrified and dismayed to do ill.

The words in their original tongue signify thus much: I have waited for thy
salvation. Wherein is commended unto us a special effect of faith, which must
be seen in waiting Waiting an effect of faith Asou^d faith breeds a good
conscience.
for that which is promised. The first general truth that we must here take
profit by, is, that if we will keep a good conscience, we must have a sound
faith, which breeds a good conscience, and without which it is impossible to
please God. If we then will do good things, we must believe in God, as the
author of all goodness, wisdom, and eternity, and that he has made a sweet
covenant with us, and believing this to be true, we must labor to keep his
commandments. For without this faith, we do good or avoid ill, either for
hope of reward, or for fear of ill: so that our obedience is violent,
constrained, and not free. He believed not only, but also looked patiently for
those promises, which is here showed by waiting. For many say, they love the
word who do not in truth believe it; or if they believe it, as they will say,
they do not patiently wait for it, and many think they fear God, who
worship rather an Idol, and stay not themselves on God his promises. Many so
persuade themselves to have faith, who will make haste that God should
presently help: which if it come not, they withdraw themselves, and seek
means to serve themselves. These declare themselves not to have this waiting
faith. Faith (says the holy Ghost, Heb. 11. 1.) is the ground of things which
are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen. So that it is a
thing which brings us to the hope of that, which afterward we shall possess.
As he that believes shall live by faith: so he that waits not on the Lord,
has no true faith, because he will not tarry for the Lords appointed time,
but will provide for himself. The Prophet says, Esaias. 30. 18. Blessed are all
they that wait for the Lord. And Habac. 2. 3. Though the vision tarry, (says
the Lord) w^ite: for it shall surely come and not stay. Again, it is said
Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord delights in them that fear him, and attend upon his
mercy. A doctrine worthy to be written with the Diamond of God his Spirit in
our hearts. This then is one of the chiefest effects of faith, when we wait on
the Lords leisure, and make a distinction of the time of making and
accomplishing Gods promises unto us. For between the one and the other, God
sends often cross things in the way to try us, whether we will wait or no.
Indeed at the first, whilst our faith is but tender, it pleases him to feed
us as it were with pap, and to perform his promises plentifully unto us: but
when we are grown to some strength, he will not still deal with us as with
children, but will often prove us by suspending for a while his promises. If we
consider how Abraham waited ten years, until the promise was accomplished,
and how Jacob stayed himself one and twenty years, until he also obtained:
and if we call to mind how long the Lord proved Joseph, after he had dreamed,
and how he tried David with many troubles, and yet notwithstanding after so
many temptations and dangers they believed, we shall see approved witnesses of
this true effectual faith. And as it is the nature of Incredulity hasty.
true faith to wait; so it is the nature of incredulity to be hasty, so that
if we have not things presently to help us, we cannot be merry, we must make
some shifts to help our selves. For how common a fruit of our unbelief is it,
that we so often have in our troubles, and bring forth of the rotten stock of
our corrupt nature, when help is a little deferred, to say, I have prayed, I
have asked counsel of Physicians, I have used all the means I can, I have
stayed thus long, I may wait indeed until my heart break, I have made hue
and cry, I can find no release, I am never the better, I must needs go
seek out, I must ask counsel abroad, I must needs go to some wiseman, I
think now the Lord would have me to use some means for my relief. Thus
Satan, after our Savior Christ had long fasted, thinking that after so long
waiting, his temptation should come in some good season moved our Savior
Christ to seek out, and to make some shift to help himself, and as he was
the Son of God, so he might the better and more easily provide for himself.

Thus we see the man of God speaks not only of a small faith, but of a
patient faith, A patient faith. Impatience.
and the cause of impatiencie is want of faith. Of this faith speaks the
Prophet Esai. 28 16. Behold, I will lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that believes shall not make
haste, to wit, to by-waies and indirect means, as casting off his hope of God
his promises. Of the contrary the want of faith speaks our Savior Christ,
Luke 18. 8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?
Likewise Heb. 10. when the Apostle had said, The just shall live by faith, If
any withdraw himself, (his mind is not upright in him) my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. Again, Habac. 2. when the Lord had commanded the Prophet to
wait, he says, He that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in him,
that is, he has a troubled mind, and unquiet spirit. Wherefore let us attend
upon that exhortation of the Apostle, Iam. 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience
of Job, and have known what end the Lord made: As if he should say, ye are not
ignorant of that my error of patience, who, when the Lord suspended his
judgments, still waited for the accomplishments of his promises. Whosoever
then thinks himself to have faith, and by patience cannot wait for the Lord
his leisure, and due time of help, but withdraws himself, and makes haste
to other means, and not staying himself on God his word and promises, but
hastneth, and cannot be quiet in his mind, until presently he have gotten
some help, he is as yet an unbeliever.

And I have done thy Commandments. Even as without faith it is impossible to
please God, so is it impossible truly to trust in God his salvation, unless we
labor by faith to True faith not without good works.
serve him in love, and to please him with good works. Wherefore as the
Apostle has taken up the truth of this rule, so he shows Heb. 11. how all
the Fathers by their faith did travel in good works: By faith (says he) Abel
offered unto God, a greater sacrifice than Cain; by faith was Enoch taken away;
by faith Noah prepared the Arc; by faith Abraham obeyed God; through faith
Sarah received strength to conceive, etc.

A contrary argument to that which we have in our times, where our faith and
profession is so barren of good works. True it is, that when we will glory
before God, all boasting in good works is shut out, in that, if he enters
into judgment with the best of our actions, he shall find them polluted with
many imperfections, so that we can by no means stand before him, but in faith:
but, Iam. 2. 20. Will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which
is without works, is dead? was not Abraham our father justified through
works? To justify diversely taken.
etc. where we must note the diverse significations of the word ( justify) if
we will show these two propositions to be true, and how they may be reconciled,
we are justified by faith, we are justified by works. For as God sanctifies
us, when he makes us partakers of his holiness; and we sanctify him, when we
show him to be holy: so God is said to justify us, when we are approved just
before God; and we justify God, when we testify that he is just. In like
manner faith justifies us, in that it acquiteth us before God from our sins
for Christ his sake, in whom we believe: works justify us, in as much as they
witness to us, and to men, that we are justified by faith before God, whereof
our sanctification is a pledge.

So that we mean nothing else, when we say, we are justified by works, than if
we should How we are justified by works.
say, We declare and make known, that we are justified by these works. For
when every good work is of the spirit of God, and the spirit of God is given
to none, but to the children of God; when we fail in doing many things,
whereunto we are by Gods spirit moved; and in those things which we do, we
corrupt those motions, so that our best actions stand in need of faith, to
have them purged in Christ his perfect obedience: it is manifest, that our
works only give a testimony to our selves, and others, that we are justified.

If then we have true faith, it must work by love, that as faith does acquit
us from sin before God; so good works may give evidence thereof before men.
When then we are carried away with dullness in good things, and with deadness
in weldoing, we are to try our hearts, if we want, God is not pleased with us,
if we have says without works, we deceive our selves.

The meaning then of the man of God in this place, is thus much: Because I
know, that they have happy success, that love thee and obey thy word; this
moves me to keep a good conscience. So we have learned thus much, that it is
but folly to boast of faith without Simile.
good works. For as we judge a man to be alive, so long as we perceive his
vital spirits, his animal powers, and natural operations to exercise
themselves, and think that he is not dead, whilst the faculties of the mind
are exercised in the senses, members and powers of the body; but
notwithstanding that life it self is a thing most secret, yet by a man's
seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, going and working we discern the same;
even so, so long as we perceive the fruits of God his spirit, and new birth,
and the effects of grace, and fruits of sanctification in the soul, we think
him not spiritually dead, in whom these things are: And notwithstanding says,
which is the life of Gods children, be a most secret thing; yet when we can
open our eyes, to see the wonderful word of God to his praise, and shut them
from seeing vanities; when our ears are open to the works of God, and closed,
and dull to hear worldly vanities; when our mouths can speak of Gods
judgments, and are dumb in leasings: we may judge by these and the like
effects, that there is the life of Christ in us. And herewithall we must
observe, as these natural workings are not the cause of life, but that rather
insomuch as we live, these things do exercise themselves in us: even so the
good works are no cause why we are good or live by faith, but because by faith
in Christ we are accounted good and just before the Lord, therefore we are
good. For as the tree has not his goodness of the fruits, but the fruits have
their goodness, because Simile.
first the tree was good, so we cannot be said to be good in respect of our
works, but our works are good in respect of us justified before by faith. And
although the sap, life and Simile.
nourishment of the tree, be a thing most secret and hidden from common sense;
yet by the leaves, buds, greenes and fruits thereof we draw knowledge of the
life in it: so though our life which is hidden in Christ, be hidden from flesh
and blood, yet by the holy practices of good works, we easily discern the
same.

Now for want of this, we may see the great judgment of God in suffering the
Papists, heretics, and family of love to spoil us of this peace of
conscience, by teaching their false opinions of justification by works. Which
thing seeing they hold the rather, with seeing the cold profession of worldly
Protestants, it must needs humble us. For thus reason they, that are unstable
in the truth, Surely their profession is not according to the truth, it is so
barren of good works, and they maintain not the true doctrine, whose lives are
so contrary to their professions. Woe be to them, by whom these offenses do
justly come, and woe be to them that take such offenses, and that shut wilfully
their eyes, and will not see the truth. Howbeit we are to profit hereby, and to
travel in a greater care of good works, whereby we may stop these blasphemous
mouths of the adversaries.

Verse. 167. My soul has kept thy testimonies: for I love them exceedingly.
HEre he confirms the same doctrine which he used before, for in saying my
soul has kept thy testimonies, is all one as if he should have said, I have
looked (or waited) on thy salvation. For as we often observed, the man of God
means the covenant which engenders faith, as the records and testimonials of
Gods favor toward us. So that the effect of these words is thus much: I have
an entire care in sincerity of faith, to increase the blessed witnesses of thy
love toward me. It is an usual phrase among the Hebrews, when they would
express their vehement affection to any thing to say, My soul: as Psalm. 103.
1. and 104. 1. My soul praise thou the Lord, and Luke 1. My soul does
magnify the Lord. So that here the Prophet does not only outwardly commend the
law, but says, that he has sworn and will perform the keeping of God his
testimonies* With the heart, says the Apostle, we believe, showing that the
heart is the proper place of faith, and not the brain, and that we must as well
be touched in affection, as in outward bettering of our judgment. They must be
vehement passions of the mind wherewith we must let the testimonies of God
sink down into the depth of our hearts. Wherefore we are here to learn that
our over profession of the Gospel will not acquit us before God his judgment
seat.

For I love them exceedingly: that is, They are not of small value with me, I
love them entirely, because they are things most precious unto me. This is the
high dignity and estimation which we owe and should perform to the sweet
testimonies of our salvation. Wherefore our Savior Christ says: the kingdom
of heaven is like unto a treasure which is hidden, which when a man finds,
for joy he sells all that he has, to purchase that. Thus we see the man of
God having made mention of faith, makes mention also of love, teaching us,
that true faith works by love.

Also he shows us, that the cause why the comfortable promises of the Gospel
so soon slip from us, and our comforts are so momentany, and griefs so sore
charge us and ouerwhelme us, is, even because we have laid up these promises
rather in the brain, than in the heart. This is too short, cold and small a
love for the profession of the Gospel, and bewrays the want of faith; and
the want of faith declares a want of love. For if we know aright, what an
inestimable treasure the promises of God were, in that in them we have the
assurance of all our sins pardoned, of God his providence watching over us,
his Angels ministering to us, his creatures waiting on us, that we shall be
companions not only with his Saints and Angels, but heirs and fellow heirs
with Christ, and that after this life a happy crown of glory is laid up for
us, we should more highly esteem of them, then we do, and more heartily love
them. For what makes worldlings so to love gold, but that they think it the
most precious metal? what causes ambitious men so to set by preferme^t, but
that they think it the best thing for them? what causes the man so to love or
like his wife, or the woman her husband, but that they are persuaded, that none
in the world were fitter each for other? When our Savior Christ would have
Peter to be careful in ouerseeing his flock, he uses this trial, love
thou me Peter? And the Apostle said, how through love he was enforced to preach
Christ to the Church. This the^ must not be faint and feeble love, but a
straightened and ^aborsome affection, which is still occupied in adorning the
thing loved, and cannot satisfy it self in thinking of it, and in speaking of
it, and in doing it, so that the greatness of the persuasion draws out the
greatness of the affection.

It is then a drowsy dream which some hold for a settled opinion, who think
that love goes before faith, when the very heathen saw by the light of nature,
that a man could not love, that which he knew not. And we know that faith is a
knowledge with a full persuasion; so that if we love the word exceedingly, we
are persuaded by an exceeding faith of the word which we love, and this faith
showing it self in love, is fruitful in good works. Look in what measure we
are persuaded of the goodness of the thing, in that measure we love it.

Verse. 168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are
before thee.
WE have heard the man of God speaking of his faith and love, whereunto now he
joins his fear, which moved him to keep both the testimonies of the Lord
and his precepts. So that if we will grow to this measure of obedience, we must
first labor for faith to believe, faith must work by love, and love breed in
us a reverent fear of God his majesty, which fear must engender in us a care
to please God, and a grief to displease him: so that we may thus show the
prophet his meaning. Lord, I set all my doings open in thy sight, wherefore I
am careful to do any thing which thou commaundest, and afraid to do any
thing thou forbiddest. So that we learn for our instruction, that as the very
motions of his heart were laid open before the Lord, whereby he was armed with
this care and fear; so if we will be beautified with the like affections we
must use the like means. True it is that God sees all men's ways, and gageth
the hearts of al, as well of the wicked, as of his children, howbeit all
believe not, all see not this in themselves* The wicked may confess it so to
be in outward things, but doubtless they are not in truth persuaded that God
does see their hearts. For if they were, how durst they do that in the sight of
God and his Angels* which they dare not do in the sight of the daylight and
of a little child? Bu^ let them cover their sins in the depth of their hearts,
let the^ hide them with darkness, surely the Lord will keep them in a
register, and in time will lay all their sins before them, that all the world
may know how they have buried the long suffering of the Lord in the hollow
graves of their hypocrisy. Wherefore every man, that will show himself thus to
be persuaded of Gods al-seeing presence, must show it by an earnest care of
obedience, and a reverent fear of disobedience, whereof the one, that is the
fear of disobedience is showed in the first verse of this octonarie, the other
is showed in the last.

Shall we then assure our selves, that we be persuaded indeed that God does
behold us, let us search our hearts whether we have these or the like
affections. For dare a subject in the presence of his prince commit any thing
against the laws for fear of a check, or rather will he not be careful in
the eyes of his sovereign to do all things to his liking and contentation?
Dare a good child in the presence of his father willingly break his
commandment for fear of controlment, or will he not rather endeavor to be
very dutiful for hope of commendation? Then doubtless without this care and
fear we receive our souls with this drowsy dream and vain persuasion of
Gods beholding us. Wherefore how dare ^h^ heretics, papists and family of
love, persuade themselves to walk before the Lord, seeing they have not
submitted themselves to his word, which is the only instrume^^ that makes
naked the conscience of man, as it is Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is lively and
(...) operation, etc. and it is added in the verse following; Neither is there
any creatur^* which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and
open unto his eyes. So that they wh^^^ are not truly instructed in the word,
cannot truly have their sins laid naked* and they which have not their sins
laid open, cannot in the fear of God forsal^e their corruptions. Wherefore in
like manner all ignorant persons may persuade themselves, that they please God
and walk before him in care and fear, but they do but deceive their own
souls. But if we can truly say this, with pure trial of it in our hearts, it
is most certain, it will serve in stead of an hundredth rules besides for the
right direction and holy government of our lives.

In that the man of God says, that he kept both the precepts and the
testimonies, he gives us to understand, that if we will in truth be persuaded
that God sees us in all things* we must believe his testimonies, and observe
his statutes because we can neither believe aright, unless our faith works
by love, neither be our works acceptable, but as they be the fruits of faith.

There is indeed a fear without this faith, but it is a servile and slavish,
far differing from that childish and filial fear which is here understood.
For as a servant may obey and do his outward task rather for fear of stripes
of his master, if he should not do it, then for any pure love; and the child
is in all things obedient, not so much that he is afraid of the rod, as he is
loath to have the least displeasure of his loving father: so we may use the
outward obedience in a carnal fear, trembling at the severe threatenings of
God, as of a judge, but without this, we shall leese the care to please him,
as loath to be deprived of his fatherly countenance and affection toward us. So
that without this faith we are in danger to walk either in secret pride, or
else in slavish fear. But faith makes us come liberally and cheerfully ^o
obedience, when we shall see, that he will not deal roughly with us, as
judging us according to our deserts, but as bearing with our infirmities, and
sparing us as a merciful father. Neither, as dare I affirm, did ever any
truly obey God, which in some measure had not this fear of God before his
eyes, where by they feared him as a God, and loved him as a father.

Gods children dare not dally with their most privy thoughts, for they know
that God sees in darkness as well as in delight: he is the God of the night as
of the day, and to him they are both as one; he beholds their thoughts a
far off, and there is no word in their tongu: which he knows not: they know
he is privy to their down lyings, and vprisings; to their goings out, and their
commings in; neither can they in any place, high or low, far or near, early or
late fly from his al-seeing presence. If they do ill, they tarry not long to
seek reconcilement, because they know that his judgments are according to
truth: if they do well, they are not proud of it. This works in them a
wonderful boldness in Gods causes, and brings them to fear, when their
cause is not good. Again, it breeds patience in trouble, profit in
slanders, meeknes, when the world contemns them, seen in secret sins,
knowing that when the world has passed in judgment on them* there ^^^ll
judgment in greater truth be given of them by Christ. And again, though they
escape the judgments of man; yet they shall not escape the judgments of God.
But as the Lord throws the wicked with their hypocrisi^s to hell: So he will
humble and punish his children with sore corrections. So that this is the way
of them that walk before the Lord, they know in time the Lord will reward, and
make known their secret godliness, and in time punish and make known their
secret sins.

If it come to pass that Gods children forget themselves sometimes to be in
their Fathers presence, as earthly children rejoice sometimes to be from their
Fathers, that they might play the more: nevertheless after they come to be
ashamed and grieved, when they consider that all that time their Father espied
and marked them: and though they did forget that their Father saw them, being
carried away with some strong lust, the best they know is to return in time.
For then they begin to reason on this mannner: Oh what a wretch was I, to do
this in the eyes of my God, and in the presence of my Father: so that as we see
this consideration of Gods presence brings grief for sins present; so it
makes after the examinations of our selves ashamed of sins past.

We heard before how it also works patience in us, when our good causes,
have not good success, because we remember that Psalm: 34. The eyes of the
Lord art over the just, and his ears are open to their prayers: Whereupon we
recover our selves, with this and such like meditations: Well I am misdeemed, I
am suspected, I see I am ill thought of, I know in the end, that the Lord
seeing my cause to be good, and to be used with a good heart, will defend me;
and he seeing their cause to be ill, and how they maintain it with an ill
heart, will in time give them the overthrow: and I holding a general good
thing, though in particulars I fail, yet mercy being with the Lord, that he
might be feared, know that he will look upon me.

And as God his children are afraid of their secret corruptions: so in their
troubles they dare appear to the Lord, who sees all things. We further are
here to learn, if we look on the law, and on the gospel, without any
consideration of the presence of GOD, it will work in us a mercenarie fear,
and will breed a care to do well in hope of commodity, and a fear to
displease for fear of punishment. True it is, as we be carnal, we need such
second helps of promises and threatenings: yet we must know that to be true
faith in the promises of GOD, which is mixed with faith in his threatenings; and
that is true fear of his threatenings, which is tempered with fear of his
mercies. For thus we shall walk in a fear of his Majesty, as he is a God,
and in fear of losing his fatherly mercy and countenance as he is our Father;
and so shall we not commit gross sins, for fear of his judgments, nor
fear too much when we commit secret sins, because we know him to be
merciful, in that he will not sooth nor cocker us in any sin, as wanton
mothers do their children, nor always be checking and taunting us as a severe
and austere father, to dull us for our secret sins.

PORTION 22. TAV.
Verse. 169. Let my complaint come before thee, O Lord, and give me
understanding according unto thy Word.
THe argument of that which has been before, is still continued, which was
briefly contained in these two things, either that he prayed for a clearer
understanding of Gods word, or else yt with his good understanding he might
have a more godly life. So that the brief sum of this octonarie is, that he
first prays for the true direction of himself in his judgment; then for the
true fruit of his knowledge in his life. For in the four former verses he
prays for sou^dnes of judgment, and in the four latter, that the issues of
Gods promises might appear in a godly life. In the two first verses he prays
for understanding; in the two next, he promises to be thankful. In the first
verse, he desires to be truly directed in the word; in the second to be rid
from all streights and hindrances of his knowledge. In the first part of the
first verse, he asks not his suite simply, but earnestly, as with complaint.
What means this, that he should pursue his old argument^ it seems that
either he was very blockish in understanding, who still prayed for his direction
in judgment, and that we are very quick in the knowledge of the word, who use
so sewe prayers; or that we are very blockish in seeing our wants, and he
quicksighted in his own corruptions. For it must needs be confessed, if the man
of God could not without using of so many means, attain to the pure
understanding of Gods word, and we persuade our selves that we with fewer means
can attain unto it, that there was either a marvelous dulnes in him, and
there is some wonderful freshnes in us; or else, that he saw much, what an
hard matter it is, either to come to, or continue in the true knowledge of the
law, which we see not. But seeing it is manifest, that he was a man of God, and
as a Prophet governed by the spirit of God, and yet so reverently and carefully
used all the means, then we are in a blockish blindness, and senseles deadnes,
who having in no measure the like graces, in no degree use the like means: And
that as on him was Gods great blessing: so unto us is due the resting of his
deserved curse. It is a manifest token that he had a marvelous sight and
feeling of his wants, in that he so often renueth his request to be taught, and
as may evidently appear, by his doubling of his prayer, at the least in every
portion. For to take some short view of all the portions going before, we shall
see port. 1. 5. he says. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
Port. 2. 4. Blessed art thou, o Lord, teach me thy statutes. 3. 2. Open mine
eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy law: I am a stranger upon earth, hide
not thy commandments from me. 4. 3. Make me to understand the way of thy
truth, and I will meditate in thy wondrous works: take from me the way of
lying, and grant me graciously thy law. 5. 1. Teach me the way of thy
statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end: give me understanding, and I shall
keep thy law, yea I will keep it with mine whole heart: direct me in the
paths of thy commandments. 8. 8 The earth o Lord is full of thy mercy, teach
me thy statutes. 9. 2. Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have
believed thy commandments: thou art good and gracious, teach me thy statutes.
10. 1. Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me, give me understanding
therefore, that I may learn thy commandments. 11. 8. Quicken me according to
thy loving kindness, so shall I keep thy testimonies of thy mouth. In the 15.
portion, he shows the fruits and effects of the word. Port. 14. 1. he
shows that it was a lantern to his feet, and a light to his paths. 15. 4.
Stablish me according to thy promise, that I may live. 16 5. I am thy servant,
grant me therefore understanding, that I may know thy testimonies. 17. 5.
Direct my steps in thy word, etc. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy
servant, and teach me thy statutes. 18. 8. The righteousness of thy testimonies
is everlasting, grant me understanding, and I shall live* 19. 5. Hear my voice
according to thy loving kindness: O Lord quicken me according to thy judgments.
20. 7. Quicken me according to thy judgments. 7. Quicken me according to thy
loving kindness, and here he says, Lord I make my pitiful moan unto thee for
this knowledge. Was he not now, shall we think thoroughly persuaded, that the
word of God is a treasure, seeing he would meditate of it, run after it,
seek early and late, pray for it, and practice it continually? this must make
us ashamed of our cold love unto it.

Well, we see here that the man of God does not ouerly, or lightly ask this
heavenly knowledge, hypocrites may stretch out their throtes, and yell with
their voices as loud as he: but the man of God in the bitterness of his spirit
complains to God of his wants, and from the abundance of the heart prays
thus to the Lord. And besides his much and continually praying, we see his
other exercises in meditating, at morning and evening, his praising God seven
times a day, his teaching and conferring with others. Wherefore we must needs
see and confess, that either he was very vile, and we very holy: or he most
holy, and we very vile. Shall we hope to attain this without using the like
means? Did not he attain to Knowledge without so many means, and shall we
attain to it with using of no means? Shall we think the Lord will be more
partial with us, than he was with his beloved Prophet? Did not the man of God
obtain without asking often, and shall we obtain without asking at all? Shall
he cry and call, pray and complain, watch, and wake to get understanding, and
shall we slugge and do nothing? Or did it more appertain to him to do these
things; or do they less concern us, seeing he did them for our instruction?
The holy Ghost has for no other end blessed the commendation of so good men to
us, then for a type of godliness, which we must follow, and whereby he
vouchsafes as it were to open heaven gates for us, and to give us access to
the treasures of heaven. Surely, it was not for any profit of the Prophet
himself, who did it, but for all posterity to come, to put us in mind of our
corruption, to show how we should strive against it. Wherefore it stands us
in hand more carefully, more frequently, more fervently to use prayer, if ever
we will hope for the like graces. For the Lord has promised, that if we
knock on this sort, the door of knowledge shall be opened; if we seek
wisdom on this sort, we shall surely find her; if we crave understanding
with this affection and ala^^^^e, we shall receive plentifully. We must then in
our behalf know, that we must knock and that instantly, we must seek and
that carefully, we must ask and that diligently, with an holy importunity.
Away then with our old drowsines, God will not bestow his hidden secrets, his
treasures, his mysteries, his jewels upon them, who vouchsafe not to ask them.
For seeing the things which he promises in his word be no small things, but
such as the eye has not seen, the ear heard, tongue expressed, nor heart
conceived; shall we think to come to them by shutting our eyes, by making dull
our ears, by closing up our mouths, and hardening our hearts? Surely no.
Behold then this vehement praying of the man of God, for a president for us to
follow.

But why should the man of God here pray for understanding? had he not often
prayed for it before? was he a nouice in knowledge being a Prophet* does not
our Savior Christ Repetitio^s in prayer how reproved.
reprehend repetitions and babbling in prayer? True it is our Savior Christ
does reprehend that babbling, which is without faith and knowledge, and a
feeling of our wants, but he speaks not against these serious and often
repetitions, which proceed from a plentiful knowledge, abundant faith, and
lively feeling of our necessities. Again, although it cannot be denied, but he
was a man of God, and had received great graces, yet God gives knowledge to
his dearest Saints in this life but in part, and the most which we see and know
is the least thing, which we see not, nor know. Besides, when we have
knowledge, and knowledge must be brought into practice, we shall find such
difficulties, such wawardnes, such forgetfulness, such wants, that although we
have had with the Prophet a very good direction in the general things of the
word, which are universal and few; yet we shall find many distractions in our
practices, which must be particular and many, and we shall either fail in
memory by forgetfulness, or in judgment by blindness, or in affection by
dulnes. So easily may we slip, when we think we may hold our journey on.
Wherefore the man of God, through that examination which he took of his heart
and affections, seeing those manifold streights and difficulties, prays in
the verse following, not for the renewing of men in general troubles, but for
the hindering of his particular estate and condition.

Verse. 170. Let my supplication come before thee, and deliver me according to
thy promise.
Well now, if we only consider those former causes, we shall see that here is no
vain repetition, and that in nothing this prayer was made too often. For
besides that, as we said, we know here but in part, we forget also that which
we know, and we cannot practice that which we remember: so that it is a rare
thing to have a good judgment, but rarer when we have a good judgment to
have a good affection, and most rare when we have a good judgment and a sound
affection, to have them still. For we have not in us any indwelling
righteousness. Again, as it had not been sufficient for us to have had light
heretofore, and not to have it now; or having it now, unless we have it
hereafter: so it is requisite Simile.
for our life which we hold in Christ, that we have not only had judgment
heretofore, unless we have it now; and it is not sufficient to have it now,
unless we have it hereafter. For they that think their judgment is perfect
enough, and their affections holy, had no need to have Christ to be their
schoolmaster, who teaches the simple and ignorant; they that are whole need
him not to be their physician, who came not to call the righteous: but sinners
to repentance. But God his children seeing their ignorance and corrupt
affections, even by experience (the schoolemistresse of schools) know, how
needful it is daily to crave knowledge, and continually to labor for a good
conscience. On the contrary part, who so bold as blind bayard; who so lofty
as he that understands least; who so proud, as he that has but slender
knowledge? But surely the children of God, who are conscious still of their
deadnes and dulnes in heavenly things, would even have despaired, had they not
seen the same in the Saints of God before them, and had they not received from
God this holy Psalm, both for a pattern of godliness, to their instruction,
and also for an example, how they might be rid from their ignorance, deadnes,
and dulnes, and how they might be comforted, when after much striving and
shaking them off, they return to them again to their consolation. For when we
see that the Saints of God before us have had such fightes, not only with
corruptions of ill judgment, and corrupt affections, which they had of nature:
but after they have been renewed by knowledge, and therewithal consider, that
by prayer alone they have been revived, we are assured and comforted, that if
we continue, and renew our prayers, GOD will continue and renew his graces in
us. Thus we see as well to our consolation as instruction, that the Saints of
GOD were not only not safe from presumptuous sins, but also they labored to
see the errors of this life, and also desired to be rid from the dangerous
and sluggish sins of profane professors, who will see nothing at all.

According to thy Word. These words will bear a double interpretation: for
either the meaning of them is, give me understanding, which is according to the
prescript truth of thy holy Word; or else, according as thou have promised in
the Word, to them that by prayer ask it of thee. But because this latter
sense comprehends the former, I more willingly embrace the latter. For if God
help us according to his promise, it is doubtless according to his word, for
he promises nothing which is not agreeable with his word. Besides; this may
be pr^ued by that which is added in the verse following, where he says,
according to thy promise.

Now in that he repeateth the same thing, he shows, that certainly God has
promised to help and relieve his necessity. Neither must we think that this
promise was made to David alone, who alone had not such infirmities, but he
speaks as a member of the Church: for the promise appertains to the Church,
and to all in the Church universally; Howbeit, look what the Lord had promised
to all generally, he applies to himself particularly. Promises are general.
For we may see both in this Psalm, Port 17* 2. The entrance into thy word
shows light, and gives understanding to the simple; as also Psalm. 19. 7. The
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives light to the simple: that the
promise is general, and as well appertains to us as to him. So that the
meaning of this latter part is nothing else but this; as thou have promised to
give knowledge to them that seek it, so Lord give it me: for I thus seek it.
Thus we see how needful it is to have knowledge of God his word, seeing none
obtain but they that pray, according as God has promised in his word,
according to that Ioh. 5. 4 This is the assurance that we have in him, that if
we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Ye ask, says S.
James, cap. 4. 3* and receive not, because ye ask amiss. We must not pray
then for every fantasy, and for every grace that comes into our minds, but
for those things for which we are taught to pray according to the word. But how
can we do this without knowledge? how should we pray to him, in whom we have
not believed? or how Prayer must be joined with faith and knowledge.
should we believe in him, whom we have not known? Whosoever then will pray
aright, must pray in faith, and he that will pray in faith, must also pray in
knowledge.

Again, we are here to observe thus much: that whosoever he be that will be
directed in singular actions, he must acquaint himself with the particular
knowledge of the word. Wherefore let us learn to use often reading, hearing,
and meditating of the word, and with often reading, hearing, and meditating,
let us use often praying, applying, and examining of our selves, that we may
both seek understanding in knowledge, and the obedience Ripenes of judgment,
and quicknes of affections, whence.
of it in our affections. For often reading, hearing, and meditating, bring
ripenes of judgment; often praying, applying, and examining our selves, bring
quicknes of our affections. We shall see then for often praying, the Lord will
drive us to it with often giving of his graces, with the giving of his graces,
he will give necessities, with the giving of necessities, he will often give
occasions to set forth his glory. How shall we pray now without judgment? or
how shall we meditate without knowledge? We must often hear for knowledge
sake, we must often meditate for conscience sake. For as we cannot have profit
in the general knowledge of a thing, without particular meditating of it: so
can we not meditate without some troubling of our mind, unless we do it of
judgment, no more then not having knowledge we can pray, without great
turmoyling and troubling of our mind. Thus we must join all means together;
as first by conference we must labor for knowledge; to make our knowledge
more effectual we must join meditation; and that both knowledge and
meditation may be sanctified, we must use prayer.

Let my supplication come before thee, and deliver me according to thy promise.
Here he prays to be rid from these streights and encombrances, which did
hinder this understanding of the word which he desired. For whereas some
understand it of outward and common troubles, I think, by those things which
go before, and comparing it with those things that follow after, that he
means that deliuera^ct, which might rid him from those things which are
contrary and prejudicial to the things before prayed for, that so both being
enlightened with true knowledge, and delivered from all blindness, he might
praise God more freely and liberally both for his understanding, and for the
escapes of those distresses perplexities, doubts and ignorances of his mind.
And thus considering that he prays to obtaine^ the good things, and to be
delivered from the contrary evil things, let us consider of that which
follows.

According to thy promise, If we will obtain any thing of the Lord, we must
first vow thankfulness; and as we be suitors, we must be thanksgiuers; as we be
suppliants, we must be plentiful in praises to the Lord. For this is the end
of our creation: this is the end of our redemption, this is the end of our
sanctification, this is the end of all our praying, and obtaining, even
plentifully to praise the name of our good God.

Verse. 171. My lips shall speak praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.
AS we learn now that the end of all Gods blessings is thanksgiving, and
unless we Thanksgiving the end of Gods blessings.
purpose and will perform this, we must never look to obtain any thing in
favor: so we are also to learn, that before God teaches us from above, we
are as tonguetide, and cannot pray, before he by his spirit does instruct us,
we cannot once speak of his word. This he shows both in the first portion
and seventh verse: I will praise thee with an upright heart, when I shall have
learned the judgments of thy righteousness: and in the second portion, where
after he has prayed to be taught in the statutes, he promises with his lips
to tell the judgments of the Lord.

We cannot then bless God before he instruct us. When the Lord rectifieth our
knowledge with clear judgment, and renueth our hearts with holy affections,
we are most ready to praise the Lord, according to that in the Psalm: Lord
open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show thy praise. And Romans 8. 29. The
spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not how to pray as we ought, etc.
Wherefore if we live to eat, to drink, to sleep, and not to praise God, we
live no better than bruit beasts, or rather worse: for they praise God in their
willing serving of man's necessities, and according to their kind in their
ways. But man, to whom the Lord has given eyes to look to heaven, ears to
hear his word, speech to sound his praises, a mind to conceive his glorious
works and blessed word, seeing he has these gifts above beasts, it is certain
there must be thankfulness in man above that which is in beasts, unless man
will be judged even by the bruit beasts, to be more guilty of his
condemnation. For as there is no more praying in us, than there is believing:
so there is no believing without knowing God, and there is no thanksgiving,
without both knowing and also beleeing in God. If in any measure therefore we
will praise God, we must in some measure know God; if we will praise God more
than the common sort of men, we must labor to know more than the common sort
of men.

But what means the Prophet, to desire to be taught? was he not well seen
in the word? had he not learned much, as becomes a Prophet? what teaching
does he here mean? knowledge puffs up and is void of humility, confessing
our wants. This is the teaching of the spirit. For it is no doubt but he had
eyes to see as well as others, he had cares to hear, he had an hear to
conceive, he was a man of God. Howbeit, we are to know, that though our eyes
be upon our book, and the word be sounded in our ears; yet it is the spirit
of God that makes us teacheable in judgment, and frameable in our affections.
What have we which we have nor received? it is the gift of God, and to you it
is given, says our Savior Christ to his Disciples, to understand the
mysteries of God. This then being given of God by his spirit, must cause us to
be thankful. Why do so many excel in knowledge? and why do so few give
thanks? surely because they are taught by the letter, and not by the spirit*
For a man may attain to the knowledge of the word, as others attain to the
knowledge of human arts, but to his iuster condemnation. Wherefore in a word
we may conclude, if the man of God might have achieved such knowledge without
such means, he was either too much busied in that wherein he needed not have
troubled himself* or else an hypocrite.

But if we read, that the blind which were restored to their sight, the deaf
whose ears were opened, the dumb, who by the finger of Christ his power did
speak again, acknowledged this to be the only work of God, and were
thankful; although indeed of the ten leapers which were cleansed, one only
was thankful, and nine held their peace: how much are we bound to praise and
magnify the name of our good God, who has delivered us from blindness and
ignorance, wherein we were plunged, to see the bright beams of the glorious
Gospel, who has opened our heavy and dull ears to hear the sweet voice of
the son of God, who has untied our tongues and unclosed our lips, which were
sewed up from sounding the praise of our salvation, yea and which more is, has
untied and restored our feet, to walk in the glorious liberty of the sons
of God, and have cast out of us the devil and his power, and spoiled from
henceforth his kingdom in us, that we might serve the Lord in newnes of
conversation.

We see now, that whosoever is taught aright to the kingdom of God, he shall
praise the Lord. But what is the cause, why this effect is so little found in
us of praising God? even because we are void of the cause, that is, of teaching
of the spirit. For either surely we have none understanding, or else we have
not the understanding of the spirit* O blessed work of Gods spirit,
thanksgiving! This made the Propher say: Psalm: 16. 2. My weldoing extends
not to thee, O Lord. And 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of
the Lord. That is, I will acknowledge his old graces received, and hope that I
shall have his mercies continued. But herein is another thing worthy to be
observed, that according to the proportion of his prayers, is the proportion of
thanksgiving. For as the two former verses contain two prayers; so the two
latter verses contain two thankesgiuings* And mark how according to the
vehemeney of his prayer, there is a vehemency of thanksgiving. For as he had
said let my complaint come before the^: so he adds* my lips shall power eforth
thy praise continually. A word drawn from spoutes or spring-heads, which
abundantly yield water out from them. So to complaints answers the word of
pouring out. In the second he says: Let my supplication come before (...)
Whereunto answers: my tongue shall entreat of thy word: Where he promises to
be no ^^sse shrill in thanksgiving, than loud in praying to the Lord.

Oh, ^^^s throws down the hearts of Gods children, that they can in no
measure nor proportion be thankful for Gods benefits. This unthankfulness
must needs be grievous unto the Lord, which is so odious in the sight of man:
we see, bestow a benefit on a beggar, their suites and complaints do in many
degrees exceed their thanksgiving; and certainly as this unthankfulness is
from man to man: so also it is from man to God. For let us be in pain, in
sickness, in poverty, or any other affliction, and what prayers make we?
what protestations vow we? how often cry we? Lord help me, Lord have mercy
upon me? rid me now Lord, and I will give thanks to thee? But when the rod is
off, how many among ten return to give thanks for our deliverance!
peradventure one. Thus we see how liberal we are in praying, because it is
easy, to see our wants; and how sparing we are in thanksgiving, because we
do not so easily see our benefits. We see how often we are in praying, how
seldom in thanksgiving: we see how fervent we are in craving, how cold we
are in acknowledging the supply of our wants.

If we attain not to this measure and proportion of thanksgiving with the man
of God, at the least let us complain and moan our unthankfulness and
dullness. For we must be assured, that if we offer not in some degree, the
calves of our lips, the Lord has lost his mercies, and spent them as it were
in vain; and we deprive our selves of the fruit of them, to be continued unto
us hereafter.

Verse. 172. My tongue shall entreat of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteous.
ANd though the man of God says here, My tongue shall entreat of thy praises:
We must not therein deny but that our lives must express the fruits of the
same, as we may see port. 5. verse. 1. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy
statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. And port. 1. verse. 8. when the man
of God has promised to praise the Lord with an upright heart, he adds in the
verse following, I will keep thy statutes, etc. As also port. 19. 1. Hear me,
O Lord, and I will keep thy statutes: So that not only in word, but in our
lives must we endeavor to praise God.

It follows in the same verse, For all thy commandments are righteous: that
is, there is no one of thy commandments but it has in it righteousness it
self; neither is there any righteousness, but it is altogether in thy law.

This is an Hebraisme to call a thing righteousness when they will express it
to be righteous in the highest degree. We are here to learn, what yields
matter of teaching others, and of praising God: Even because whatsoever is
good, it is in Gods law; and whatsoever is in Gods law, it is absolutely good.

Besides here the man of God teaches us, that the coldness of teaching others,
and giving of thanks proceeds from hence, even because we want this thorough
persuasion, that whatsoever is in the law of God, it is righteous, perfect and
holy: and whatsoever is righteous, perfect and holy, is in it.

Verse. 173. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.
HEre we see the effect of the man of God his prayers, which has this sense:
As I have prayed for understanding, so that now I might see the issue of it,
let me see, O Lord, thy fatherly and provident care of me. As afterward he
says, Let me see, if thou host true judgment for me. For as he prayed to be
directed by knowledge, so he also prays for the effect of it, that he might
thereby see the merciful hand of God, assisting him in all his troubles.

For I have chosen thy precepts: that is, I know I am but a man, I have many
injuries offered me, which may hale me this way and that way; yet I prefer
thy word before all these troubles. We must not think now, as the world does
judge of Gods children, that he chose these as a Mome, or of silly
simplicity: but his election was with judgment, which proceeded from
consulation, which co^sultation proceeded of reasons, used on both sides of his
causes: so that he made his choice advisedly, considerately, and after long
deliberating of the matter, he prefers the word of God before all the
pleasures of this life. It was not then a foolish precisenes of puritanisine,
it was no childish simplicity, as of a man who chose this because he knew no
other things, but it was of wisdom. Wherefore the man of God here teaches
that it is not with Gods children as the world deemeth them, that is, that they
be silly souls, simple men, and Gods fools, who know not what the world
means; but as the world is of it self too wise, so it thinks too hardly of
Gods children: For it is not to be doubted, but that he had many temptations,
and that he debating them by the wisdom of Gods spirit, chose the word of God.

They are not ignorant, what it is, to have worldly wealth, and pleasures, and
earthly commodities, but comparing these with the wealth of the soul, the
pleasures of the spirit and commodities of the world, they by judgment and
sufficient advice, prefer the word of God. And herein is their blessed
wisdom, that they seeing and weighing both in the balance, being moved on
one side by carnal reason, and sustained on the other side by spiritual
wisdom, they refuse the worst, and choose the best, contrary to the folly of
the world, who also has some sight of them both, and yet refuses most
cursedly the word, and chooses most foolishly the pleasures of this life. For
as the preferring of good things is the blessing of God in the godly; so it is
a fearful judgment in the ungodly, in preferring these transitory
pleasures, before eternal treasures.

Again, what is the cause of such halting between two professions, and of
such mammerings in religion? surely the want of choice, and a purpose not
resolutely set in any part, in that whilst we will be between the flesh and
the spirit, between the Church and the world, between God and the devil, we
know not which side to cleave unto. For if our choice were made, we must not
seek Gods glory, and our glory; the honor of the Gospel and our own
commendation. For undoubtedly, if God his children thus walk in a mammering,
as though they would give the Lord the half part of their profession, and part
stakes with his glory, shall for their pleasure be sure to seek pain, and
seeking sport, they shall find smart: when they look for profit, they shall
have loss; when they sow for glory, they shall reap shame. This is the
singular mercy of God in this world to his children, to punish them here, and
to save them from the great judgment to come. And as the Lord used in mercy
these means to his, to school them in their choice, so also when they are
come to their choice, he also in wisdom will try them.

Again, with permitting the world to offer on the one side preferment, or if
that serve not, on the other side imprisonments, he suffers Satan either to
illude them with fair promises, or to terrify them with fearful
threatenings: and gives leave to the flesh, to assault them with delights, or
to oppress them with calamities, that he may in truth prove their constancy,
whether they have so chosen, as they will not repent them, or whether their
choice be as sure as free. For many if they might be basted with glory and
estimation, and might maintain still their credit, and wallow in wealth, would
not care greatly to serve God; but without this resolute purpose, we shall
surely find, that when trouble comes we would shrink away. Wherefore the
Lord tries his in the furnace of affliction, and in the floods of temptations
he gageth them, to try their hearts, to find their faith, to scour them from
the dross of infidelity, the dross of security, the dross of hypocrisy;
as the furnace is not only for the trial of gold, but after the trial had, to
purge it thoroughly from corruption.

Indeed so long as we are led with the cord of our natural corruptions, there
is no conflict, the flesh rebelleth not against the spirit: but when our
judgments are heavenly, and our affections spiritual, fighting with carnal
reason and earthly cogitations, then is the maine battle. When Satan sees a
man given to the world, and as long as he is in a mammering, he strives not
with him, but when he sees himself forsaken and defied, and that Christ Jesus
a stronger than he has made an entrance into the house, then he rages, then
he uses his cunning, al his shifts, and summoneth a Parliament of seven devils
more, who come all together to the casting out of Christ, to the discouraging
of the man newly called, and to make a reentry into his old possession. Thus
then we shall see, he is a roaring lion, and that our fight is not only with
worldly powers, but also with spiritual enemies in heavenly things. So long as
we follow the guise and fashion of this world, and frame our selves to live
after it, we shall be at league with them, and they will be at peace with us:
if we follow heresies, heretics will not speak ill of us; if we like
idolatry, idolaters will be acquainted with us; if we will walk carefully our
selves, and will not rebuke the sins of the world, or desire the dreams of
heresies, happily we shall pass scot-free; but when we hate the world, the
world will hate us, because though we be in the world, we are not of the world,
John. 15. If we proclaim war with heresies, heretics will condemn us, if
we taunt and rebuke the sins and cold profession of worldlings, they will
soon put us to silence. For it may be, they will be content, that we should be
Momes, and do well, and not rebuke them; but when we pull at their sins by the
ears, and lay violent hands on their cold profession, then we shall see the
enmity between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman. Thus we
see, so long as we will shake hands with the world, the flesh and the devil,
we shall be quiet enough; but all our perils and dangers are in resisting them.
For all must have these troubles, that make their choice, but all make not this
choice, and therefore are so quiet: all must suffer persecution, that will live
godly in Christ Jesus; but so few suffer, because so few live godly in Christ
Jesus. We may now conclude, that all our conflicts are in new birth, not that
we have more troubles and temptations in regeneration, than in old birth: but
because we were so sowsed and brawned in them, that we saw them not so much, as
we afterward do, being enlightened with Gods spirit. Why do the wicked then say
of us, Oh these are new Professors, ne^ fangled, these men had need have a new
world? surely because there is no argument with the worldlings and Gods
children. But all these troubles are to make us more zealous in our choice.
True it is, the Lord deals favorably with us in the beginning, as a father
dandleth his children, and as the Bridegroom uses the children of the
marriage, but we are grown and are past children in knowledge and profession:
he thinks it meet we should be purged as gold seven times in the furnace,
Psalm. 12 He thinks we must be pruned to bring forth fruit more abundantly,
Ioh. 15. If we dally then with our sins, as truly as God has sworn our
salvation, and it is most sure we shall be saved; so has he ordained means,
for so many as shall be saved, as his word, Prayer, the Sacraments and
discipline, which when they do not prevail with us, yet has he sanctified
another mean, that is, affliction; wherewith he will rather humble us, than we
should leese our salvation, that when prayer cannot help us, when the word
does not instruct us, when the Sacraments do not confirm us, when discipline
does not awe us, we should taste of this last remedy, his fatherly correction.

Here we see, deliberation did put the reasons in the balance, and election
made the choice, and Gods children comparing and examining the love of the
world with the love of God, though they be made of the same mould, that others
are made of; yet seeing the judgment of God on both parts, they ponder the
reasons of one side, and the reasons of another side, and after long
deliberation they forsake that glory, riches and dignity which the world does
offer, and takes that which the Lord in mercy bestows on them.

But the wicked go indeed so far, as they see the good, but to their
condemnation: for light coming into the world, they refused it; and though
with Balaam sometimes they desire to die the death of the children of God, yet
they blot out these motions, and forsaking the word, they follow error;
farsaking God, they follow the devil; forsaking the Church, they cleave to the
world: so just is their co^de^nation, for burying the light of God his spirit.

Verse. 174. I have longed for thy salvation O Lord, and thy law is my delight.
THe man of God goes on forward in showing his unfeigned affection to the word,
and therefore here he shows, both how he longed for it, and also how in the
mean time he slays himself. It might seem a general speech, and of less
importance which he uses here: for who is so far gone, and has so small
hope of recovery, that cannot say, he longs for his salvation? for we read
that even Balaam desired to be saved, and the most wicked in their life time
will have many wishes of their salvation. What notable thing then is there here
in the man of God? true it is, that the Lord wringeth out thus much often even
out of the mouth of the wicked, unto whom he imparteth so much of his right and
goodness, that they see what they should do and desire, but yet in truth they do
it not, in that their desire is so short and slender. When we see then that all
their wishing and praying comes to nothing, it is sure they are but
hypocrites. Again, they will say they long for salvation, but they will not
use the means thereunto: as if one should say he longed for bread, and pray
daily, give us this day our daily bread; and yet they will either walk in no
calling, or else get it by fraud and rapine, not staying themselves at al on
Gods providence, but they long rather for other things joined with Gods glory,
than for God his will, howsoever in the mean season they make the help of God
their pretense: so it is in the spiritual estate of the soul; for although
Idolaters, heretics, and hypocrites say, that they long for their salvation:
yet they long indeed for their profit, pleasure, glory, and self-loue. For if
they longed for that salvation which is of God, they would not so follow their
own dreams, revelations, and superstitions, but use those means of the word,
which the Lord himself has appointed. As for profane Professors, they will
indeed say as much as the other: but bring them to the word, to prayer, to the
Sacraments, and to discipline, ye shall see they have no sound longing, but
are carried away with the desires of their own flesh and blood. Wherefore we
see how this longing of the man of God differs from the longing of other men,
as we may see by the sequels; for my delight is in thy word. Where we see,
that as he longed after salvation, so he delighted in the means thereunto.
And here as we often showed before, the law is taken for that general thing
of the whole word of God, and not for the particular thing of the moral law,
which consists in bidding and forbidding, in promises to the obedient, and
threatenings to the disobedient. And that the true longing is no new thing in
him, but appertains to all men, we may see in the first Psalm where he is
said to be blessed, who seuereth himself from the wicked in thought, word and
deed, both in religion and manners, and gives himself to meditate continually
in the word.

Now if we will try our selves, whether this true longing be in us or no, we
must see whether it be after that salvation which is to be ioyed, or whether it
vanishes away, and is nothing but a torment of the conscience. Besides, this
is a sure note of it: if our desire be sound, it is not satisfied, until the
thing longed for, be accomplished. As we may see in natural and humane
things; is in them that are sick with love, they are in continual perplexity
of mind, until they have obtained their love, likewise must we long after the
word. For lo^ging is a fervent desire, and not a thing quickly come, and
quickly gone; but a thing that has bin searched by reason, and in judgment
has bin chosen So that as we showed before, there is a great difference
between a lightning desire, and a settled judgment which causes us in truth
to long. In that he now makes mention of his longing after his election, he
shows that he had cast his accounts, and set down how he might be able to
meet the mighty man, indenter battle with him, as it is in the gospel. This
longing cannot be in the wicked: for when they long, it is for heresies or
worldly pleasures, and right longing comes from a right sight, judgment and
affection, which will bring in the careful using of the means. For as it
holds in false longing, so also in holy longings, that after long deba^ing,
and examining of our selves, and casting our accounts, what will be the fruit
of the good, and what will be the end of sin, carefully will use the means.
For as the desire uses means; so longing uses means carefully.

Let us now examine our selves, where our feruency is: for joy and hope, fear
and sorrow show a ma^s heart; as whatsoever we joy in, whiles we have it; that
we sorrow for, when we have lost it. And let us examine our longing, whether
we can use the word with delight or no; whether prayer be pleasant, whether the
sacraments be comfortable to us or no, and whether the discipline of the Church
be reverend and precious to us. If our desire be cold, our ^sing of the means
is also cold: if we be fervent in desire, we are also fervent in using of ^^e
means. The Apostle speaking to the Romans, cap: 6. after the manner of men,
says he will not extort so much as he might do, but he will deal with them
more easily; and whereas he might require greater obedience, he says: as ye
have given your members servants unto uncleanness, and iniquity, to commit
iniquity? so now give your members servants unto righteousness in holiness. This
is but an humane thing if we should see how we have longed after things
natural and unnatural: if we should see how we have longed inordinately, let
us ^ee if our longing be alike after the word, and let us say to our own
souls, what was there such a longing in us, after such things whereof we are
now ashamed before God in our prayer^* and before men when they are but named,
and have we such slender longing after our salvation? it is to be feared, our
choice is not yet made, for if it were, we should surely long m^^e, and
longing we should more use the means.

Verse. 175. Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee, and thy judgments
shall help me.
HEre ^^^ man of God desires life to none other end, but to praise GOD, in
keeping of his word, as he said before, Port. 3. 1. Be beneficial to thy
servant, that I may live, and keep thy Word. In which place he also desires
none other life, but that which is according to the word of God. For all other
lives have a vain title of life, but this is true life: We see the man of God
does not only feel with the Apostle, that in God we move, live, and have
our being: but also speaks of a more excellent thing, to wit, that in him we
live spiritually. Again, he looks not in himself for any natural life; but
acknowledges that man^ life is of the word of God. Let us therefore learn
with David to commit our lives to the Lord, Psalm. 31. 15. Into thine hands I
commend my spirit, etc. He speaks this in his life time, and commits it to
the Lord, that as he gave it him; so he would vouchsafe to keep it being given.

Now we shall never in truth say the like, until we perceive how we received
our life of God, how he nourishes it* and how to him we must surrender it
again. Wherefore we are not to live, as do the brute beasts, and the
heathen: but we must live to enjoy our salvation, and covet our salvation to
praise the Lord, because there is no other end of man's life, than Gods glory.

As for them which live to any other end, Solomon judges no better of the
untimely fruit than of them, who enjoy many days in pleasure, and after go
to the darkness. Besides we know how all other inferior things were created to
glorify God in serving man, and man was made to glorify God by the true use
of the word.

Let my soul live. etc. This is the usual phrase of the Scripture, when they
use to set dow^ a thing more pathetically, as Luke 1. My soul does magnify
the Lord: my spirit praises Go my Savior. And Psalm. 103. 1. and 104. 1. My
soul praise thou the Lord. Psalm. 115. 17. The dead praise not the Lord,
neither any that go down into the place of silence, and Psalm. 6. 5. In death
there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall praise thee: and Esaias
38. 19. The pit cannot praise thee, the grave cannot confess thee, death
cannot praise thee, they that go down into the pit cannot praise thee: but
the living, the living shall confess thee, as I do this day, etc. How
grievous a thing it is now, every man may judge, that a man should go out of
this world, or ever he knew wherefore he came into the world, and this is that
which makes us so loath to die. This was it that made the Saints of God in
former times so unwilling to leave this life, not that they wanted any hope of
the life to come, or had not the joy of a blessed resurrection; but either they
had some special sins heavily pressed their consciences, whereby they had
dishonored God; or else they desired to live in greater measure to glorify
God, either in entering into the way of repentance, or else growing in the same*
after they had entered; because as yet they could not say in truth: I have
fought a good fight, I have run a good race, I have kept thy faith, from
henceforth a crown of glory is prepared for me. For they knew that, whereof
we are willingly ignorant, that we shall never incessantly praise God in
heaven, unless we carefully serve God in earth; and we shall never praise God
in the congregation of Angels, which praise not God in the congregation of his
saints. Let us remember then, that we live not to eat, as do brute beasts;
we live not to live, as do the heathen: we live to live well, as having all
the creatures to serve to our use we must live to Gods glory, according to his
will. It is requisite that Christians in this lie should be prepared to praise
God in the life to come with Angels: for how shall we c^ie holy, holy, holy,
with Angels, unless we learn to praise God with his Saints in this life?
Neither is there any thing more effectual to enforce this doctrine, tha^ to
know how our life is given us of God to his glory, and that it shall return
to him again. And as the children of God use this world, as though they used
it not; but they use prayer, the word and Sacraments most carefully: so the
ungodly use prayer, the word and sacraments, as though they used them not; but
they use the world most carefully.

Some can put on a good face, and run slily away with sin: but when Gods
children see the occasion of weldoing taken from them, oh how it wounds them*
Oh how it grieueth them, that they have dishonored God, it pincheth the^ so to
the heart, that ^hey had rather die a thousand deaths, than so displease God.
They then deceive themsel^es, that think they can be saved, and use their
pleasures too: but God his children dar^ not fully use their liberty even in
lawful things, least by little and little they should ab^se it. And here is to
be noted the vehemency of his delight, that he contented not himself in the
verse going before, to say: thy law is my delight, but thy law is my delight,
and thy judgments shall help me: that is, and to confirm my self herein, I
will set before me thy judgments, which are the real records of thy truth:
for as thy word is my delight; so I will mark how thou do ratify the same,
both by accomplishing thy promises, and executing thy ^hreatnings. And whereas
other men make no conscience to observe thy judgments, yet ^ will mark them,
that I may go on to the end. If we will live then to the praise of God, ^e
must see how he does deal with men, considering as he has a word written: so
also he ^ath an hand working. The word teaches that God governs the world,
and the obser^ing of this government confirms the word; indeed heathen men
attribute things to ^hance, or to fortune, for want of knowledge of the word*
but seeing we have Gods myste^ies in his word, we must observe them in his
works.

This observation consists in things already past, and in things hereafter
to come: in things past, as if the Prophet had said: Whereas I see that flesh
and blood would discou^age me, because my faith is weak, I consider thy works
of old, and I find thy children ^ere never finally forsaken, and that their
enemies in the end were overthrown. Let us earne in this strength first to
look into the word of God, and from thence to observe the works of God: let
us consider how he has dealt with the ^^triarches, Prophets, Evangelists and
Apostles, and all our forefathers that put their (...) in him, and we shall see
his ^ich mercy to the repentant, and his treasures of vengeanc^ ^n the
impenitent. And as we look into the judgments of old, so are we to think
that (...) will deal in time to come: for whatsoever is written of old, is
written for our learning, that we might receive comfort in the accomplishing of
the promises, and fear by the execution of the threatenings. This the Apostle
shows, 1. Cor. 10; who after he had feared them with the examples of Gods
judgments in the Jews, in the 11. chap. Now all these things came unto them
for ^nsamples, and were written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world
are come. As if he should say: For this cause these things remain in record
to his (...), to instruct us, that if we commit these or like sins, we shall
have these or like punishment. Thus we have them not as personal, but real
examples. The Apostles Peter and Jude gather the examples of Gods wrath on the
Angels, on Sodom, on Gomorrah, on the old world, and on Judas to threaten
sinners, and to enforce their threatenings: for as God will never leave his, so
upon the heap of sin, he will bring the full heap of destruction upon the
wicked, whipping their naked bodies to the grave, and scourging their wret^c^^d
souls unto hell fire.

Verse. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy commandments.
HE compares himself to a sheep, which of all other is most simple, and
stands in most need of a guide: so that here he confesses his need of a
guider: and this appears in that there is a continual comparison of a sheep,
and shepherd in the Scriptures. Again, though a sheep go astray, yet it is
soon called back by the voice of the shepherd: My sheep hear my voice.
Thus David when he went against Nabal, was called back by the Lords voice in
a woman: and when he had slain Vriah, he was brought again by Nathan. And
therefore if we will be sheep, then though we sometime me go astray, yet we
must be easily reclaimed.

Seek, etc. Before we be come to the Lord, we cannot desire to be fought, but
he of his own pleasure must look upon us. Thus he prayed then after his
calling, that he might not err.

Forgotten. A thing is said to be remembered, either which is wholly remembered,
or else in part; so that it may be easily brought to remembrance: and after
this sort had not he forgotten the word, that is, not wholly: but yet in part he
might, for we have the holy Ghost not only to teach us new things, but also to
bring to our remembrance things forgotten.

FINIS.
This verse (...). should have come in after the verse 86. in the page 442.
[Vers. 87. They had almost consumed me upon earth, yet did I not forsake the
statutes.
HEre is another argumet o^ David's faith, and constacie, nothing could make him
forsake Gods word. He was like a bladder bottle in the smoke, verse 83. Pits
were dug for him in which he was near fallen, he was in a manner consumed
upon and from the earth, yet nothing can make him to forgo his hold, abandon
his general, run from his colors, and forsake that profession which he had
made of Piety. Thus the malice of the wicked will never have an end, the state
of Gods children is oftentimes desperate, and so long as the ungodly remain
upon earth, the godly must think by them here to be troubled. In the world
says Christ ye should have trouble, but in me peace, be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world. John: 16.

There: 1. Saul, his courtiers, his generation, and alliance, yea and many of
Judah by his means: they, thine enemies, the Churches enemies, and the enemies
to the commonwealth: they adversaries to thy providence in annoynting me King,
opposites to thy mercies in my manifold deliverance, even they.

Had almost) not altogether, for thou wast on my side, thou did confound
their consultations, disanull their des^gnes, overthrow their enterprises.
Thus God brings to the grave and reuiueth again, and though his servants be
ready to perish, yet will he send a gracious deliverance.

Consumed me.) Nothing but desolation will serve the wicked. Searing, wound.
^^ hurting will not se^ue. But the memorial of the just must be rooted out.

Upon earth.) Perhaps he means his exile in the land of Judah: yea, but God
has provided heaven for his, there shall we be free from all confusion, though
we loose earth, yet shall we never loose heaven, we may loose an earthly
Jerusalem, we shall not our heavenly.

I did not forsake.) Here is the true godly man indeed, he will forsake house,
and lands, father and mother, wife and children, friends and favors, before
he will forsake his God* and that profession he had made of Piety and
godliness, whereunto he was directed ^^ the word.

Errata.
PAge 395. l. 1. for he may fail VI, read we may say, p: 412. l. 34. his
truth, this truth* p: 413. l. 2^. where, when. p: 414. l. 16. take for keep,
and l. 26. if he, for if we, 37. read and righteousness pa: 415. l. 43. with
for without p: 416. l. 5. not the life, ^ot the least in the life of man. p:
442. the 87. verse is not expounded, but it is the same with many others in
this Psalm: expos. verse. 9^. 95. 445. l. 1. for David's. read Adams, l. 13. for
i^y, read say* p: 447. for I will never, read thou have quickened. l. 45. for
^^^ltation* ^^ultation. p: 451. l. 45. for she must, ^e must. 452. set ^^^as
before ^^ta.

MEDITATIONS ON PROVE. 4. VERSE: 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.
Take hold of Instruction, and leave not, keep her, for she is thy life.
THE matter which is contained in this verse, has been often repeated Many
think they love God his word, and religion, when indeed they do not.
in the Chapters before, yet here again it is necessarily repeated: for in
these matters besides our great dullness and negligence, we are so ready to
deceive our selves, and to think we love the Word when we do not, and do
persuade our selves in our own imaginations, that we have laid fast hold of
Wisdom, when indeed we have neither touched* nor tasted it. Therefore that
we might beware of this, he repeateth that which he had spoken before in most
effectual and significant speeches. For the word which is here translated, lay
hold, does signify to lay hold with strength, as we see men that are in
peril of drowning, they will lay hold so fast Simile. How to hold fast true
Wisdom,
upon a thing, that their hands may be sooner broken then loosed: all their
power for the present time is in their hands, and they will most surely hold
fast that they catch in their hands; In like manner must we lay hold upon
Wisdom with our heart, with such strength and power must we catch hold of it,
that nothing whatsoever be able to separate us from it. This is the first thing
whereunto we are here exhorted. The second must necessarily be joined to this:
which is, that we do not leave it for any thing, but keep it as fast as we
hold it.

Both these exhortations are most necessary, for we are very slack and slow
to lay The cause of forgetfulness, is carelesnes.
hold, and when we have laid hold, through carelesnes we are ready to loose
it: hereof it follows, that we forget many godly lessons that we have
learned. Hereof it is, that we lose many worthy things, wherein we have been
greatly comforted, yea, hereof it comes, that we be many times ignorant of
some principal points, of which we have been often instructed. Therefore if
we will for ever learn, that we have once learned, if we will continually
feel comfort, in that wherein we have once been comforted? then Two things to
be avoided; first, vanity of mind: secondly, worldliness, if we will
entertain and possess wisdom.
let us with all dilgence attend unto these two things: First, that we lay fast
hold upon the word, and then that we keep it fast and sure, when we have laid
hold of it. This if we would do, then are we to beware of two things, which
herein would greatly hurt us: ^^st, we must beware of the vanity of our
minds, that we be not led away with it, from the Word unto worldly lusts, and
from virtue unto vanity. Secondly, we must be very circumspect in matters of
this world, for the ouer-bolde and unwary dealing in them, is of great force
and power to keep us from catching fast hold upon Wisdom, and if we have
already laid fast hold as we think, yet if our minds be bewitched with
worldly things* the covetousness of them will choke up all care of the Word;
the desire of them will dispossess Wisdom, and cast it out of our hearts.
These two things, if we be careful to avoid, then shall our hearts be much
more fit to receive the Word, and to keep it with care, when we have received
it. The things whereunto we are here exhorted, are given us in charge, in the
second commandment of the Law, unto which place this verse must be referred.

Verse. 14. Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way with
them. 15. Avoid it and go not by it, turn from it and pass by.
Solomon has hitherto exhorted us to wisdom, now he dehorteth and calls us
back from all manner of evil, which might hinder our proceedings in wisdom,
and first he advises us to avoid all evil examples: secondly he wills us to
beware of our own way-wardnes and corruptions, and to fly from the evil
examples of sinful and wicked What to be avoided.
men. He dehorteth us in six verses, that is, from the 14. to the 20. and his
dehortation consists of a precept, and the reasons of the precept: the
principal is expressed in the 14. and 15. verse: we must have no fellowship or
familiarity with the wicked, and because it is hard to fly from them, and
because their company is dangerous, therefore Solomon uses many words to set
out the matter, showing indeed, that we can never be too much or too often
warned of them: for he says, Enter not, walk not, withdraw thy self from it,
pass not by it, decline from it. Much like unto this Physic, the Physicians
prescribe for the Simile. To avoid the society of the wicked. Cito, long,
tarde.
plague: for they say, if a man will be preserved from the plague, he must
observe these 3. things: first, that he quickly and with all speed fly from
it: secondly, that he fly far away: thirdly, that it be long ere he return
to the place again. By this they mean, that if the air be once infected,
there can be no remedy devised to preserve a man in that place: now the
plague is more contagious then the wicked are, the plague does no more infect
the air, then the wicked do infect those places wherein they live: and
therefore Solomon does very well to prescribe this remedy for the avoiding of
the infection which might be gotten by evil company. For what could preserve
a man in Sodom, but only his lawful calling: therefore unless a man have such
a calling to keep him there, he must fly quickly from the wicked, he must
fly far from them, he must see them amend, before he return unto them.
David did very well see this, and therefore he does in many places cry Psalm.
119. and 1^0.
out against them. Away from me ye wicked. Woe is me, that I have so long
dwelt in Kedar. David was not effeminate, he had not a womanish heart to cry
without cause, he felt the smart of it, and therefore cries so earnestly
against them, he saw no good example, he saw no occasion of goodness, he was
much hindered in his obedience, he had many pulbackes, and other great
disprofits. By this then we see, how needful a precept Solomon does here give
us; but the necessity of this shall more plainly appear, if we consider
either the wickedness of their wicked practices, or the hurt which the godly
have received by them: for the will of the wicked is wholly bent to evil, they
be ever willing and ready to hurt good people, when any occasion is offered,
their skill is great, and their wisdom is answerable to their will. And
therefore our Savior says, The children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of Light.

This wisdom we may perceive in them, whether they show themselves deadly and
open enemies, or friendly and counterfeited friends: for if they profess
themselves to be 1 The practices of the wicked against the godly. 2
our enemies, it is marvelous to see their practices. First, they will use all
extremity and hard dealing, they will offer violence, and oppress him (if it
be possible) with wrongful injuries: and what is their purpose in all this,
but to provoke him that is good, to requi^e evil for evil, and so fall from
his GOD, or at the leastwise to stay and hinder him in the course of his
godliness, that God may be displeased with him* If this thing will not prevail,
they will work another way, and labor by slanders and false reports, in such
wise to discredit him, that he may be utterly discouraged, and caused to
forsake his profession. And yet they will find another way if this will not
work: they will devise crafty fetches, 3
and practice subtlety against him, they will invent pestiferous policies, and
find crafty counsels to overthrow him. These and many other ways have they
to spit their spite, and spue out their venomous poison against the people of
God. If thus also they cannot have that success they look for, if by this
means they cannot obtain their purpose, they will take a contrary course to
prevail that way if it be possible: they will fame friendship and become our
friends, they will flatter us with fair words, and allure us with their
benefits, to communicate with them in their wickedness; and to be companions
with them in their sins: but when they deal most dangerously, when they
mark and observe our dispositions, and become appliable to our nature (for
this means will they also use:) so malicious are they indeed toward us. If we
be religious, they will shape some show of religion: if we praise any, they
will praise him; if we mislike or dispraise any, they will show their mislike
of him. Thus in all things they will mark our minds and our dispositions, and
will so apply themselves unto us, that except God give us grace they will
overthrow us. Seeing therefore they have a ready will to hurt us: seeing also
they have great skill to devise most forcible and politic means against us,
what worthy account must we make of this precept, wherein Solomon teaches us
how we may keep our selves from receiving any hinderance by them? Again, if
we think upon the hurt that the godly have had by them, or if we consider how
they have been infected through their corruption, we shall confess indeed
that it is most dangerous to deal with them, and it is the best way to keep us
far from them. Joseph was a good man, and endued with great graces, he had
received great increases and strength of Faith, and had strong temptations: yet
being daily conversant among the Egyptians, he learned to swear by the life
of Pharaoh. David was a man What evil examples do
according to Gods own heart, he suffered much, and learned great obedience by
his sufferings: yet abiding but a while among the uncircumcised Philistims, he
learned to lie, and to dissemble. What shall I say of Lot and his family? what
danger was he in? what loss did he sustain? what hurt had he in his goods, in
his soul and body? he was carried away with the wicked Sodomites captive,
his goods and Cattle were taken from him: and though through Gods goodness
he was rescued, yet he loved Sodom still, and would live in it, yea, though
fire and brimstone were ready to be powered upon it, he must be dragged and
drawn out of the Town, or else he would not easily have left the place,
albeit his soul was daily vexed with the filthiness of their behavior; his
wife looked back when she was delivered, and therefore she was turned into a
Pillar of salt: his daughters were so corrupted, that they were not ashamed to
lie with their father, and Lot himself learned to drink wine very liberally,
whereby he was brought into a filthy sin. If a man were assured that he
should continue safe, notwithstanding all the temptations of the wicked: No
hope of Lucre or preferment must link us in any league with wicked men.
yet the care of his family, and fear of their falling, should be a cause
sufficient to drive him from wicked company. But if he himself be touched
with a conscience and a feeling of his own infirmity, what love of profit,
what hope of aduautage should keep him there? Lot therefore might plainly see
the judgment of God upon him, and upon his family, because he would live, and
linger so long among those wicked Sodomites. Now if these men received such
deep and great wounds by wicked company, then who is that man, or what is
his name that can think to stand among them? We therefore ought to be most
circumspect and careful to keep us from the company of wicked men: for their
heresies will make us heretics, their carelesnes will make us ungodly and
secure. This commandment of flying evil is very general, and may be
extended to all the commandments, which we are brought to break by reason of
evil company.

Verse. 16. For they cannot sleep except they have done evil; their sleep
departs except they have caused some to fall, etc.
THe law and precept which was provided for the avoiding of evil company, was
most effectually set down in the two former verses. The reasons of this
commandment Reasons of the former precept.
do follow in the four next verses. These reasons are in number two. The first
is drawn from the perverse and crooked nature of the will and disposition of
wicked men, in the 16. 17. and 19. verses. The second is drawn from the state
of the godly, and from their behavior, verse. 18. The nature of the wicked is
such, that they count wickedness as pleasant as wine, and therefore they make
ungodly practices their chiefest delight; it is their The delight of the wicked
meat and drink to do evil, they are best refreshed when they most offend:
neither are they content with their own wickedness, but they do moreover
cause other to fall into wickedness. If they cannot come by their purpose; if
they have not great occasion to work that which they have devised; if they
have not made some fitter for their ungodly friendship, then their sleep
departs from them, they cannot be at rest. For as the hungry man cannot
sleep quietly, because his appetite continually craves meat: so the wicked
takes no rest nor sleep, if he be not st^ffed, if he have not his b^l^ie
full of wickedness. A true mark of the wicked.
How careful ought we then to be to avoid evil company? how jar must we
fly from it, and how heartily should we hate it continually? Here we may note
the contrary, as a very special sign and mark of the true child of God: for
if we can make it our me^te and our drink to do good, as our Savior Christ
says, It is my m^^te ^o do the will of my Father: and as Job says, I esteemed
it more then mine appointed ^oode. And again, if we can count it the great
comfort of our hearts, and solace of our souls, when we can do good ^o other^,
How we must endeavor to s^irre up ot^ers ^o ^^ad ne^: ^^^ be (...) we have not
performed any such autie.
and provoke and s^irre them up to goodness, this is an argument that we have
received the spirit of GOD, as a pledge and a seal of our everlasting
salvation, and that we are the children of God. Moreover, if we be gr^eued
when we have wrought no goodness, nor gotten good by others: if we be as it
were comfortles, when we have not taught others ^ome goodness, or when we have
not provoked them unto practice of some good, which they had before time
learned: this may well warrant us that we do truly love God, and that he
loves us, and will bring us unto life. Thus far for the first reason, which
as it describes unto us the nature of the wicked: so it must be applied to
the general head of sin, and the corruption of our nature.

Verse. 18. The way of the Righteous shines as the Light, that shines more and
more, unto the perfect day.
THe second reason why we should avoid the evil company of the wicked, is,
because of duty we are bound to join our selves to the godly, and to be
companions of all them that fear the Lord. It is not enough to fly from the
wicked, and to leave their Psalm. 119. It is not sufficient to fly the
counsels an^ companies of the wicked. We must haste^ to the society of the
godly.
company: but we must make have to the assemblies of the godly, and link our
selves in frie^dship with them: ^or of our selves we can devise evil, and by
our selves we can learn to work wickedness: we can give place to ungodly
motions, we can foster up fleshly desires, yea, and through our corruptions,
abundance of evil will flow ou^ of us. Albeit therefore we do a^oyde the
corruption wherewith we might be infected by others, yet if we provide not
some help for our own infirmities, by good company, we may be as wicked when
we are alone, as those which live among the wicked: we must then seek the
company of Gods people, and with them we must nourish peace and love, by
laboring to profit them by what good thing soever we have, and by receiving
and learning some goodness by them, for the sustaining of our infirmities, for
the relieuing of our needs, and for the supply of our manifold wants. David
did see how needful this was: therefore Psalm. 16. he does not only say, that
he will keep himself from the corrupt worship of the wicked, because he
hates them: but he will join himself to Gods people, for the love that he
bears them, saying: All my delight is in the Saints. And in another Psalm,
says he: I ha^^ them that hate thee O Lord: whereunto that may be well
joined, that is, I am compa^ion (...).
to all them that love thee, and love thy name. But Lot did greatly fail in
that point, when he would not return to his uncle Abraham, after he was
delivered out of Sodom: for if (...).
he had gon^ unto him, he might have bin preserved from much woe peradventure,
which ^lter did befall him. But it was hard for him to confess his fault unto
his uncle, this was grievous unto him, and therefore he would not seek for
the company of Abraham. And what came hereof but grief unto himself, shame
unto his family, and continual punishment unto his posterity?

This rule then must be diligently observed, that we be always as careful and
desirous to join our selves with godly company, as we be to avoid the
assemblies of the wicked. If this be so, as it ought to be indeed; then how
great and how grievous is their sin, and ^^al. ^. 1. 2.
how fearfully do they offend, which forsake the society of the godly, to
dwell among the wicked, and do leave the company of Gods people, to have the
familiarity of wicked men? It were good for such to consider what the Angel
of the Lord said unto Hagar, when she fled from Sarah her mistress: Hagar,
Sarahs maid, whence come thou? and whither (...). 16. ^.
will thou go? This talk might pass between them. Angel. Whence come
thou? Genesis 16. 8.
Hagar. From Abraham's house. Angel. Whither go thou? Hagar. Into Egypt.
Angel. Whence come thou? Hagar. From the people of God. Angel. Whither
go thou? Hagar. To the vngod^^e Egyptians. Angel. Whence come thou?
Hagar. From the Church of God. Angel. Whither go thou? Hagar. To the
Synagogue of Satan. Angel. Take heed to thy self and beware, commit not this
great wickedness, do not this great sin against the Lord, return thy self
unto thy mistress, humble thy self unto her, and be obedient unto her will.
How pithie is this speech? How effectual and worthy to be remembered, if we
have already changed our places, or if we go about to change them? Let us
remember the saying of the Angel, and let us consider whether it may not
likewise be said unto us: whence come thou? out of the Church of God:
whither go thou? to the assembly of heretics: where have thou been? in the
Church: where art thou, or Vain and unprofitable changes, of places and of
callings, etc.
whither will thou go? to the world and the vanity thereof. O fearful
exchange * Refrain thy self betimes, return thy foot with speed, come
hastily to the Lord thy God, humble thy self under his hand, promise and
perform all obedience unto him, that thee may receive thee to his favor
again. Let us think that the Lord does speak unto our consciences, and let
us answer him with a pure heart, and it will without doubt stay us from many
unadvised and unprofitable changes. If we do rightly and in truth consider of
this, we shall be so far from going to the wicked, that if we be among them,
we shall hastily separate our selves from them, that we may resort to the
children and people of God, which in this verse are called righteous.

The righteous men whose company we must keep, and to whom we must associate
Two marks of a righteous man. 1
and join our selves, are here described by two notes. The first note of a
righteous man is this, that his life be ordered and guided by the word of God,
which shines out before him as a light to his feet, and a lantern to his
paths. When a man therefore has a desire and care to measure all things by the
word, he walks in the light, his light shines, he has an argument that she
is a righteous man.

The second note of a righteous man is, that he still grows up, and makes
daily good 2
proceedings in godliness. But here may some man say: I feel not this increase
and going forward: nay I am so far from that, that I am sometimes driven to
commit sin. To this I answer, that such a state is both doubtful and
dangerous: yet if in a good conscience Notes of a good conscience. 1 2
thou labor to provide for the peace of thy soul, then try thy self and
thine own heart by these notes. First if the conscience of thy former
carelessness do make thee careful: if the remembrance of thy former sins do
cause thee more to hate and abhor sin, more to fly from it, and the more
manfully to strive and fight against it; and to be short, if thou can make
every thing that befalls thee, an occasion to help thee forward: then may
thou think, that even in these things thou make some good proceedings; for 3
as we know that the clouds can neither lessen the light of the Sun, nor
let the course thereof, because at the last they are scattered by the heat of
the Sun which shines out Simile.
most comfortably: so we may be sure that although sometimes our righteousness
be covered with our infirmities; yet if we overcome them and drive them away,
the course of our righteousness is not hindered. And again, as a man is not
let by a fall in his journey, Simile.
when he learneth thereby to take better heed, and to haste faster forward:
so we by our falls and infirmities are not stayed, if they make us more
careful of our selves, and more earnest in going forward; yet must we not say
here, it is a light matter to sin, that thereby they may be made more
careful: for if a man have once truly felt the grief of heart Simile.
for sin, if he know how hard it is to get victory over it, if he consider
how much he has displeased God by sin, if he consider the fearful
punishment which he has procured to himself, and if he be persuaded that
none can raise him up from sin but God Good cautio^s to keep us from sin.
alone; then he will be most afraid to sin, because he knows not whether
God will raise him up or no, and therefore if any think that it is but a
small matter to sin, it is certain, that they have not as yet unfeignedly
repented, they are not as yet washed from their sins. This first rule is
good, and very fit to try ourselves, when to our own feeling we can perceive
no increase of godliness within us, which does cause us when we see it, to
esteem more highly of the word, and to make greater account or it: for if our
former negligence, or some sin through infirmity, whereunto we have slipped,
do make the word more sauorie and lightsome unto us, then it is certain, that
the Lord of his goodness, by this fall has helped us forward. Contrariwise,
if our former carelessness do make us more careless, if our slippes or sins
do make the word unsavory or unseasonable unto us, we are in a most
fearful plight, we are in great danger to fall away: therefore let us strive
against these, and let us labor to use every thing to help us forward, let us
labor to find sweetness in the Word, and thus we shall have comfort, even in
our infirmities; then shall our light shine brighter every day, until we come
to our dying day now: the means which God has appointed to preserve and
increase this light in us, is his holy Word* by which as we received our light,
so must we labor to have it continued: therefore i^ we will not ^au^ our
light quenched, we must not despise prophecy; if we will have it to burn
cl^^^e, then we must attend unto hearing, reading, conferring, meditating, and
other exercises of the Word, we must eschew evil, and the occasions of evil,
then our light shall flame out continually.

Verse. 19. The way of the wicked is darkness, they know not wherein they
shall fall.
THe former verse is amplified by the contrary estate and condition of the
wicked, their way is as darkness, because they be destitute of the light of Gods
word, and they know not wherein they shall fall: they sin and see it not; they
run unto heresies, and know it not; the judgments of God hang over their
heads, and they epsy it not: therefore when How the wicked walk in sin and
know it not.
they think least, they shall be brought into greatest danger; trouble shall
assail them like an armed man, and their sorrow shall come upon them like as
upon a woman that trauelleth with ^hild* In this case are all those which are
not enlightened by the word, this is the state of all those that make not the
word their lantern, continually to shine out before them. But the children of
God are in a contrary case, they are directed by the word in all their doings,
and in the light of the word they see light. They see the subtlety of sin,
and therefore they shun it, and they are taken with an horror as it were of
all manner of heresies, they foresee Gods judgments and prevent them, and so
are they kept safe and preserved from evil. Thus far have we been dehorted
from ungodly company, both by precepts and reasons. The second part of this
dehortation follows from this place to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 20. My son, attend unto my words, incline thine ear unto my sayings.
HEre follows the dehortation, wherein we are forewarned of the corruption
which ^s in our selves: yet before the Wiseman comes to give any special or
particular precepts of this corruption, he does after this manner deliver some
general precepts Profit by reading, preaching, and conferring of the word.
for the use of the word, whereby this corruption may be cured in us. These
general precepts are set forth in these 3. verses, wherein first there is
generally required of us great attenda^ce unto the whole word of God in these
words: Attend unto my words. Secondly, we are commanded to hear the word.
This precept binds us to hear, whether the word be read or preached, or
whether it be conferred of: for all these ways we may get great profit by
hearing the word. And because we are not easily drawn unto this hearing,
therefore the precept is very effectually delivered in these words. Incline
thine ear. In which kind of speech there is first noted, our natural
slothfulness and security, which of our selves have no good desire or
inclination to hear, unless GOD by his spirit do work it in us, and bore
through our ears. Secondly, there is noted this; that we should hear though
it be plain for us to do, we must strive and struggle with our selves, that
we may hear when the Lord does never so little st^^^ us up thereunto.

Verse. 21. Let them not depart from thine eyes: but keep them in the midst
of thine heart.
IN these words is a third charge given unto us, and that is this, that we
should make a profitable use for our selves in the reading of the word, and in
beholding of the creatures: for both these ways we may win great and good
strength to overcome our corruption, and both these exercises are in the word
commended unto us. The fourth and last precept is contained in the latter end
of the verse in these words: Keep them in the midst of thine heart. In this
precept is prescribed the manner of the using and doing of the former duties:
for all of them must be done with the heart, we must give attendance to the
word, not only with the stilnes and quietness of the outward members, but we
must also be attentive with our hearts, we must hear the word read, preached,
and conferred of, not with our outward ears alone, but also with our very
hearts. We are not to rest in the simple reading of the word, or the bare
beholding of the creatures: but we must labor for a fourth thing, we must
look that our hearts be present, when we either read the word, or behold the
creatures. And yet there is a further thing to be here observed: for by We
must store up the word in our heart, by prayer and meditations.
this commandment we are charged to lay up in our hearts all the profit which
we learn by these means. It is not sufficient to use them, it is not enough
to feel some present use and profit by them: but we must lay up in our hearts
whatsoever gain we get, that we may be stored and prepared for the time to
come. This must be done by prayer and meditations; for if we pray fervently
before, after, and in the using of these means: and if after we have used
them, we do diligently meditate upon them, both that we may be confirmed in
each duty, and also that we way apply them to our own particular and private
use: then undoubtedly God will give a blessing to his means rightly used, and
will write the fruit of them in our hearts, yea the Lord will give a further
blessing unto them; life unto us, and health unto our flesh, as it follows in
the 22. verse, which before has been expounded.

These verses are very notable and worthy of all remembrance: for they commend
unto us all the means whereby Gods word is made effectual unto us, as
hearing, reading, preaching, praying, conferring, meditating, and such like
godly and heavenly exercises. In other places of the scripture, sometime one,
sometime another is mentioned. But here all are expressly named, and this no
doubt was done by the great wisdom of God the holy Ghost, which by this has
met with the corruption of our own nature. For this corruption We must not
rest in the use of one good means.
much prevails and bears great sway in us, that we using some one means
diligently, do neglect all the rest. Some men do so rest in their private
reading, that they neglect hearing, praying, and other wholesome means: some do
so highly esteem hearing, that they will never read to confirm the thing
that they have heard, nor use any other means. And so of the rest: for there
are men of all sorts. But the holy Ghost commends all unto us, and charge
us with all, and that so straightly, that we cannot with hope look for any
blessing from God, unless we be careful and diligent in all. It is the
duty then of every man to be seriously exercised and occupied in all those
exercises, that God may bless al: or if not, that sometime one, sometime
another, according to his good pleasure, may profit us. These 9. verses,
because they give us in charge to use with diligence the hearing and other
exercises of the word, must be referred unto the second commandment.

Verse. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for thereout proceed the
actions of life.
IN this verse he does call us from all kind of inward evil, which secretly
lies lurking in our heart, for as much as that in very deed is the wel-spring
of all wickedness, and because Solomon does here note the heart, as that which
is the cause of al sinful actions: so that although we should never see any man
do evil, and although we should not at any time be tempted to do evil by
any: yet our own hearts would corrupt us, and cause us to sin. We do hereby
see that the doctrine both of the Papists and of the Family of love is most
untrue: for they do teach that a man is not naturally inclined unto evil, that
his nature is not wholly corrupted with sin: but that he is corrupted and
infected either by the allurement, or example and temptation of others. True it
is, that the occasion of evil may be offered by some other man: but Solomon
does here teach us, that the cause of our evil is in our selves, and for this
cause he commands us above all things to be watchful over our hearts; for
from them do proceed the actions of life or of death.

Now the causes why we are charged to keep such strait watch over our
hearts, are in 1 Two causes of watching over our hearts.
number two. The first is, because the heart does carry with it every way all
our senses: so that as the Heathen said, It is not the eye that sees, but the
heart; it is not the hand that touches, but the heart: and so the other
senses. So from hence it comes that there be oftentimes great sounds and much
noise: yet because our ears do attend upon our hearts, which are earnestly
occupied about some other matter, we hear not the sounds, we do not listen
unto the noise. From hence it comes, that we see not goodly sights and shows
when they be sometimes offered unto our eyes, because our eyes are set upon
that thing, about thwich the heart is occupied. Yea from hence it comes, that
we sometimes stumble in the plain ground, and our feet do fail us even in
^^^^ places, because our feet are carried with our heart, which is earnestly
occupied on some other matter. Therefore although we ought to keep with great
care our eyes, our hand^, our ears, and other parts of our body: yet does it
most stand us in hand to keep all watch and ward over our hearts, seeing they
rule all the rest.

The second cause why we should watch over our hearts, is, because it makes or
marreth 2 The second cause of watching over our hearts.
all our actions: for if our heart be pure, then all our actions be pure and
accepted of through Christ, though some want be in them: and contrariwise, if
our hearts be not sound, but corrupted and vnpure; the things that in their
own nature and kind are good, yet do become evil and sinful through us.
This may be perceived in all the parts of our life: let us then a little fee
how our corruption deceives and defiles us in many things. First this is
without all controversy, that is only the corruption of our own hearts,
which causes us to be slack in doing good, or to leave it altogether undone,
or else to do that which is evil and odious in the sight of God. For albeit
many causes may be pretended, which sometime may have a show of goodness: yet
those causes are but corruptions, there is no goodness in them. Some men are
kept back from doing good to their family by catechizing them, because they
would not have all me^^^ talk of them, and because they would not hazard the
credit of their name. Some are (...) back from being zealous in godliness:
because they might still use their liberty, in buying and bargaining, whereby
they might provide for their selves and families. And for every thing they do,
they will have a colorable excuse, they will do nothing without a reason. But
their excuses are but colors, their reasons are very raw, not seasoned with
the word. They are deceived through the deceitfulnes of sin, their corruption
deceives them, they are beguiled because they make no trial of their hearts.
The same thing comes to pass even in those things which in their kind are
good. To leave sin is a very good thing: yet if we do not herein take heed
unto our hearts, we may besore deceived: for when we be minded and do purpose
to leave sin, let us consider the cause why we purpose and go about such a
thing, and we shall often find that it is not the conscience of sin, but the
fear of punishment, or the shame of the world, which moves us so to do. The
adulterer does many times abstain from his filthy adultery, not because that
sin is odious in the sight of God, but because it will bring him to open
shame among men. The thief without any hatred of theft does sometimes keep
himself from the outward act, that he may avoid hanging and the outward
danger of the law. And that the shame of the world and fear of men does more
prevail with many than the fear of God, it may appear by this that In what
respects the worldlings leave sin.
they will abstain from such things whereunto there belongs shame, or for
which some grievous punishment amongst men is appointed, as for theft, murder,
adultery, etc. yet they will pass by great sins for which there is no
penal statute, as swearing, etc. For if there were any true conscience of sin
in them, they would make a conscience of all sins: but especially of these
sins which in Gods eyes are most abominable. Again, we must not rest when we
have left any sin, as though that were sufficient: but we must narrowly
search into our hearts, to see what cause has moved us so to do: for if we
do not with sorrow repent us of our wickedness, and leave it for the fear of
God; but forsake it, either because it will be no longer profitable unto us,
or because we be sickly, or old, or weak, and take no longer pleasure in it;
then our labor is but lost, our hearts have deceived us. And many (no doubt)
are thus deceived; yea, they show that they be deceived by this, that they can
still speak of their sins without sorrow, and laugh at others, which commit
the same sins. Verily, if they had repented of their sins, the remembrance
of them would have been grievous unto them; yea, they would be very sorry when
they saw others fall into the like sin. But seeing they can laugh and make a
sport at it when any man does it, as they have done, most sure and certain it
is, that their hearts have deceived them, they are yet in their sins, though
they have left them outwardly.

Let us proceed a little further, that we may see into the corruption of our
hearts. We purpose to deal faithfully, we purpose to hear the word, to read
it. These things in themselves are very good: yet if we be not careful over
our hearts, their corruption will pollute and defile them. For if we be moved
hereunto (not with any zeal of Gods glory) but with a care of our own
credit, not because in Truth we would countenance the Gospel, The trial of
our hearts, whether in sincerity we love the Gospel for the Truths sake, or
because we get some gain and glory by it.
but because we would get some countenance by it, the thing good in it own
nature is made evil unto us and sinful, because our hearts are not right in
the thing. And how many be thus deceived, may soon appear by the small
fruit, which most men do get by the word. For when we see many very diligent
in hearing of the word, yet profiting nothing, nor desiring to profit, it is
undoubtedly true, that those men are deceived by their own hearts, which are
not right with God. If there were any conscience, if there were any heart or
spirit in men, they would profit something, or at least they would be greatly
grieved for their not profiting. Moreover, when we have brought our purpose to
practice and have done any good thing indeed; even then I say, may we be
beguiled, if we take not good heed. The corruption of our heart is ready to
make us proud of well-doing, whereas indeed we should be humbled: it is ready
to make us glory in that, for which we should give glory to GOD; it is ready
to make that an occasion of slothful carelessness, which should be as a spur
to make us more careful. Therefore when the thing is done, when the work is
wrought, and when all our purpose is brought to pass, we must still be
careful over our hearts, we must still have an eye to them, that our
corruption be in no wise hurtful to that good grace which God has given us.
Thus whether we purpose to leave sin, or we leave it indeed, yet we may be
deceived by our hearts, if they be not right in doing of them. Therefore above
all things we must take heed unto our hearts: otherwise, we may do many
goodly and glorious things in the sight of men, yet our hearts will one day
accuse us for them, our conscience will check and control us, and God, which
is greater then our consciences, will utterly condemn us. Now contrariwise,
when our heart is upright with God, when it is sound and sincere, then will the
Lord favorably accept of our doings, and through his Son he will count them
righteous. Thus if we with a pure heart do leave sin, though the dregs
thereof remain with us: if with a good heart to Godward we labor after
goodness, though we cannot do the good which we would, this vprightnes of our
hearts does please God greatly, and he will surely pardon the other
imperfections through Christ. True it is, that no man can say his heart is
pure, if he compare it with the rule of Gods word, or with the justice of God:
and therefore, who so sees not great corruptions in his heart, he sees
nothing. Yet the children of God may say, that their hearts are pure by Christ,
which by Faith purifieth them, and has wrought the death of sin in them,
though some corruption remain in their hearts.

This doctrine has two special uses; First, to humble us: secondly, to
comfort us. We Cause of all sin in our own selves.
have good cause to be humbled, seeing that it teaches us, that the very
cause of all our sins is in our selves, and cannot be laid upon any other. It
is our own corruption which causes us to sin, whilst it gives place to
the suggestions of Satan, to the policies of perverse men, and to the
temptation of our own flesh. If this corruption were not in us, no temptation
should prevail against us: if this corruption were not rooted in our hearts,
we should overcome evil through goodness. Christ was free from all sins, and
void of all corruption, therefore satan by temptations could not prevail
against him; no, satan could not prevail against our first father, until his
heart through unbelief was corrupted: but we through our corruption do yield
unto our temptations, and therefore we are the cause of our own sins. That
saying therefore is altogether unsavory, which thieves and others have often
in their mouths, when they say woe be to such a man or to such a woman, that
ever I knew them; for if I had never fallen into their company, I had never
come to this stay and woeful state. For albeit evil company might be a great
occasion of their fall, and though such men and women did sin greatly in
tempting them to sin, yet their own corruption caused them to be overcome by
evil company, and therefore the cause of their sin rests upon themselves.
Secondly, this doctrine does greatly comfort us, seeing ^t gives assurance of
victory against all temptations; if we be renewed in our inward man; if our
heart be purified by Faith, and if we labor against them by flying unto Christ.
And this shall seem comfortable indeed, if we consider that every man has
some corruption either more or less in his heart, according to the measure of
his regeneration. And again, if we consider that the devil as a deadly
enemy, goes about to overthrow him, and to subvert his Faith by means of
that corruption. These things if we think of, it will be very comfortable to
know, that we shall persevere and continue, not able finally to be overcome
Satan is made a surgeon, to cure the corruption^ of the Saints.
of any temptation: it will be very comfortable to know, that the devil for
all his fury, is like unto that soldier which launced the impostume of his
enemy, and preserved his life, when he purposed nothingelse but to have slain
him. Joseph was regenerate, and when the temptations of his Mi^^risse came into
his ear, he did fight against them, fled unto Christ, and had a good issue
of his temptations. David contrariwise, though in part regenerate, and truly
renewed: yet when the like temptation was offered, he yielded and was overcome,
because he looked not unto his heart, distrusted not his own weakness, set not
the Lord for the time before his eyes, fled not unto Christ, nor fought not
courageously himself against it: therefore in what measure we be regenerate,
in what measure we unto our regeneration do add the fear of God, for the
purging of our hearts, and a distrust of How the pure heart stadeth fast in
temptations.
our weakness to drive us unto Christ, in that measure shall we withstand all
temptations: and ^s we fail in all these, or in some one of these; so do we
yield unto temptations, and so are we buffe^ed by Satan. If we be pure in
heart and stand steadfast, the devil, the world, wicked men, our own
corruptions and all may tempt us, yet they shall not hurt us. They may let us
see some corruption that is in us, some sin whereof we have not thoroughly
repented of, or something that is not right within us: yet if we yield not
unto them, they shall do us good and not evil, they shall drive us to CHRIST,
before whom we must lay open our wounds, that he of his goodness may bind
them up. This doctrine then (as we see) does teach us reverent and Christian
humility, withal, it does ^^nister most worthy matter of singular comfort.

Now that we be not deceiu^d herein, it is requisite that we make some trial
of our hearts, whereby we may be truly humbled if we find them corrupted: or
we may be comforted, if through the blood of Christ we do feel our sins
washed away. Our hearts are tried two ways, either by afflictions and
temptations, or else by the motions and affections thereof For if there be any
corruption in our hearts, it will appear by one of these. Our hearts tried two
ways. The first by afflictions.
Sure it is, that as a man does show himself in troubles and temptations, such
a one he is indeed: if troubles do not ouerturne him, if fear cause him not
to fall away, if temptations cannot move him to forsake the truth, or to deny
his profession; then verily he has a good argument that his heart is upright;
he has great cause of comfort and rejoicing. But contrariwise, if for fear
his heart faint, if for troubles he turn away, if in temptation he forget his
trial, and betray the truth; his heart is not upright with God, he is in the
gall of bitterness, he ought in his heart to be greatly humbled. Before this
time of trial come, he may think well of himself, he may persuade his heart
that there is great godliness in him: but if he examine not himself, if he do
not straightly look unto his heart, his virtue will prove vanity, and such
godliness will work his grief.

There be many men which now in this time of the Gospel, do account
themselves very religious, and they will bear a countenance with the best,
and will outwardly appear very forward: but because they resting in their
profession, do not examine their heart, their hope fails them, and they fall
away. For when the state of the Commonwealth shall be changed, when religion
shall be altered, when the truth shall be persecuted, when the Lord shall take
from them the light of his word, and shall suffer Satan to tempt them with
heresy; then their corruption will overcome them, and cause them to believe
lies. Likewise men that have been brought up by godly parents, and men that
have the company of good men, may seem to be sure settled in sound religion:
but whilst they rest in these outward means, and labor not after some inward
truth, their hearts do deceive them, and in time they show themselves to be
but hollow hearted hypocrites: for when the benefit of good company is taken
from them, and when they light upon wicked company, their former godliness is
forgotten, they will frame themselves unto that company. Therefore if they be
tempted unto theft, they will prove thieves: if occasion of filthiness or other
vices be offered, they will take the occasion, and stay themselves with many
sins. Thus do temptations try what is in the heart of man. Thus do
afflictions find out the hypocrisy of the heart, so that he may well be
counted a sound hearted man indeed, which is not ouerturned by temptations, and
which falls not away by the vehemency of afflictions: for even Gods children
for want of examining their hearts, do oftentime^ take the foil in
temptations. Lot no doubt was no common drunkard, and yet the forcible
temptations of his daughters caused him twice to commit that sin: his daughters
were no common harlots, for then they might have had great pleasure in Sedome.
But the devil deceived them with a show of godliness, and brought them to
that filthy sin of incest: for when they saw there was none to continue
their fathers name upon earth, they thought it good to lie with their father,
that so his name and seed might be continued. Very needful it is therefore to
examine our hearts, and often to take a trial of them, least the couertnes of
our corruption deceive us, and make us hypocrites: and this we must be careful
to do, before afflictions and temptations do come, that when they come we may
glorify God by keeping our standing.

The second rule to examine our hearts is, to take heed unto our joy and our
grief, our The second trial of the heart by our joy and grief in good and
evil.
hope and our fear: for whatsoever our hearts are most set upon, we will be
most glad when we have gotten it, we will be most fearful of loosing it, and
most greatly grieved when we have lost it. By this rule we may see how our
hearts stand affected in any thing we go about, or in any time wherein we
live. As for example, in seeking riches, honor, promotion, or glory, if we
are most comforted when we have great hope to obtain them, if we be most
cheerful when we have gotten them; if we be most afraid least we loose them,
and if we could be contented to forgo any thing, rather than them, verily
our hearts are most set upon riches, upon glory, upon honor, dignity, and
promotion. Again, if ^e be most destrous of our salvation; if we can most
heartily rejoice, when we Desire of salvation.
have gotten assurance of it; if we be sore afraid of all those things which
might put us in danger of loosing it, if no greater grief can be fall us, than
when we feel not the comfort of it, a most certain argument we may hereby
gather, that our hearts do stand very rightly affected to our salvation:
contrariwise, have we no desire to seek after it? have we but small love of
the means whereby we may attain unto it? then surely we are more carnal then
spiritual; vea, it may be well doubted that we are altogether earthly, we
seek not the things that are above. The like may be seen in all other things:
Art thou glad and cheerful when thou receiuest some profit, and heavy
hearted when thou should be thankful? Art thou sorry when thou receiuest
any loss, and without all sorrow when thou have sinned? Art thou angry when
thou art wronged, and not at all displeased when thou have done open injury to
the High GOD? Where is thy heart? where is thy uprightness? it is gone,
wickedness has bewitched thee, and thy own corruption has made thee
careless. In heaping up thy riches, thou say thou art not covetous, because
thou give to every one his own, and take nothing but that the Law will
give thee. But all this thou may do, and yet be covetous: if then thou
would know they heart thou may hereby try it. If thou be ever musing how
thou may get thy goods: if it, cheer up thy heart, when thou do increase
them, then thou art covetous, though thou see it not, thy mind is on thy money,
though thou perceive it not. Let us see in this one particular How to discover a
covetous heart.
point: thou have much corn to sell, dearth of corn would be commodious unto
thee, and yet hurtful unto thy poor brother, and to the whole land: Now if
thou would wish dearth for thy own profits sake, though it would be a
hinderance to the whole Church; if thou rejoice more in thine own gain, then
thou can be sorrowful for thy brothers harm; if thy gain do make thee
through pride, to advance thy self above thy brother, then doubtless, thy heart
is sore infected with corrupted covetousness. Contrariwise, if it be cheap, and
thou can be more glad for the profit of many, then thou art grieved for
thy own loss, or if it be dear, yet thou can wish from thine heart, that
it were cheap; then thou may safely say, that covetousness prevails not
against thee, it rules not in thy heart, yea, by this thou may see, that
thine heart is rightly affected, both to God and to thy brethren.

To conclude this point, would thou know in what truth of heart thou do
labor for the glory of thy God? Come hither, examine thy heart with all
reverence by this rule, and thou shall know it. The glory of God especially
shines in the prosperous and flourishing estate of his Church, and his glory
is then trampled under foot, when his Church Care for the prosperity of the
Church, a special note of Gods children. Psalm. 122.
is oppressed. Thou see the Church in our land has great quietness: this
thou reioycest at, yea thou can heartily pray for thy Prince, that peace may
be continued in this Church. This is well, and more than many do: but this is
not enough, thy heart in this may deceive thee, because thou may be moved to
do this for thine own ease, without any care of Gods glory: examine thy self
therefore a little further, and call unto thy consideration the Churches beyond
the Seas: thou do hear that they be in continual trouble, they be
persecuted, and on every side invaded: Their Priests are slain, with the
sword, their Princes are pitteously abused, their people are led into
captivity: so that there are nothing but complainings in their streets. Here
may thou try thy self, if there be any truth in thee. For if True trial
of our joy and sorrow.
so be thou be so full of thine own prosperity, that sorrow cannot enter into
thy soul for thy poor and afflicted brethrens sake: nay, if thou can not be
more sorrowful in their sorrow, than thou can rejoice in thine own joy,
thou have cause to fear, thy heart is not sincere toward the glory of God. In
like manner, thou thy self art in misery, tossed with afflictions, and
troubled on every side: yet thou hear that rest is given to the Churches,
thou hear that God has blessed them with the blessing of peace. Oh now if
thou could rejoice in the joy of Gods people, though thou were in sorrow; if
thou could glory with Gods inheritance, though thou sufferedst some outward
shame, if thou thoughtest thy self happy in the felicity of Gods chosen,
although of all men thou might seem most miserable; then would thy conscience
no doubt speak comfortably unto thee, it would tell thee thou did truly
esteem of the glory of God. Now if thou think that herein too Paul
afflicted, yet great ly comforted, when he heard of the peace of the church and
prosperity of the gospel,
much is required of thee, then look unto Gods children in former ages: Paul
was sore afflicted, much troubled, and often imprisoned; yet all this did
nothing grieve him, so long as the Gospel had good success, and the Churches
flourished. Therefore in his Epistles he says often: I was comforted when I
heard of your faith: I live if you stand fast, and such like speeches, whereby
he did evidently declare that he sought the glory of God, and not his own
praise. Daniel contrariwise was in greart credit, honor, and estimation, he
was preferred above all the Princes of Persia, and was second unto the King;
but how did he esteem of this honor? what account made he of his authority?
Surely very little, for when he saw that the appointed time of the end of
their captivity was not come, when he saw the worship of God decayed and worn
almost clean out of mind, when he saw the oppression of Gods people by the
wicked heathen, his heart was heavy, and his soul did melt for grief; yea,
though he had liberty to worship God, though he were free from all oppression,
yet did he humble his soul with fasting, and was in heaviness three weeks of
days, because Gods Church was not farther enlarged, because the Temple lay
vnbuilded, and because his brethren the Jews had no opportunity to cleave unto
Gods worship. This was the practice of godly men in ancient times. This also
must be our practice, if our hearts be pure: thus far for the trial of our
hearts by fear, joy, hope, and grief, in all things which we take in hand.
Now follows the second part of this trial, by applying it unto times, as
unto prosperity and adversity. If we look not warily unto that time wherein
we live, we, through the great corruption of our hearts may be dangerously
deceived. For prosperity will move us to praise God, and trouble will make us
tremble at the thinking of him, and none almost is so desperate and void of all
knowledge, which will not do so: the wife of Job will praise and bless God,
in abundance and prosperity* and she no doubt has many companions. Pharaoh
will be humbled when the hand of God is upon him: Saul will be godly when God
does afflict him: and will not many do as Saul did? are not many like unto
Pharaoh? Therefore if thou will have thy heart pure, Trial of the heart in
prosperity.
look unto thy profession in prosperity, and diligently try thine heart when
thou art in trouble. For thou may seem to fear God when his hand is upon
thee, thou may seem to love God when he does enrich thee, and yet thou may
prove an hypocrite at the last. Take heed therefore unto thy heart, and try it
thus, when thou aboundest in all things, thou love God. This is well if it be
in truth. Do thou also fear him? Art thou afraid to displease him? Art
thou afraid to sin against him? Do thou of very conscience abstain from
secret sin against him, though no law can punish thee? Art thou afraid to do
wrong to any man, then when he cannot revenge himself upon thee? This if thou
can do, thy love is true, thy prosperity has not deceived thee: but if thy
prosperity puff thee up, if it breed in thee a carelessness of sin, if by
thy might thou will oppress him, although he be poor, and cannot withstand
thee; then if thou had the love of men and Angels, it were but hypocrisy,
though thou seemedst to be nothing but love, yet thy heart is bewitched, thy
prosperity has drawn thee from God, thy wealth has deceived thee. O look
unto Job, and consider his life, and thou shall see, that when he flourished
like the green bay tree, yet if he had sinned, he durst not go out of the
doors, and if the most contemptible of his family had ought against him, he
would have taken the reproof: if then thou abstain from open sin, and yet
make no conscience of secret corruption, if thou abstain from those things,
for which punishment is appointed, and yet not from those, which indeed are
greater, though by law they be not punishable, thou do not love God, because
thou fear not to offend him, he will count thee an hypocrite, although thou
be called a Christian. The way to remedy this thy corruption, is to labor in
thy trouble, that thou love God, and to strive in thy prosperity, that thou
may fear God, and then thy heart shall be upright, neither thy prosperity
nor thine adversity shall draw thee from God. But what speech can be
sufficient to paint out the corruption of the heart, which unto man is
unsearchable, and above all things most deceitful? One Sermon is too too
little, if the exercises of weeks and months might be spent in one thing: this
amongst many, would minister sufficient matter in this exhortation. Take heed
unto your hearts, for from thence proceed the actions of life.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONS ON PROVE. 14. VERSE: 5. 6. 7. 8.
Verse. 5. A true witness will not lie: but a false witness speaks lies.
THE righteous man knowing that his tongue was given to him speak the truth,
will make conscience of a lie even in To love and speak the truth in the least
matters.
the least things. But if the matter be of more weight, or if it come into the
place of judgment, then he will much more heartily abhor all lying and
deceitfulnes: yea, then he will not be brought to speak any thing whereof he
has not a certain ground. As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: for
they having no care of truth in light and common matters* do soon cast off
all care and conscience even in greatest and most weighty causes. This agrees
with the saying of our Savior Christ, Luke 16. 10. He that is faithful in the
least, he is faithful also in much. Which may be thus particularly applied: he
that for conscience sake does speak the truth in common and small matters, he
will also speak the truth in matters of great importance: and he that is not
ashamed of a lie in his private dealing, he will also without shame bear
false witness before the Judge. Here then we be taught in the least things,
to inure our tongues to speak the Truth: So shall we be better preserved
from false witness bearing: for the Lord would not have us to dally with
sin. Therefore in his righteous judgment, he does leave men that make no
conscience of a lie, and suffers them to fall, and to offend in some open and
known truth. Again, whereas men take great liberty in lying, if the matter
be secret and unknown; How God chasteneth his children for lying.
the Lord does hate this hollownes and hypocrisy of men, and does often bring
it to light, that by the sorrow for, and shame of that sin, (if it be
possible) they may be caused to make greater conscience of a lie for ever
after. Therefore if we would not have the Lord to punish our lesser frailties
with greater sins: if we would not have him to punish our secret sins and
faults, with open and notorious offenses, then let us be afraid to tell a lie
in the very lightest and most secret causes. But if this will not at all move
us, yet let us be overcome with the consideration of those fruits which will
come of true speaking, specially let us consider of these two. First, the love
of the Truth does breed and beget in us a great and singular comfort, when
we see that herein we resemble our heavenly Father, who is the God and author
of Truth. Secondly, the love of the truth is a special help to revoke us
from sin. For as the liar can so cloak his sin, and set such a color upon
it that no man can accuse him; no admonition or rebuke can take hold upon him,
no threatening fear him: So the silly soul that in simple truth does confess
his sin, is open unto rebukes and holy censures, his heart lies naked before
the word, which doubtless will work effectually to reclaim him from sin.

The second thing which we must learn out of these words is this: that albeit
we must speak the truth at all times, and in all places: yet must we be
especially careful so to do To speak the truth in judgment.
when we be called as witnesses before the judgment seat. For the whole state
and order of judgment does depend upon the witness: so that the Questmen, the
Judge, and all, do proceed either falsely or truly, according as the testimony
of the witness is either false or true. Last of all, we learn that good care
must be used in choosing of witnesses: so that we may not take perjured persons,
or common liers, no not such as do often lie, though it be but in light
matters: but if there be any one man that of conscience speaks truth in all
things, he is worthy and fit to be a witness. This condemns the practice of
the receiving all indifferently to be witnesses in court, and specially such as
be known to be common liers. Thus much for this verse.

Verse. 6. The skorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: but knowledge is
eas^ for him that will understand.
BY the skorner is here meant the proud and contemptuous man, who in the pride
of his wit will compass any thing, neglecting, yea contemning those holy
means which Scorn.
God has ordained. This proud and contemptuous skorner shall not find
knowledge. By knowledge we may understand, not the knowledge of the letter
floting in the brain, and flowing even at the tongues end (which indeed is not
worthy the name of knowledge:) but the true understanding of the word taught
by the spirit, which enters into the heart, and works on the affections,
frames to obedience, and assures of everlasting life. This indeed is
healthful knowledge, which the skorners though they seek, shall True
knowledge, where and how to find it.
never obtain. And hereunto does our Savior Christ give witness when he
says: Many shall seek to enter in, and cannot. Now if we would see the cause
hereof, it is this, they do refuse the right and direct means whereby to come
to knowledge, or else use the means with corrupted hearts. For if they seek
and search in the profane writings of Heathen men, or in the corrupted
writings of hellish heretics, no marvel if they never find this knowledge.
For how can they find truth in falsehood? How can they find the true
knowledge of God in the fained devises and inventions of men? Again, though
they cast off all these, and come to the holy word of God: yet if their hearts
be not sound and right; if they seek profit, preferment, and vain pleasure,
doubtless they shall never attain to this holy knowledge. For sure if the
heart be corrupted when they come to study upon the word, they shall be made
worse and not better by it. The experience of this do we see in many, who
seeking and searching after knowledge, either to get livings, or to gain
credit, or to some such like evil and corrupt end; they have been
disappoynted of their hope, and have failed of that which they sought after. By
the example of others then let us beware and learn to seek after the
knowledge of God and of godliness in the written word of God, which only is
able to make us godly. Again, above all things let us take heed unto our
hearts, that they be upright and sound in seeking for it. Now for the trial
hereof, let us examine whether we seek knowledge, that we might be better able
to glorify God, and to profit our brethren: let us examine whether we seek
Christ for Christ: whether in Christ we seek nothing but Christ: and this if
we can truly see and feel even in the truth of our hearts, then our* heart is
upright, then have we before us a right end, then do we rightly seek God, and
he whom he has sent Jesus Christ, even to the salvation of our souls. True it
is, that the Lord may and does often bestow livings, Trial of our hearts
whether we principally respect Gods favor in all our actions.
riches, and such other outward helps and benefits on his children: but they
do not chiefly seek these. They take these as an handful, yea as an overplus
of his favor: but their hearts are not set upon them. Their love is set upon
God and upon his glory, and that they especially labor for, that they do
toil and travel about, and that is the end of all their labors, in what
measure they obtain that, in that measure they be quiet, though they want
other things: but in what measure they do not find that, in that measure are
they grieved, though they abound in outward things. When a man is of this mind,
when he has this heart, when he has this good will to learn; then among many
other blessings he shall be sure to find that which follows in this verse:
Knowledge shall be easy to him that will understand.

There be two things whereat many men are much offended, and whereby they are
Contempt of the word, what causes breed it.
driven from that due care which they ought to have of the word. The first is
because they see that great and wealthy men of this world little esteem it,
and make light account of it. But men should know that the affections of such
are for the most part weaned from the 1 We say the rich and the mighty est^eme
it not. 1. Cor. 1.
word; their love is set upon their profit, upon their pleasure, and upon such
other things below. Now the mind and heart being forestalled, yea and
surcharged with the liking of these things, they cannot with desire receive the
word into their souls: and seeing that they have little liking of it, and
less will and desire to learn it, no maru^ile though it be as unsavory salt
unto them.

The second thing which fears and offends many, is the hardness of the word.
Oh 2 We say it is too hard. Psalm. 19. 7.
(say they) we would gladly learn indeed, but the word is so obscure and hard,
that indeed it cannot be learned. See the shameless ungraciousness of some
men, who to clear themselves, will lay a fault upon the holy and pure word of
God. But know this O man that the word is hard, because thy heart is hard
through sin. Covetousness, anger, uncleanness, security, and such like
sins, have so beaten and trampled upon thy heart, that it is even hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin: but repent thee of thy former sin, and
Hebr. 3. 12. 13.
put away the evil of thy works, and then come to the word with a holy heart,
and then thou shall see and feel thy understanding enlightened, thy judgment
reformed, and all the words of wisdom plain and easy unto thee. All this is
confirmed unto us by plain 3. Cause. Some secret or open sins, cause the word
to seem hard unto us.
and daily experience: for when a man has been buffeted with some sin; when
he has yielded too much to pride, worldliness, anger, and such like; when he
has fallen into some misliking of the word, or of the preacher, then in
hearing he hears not, and the word is a sealed book unto him. Contrariwise,
when men do most mislike themselves for their sins, when they be most
grieved for their dulnes, when they think themselves most unapt and most
unworthy of knowledge, and yet desire to find comfort in the word, wish to be
enlightened and led into the true knowledge of it: then does the Lord very
often give them the deepest insight into his heavenly mysteries; then does he
work in them a most comfortable feeling, and then does he also put and stir
up most heavenly and holy motions in their minds. By all this must we learn
many things: first when we 1
hear the word without fruit, then we must return into our selves, and know
that our sins are the cause of blockish dullness which is come upon us. Anger
has troubled our affections, and pleasure has stolen away our hearts: profit
has corrupted our judgments: therefore our judgments do not yield unto the
word, it cannot enter into our hearts, neither can it work upon our
affections. We are then in this case to bewail our sins, to labor for
repentance, to pray for the spirit of sanctification, whereby these sins may
be consumed, and then return unto the word with prayer, and the Lord will
bless our understanding. 2
Again, when we see our judgments reformed, and our hearts touched, so that
the word works upon our affections, then we must know that the good work of
God has gone before: his mercy has disburdened us of the heavy burden of
sin, his goodness has emptied our hearts of unprofitable thoughts, and his
good spirit has wrought all in all in us. Then to shut up this verse let us
know, that as sin does hinder and hold the word out of our hearts: so does
the love of the word as it were open the door of our hearts, and make a broad
and large passage for the word to enter into us, and to work that good work
for which it was sent. It follows in the next verse.

Verse. 7. Depart from a fool when thou perceiuest not in him the lips of
knowledge.
GOD has ordained that men should live together, that one might be helpful
to another. But there is a nearer bond of friendship, when one enters into
league with another, Friendship.
or when one makes choice of another, for some nearer bond of friendship,
affinity, or such like. And because this bond cannot stand, but where there is
a great likeness of conditions and qualities, and it is commonly seen that the
party better affected is sooner changed: therefore in this place we be
admonished to beware, least at any time we join our selves to those that are
foolish and ungodly. Not that it is altogether unlawful to have any dealing
with them: but that we may not come too near unto them. For to Common duties
with godless men.
eat and drink with them, to dwell in the same town by them, and such other
common duties, be not unlawful. But to join in marriage with them, to make
them privy to to our counsels, or to use them as more near and special
friends, this is unlawful, and this is here forbidden. For little or no good at
all can be gotten by them, they will hardly or not at all be brought to
goodness, and such is their subtlety, that one of them is able to pervert the
faith, or at least to corrupt the manners of very many. Good cause therefore
there is why we should depart and get our selves from them: on the contrary
side we be taught to seek out good company, and to join our selves to them
as nearly as may be, yet with this full purpose of heart, that we may receive
fruit and profit by them. Nature does call upon us to do this; the communion
of Saints requires it at our hands, our own profit should compel us, the
examples of every man in each calling may move us thereunto. For men do desire
to be in company of their betters: the scholar would be in company of him
that is better learned: the worshipful man desires the company of the noble
man, and the honorable delights much in the favor of the Prince. Yea in the
basest occupations and handicrafts, men do still desire to be in the company
of them that are most skillful. And all this is to obtain the knowledge of
earthly things, and the favor of them that can help them; how much more then
should we desire the company one of another, that we might be helpful one to
another in heavenly things? Nay, how entirely should we be joined one to
another, and receive good one by another in all kind of goodness? And yet
must this be done in great discretion: for the best men have their faults.
Therefore we must be most careful, as to receive what good we can by any, so
to receive hurt or hinderance by none at all It follows.

Verse. 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the
foolishness of fools is deceit.
THat is true wisdom indeed, which beginning at knowledge does go forward
unto True wisdom.
practice, and beginning at faith does further proceed unto the fruits of
faith. For unless there be profitable use of knowledge, both in our general
and particular callings, it has neither the sense nor the savor of heavenly
wisdom. Then we be here admonished to labor that our knowledge may grow
unto faith, and that we build a godly life upon faith. And that we may thus
do, we must especially travel that our hearts may stand in awe of Gods word,
and that we may have a charitable and loving heart unto men. This if we can
obtain, then shall we in fear and love do the good duties which may
glorify God, profit men, and have sure arguments that we have true wisdom.
But the foolishnes of fools is deceit. That is, they do either take a wrong
course of life, or else if they take a right course, yet their hearts are not
aright: and therefore they deceive both themselves and others. All this comes
to pass, because with conscience they do not apply every general point of
doctrine to their particular estate, and labor not to make practice of it. We
give titles unto men, and count them wise and politic men that can foresee and
prevent worldly displeasure. But the holy Ghost has given sentence upon such,
that if they labor not to live godly, they be but fools: yea and the more
knowledge they have, so much the greater fools they be, if they do not for
conscience sake practice the same. We see then what we must do if we will not
be counted fools. Now all of us, be we never so simple witted, would be loath
to be counted fools, and indeed the name is most reproachful, and will
Greatest fools. Matthew, 5.
grieve a man at the very heart. Therefore our Savior Christ does recite it
among those words that kill and murder, saying: Whosoever says unto his
brother thou fool, shall be guilty of hell fire. But howsoever grievous it
is, yet in truth we are such, if having knowledge we do not bring it into
practice. This then must be forcible to make us to join a godly life with good
knowledge, and good works with a lively faith, if before the Lord we will not
be accounted fools.

Verse. 9. A fool makes a mock of sin: but among the righteous there is
favor.
THe heart of man is fraught and filled with much gross and filthy
corruption: but none is worse than that which is here spoken of, that a man
should make a light matter of sin. It is strange and very monstrous that it
should be so, and yet by this place we see it does often so fall out. Yea in
another place the holy Ghost does testify, (and we know Fearful to make a
sport of sin.
that his testimony is true) that the fool does make even a sport and a
pastime of sin. Our own days will confirm the same. For come unto an
adulterer, to a false witness bearer, and to such gross sinners, tell them
that God is angry with them, that he will be avenged on them, as he has been
upon others for such sins, and what I pray you, will they do? Surely he that
is filthy will be more filthy, and the false witness will mock at
judgment. And what is this but to make a mock and a ^est at sin? ^ay, what is
it but to make a God of sin, and to serve it in stead of God? and how do they
grow unto this height and excess of sin? Surely one chief cause is, because
they be not plagued like other men, because the mercy Psalm, 73.
of God does hedge them in on every side, and because they pass their time in
prosperity and pleasure. O what a monstrous thing is this that a man should be
made worse by the Romans 2. 4. 5.
goodness of God? how miserable is that man that will make the mercy of God an
occasion of his own misery? and how unthankful is he, that the more benefits
the Lord does bestow upon him, the more he will heap sin upon sin? nay how
worthily is he destroyed that will abuse the unspeakable loving kindness of the
Lord to his own destruction? And that there should be such, the Apostle Peter
foretold us, In the latter times (says he) shall come mockers, which shall
ask for the coming of the Lord, as though he would not come at 2. Pet* 3.
all. But these abuse the goodness and bounty of the Lord, who would that all
should be brought to repentance. They therefore do treasure up wrath for
themselves against the day of wrath, wherein the Son of GOD shall come in
judgment and fierce wrath, against them that have made a mock of sin, and
have not been led to repentance through his long patience and loving kindness.

Now seeing the judgment of God will lay hold of all those that lie in sin,
and seeing we can never com^ out of sin so long as we make such light account
of it; let us know that although one sin is less than another, and although
a sinner in thought may be counted a little sin, in respect o^ a sin in
outward act: yet in very deed and before the Lord no sin will be counted
little For the infinite justice and mercy of God is violate Light sins with
men, great with God.
even by the least sin, and therefore no sin can be counted little; for
even the least sin is sufficiently able to condemn and confound us from the
presence of God. Again, if the Lord should set the least sin upon our
consciences, and suffer our consciences to check us for it, and Satan
himself to burden us with it: doubtless it would be so heavy and grievous,
that we should not be able to abide it. How then can we make light account
even of that sin, which of all other seems least?

Moreover, the Lord will not only condemn the wicked as for their great, so
for their lesser sins: but he will very sharply correct, yea and severely
punish even his dearest Light and small sins in appearance in Gods children
severely punished in this world.
children for those sins, which in our eyes do seem most small. Thus was
Adam thrown out of Paradise for eating of the forbidden fruit. Moses for
speaking of an angry word dyed in the wilderness, and could not be suffered to
come into the promised land. Ezechias did but show his treasures to the
Ambassadors of Babel, and for that sin they were all carried into Babel: yea
the holy temple was spoiled, the holy vessels were profaned, and their glory
was given into the enemies hand. Josiah did go to war against his enemy and
the enemies of God, and that only to keep them out of his own land: yet
because he did not ask counsel at the Lord, therefore he was slain in the
battle. What sins are less than these? and yet see how sharply the Lord did
punish them in his own children: and can it be then that any sin should be
counted light? Besides, though it were granted that some sin in it self
were but little, yet for this cause could it not be counted little, because in
time it will draw us and drive us into gross offenses. But seeing that in
truth the least sin is too great, then how much the greater must we think
every sin to be, considering Note.
that it comes not alone, but either presently or shortly after brings in
great transgressions? Last of al, seeing that the least sin could not be
forgiven but by the death of the Son of God, so that he must suffer the very
pangs and pains of hell for the least sin that ever man committed: seeing
that even our least transgressions caused him to be accursed, and in the
extremity of grief to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Where
have we the face, or how can we find in our hearts to make a mock of the
least sin? Well then, let us know sin to be sin, and labor to be
sorrowful for every sin: so that although we be not in like measure
sorrowful for all, yet let us take heed that no sin escape us without some
true and godly sorrow: then shall we find favor True sorrow for sin.
among the righteous, yea then shall we obtain mercy from the Lord. For the
less we favor sin, the nearer we be to the favor of God: and the more we
hate sin, the more we shall be sure to enjoy the loving kindness of the Lord:
yea, joy and peace and comfort in the holy Ghost is oftentimes bestowed upon
men in greatest measure, when they feel the greatest measure of unfeigned
repentance, and godly sorrow for sin, and have conceived the greatest hatred
against the same. The Lord in mercy therefore increase this sorrow and hatred
in us ever more and more, that our joy and comfort may be the more increased,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the holy Ghost, one true and
everliving God, be all praise, power, dominion and principality, now and ever.

Amen.
THE SVMME OF THE Epistle to the Hebrews.
THE whole Epistle to the Hebrews contains the sin of Apostasy, from
which the Apostle labors to dehort them, and that by five reasons specially:
First, in the first Chapter he shows that Christ is above all Angels, whereof
he infers in the second Chapter, That if God did punish the contempt of the
ministry of Angels, much more is the contempt of the ministry of Christ
punishable, because he so far exceeds the Angels. In the third Chapter he
shows that Christ is above Moses, whereof he inferres in the fourth Chapter,
That if Moses ministry contemned caused revenge, much more Christ his
ministry contemned causes revenge, because it is far greater than Moses. In
the fifth Chapter he shows, That Christ the sacrificer is greater tha^ Aaron
the Priest, whereof he infers in the sixth Chapter, That if God did correct
the contempt of Aarons sacrifice, much more will he condemn the contempt of
Christ his oblation, because Christ is superior to Aaron. In the seventh,
eight, and nine Chapters, That the ministry of the Gospel is better than the
ministry of the law, whereof he infers in the tenth Chapter, That if they
were punished that despised Moses law, much heavier is their judgment which
despise Christ his Gospel, for that Christ is above Moses. In the eleventh
Chapter he shows, How all the Fathers were justified in continuing in the
faith, whereof he infers in the twelfth Chapter, That who so will be
justified with them, must after their example continue in the faith. Lastly, he
concludes with wholesome exhortations fitly joining to his former doctrine,
For because we may be Apostataes in life as well as in neglect of doctrine in
the thirteenth Chapter he adds many good precepts of Purity, mer^^,
sanctimonie, prayer, thanksgiving, liberality, and obedience to t^eir
teachers* And then falling as it were on their necks, he kisseth them, and
comm^^ding himsel^^ to their prayere, he commends them to the rich grace of
G^d, (...)nd s^amp of all his epistles.

A BRIEF SVMME of Ecclesiastes.
FOr the understanding of Ecclesiastes, because the things therein contained
depend of an history, we must know that Solomon, from the beginning Salomo^
how qualified in his youth.
of his days was a well disposed young man, endued with most excellent gifts
of regeneration and government. Afterward from one well given, and in a good
way, he fell to be a riotous and a profane person: and yet obtaining grace
by extraordinary privilege (I call that an extraordinary privilege which
either implies a particular commandment against a general precept, or a
particular practice against some general rule dispensed of by GOD) he became
sorrowful for his folly, and being desirous to leave to the world a testimony
of his sorrow, he takes upon him in this book the person of a public
Penitentiarie, professing it to be a monument of his unwise dealing: and
therefore it may be called Salomons retractations. And surely it is verily to
be supposed, that the Lord has set up this man as a sign, in whom he would
by proof and experience show, that men can never be happy, for these things
which most men account to be happiness. We say in schools, that practical and
real syllogismes are far above speculatiue and imaginary reasons. And we
know that in all histories the proof and experience of the reporter
affoordeth great credit. Solomon shows in this book that he Practical and
real syllogismes far above imaginary.
proved all, and yet this is his conclusion, That to fear God, in reverent
regard to keep his commandments, is all a man can come to, the only way to
find peace of conscience, and to assure us of the favor of God. This is the
assurance of our country, that we shall one day enter into it; when we have a
purpose to this, we need seek no further This had I (says Solomon)
notwithstanding he was not content, but he imagined some thing else might be
found out which he had not, and being a man of wisdom he thought there
might besome better kind of life invented than this was. Well, he tries
mirth, wives, building, etc. which might seem to content him: but when twenty
years were spent in trying conclusions, he was as near then as he was at the
first: nay, without the special indulgence of the Lord, he was further off
too. And as a horse in a mill, when he had gone in his circuit, he was at
last where he began first. Well (says he) whatsoever I tried beside the
conclusions of the faithful, all deceived me in the fruition. And that which
is more, every purpose of mine heart being vain, left a sting and prick
behind in conscience, which did counteruaile and surpass all the former
delights. So then, Solomon returning into the favor of God, condemns all
external things to be but vanity, and he would teach us this lesson, that
ruina pracedentium must be admonitio sequentium. If any man will try
conclusions against Gods conclusions, he shall try nothing in the end but
himself to be a fool: and by how much the more examples might have forwarned
us, the more we are to excuse the Lord, and to accuse our selves if we fall.

GODLY INSTRVCTIONS FOR THE DVE EXAMINATION AND DIRECTION OF AL MEN, TO THE
ATTAIning and retaining of faith and a good conscience.
CHAP. 1. Of Christian Admonition.
WOrldly wise men call admonition meddling, and that they that look not to other
men's matters are thought to be peaceable, and learned sober wise men, and they
that practice admonition are thought to be unsociable. Caine himself was of
this judgment, he was one that looked not after his brothers life, but
soberly (as he thought) respected his own: by this one example we may see
what spirit they have, who say, I have nothing to do with him. We, having
learned not the practice of the world, but the practice of the word, look for
another judgment, and breaking through all such shadows, we dare and must be
busy with our brother, Leuit, 19. 17, And if need be, we will sharply deal
with him, as plucking him out of the fire, Jude verse. 23, We may not under the
color of peaceablenes, muzzle our mouths: if I have an eye in the Church, I
must point at sin; if I be an hand in the Church* I must pluck it out: for
every sin not admonished, when, and where we may, is enrolled among our
sins, because how many sins we have willingly seen or heard, and not
rebuked nor lamented, we have committed them. They object, our corrupt nature
is disposed to wink at the offenses of our brethren. I answer, howsoever
corruption may be intermingled, yet the first motion of rebuking sin is of
God. A good Father said, I was never acquainted well with any, but first I
displeased him by admonishing him of some sin. And like as the children of
Israel were going but eleven days journey in thirty years: so we might go
by admonition as far in eleven days, as some without it can do in many
years* And as in a lethargy we have need of a purgation: so when the grace
of God freezeth in us, we have need of admonition.

2 As he that admonishes another of sin, and is not grieved, profits
another, but not himself: so he that seems grieved, not admonishing his
brother when time serves, is not truly grieved.

3 In admonishing it is good to observe the rule of our Savior Christ, Matthew.
18. before we proceed either to Minister or Magistrate: than so doing all
things with love, lenity and prayer, we may not doubt but the Lord will
bless his appointed means, and so in faith and meekenes offer our selves to
him: if it be so that we see no fruit, yet we shall possess our souls in
peace, with the conscience of our simple obedience.

4 A godly man doubting whether (being moved in heart to admonish an unruly
party by writing, and fearing that it would not be profitable (he should
continue in his purpose or no; he was answered: it was a great sin then not to
do it, and also a great great judgment of God came on that sin often, which
was, that we should forget the good motion: or having the good motion, we
should want opportunity to do it: wherefore let us do the thing, and leave the
success to God, after we have prayed for it. And if it so come to pass (as
often it does) that though the action be good, our hearts upright in the doing
of it, our affection loving, considering the thing right and good, yet our
labors and our prayers be unfruitful: let us remember that in all these were
secret imperfections and sins, for the which the Lord might hinder the
success, which by deferring he does scour away, that afterward in fuller
measure of his mercy, when we shall be the better prepared by humility to be
thankful, he power out a more rich measure of granting our requests upon us.

5 The children of God become better, and profit more when they are rebuked;
and a rebuke is not without effect in any, but in the wicked. They that harden
their hearts and necks when they are admonished, and think that sharp
handling does make them worse, had need to take great heed to themselves: for
if the Lord cannot prevail by great admonitions, nor sharp rebuking, he will
certainly punish: for though he did bear with the often murmurings and many
sins of the Israelites, yet at the last he swear in his wrath they should
not enter into his rest.

6 Iethro does not rashly reprehend Moses, Exodus 18. 14. but he first comes
to the knowledge of the cause: and when he saw clearly that there was an
oversight in his son, then does he admonish him, and give him such counsel
as is agreeable to the word of God. The want of this wisdom does often make
our admonitions unprofitable, because we take not aduisement how the case
stands, then for that we do not labor to have a sure ground for our
counsel out of the word of God. If then we will that our admonitions take
place, let us first duly consider of the thing it self, and by the word try
it to be a fault; then let us also labor to have a way out of the Word,
whereby the matter may be better handled. If this were an oversight in Moses
that he had need of an admonition, who can exempt himself from it? None at
all, but every man must be content to be admonished, yea though it be of his
inferiors: for so Moses, far excelling his father in graces, yet is
profitably admonished by him, and willingly receives it. So was Naaman the
Syrian admonished 1. Sam. 25. 31. 32.
by his servant, and Abigail by her servants, and she did also admonish David
the King and Prophet of God. We must then admonish, and be admonished, even by
them that have received lesser graces then we, and with all modesty and love,
and thanksgiving, as Moses and David.

7 The nature of the wicked soon appears in admonition, who will at no hand
be admonished by the godly, albeit the cause be never so just. The wicked
Israelite could be content to suffer the wicked Egyptians to whip him, but not
godly Moses to admonish him. The world will be subject to the world, but not to
God,

8 We must learn to admonish speedily after the offense is committed, because
our nature in good duties, and in them especially which have offense with them,
is ready to put off, we must not-tarrie until we meet the offender; but go
to him, whilst the brunt is upon us: for our nature is given to cool too
fast, if we plie it not whiles it is hot. So our modo and modo, never have a
modum, when we post it off from time to time, and our anger against sin is
quickly shaken: while we are hot then, and our brother is sick, the equity
of the thing requires, that we should go to him, though otherwise he should
come to us: The reason is, because after sin is once committed, there is a
darkness, a dimnes, or a mist brought on our souls, whereby howsoever in
judgment we receive somewhat of other men's sins, (as David did of his
offense, that took the poor man's sheep) yet we cannot see our own.
Besides, there is cast a deformed blemish on the glass, showing us our sin,
and the devil so providing, that sin never dies, we abhor those means
which should recover us; we on our parts receive our standing to this end, to
admonish. Wherefore, Peter not being able to requite Christ for praying for
him, that satan might not overcome him, is commanded by the confirmation of his
Faith, to remember to confirm the faith of others. And Psalm. 26 the Lord is
content to set over the debt due to himself to others. And John makes this a
special note, that we are not dying, if we love the brethren. The third reason
that should move us to make haste, is this: whilst sin is yet tender, green
headed, and shamefast, whilst it has blood with blushing in the face, whilst
it is like a little aspe, or like a small cord, it is wisdom to admonish the
party of it: otherwise it will fall out with us, as with the practice of an
ancient Father, who planting one year, plucked up the plant with one hand, who
suffering it two years, was feign to pull it up with both his hands: but
planting three years, he used both hands and breast; at the length when it
was a plant of four years old, he was constrained to let it alone. So God
would have us pull up the sin whilst with one hand we may do it, not to
tarry, whilst two hands, breasts, and all will not do it: for fear of
negligence we are to admonish in respect of our selves, because the sin is on
our score, that we admonish not. The same God that says, forgive thy brother
if he offend, says also, if thy brother offend, admonish him, Many would have
their faults forgiven, but not reproved: but he sins as deeply that
reproves not, as he that forgiueth not: so fearful a thing it is not to
admonish.

9 It is a good thing when we so take an admonition, as the admonition take
us. Paul Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13.
reproues Peter openly, and records this fault in his epistle: and yet Peter
for all this calls him his brother Paul, commending his wisdom, his gifts
and graces, accepting his admonition not as a blow with a staff, but as a
most precions balm. But we when a spot is showed to be in our garment, are
ready to take up mire, and to cast it on his coat, that pointed at our spot:
or seeing something in our face by a glass, we be ready to break the glass
that showed us our blemish. Again, when we admonish, we shall meet with
some that will flatly deny the fact: some will grant the offense, but in part:
some will confess the whole, but they do extenuate it. For all which
maladies, as good Physicians, we must not at the first urge the most forcible
medicines, but use them in their degree and place, that is, when more
favorable means prevail not: we must not with Rehoboam use too strong a
purgation at the first, least our patients be not able to bear it, but we
rather cause them to be more crasie, than rid them of any part of their disease.

CHAP. II. Of the form and rules of Christian admonition.
THere are two sorts of sins, some greater, some less: for Christians are All
sins are not equal.
neither Stoickes nor Epicures, for Paul opposes himself to the^ both* Act.
17 18. they esteem not all sins alike: Neither are they all one with those
which have a bottomless charity, who can count all evils infirmities. And
there is a third sort worst of al, and they will make every sin a mote, and a
beam when they list: the earth is a beam in it self, but a mote in the sky.
But we know that all sins are not of one last, Genesis 15. I will not bring in
the Israelites till the measure of the sins of the Amorites be full: So
there is a full measure, and a wanting measure, all have not one measure. When
Paul speaks of a gangrene, and Job of a sin, which he calls the rottennes
of bones, they mean qui me tradi^it maius peccatum habet.
there are diverse degrees of sins spreading in our flesh. A Father says,
some sins were scoured by the blood of his hands, but others required his
heart-blood, Ioh. 19.

2 Now, for that in admonition this distinction of sin is not known, some do
trouble Turbare oculum and excaecare.
the eye, some put out the eye. Some sins there be that our brethren may
pluck out, some that are left to our selves to pluck out. Truth it is, if we
consider every sin as it is against the majesty of God, we shall see it is no
mote or light matter, Matthew. 5. God esteems one ^ot of his law more than
heaven and earth. Does every sin require the blood of Christ? Nihil leave
quod praepond^ratu^ m^do*
how then can they be motes, unless we think his blood to be a mote also? As
it is said of Baltashar in Daniel, so it may be said of every one that sins,
if thy sins be weighed, it is the loss of thy kingdom, even of the kingdom
of heaven.

3 The better to examine sins, let us not weigh them by themselves: for a
sin seeming by it self to be but a grain weight, yet by reason of some
circumstances, may counterpoise a heavy beam. For example, consider the sin
of Judas, you shall see it by all the six circumstances: First, of his person,
in that he was a Disciple put in trust with the temporal things that belonged
to Christ. 2. Of the object, for that he had confessed Christ before. 3. Of the
time, when he received the Sacrament. 4. Of the place where Christ went out to
pray and to teach his Disciples. 5. Of the manner which was in hypocrisite to
say, Hayle master, 6. Of the cause; for such a small value. So in like manner
the sins are greater in public persons, than in private, and that first for
the offense, which Christ Note. Leuit 16. 6. 15. Heb. 7. 27.
counts a beam. There was as much sacrifice offered for the sin of the
Priest, as of all the people besides: for surely as the measures of the
Sanctuary were double, so their sins were double. Adn as this is said of the
person, so now of the place. Public sins are greater than private, in that
they have impudency joined with them, in that they be committed with an high
hand. In respect of the time, a sin of long continuance is greater than a
sin that began but yesterday*

4 There are six notes to know a beam by. The first is taken out of that
place where Christ says, it is impossible for a ca^nell to go through a
needles eye: and this is to express the absurdirie of those which say, as
Absalom said, every man's cause was good: these foam out A man may shun a be^me
in the dark, but we cannot see motes but in the Sun light. Multiplex
peccatum. Saint lerome says: Si cito remouetur festuca est, si durauerit trabs
est. Simile. Accusat, aggrau^t, quaerit remedium. Satan.
sin without shame The second is ser down, Rom 7. where the Apostle speaks
of a sin, that by the light of the law he saw to be great and fearful, which
before he counted as a shadow, or a mote only. The third note is Revel. 17. a
sin of many heads, able to be divided, to be quartered, must be a beam: but
a mote cannot, being almost as little as the Geometrical punctum. It is a
compound sin. The fourth Dauia speaks of, Psalm. 118 22. making relation of
certain stones which the builders refused, such as we use to serve at turns,
to build the kingdom of ignorance: Thsi must be a beam, and not a mote. A
more may be blown out, but a beam can searse be haled out with horses. The
sixth is drawn out of that saying of Christ, Hypocrite, pluck the beam out of
thine iowne eye, then thou shall see: so that is a beam whichmakes us blind.
This is that which Solomon says, All the workers of in^quitie go astray,
knowledge first decaieth. These sins we have, and feel them not; and the
greater they be the less grief. These malladies of the soul are contrary to
those of the body; for these the greater they be, the more we feel the^, the
other the less. Those were but small in comparison, and mystical sins,
which Paul was so grieved with, Romans 7. yet he displeased himself in them, and
sought the remedy; and when he found it, he esteemed it much. The use of all
this is, that we know, when we have motes in our eyes, and that we take heed
they grow not to be beams: for there is one will take order they shall not
fall out. And to this end, we must labor to have a good judgment, at the
first to esteem all sins as beams in our selves.

5 To recover brethren from their faults, belongs to private and public, to
Minister and Magistrate. David Psalm. 101 says, it was his mornings work, to
cast out the workers of wickedness: what case are they in then, whose morning
and evening work it is to keep them in. This is now the first sin of the
Magistrate, to leave beams as motes unpunished; as I^roboam would let them
commit idolatry, so he might have his kingdom. Secondly, it is their fault to
punish motes, and to let beams pass; as Saul put the holy Priest to death for
David's cause; but Abner for whoredom was not punished, because he was a beam
of his kingdom. Thirdly, they offend in punishing beams as motes, and motes
as beams; as David in dividing the in heritance between Mephibosheth and
Ziba. For the Minister, Tit 1. elenche apotomos. Redargue praecise B.
Cortipiendo corripies.
he must reprove in the light before all men: and if they be slow-bellies he
must reprove them sharply. Private men must also admonish. There is not only a
healing of eyes in the Chirurgians shops, but every man msut have a care of his
brothers eye. If we look for a commandment, Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall reprove
him plainly, is as vehement a speech as God could use. Now they say, if a
manreprehend, he is an hypocrite: but assuredly, he that performs not this
duty when, and where he may; let him know his silence is a servile hypocrisy.

6 The holy men of elder ages have been in the duty of reprehension and
admonition Examples practicing this duty.
most careful. Esaias for this cause was counted a man, in his time, so
contentious, as that nothing in the land could please him. I^remie says, he
was borne a man of contention: Eze^hiel was called a finde-sault: Christ
himself both commanded, Matthew. 18. and practiced this duty, he is often
curning the eyes of the Pharisees, Sadduces, high Priests, Matthew. 23. Herod,
Luke 4. his own countrymen: his own disciples, most sharply; calling Peter
Satan, and saying to James and John, ye know not what ye ask, and his own
mother he reproues roundly, Ioh, 2. The holy Ghost is a reprouer also, Ioh. 16
and this he pr^ctiseth even at his first coming, Acts. 2. 22. Ye have sl^ine
the Lord of life, Paul reproved Peter, and Peter James. All their Epistles
command this duty. 1. These. 4. 15. Ephesians. 5. 11. They Note.
which will not perform this duty, to reprehend the wicked, fall often to
^euile good men. When there was but one Miohaiah to perform this duty, there
were 400. Prophets which stood by to preach peace to the people. As often we
read in the book of Kings, There Venit quidam e Prophetis: where a Father
says, H^u quid est quod venit ni^i vnus.

How we must suffer reprehension, A Father says:

Ostendo illi lutum, and aspergit me ^uto; ostendo ill^ speculum, and ^llidit
parieti. Exiu^e gen^i^m.

Ex iure membrorum.

Pr^^^be ^crrectio^em diuinam fraterna correctio. Mutua app^obatio.

Mutua laus. Nam non putat se pecca^e qui a nemine corripitur.

Est peccatum tuum quicquid non dis^l^ce^ ubi.


came one of the Prophets: there came not many to perform this duty, and so
it is to this day, and this makes this duty as bitter as wormwood, for that
it is so little put in practice.

7 That we may suffer rebuke, these three things must we do. First, as Psalm
141. we must esteem it as a balm, and make profession that we do so Secondly
men must fear themselves more: now every man presupposes himself innocent,
when as we should be fearful to have offended, when we have not offended, 1.
Sam. 22. I am thy fathers death, s^^^h David, when he was not indeed. Job was
afraid of his children, when he knew not they had sinned. Thirdly, though the
accusation be false, we must perform thankefulnes, Josh. 22. 10. 11. 12. 13.
14. 15. 16 But contrary ways, if one epsy a mote in our eyes, we straightway
look into his, and then ours is whole.

8 If yet we desire more reasons to persuade us to the practice of this most
Christian duty: let us remember we are to admonish, because they are our
brethren. If two strangers walk together, and a mote fall into one of their
eyes, the other will blow it out, or wipe it out: this nature teaches us. Paul
goes a note higher: If there be a thorn in the foot, the head stoopeth; but
if any thing be in the tender eye, it labors to ease it much more. But we
reprove commonly when we fall out with our brethren: and therefore in verity
we be enemies and not brethren: for this is a good argument wi^h ^s, he is
thine enemy, therefore reprove him. And this is an Egyptians trick, to
reject a just reproof and to say who made thee a ruler? who made you a
Preacher? Augustine faith, if thou do not help his eye, God will plague
thine eye and his too. And again, though thou say not euge, yet because
thou say not apage: there is (says he) a mutual approbation, as well as a
mute commendation.

9 Three things ought to move us to this duty. First, least men think it an
indifferent thing to offend, and so we nourish him in his sin, and thereby
his eye will gather more filth and scales, and in time go clean out.
Secondly, if thou pity not him that offends, yet pity him that stands by,
least he be offended, or any way endangered by thy silence, or by the sin past,
or both: as we see in Barnabas by Peter, Gal. 2. 13. Thirdly pity thy self,
and deliver thy self from the guilt of this sin: for if thou be pr^sent, and
be est not grieved for the offense, it is in account laid upon thy score.
Neither let that hinder us that we shall not prevail: for Nichodemus also
performed this duty when he had no hope to be heard, Ioh 7. 50. Again, by
rebuking thou shall deliver thy self from cotempt, for by thy silence the
wicked will give thee the same reward they give unto God, Psalm 50. 21. They
will conclude, that thou art in the some league of imp^^tie with them. Finally,
so doing thou shall free thy self from the punishment of sin. Ely for not
reproving his sons, perished with them in the same calamity: but Let escaped
in the destruction of Sodom, Saint Peter renders this reason, because he was
v^xed with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked, continually preaching
righteousness and reclayming them from their sins.

10 This duty of reprehension is only to be done to a brother, of whom there
be two Who ought to be reprehended.
sorts: the natural, and the believing brother; for the faithful have one
spiritual Father, and one Holy mother, even the heavenly Jerusalem, the
mother of us all. As there be beams so great that we ca^^ot move them at all,
so th^re be some men whom we must not touch with any reproof. We must not
reprehend the^ whom the Church acknowledges not for children, for they be not
our brethren: Such a^ deserve to ^e rejected by the Church, I am not bound to
perform this duty unto them, for holy things must not be given to dogs
Again, the scorner must be smitten and cast forth, as Ismael was, he is not
worthy a christian reprehension, nor a barker or biter of the religious and
godly, as profane Esau: for these cast off all our admonition with a jest.
Some thought Paul should have reproved Nero, but it was a rule in the Primitive
Church, and the School men have observed, that Absti^^endum metu charita^^s
non metu ^upiditatis.
furious Tyrants may not be reproved, least they disturb the peace of the
Church. Elias was more plain with the Kings in his time, albeit he was left
alone. If thou have authority, thou may reprove all that are under thee.
Reprove strangers only of open and known sins: no Samaritan at al, unless
he be wounded. Let us in performing this duty observe divine rules well, for
some are as unfit to reprehend and to be reprehended, as Esaus Plow^^are was to
make a sword.

11 Though good duties are to be done, yet every man is not fit to do every
good duty, therefore let us see who is fit to execute this work of
reprehension. The eye is a tender part, every finger must not be taking in it:
for of an action without skill comes an end without fruit. This duty does not
consist in readiness of utterance, nor in bitterness and stinging Munus
proportionatur dono. Per oculum mentem, pervisum cogni^^onem.
words, but in good sound judgment, which makes a man fit. And to this are
required three things, which answer to those in the bodily sight: first the
cleerenes of the eye: secondly, the right situation of it: thirdly, not to be
hindered without. By the eye, the mind, the seat of knowledge is understood:
and here in they must be rich. It is promised, Esa. 64. that the people under
the Gospel should excel in knowledge the Levites under the Law: and it may
appear it was so in the Primitive Church, for they became most ready and
familiar in the holy Scriptures: in so much that women began to grow so
cunning, that there was a general prohibition that they should not speak in
the Church. Daniels prophecy was, that in the later times men should run over
books: and if we cannot so abound, yet must we get a through knowledge of
things, against which we deal by reprehension. Christ finds the Pharisees
often short, and blind, albeit they gloried of great knowledge, though the
Phylacteries were broad, yet their heads were shallow. So it is also with us:
there are many dim eyes which have need of that eye salve, Revel. 3. If any
thing be ambiguous we cannot hit the joint to restore the member that is
loosned, Gal. 6. 1. And so in our building, all will down in the tempest that
we build with untempered mortar. Nothing can abide soundly in affection, that
is not surely grounded in the judgment. That which Philip said to the Eunuch
may here well be used, a little changing the word in the original: Do
thou know what thou do condemn? And it is said well of Peter, that many
speak evil Ginoskeis, anaginoskeis, Cataginoskeis Sapiunt ex a^^^no pectore.
of those things they know not: but they do as Balaam, fetch their diuinations
from others, and so cannot speak according to time, place and persons, but as
they are then provided. Secondly, the eye must stand rightly in his proper
seat, for if it stand awry we cannot see well, how clear soever the eye be,
This site and right place of the eye, the old writers call intentio vitae, and
that is that which even their own consciences know, and other men often see,
they level at in their whole life. The right situation of the eye is this, if
we set before us this scope to please God, without any sinister respect: albeit
some can look awry and that sildome, and that shortly, and wax not worse and
worse, but more zealous. He looks not aright that has a worldly end, as
Balaam would now and then look to Gods commandment, but because his heart and
mind was fixed on the wages of iniquity, his eye was ever over his shoulder,
and in the end showed he was blind indeed. Thirdly, the outward hindrances
are the beams that are in the eye, and they are those sins that are past
shame and sorrow, and such as may be felt at midnight. They receive many
divisions: they uphold wicked practices; they be such as the Disciples cannot
cast out, they are directly opposite to the calling of a Christian. They that
work this trad, are workers of iniquity, of whose eye and judgment mark
David's question, the answer whereof is soon made. Are they not all without
understanding that work wickedness * And this is the reason why the Fathers
having less means of knowledge than we, yet Note.
saw more concerning heavenly things then we. Albeit Christ says of this eye,
thou see a mote, yet he speaks but of his false imagination, for it is
hard for him to see a mote, that has a beam in his own eye* he may only
think there is a mote where there is none, and therefore no man is to believe
him. And yet this man challenges to himself authority not only to dispute,
but also to reprove, yet little reason is there of the first, but none of the
second. Besides, whereas the end of reprehension is amendment, he is like to
make him worse: for seeing how little he accounts of the beam that is in
his own eye, he may gather, if that hurt not him, his mote will hurt him
less: nay he is more A rule. Deceptus in minoribus no^ debet de maioribus
iudicare. Mensura enim prior mensurato. Potes ne alium melius noscere quam ^^?
like to pluck out the eye, than the mote out of the eye. It is a general
rule, that he that does willingly reprehend, and feels not a mixed affection
of sorrow and fear, is not fit for it. Our own love is the measure of our
love to others: he cannot then be good to others, that is not first good to
himself. Chrysostom says, Can thou know another better than thy self? He
that loves another more than himself in spiritual things, he is void of
charity. We must therefore ever take heed of these beams in our own eyes,
for if we so cast aside our eye after preferment, we set the fist commandment
above the first, and make our selves unfit for the practice of the duty of
Christian admonition.

12 The people so profited by Moses sharp rebuke, that they after came to ask
him counsel, as loath to displease him, when they saw that he was angry for
Gods cause, and their sins. Where we see how needful it is for a man to have
his conscience ripped up, and to take heed when the Minister of God does with
anger rebuke, that then we do rightly interpret his anger, for the devil will
be too busy to persuade, that he does it for his own pleasure. And the
Ministers of Christ must take heed to rule their anger, ever intending
principally Gods glory, and the profit of their brethren.

13 In admonition, when we love too much the person, we slack our zeal
against the sin: when we are too zealous against the sin, we forget meeknes
and love to the person. It is the greatest judgment of God, upon the corrupt
judgment of the world, that until sin be prodigious, and monstrous, such as
goes round about the world, we are not moved with it. When we admonish
others of sins, as of jesting, and such like: forsooth we must smile, when we
do so, and we must laugh upon them, least we move choler, and give offense.
Well, for all sin in equal measure, and for the least of all sins, Christ
Jesus the Son of God was feign to shed his precious blood; howsoever this
seems little to us in committing, it was very great to Christ in suffering
for it. They be small sins to us, which are usual to all; but if they were
not usual, they would seem prodigious.

CHAP. III. Of Adultery and youthful Affections.
IF that after often falls in the sin of Adultery, the Lord give a man the
sight of the grieuousnes and greatness of this sin, and fill a man with the
fears of his judgments, and then this fear cause the power of this sin
Fear.
to abate in him, and cause him to fear all occasions, and to love chaste
persons, then such a man may be well comforted, the Lord will give him Grief
for sin Remedies against unclean lusts.
the victory of that sin. But yet remember to proceed, and in affection let
that unclean life be as loath some unto thee as it has bin pleasant, and to
the end that thou may know how to keep and possess thy vessel in holiness
and honor, begin to delight in the Lord Christ, and to use with fear and
reverence the means of thy salvation, the Word, Prayer and Sacraments; and
then the Lord will seal unto thine heart the pardon of this sin: for this is
not obtained before we have thus repented. And when thou have found these
effects of Gods grace in thee, thou may reason thus against Satan: If the
Lord would have destroyed Note.
me for this sin, he would not have given me a sorrow or ha^red of this sin,
therefore I am now well assured he does, and will accept me for his adopted
son, in his true son Jesus Christ. That a man may do this, and learn this
sin with repentance, he is first to consider, 1 2
I say, the mercy of God, which strives with us till we be brought so far
as is aforesaid. Secondly, we must consider the justice of God, which will
confound those that will resist. The mercy of God appears in fearing thee,
and punishing others, in giving thee the means, and not others, in punishing
thee lightly, and confounding others. This will greatly commend the greatness of
Gods mercies, especially, seeing he gives mercy when he might punish, and
does as it were hire thee from thy sins. Thus will the spiritual man gather
of the great mercy of God: Shall then provoke him, and add rebellion unto
sin? Shall I utterly deny him, and become the slave of satan? So then, thus
the meditation of the mercies of God in Jesus Christ leads us to the hatred of
this and all other sins, Luke 16. But contrariwise, Satan, and the flesh
conclude: If the Lord had hated this sin, he would have punished it before
this time in me. In old time he destroyed many for sin, but now under grace
he is more merciful. O cursed flesh that does reason so much against reason
The reason of our corruption for sin.
and grace: for there is now a secret curse of GOD upon every sinner, which
will consume a man if it be not prevented; for the word gone out of Gods mouth,
will have his effect, and shall not be changed because God cannot be changed.

2 Many think youth as the flower of our age, to have a privilege above
other ages. But alas, it is an age of great confidence; All this have I done,
says the young man in the Against the unbridled affection of youth. Simile.
Gospel. So dangerous is their case, that they must not do things indifferent,
for fear they make them sad; and we know, that ordinary things denied, argue
an extraordinary peril. The prodigal son did walk his four stations, and
as Ambrose says, he had four prouocations: first, his portion; secondly, his
fathers indulgencie; thirdly, ill company, but youth more than all; Psalm 119.
19. David abruptly with an Apostrophe breaks off his meditation into this:
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ways? Upon which place all the
Fathers agree, that the accent is upon a young man; for he has fewest means.
The word which David uses for clensing, is very effectual; by clensing,
signifying the clensing of glass, and therefore compares he young men to
glass, which though it be very Simile.
clean, yet it will gather filth, even in the Sunne-beames, and of it self,
which notes the great corruption of this age: Prou. 22. 13. he has a bu^dle
of folly bound close in his heart, Eccles. 11. Children and youth are vanity:
vanity is not in them, but the age it self is vanity. Such is the stream of
affections in them, as the heathen thought it best policy to let them have
their course a little. But let us consider their corruption in one measure
further. Youth how dangerous an age.
Not only the common sort, but the best wit, who is thought to be of an
excellent disposition. 2. King. 22. And not only the best in civil gifts, but
those that are best in spiritual graces, find it hard, as Timothy, who
brought down his body, that Paul was feign to write to him to drink wine,
and for all that he wrote Flee newfangled lusts. This Timothy was such a
one, as that says Bernard, Give me one Timothy in these days, and if he will
eat Pheuge tas neo^erikas epi thumias. h^n phil^i Theos, apothnes kei neos.
gold he shall have it. This makes me that I cannot subscribe to that saying:
Whom God loves, he takes away in tender years. For I tell you it is a
dangerous thing to die in youth: and surely, except the Lord work marueilously
it is dangerous. And why? Surely in young men there is a double pronenesse:
First, their natural corruption: and then their age in which their affections
be grounded, but their reasons be raw. Besides these, the devil has a
special affection to this age. And it is a Proverb, chapt. 22. Set a young
man in his way, and he will not depart from it when he is old. If you stamp
garlike in a new mortar, it will always Ne^phyta.
smell of it.

CHRIST says, Suffer little ones to come unto me: If they can sing but
Hosannah, and know Youth.
not the meaning. It is a good thing to do as Marie did, betimes to lay up in
our hearts such things out of the word, as we do not know, while as yet thou
art ^ude (says Hillary) least then, thou begin, when thou should end.

The service of youth how greatly it pleases GOD, may appear. Moses and
Aarons rod was of an Almond tree: what this figure meant, is taught, Ierem. 1.
I am but a child: It is no matter says God: What see thou? an Almond tree,
which in those countries (where it grows) is the first that does blossom.
Him that God will have his rod, must be a branch of the trees that first
blossom. The first fruits, and the first borne are due unto GOD. And this is
the difference between the sacrifice of Cain and of Abel* Cain offered he
cared not what, but Abel offered the first fruits, and the best: and this is
the best note to know a Cains heart from an Abels.

5 Consider Gods liking of Timothy, David, Samuel, the Prophet of Prophets,
who served ^^^um^a^es ^^^^te^.
God when he was a child, and so the good King Josiah. These were not trees
which blossom when others have done. Let men be never so soundly come home, it
were better Take heed of lusts of youth
they had never been so, both for the Churches and themselves, for they carry
the smell of the garlike mortar still where ever they go.

6 Old men which have lived loosely in youth, have great diffidence in
themselves, for they dare not reprehend so sharply, as others; nor punish so
severely as they should, for that the sins of their youth are so in their
foreheads, and all men see them. Many of these Sins of youth David and Solomon
no Proctors for sins. Youth dissolute. Salomons example.
are rocks of offense. They make David and Solomon proctors of their sins,
which I am persuaded grieueth those souls at this day, if there be any sorrow
in heaven, to hear men allege them for their sins.

7 We be taught Esai. 9. 17. that when the Lord intends to destroy a
Commonwealth, a special note thereof is this: He takes no delight in their
youth: therefore where young men be dissolute, it is a heavy note of Gods
wrath to fall upon his people.

8 Such as do take liberty by Salomons example, let them consider it well. He
was in the prime of his youth well disposed and wise, but having past to riper
years, he grew vain and dissolute Then by Gods free mercy, he became a
sorrowful man in his age. And he made himself a public penitentarie, leaving
his Ecclesiastes as a monument of his folly: and it may well be called his
book of Retractations. This is Salomons experimental conclusion: All is
vanity and vexation of mind. This he tried, when he had gone Tria bonorum
genera.
through all things he was fame to return to that wherewith he began. His
book confuteth all Pagans best moral wisdom. He wanted nothing, he had
experience of all kinds of blessings that may be found on earth. Yet after long
experience he found no true joy in any thing on earth. The wise men of this age
would say: he was too sad, or of a melancholic humor, and could not use
things well. But himself answers the folly of such, chap 6 None could have
more joy, nor so much pleasure in them, as he had: yet he found in conclusion
nothing in them but vanity and vexation of mind.

9 Job was never adulterer, yet made he a covenant with his eyes, because he
being clean Adultery* She called to the men of her house. Genesis 39. 14.
Carnal love
in heart, would give no occasion outwardly. When Putiphers wife could not
prevail because of Joseph's constancy, she was not moved to repentance as she
ought, considering that her servant was so faithful to her husband, much more
she ought to have been: but contrarily s^e uses a desperate remedy, worse
than the fault it self: namely, to seek his life. And this is the end of all
unbridled and carnal love, that in the end it turns to extreme hatred: yea
and that more bitter than of them, who never bare them good will: as 2. Sam.
13. 15.
appeared in that incestuous love of Ammon to his sister Thamar, who afterward
hated her exceedingly. Let us learn to fear these unbridled affections; and
if we will not have this issue to come of them, let us make our bond in the
Lord, that one may draw another nearer to him thereby. And this is not only in
this lusting love, but in all other familiarities of men whatsoever, without
the Lord, whether it be for gain or favor, etc, for when they cannot enjoy
the things they look for, their love is turned to hatred.

10 Joseph in his prosperity would not forsake the Lord to cleave to his
Mistress, and now Perseuera^ce
in that he sees present danger, yet he stands fast: Thus on every side the
Lord tries his children, and gives grace withal to persevere. Out of this we
may learn, that we never know whether we love righteousness and holiness for
Gods cause, so well as when we endure some trouble for it. Joseph might have
done this secretly that it should not have bin known, yet the love of God
constrained him, and the fear of the Lord caused him to refrain from evil.
Albeit he saw present danger of his life and good name: yet because he knew
that the Lord which sees secrets he rewards openly, therefore he commits
himself to the Lord, and had rather hazard his good name before men, than keep
an evil conscience before God. And he believed withal, that the Lord at the
last would make his righteousness as clear as the noone day.

11 Many will not fight or murder openly; but if their enemies were secretly
delivered into their hands, they would be far from David, who would not hurt
the Lords anointed: 1. Sam. 24.
in the mean time they devise evil amongst themselves, and when they come
abroad they utter it. Many do abstain from fornication for fear of laws and
such like; but they consider not that the Lord sees their unchaste minds, and
will recompense them. Many would be religious, but yet unlike to Sidrach,
Misac, and Abednago, who would not for Da^. 3. 16.
fear of the King so much as consult of the worshipping of the Image. But they
would seem to be more than they are, as Ananias and Sap^ira: therefore they
shall have the same reward with them for their tempting of God. So long then as
our hearts do deceive us; and these evil desires overcome us, and we use
vn^odly means, we shall never Act. 5.
stand to suffer any trial. We may learn also by Joseph's example, even for
the least part of godly life, or good religion to suffer persecution: and not
only for the chief points and parts thereof. And as great a sign of a good
heart is it: for if we should deny the faith, or Note.
God, or Christ; all the world would cry out, whereas in lesser matters they
would hold their peace: and therefore so much the greater trial is it, if we
stand.

12 The end of adultery is beggerie: besides that, often such can have no
children, by lawful and chaste wives. Hence it is often, that even great men
want children, and their houses decay: again the wife requires it with like
whoredom. This sin of all others leaves a brand in men's consciences: as
thieves at Sizes convicted of theft, and confessing it, yet does it not often so
much trouble them, as this of adultery. They cry out of this, O adultery
brought me to this misery.

CHAP. IIII. Of Affection.
IT is a great mercy of God to have a large affection of well doing, when we
have good occasion thereof. The Lord cease not to offer occasions, but we
often cease to have Good affections.
good affections.

2 We must as well see what is against us, as those things that our affections
lead us to: therefore must we pray, that our hearts may be upright, that we
be not like ^alaam, and the Elders that ask counsel of Jeremy. So long as we
have to deal with men, we set a gloss upon the matter, but when we know
that we have to deal with God, before whom no wickedness will stand, this
will humble us.

3 The people of Israel would not hear Moses, though he did sharply rebuke
them: Headstrong affections.
wherein we learn to pray that our affections be mas^red betime, for many are
so heady in their affections, that they will give no ear to admonitions: and
as it is said of the belly to have no ears, so it is of such headstrong
affections. Some give so much place to their grief, that they will not receive
comfort of the promises, no^ be rebuked by the threatenings of God in his word.
This grief is carnal and dangerous, and therefore every man is to search his
heart to see how such corruption is settled in him, and let him in time st^iue
against it, suffering himself to be rebuked by the word, and so grace
assisting him, he shall overcome it.

4 Many see Gods works with Moses, but cannot profit by them, because the Lord
Pray for good affections.
has not given them the affections of Moses. According to our affections so
we profit both by works and word of God: let us therefore ever pray unto God
to fill our hearts with good affections.

CHAP. V. Of Affliction.
WHen we are in affliction we are not so wise of our selves, as to see the
cause of it: or if we see the cause, we cannot see the mercy of God, that his
hand which is upon 2. Chor. 19. 3.
us, is not a destroying hand, but a delivering hand.

2 Afflictions work much in men, but most when they come with the word of God,
to How to consider of Gods hand in affliction.
give us a more lively sight of sin, and to manifest the rich mercies of God
in Jesus Christ to deliver us from sin. Iehosaphat was more humbled by the
speech of Iehu the Seer, than he was being compassed with an host of enemies
round about.

3 When affliction comes to Gods children, not so much the sins themselves,
as 2. Chro. 19. 2,
the not avoiding of the means which procured their sins, and not the using
of the means which might have preserved them from sin, will torment their
consciences: for The conscience in afflictions.
as a man falling into some sickness, if it come whilst he is walking in his
calling, is then less grieved, than if through surfeiting he had procured and
ha^ched the disease in himself, even so it comes to pa^^^m in the other. By
using the means of godliness in simplicity of heart, we shall be either freed
from sin, wherein we have lain, or else be confirmed in some good things
begun in us.

4 Although the godly shall escape hell in the world to come, yet they shall be
punished in this world: and though the wicked be not punished in this world,
yet shall they not escape hell in the world to come.

5 When Satan does desca^t upon our afflictions, we must be comforted being
Gods 1. Pet. 5. 9.
children, because we suffer no more than Gods children before have suffered,
and the Lord himself does suffer with us.

6 It is the Lord which sends crosses to his children to save them, that they
freeze not The cross needful.
with the wicked world in their dregs.

7 When Moses was rebuked of the Lord for the not circumcising his son, his
faith was weak, and his wife in performing that duty, was almost without
faith, yet the Lord says, and that if any affliction lie upon us, it is for
want of faith: and if it depart without Faith. Note. Patience.
effect in us, then a sorer punishment is like to light upon us, because we
have not profited by the cross of Christ: but if we effectually profit by it,
and still it lie upon us, let us then patiently abide, for it is to try our
faith.

8 If we would so provide for our selves, that no afflictions make us quail,
let us in the time of prosperity and quietness, cut off all headie affections,
as grief, sorrow, and such Headie affections.
like; and then shall they not in our trouble prevail against us.

9 When our afflictions do not drive us to God, nor cause us more humbly to
hear To seek unlawful means in affliction.
and seek his word, but rather to stop our ^a^es* and to run from it, and
to seek unlawful means, let us then mourn secretly and heartily unto God,
for the direction of Gods spirit: for that case is dangerous.

10 It is the Lords mercy that we are not destroyed, Lamenta. Chap. 3. But
when we are freed from punishments, and others are afflicted, it is either to
show his further mercy, or his further judgment: if we wax better, and be
more thankful, then it is of mercy; but if we wax proud, and think our
selves better then others, then is it assuredly to confound us: And hereby we
may gather comfort or grief, when we escape punishments. If he pu^ish not in
this world, either GOD is unjust, or else there is a hell to punish them
euerl^stingly. But his children, if they profit not by one, he sends another
to condemn them in this world, that they may escape in the world to come.

11 We must deny our selves and our own reason; that we may continue with
Christ, we must take up our cross and follow him, and if we will be glorified
with him, we must The Cross of Christ.
also suffer with him; and if we will rise again with him, we must first die
with him, and if we will partake of his benefits, we must also drink of his
cup. But many would willingly have in Christ forgiveness of sin, yet would
they not bear his cross.

12 We must faithfully remember Gods corrections, and though our trouble be
past, yet still with fear to remember the hand of the Lord, not to attribute
our cross^s to Fortune, Health*
complexions, or humors, nor health to Physic; but only to God, glorifying
him continually, and making our daily profit by all his loving chastisements
upon us.

13 The deliverance of the people of Israel is often repeated in the
Scripture. And it is not without great cause, for it serves notably for the
comfort of the godly, and the terror of the wicked: for if we would think
that he were not able to help us; we see that he divided The Lord has helped
the unworthy often in afflictions. Curse^.
the mighty Seas: If we should think our selves unworthy of help, he then did
mi^htily deliver the unworthy. So that if we being in any danger can be
persuaded, that the Lord is able to help us, and that he will help them that
are unworthy, it will be a notab^e stay unto us, that we fall not away under the
cross by the vehemency of temptations.

14 Curses are turned into blessings through Christ, as by sin blessings are
turned into curses. The benefices of God being in themselves good, yet by our
corruption we make our table a snare unto our selves, and so in other of his
mercies.

15 Job served God in truth, and yet punished, and so Lazarus: but this was
not so much for their own sin, as for the trial of their faith and that after
them the Church might receive great comfort by their examples. For as it hurts
not the gold to be put into the fire, Simile.
both because it is thereby tried, and also made more pure: so is it not evil
for the children of God to have their faith tried: if it be a strong faith it
will bear the fire, if it be weak, Trial of faith.
it will yet shine brighter: if there appear no faith, but all dross, then
the party tried must more seriously seek after Christ and the means of
salvation, that he may attain that faith that may go through the fire of
affliction.

16 It is the great goodness of God to curb us by affliction, and not to let us
go forward in sin: as to diminish the health of our bodies, because we are
careless of our souls; and Sickness.
to pull away outward things, that we may learn to seek heavenly things: And
contrarily, it is his great punishment to leave us to our selves. Let us mark
this, that the crosses of God may be sweet unto us, and that we may the sooner
profit by them: For it is certain, God scoureth away the infirmities of his
Saints by many afflictions, yet never breaks his holy covenant with them,
albeit they have many tribulations which they deserve and pull upon themselves.
Patience. For what causes the Lord chastises his elect in this life. 1 Heb.
12. 3. 4. 5 2 3 4 5 6


17 The service and worship of God in affliction is patience. Of Gods doings
we are not to inquire a reason: yet he has revealed to us many causes
wherefore he chasteneth his elect in this life. First to declare his justice and
anger against sin: therefore the waters of strife cost Moses his life.
Secondly, to win us to repentance, who in prosperity are vn^^med, and will not
hear him, for vexation will teach us understanding. Thirdly, to know and try
us whether we will bear his loving correction: and whether we love him so,
that we can endure our service unto blood for his sake, Genesis 22. Now I know
thou love me. 1. Pet. 1. 7. which trial is more precious in his sight than
gold, and the way to purify gold is to make it pass through the fire.
Fourthly, Satan will say, Does Job fear God for naught? Therefore to triumph
over him in our obedience the Lord does it. And says the more it is sifted the
cleaner it is; the more it is cut, the more it grows; the more it is trodden
the thicker it comes up. Fifthly, to separate us from the wicked, for which
cause it is compared to a fan, and the devil is said to winnowe us, and he
will not use a course sieue in doing of it. Lastly, to conform us unto Christ,
Romans 8* 25. that we may have the sympathy of his affections, 2. Tim. 3. 12
all that will live godly must bear his cross, and in his time and measure
drink of the cup.

18 It is not to be doubted that Christ is in the kingdom of heaven, but how
came he to it? Luke 24. He suffered all things, and so entered into glory. No
man then must look to be Di^es all his life time, and Lazarus after death too.
Christ himself entered not on this condition, the Apostles entered not on this
condition, for Act. 14. they knew that through many tribulations we must enter
into the kingdom of God. The estate of the Church is as of a tree, we see that
some blossoms the cold nippeth, and some the worm eats, and some continue
fruitful. For some men are n^pped by reproaches, others eaten away by corrupt
example, and some continue fruitful. If a man have an heritage in the world
either by gift or purchase, if it have a fine, or service joined with it,
surely he that will look to have the one, must look to do the other, else
not. Now the kingdom of God is the heritage we look for, and therefore we
must have the burden of it. The burden Christ himself suffered, and we must
suffer it, even the persecution both of S^em, and Caine. The Lord has annexed
the burden and the heritage, and he will not separate them. Nebuchadnezzer his
image, Dan. 2. had an head of gold, breast, and arms of silver, and the nearer
the feet the baser it was, we must not be so: we must set our selves against
all troubles, that if God will have us to go ^^ to heaven in a chariot of fire,
we may not refuse it.

CHAP. VI. Of Anger.
IT is a good trial whether we be carnally angry or no, if we try our selves
whether it kindles to good works or no, if it cause us to pray with liberty
of mind, if it hinders not our meditations, if we can do The trial of anger.
well to the party offending us, if we can deal with others without all
peevishness, though all the world accuse us, it is a sign that our heart is
not evil. Patience.


2 Moses is said, Numb. 12. to be a me^ke man above all that were on the earth,
and so it appears by his patience in bearing the reuiling speeches of his
brother and sister: but Exodus 11. 8. and 32. chap. of the same book he is said
to be very angry, and in that his fierce anger causes many to be slain, yet
his anger is commended as good, for that the cause thereof was good. So Elihu
is said to be very angry, Job. 32. 2. not only against the wicked but against
godly men. Christ also is said to be angry, Mark. 6. and to call Peter Satan,
Matthew. 16* And Paul calls the Galathians fools, Gal. 3. verse 1. And to the
Ephesians. 4 28. he forbids and warns us only of that anger which is of sin
or mixed with sin. Now then to discern this evil anger note these marks
following. First, 1
if we be angry in our own cause, that is, for those things which might
either pleasure us, 2
or hurt us, and not for the glory of God, our anger is carnal and evil.
Secondly, again, it is true that we shall never be angry for Gods cause,
until we can leave all care of our own causes, and not become angry for them,
further than they are joined with Gods cause. Those then that in their own
cause will be as hot as may be, and in Gods cause will be as cold as ice, do
offend much in anger. 3. Every trifle must not move anger, but a great 3
and weighty matter, therefore we must be ready to bear with, and to pardon
many offenses, so they be not great: but when they greatly concern the glory
of God, and are very weighty, then are we justly angry. 4. We may not be more
angry with the person than 4
with the sin, for godly anger is only moved against the sin, and nothing
against the person: and this may be tried two ways: first, if we mislike that
sin wheresoever we find it, whether it be in our selves, or in our dearest
friends, then is the anger good. Secondly, when our anger hinders us not from
doing our duties to the person offending us, or to any other.

CHAP. VII. Of Angels.
AS God and his good Angels are about us, so the devil and evil angels: and
as the good Angels have not been seen, but extraordinarily, so are the evil
angels; and he that depriueth himself of this meditation, weakeneth his faith:
For it is to our comfort and humbling: To our comfort, that albeit we be in
danger, and no man with us; yet God and his Angels be with us. To humble us,
that in evil doing, they both see us and can hurt us; as also the evil angels
which still houer over us. And therefore we must know, that as the good Angels
have appeared to good men for special defense, so the foul spirits do
appear also to some men for special sins. And when evil spirits so
appear, we may not with the Papists and the Jews believe they be souls
departed, but the evil spirits in the air about us, Epes. 6. 11. 12. 13.

CHAP. VIII. Of Baptism.
Baptism is a pledge of our washing in Christ's blood, Act. 2. 30. of our
Baptism, how effectual in the faithful.
justification, Gal. 3. 27. of our ingrafting into Christ's body, Ephe. 4. 16.
of our dying to sin, Romans 6. 3. of our resurrection, 1. Cor. 15. 26. of our
unity of spirit with our brethren, Ephe. 44. of not seeking our own, 1. Cor.
10. 1. 2. 24.

2 Of Baptism in Papistry this we may say, for as much as they Baptism in
Popery.
ever kept the foundation, and the substance of the institution of Christ, that
Sacrament was effectual: for more prevails the institution of Christ unto
good, than the corruption of man unto evil.

3 The example of Zipphorah cannot be followed amongst us, that women should
baptize; Baptism of women unlawful. 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 20.
though Papists abuse that example to prove it: for the ministration of the
Sacrament is joined to the ministry of the word, which office none can take,
except he be called as Aaron was: and it is a most weighty and most honorable
office, to have the word and seals of our reconciliation committed unto us.

4 It is objected, that it is a dangerous matter to want Baptism, it causes
death. I answer: The child (says the story) was not punished, but Moses,
through whom that contempt came: for when as it is said, Genesis 17. that the man
not circumcised shall be cut off, the reason is this, because he despises the
covenant of the Lord. Now a child cannot so do, Contempt of Baptism,
dangerous: not the omission.
therefore the negligent father is punished: and if the child come to years,
and continue in his fathers steps, he is in the same state of rebellion and
contempt against God; and so it is in our Baptism. Again, this popish opinion
of the necessity of Baptism, is confuted by the Lords institution of
Circumcision the eight day; for if this necessity had been in Circumcision,
which they affirm to be in Baptism, all that dyed before the eight day were
condemned. The Lords meaning was in appointing this convenient time, to provide
that the child might have more strength to bear the wound: and this regard of
time is fit to be observed also with us, that this holy work might be done on
the Sabbath day in the congregation, because it is a public action by divine
institution.

5 Concerning promises in Baptism, and the office of the witnesses, which be
called Godfathers in Baptism.
Godfathers and Godmothers, look in what things the Scripture gives general
rules, the Church may use the particulars, so all be done decently and to
edification: the law gives this general instruction to a man in authority,
to defend the good, and to offend the evil: he may to this end take some godly
man to him for an assistant. The law commanding generally to distribute to the
poor, a man is not able to help all particularly, therefore he endeavors
the relieuing of some special persons. The law commanding generally to help
one another with godly instructions, and no greater need to any, than to a
father, in helping him for the education of children, surely this duty of love
to be an assistant in Baptism may not be denied. Again, to profess ourselves
enemies. to Arrianisme, we use, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.
all one with that so often in the Psalms, Praise ye the Lord: So may we in
like manner to avoid Anabaptisme, have witnesses to testify to the Church that
we are Christianly baptized. And as we are to renounce all frivolous
ceremonies, so to keep the peace of the Church, we may not refuse such orders
as tend to edification, to love, and comeliness in the Church.

6 It is good to teach children while they be young, that whereas they have
been baptized, Catechizing.
and blessed in the name of the Trinity, they should be taught forthwith some
questions concerning their creation, redemption and sanctification.

CHAP. IX. Of Covetousness, and the desire of Riches.
THere are many which can be content to make Jacobs vow, that is, if they
have meat, drink, and clothing, they will serve God, but they go upwards
still in their worldlike accounts, and downwards in heavenly Covetousness.
things, they rise from tens to scores, from scores to hundreths: they will not
go downward with Abraham, they will have thousands of sheep, else they be but
poor: they will have Nab^oths vineyard with Ahab, and dwell alone, else they be
sick. Thou have set up the heavens Man's desire how satisfied.
high, says the Prophet, else surely rich men would have all the use of them,
and leese them too. So nothing can satisfy man's desire which is infinite, but
God, who infinite. And if he have all the riches in the world, he will desire
more. A very unnatural Simile.
desire is this (as the dropsy in desiring drink) when the desire proceeds
from fulness, for a man should desire that which he wants. The mind of a man
is not filled with corporal things, no more then a chest can be filled with
wisdom or spiritual things. But presuppose Simile. Note. Desire of riches.
that riches could fill a man: if we had all wealth, all riches, all apparel;
we put not our wealth in our minds, our clothes do us no good, but when they
are upon us. The possessing of riches does not so fully possess the heart, but
that it can desire a thousand things more.

2 Riches are in question whether they be good or no; When the Scripture speaks
of riches, they join always somewhat to them: to take away our hearts from
them, as the deceitfulnes of riches, the uncertainty of riches, the riches of
this world, and therefore like the world; now here, and now gone, they either
have their own end, or our end. They make no man good, but they are even like a
penie purse, which is worth as much as the money that is in it: but the money
taken out, it is nothing worth: even so is the man that has his good in his
riches. When they are taken from him, he is worth nothing, he has no good in
him. Many rich men are empty of all goodness.
God has them not, and yet he wants no good thing. It is the common
complaint, that the worst men do most abound with them. David was feign to go
to Nabal for them. Esau had four hundred men; when Jacob lay down at his feet
with a few. Sometimes indeed they do good, but that is not sufficient to
ground a Maxim; they are good: for that which is good does always good. They
have a mixte nature retaining some use as a blessing of The nature of riches.
their creation, and much evil by the fall of Adam. And they have been ever
greater causes of harm then of good by occasion. And therefore says a Father
on the Prayer, Prou. 30. Lord give me neither riches nor poverty. Poverty
(says he) has been the decay of many a man, but riches of a far greater
number.

3 Many desire that, which when they have gotten, their conscience is afraid
to use.

4 Nothing is ours, but as we feel our title in Christ, and as it is
sanctified by prayer and by the word.

5 Many are outwardly well and rich in this world, which are inwardly ill and
poor in Many rich poor.
godliness, and many hate outward evil things, which for want of spiritual
knowledge fee not the corruptions of the heart.

6 Though the hawthorns in springtime have a fair white flower, pleasant to
the sense; Simile.
yet indeed, it is but a pricking thorn: so riches, glorious to the eye, by
Christ's own mouth are called thorns. They prick both hand and heart. CHRIST
has spoken it in his time, Riches Thorns.
and it is not to be thought that they have changed their own nature since. And
though we feel not these pricks in the beginning, yet we shall find this true
in the end. Though some die as swine in a ditch, as benumbed, as men already
plunged in the pit of hell; yet have others wished on their deathbed that they
had never gone further then the shouell and spade. How some rich men die.


7 There are two kinds of love among us, as may be gathered by our common
talk: First, we say we love our friends, that is, we would have them do well:
Next, when we be said to love money, the meaning is, we wish to have it. But
let us observe, that whatsoever we love, we wish the good of it. And the good
of every thing is the end. For which God has created it to serve his glory.
For this cause the Prophets tell us, that the wood and stones of our houses
shall come and give witness against us at the great day, for turning them
violently to another use than God has ordained them. Now the use of riches is
to Use of riches.
be communicated: else God might have made all rich. If we wisely note this* we
love not riches, when we desire so greedily to have and keep them. None would
be so loved of his friends as he loves his meat, that is to be eaten and
devoured, as great men devour the poor and riches.

8 And to show that God is highly displeased with this immoderate love of
riches, he Note.
punishes it with itself; he does punish a desire with a desire: As the
Prophet Nathan says. Thorns are folded one within another: So it is in the
desire of riches, one desire follows another. Such men are well compared to
great Mastiues, who having received one morsel, swallowe it up greedily, and
wait for another. The holy Ghost compares them to horsleaches, who suck
blood till they burst their skins. When men begin to The heathen poor man at
the first, would have of his God but 1000. sheep, but after he desired more
saying: Pauperis est numerate pecus. Riches cannot fill the soul, Simile.
be rich, their desire is infinite, and they like not their substance when it
may be numbered or manifested. But we see Luke 12* there is no other speech used
of the rich man, then of most poor men: What shall I do? There is mention
made of a beast in Daniel, (and in that he was a beast indeed) which wept
because there were no more worlds for him to overcome: So is it with the
covetous rich men.

9 It is no marvel if riches fill not the soul, for they were all made for
man, his soul for GOD. Whatsoever is capable of God, that can never be
satisfied with any thing else: all riches, all preferments cannot satisfy one
soul, but when God is come it is full; and whatsoever is added more it runs
over. Man's desire is like a burning fire, and riches are the wood and fuel,
which may seem to slake the fire for a time, but it will burn more vehemently
afterward. The wise Preacher concludes this, saying: He that loves silver
shall not be satisfied with it, and he that lovethriches shall be without the
fruit thereof. Eccle. 5. 9.

CHAP. X. Of Care, Covetousness, and Contentation.
IT is no great thing for a man living on another man's charges, not to be
covetous: but Parents to rest ^n Gods preuidence.
for one that has wife and children, etc. for to rest upon Gods providence,
and to use only lawful means with patience, this is an argument of Faith. So
if death or age make us carefully covetous and unfit for heavenly exercises, we
may soon see what faith is in us. This trial must be diligently taken in
prosperity, least if we neglect it, our Faith Trial of our faith in Gods
providence.
do fail us in adversity. For if we do not in the good day store up our
selves with comforts, we shall be empty in the evil day when it comes. If
in prosperity we set our delight on heavenly things, we shall easily want
earthly things, because we never set our hearts on them. But if our delight be
in riches^, then assuredly when they are taken from us, our Faith must fail
us, because our joy is taken away with our riches. Beware then of Covetousness,
how dangerous.
covetousness, which is a sin when all other sins wax old, this waxes
young in thee: for we see daily many freed from other vices, yet foully spotted
with this.

2 We must take heed that we indent not with the Lord, but simply give up our
selves to him, and seek the grace of God at all times, and with all our
hearts, and let us ask other things as it pleases him. For when we give these
outward things to the Lord, then will he soonest give them us again. Solomon
desired Wisdom, and God gave him wisdom which his heart desired, and riches
which his heart desired not. O happy man, if withal he desired the fear of
the Lord. Abraham gave the Lord his son Isaak; the Lord then gave Isaak to
Abraham again: So the readyest way to obtain outward things at Gods The
readyest way to obtain temporal blessings.
hand, is to give them up to the hands of the Lord, not that we must commit
them to the Lord with this condition, for that were to mock the Lord, but with
Abraham we ought to give them to him freely, without hope to receive them
again; and yet being content in respect of the Lords glory and will, with the
want of them: and then if they be good for us we shall have them, or else
some spiritual grace, which with the better shall supply Carking care
the want. Therefore the carking and greedy care of these things, is left to
the godless which are ignorant of the forgiveness of sins, and of Gods
providence. Carking care. Earthly blessings no signs of Gods favor.


3. We may not ask earthly blessings as signs of Gods favor: neither must
we esteem the wants of these things as tokens of his displeasure. Again, the
Lord often keeps these things from us, for that we would abuse them, and set
more by them than by spiritual things: yea the Lord holds us without these,
that we might esteem his spirtuall graces the more, that so in his good time
we may have both together.

4 We must use and not love, that is, we may not set our hearts on the
creatures of God, 1. Cor. 7. 31.

5 Seeing salvation is our end, all that hinders salvation, must be cast off,
whether it We must take heec^^^^ and to what end we use things lawful in
themselves.
be marriage, farming, trying of oxen, or any other thing lawful in it self,
if ever it press us down, Heb. 12. 1. 2. The soul is made for God, and
therefore considering the very nature of the object, we had need have a
special vigilancie of our love to any other thing. It is like a purgation
which must be taken in quantity, and in a certain measure, that it purge not
out as well good humors as bad, and as there was first a covering of gold in
the Arc, and then of Badgers skins; so our more precious love must be bestowed
on God, his love must chiefly possess our heart. It is said, in the first
Epistle to the Corinths. Does God care for oxen? Nay this is written for our
instruction: and yet it is certain that God does care for oxen, but in respect
of that care which he has for man it is no care. So are we to take no care of
oxen in respect of him.

CHAP. IX. Of our general and special calling.
CHrist does pass by us, see us, and call us, when we little respect him. In
How Christ calls us.
law cases, and points of Physic we go with our best feet, we will do
all our selves, or else sue by some special friend to them, who can far less
profit us than Christ can: but in Christianity, unless Christ himself come
and ring a loud peale in our ears, we never vouchsafe to be Christians. It is
therefore well with us that Christ so comes to call sinners to repentance: for
he may come from heaven and return again often, before we seek him or call
upon him. It is well therefore that Christ would come to call sinners to
repentance, for he may come from heaven, and go to heaven again, ere we will
call h^^. Indeed we read of certain poor diseased men in their bodies
constrained by outward pain, and some hypocrites, who rather to boast than beg
holiness, came to Christ But who else would? Surely one that said he would follow
Christ wheresoever he went, but when he said so, he had thought he would not
have gone far: he looked for better lodging than Christ was able to afford
him. And when he saw that, he could give him leave to walk alone, and when
he saw Christ to have none of the great buildings in Jerusalem, he would go
no further with him than the towns end.

2 It is certain* Paradise is our native Country, and we in this world be as
exiles and as strangers: we dwell here as in Meshech, and as in the tents of
Kedar, and therefore we be glad to be at home. The path and high way to our
country is the path of Gods commandment: We stray when we bend to
superstition or profaneness. The Lord Our loadstar to Paradise.
has appointed his word our load-star and cloudy pillar to conduct us to the
land of promise, and has instituted faith to attend upon the word; but the
devil has substituted carnal reason, but if we deliberate long with carnal
reason, we shall hardly or never Carnal reason. How to obey Christ when he
calls.
come to Paradise.

3 If we must have reason to hearken and to obey the calling of Christ, let us
remember and consider: Christ has followed us, and therefore we ought to
follow him. Christ has gone far out of the way to make pursuit after us (for
what need had he to stir out of heaven) and therefore we must go after him.
The Son of man came to seek that which was lost, and therefore by good
proportion we that are lost should seek him. The analogy is good, for
seeking requires seeking. Elizabeth said to Mary the mother of Christ, coming
to ^^^ ever. Whereof comes it that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
If Elizabeth esteemed so reverently the coming of Mary unto her, much more may
we say, whereof comes it that my Lord the redeemer of the world should come
unto me?

4. The Lord does often cast out men, by decay of gifts: as they pray, Psalm.
137. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget her cunning.
We see this daily: So long as Decay of Gods gifts.
men serve God in their callings; and apply their gifts to his glory, so long
their gifts are good and receive an increase; but they are soon washed away,
when we use them not, or if we use them not aright.

5 When Moses was in his calling, the Lord called him again. So David, and the
shepherds to whom Christ's birth was revealed. Our calling makes us fit for the
Lord, and helps Idleness. Angels.
against the Devil and his temptations: and idleness yields occasion and
matter for sin and Satan to surprise us. So long as we walk in our ways,
the Angels have charge over us, Psalm. 91. but if we go astray they forsake us.

6 Many are hasty to undertake a matter, but afterward faint in following it.
We may not be rash to enter into any calling if we will discharge it with
conscience. Examples for this are, Moses Jeremy, etc. They can teach us that we
take no calling upon us without commandment, Not to enter into any calling
rashly.
that we think nor too well of ourselves, that we attend the Lords calling, and
when he calls us, and has given us gifts to testify his calling, let us
trust in his power and fear no danger, for he is all in all in us.

7 Moses had infirmities of speech, and yet the Lord used his ministry:
wherefore we may not for every infirmity be drawn from our callings; neither
if we mind to take a Our infirmities in our calling. Ministry.
calling upon us must we refuse it, though all things do not answer our
desires. How be it if we want that which is most essential and pertinent; as
in a minister learning, and the wisdom of the Spirit, we must be wary how we
enter in. Our infirmities are left in us for our further humiliation, and that
Gods holy work may the better appear.

8 We must be well persuaded of the truth of our calling, as well to
Christianity as to any other particular calling: so troubles shall not move
us, nor fears disquiet us. If we Truth of our calling.
doubt, we soon faint, but then let us behold him that is invisible, as Moses
Heb. 11. 26* and then no sight nor evil shall dismay us.

9 It were to be wished that every man would search his own heart whereunto
in affection Trial of our selves before we enter into any calling.
and action he is most serviceable to God, and profitable to his brethren, and
to pursue specially this gift most carefully and continually, yet without pride
in all humility.

10 The Lord loves our obedience, but so that it be in our callings.

11 When Christ calls us to heaven, we must follow him through the
wilderness of this world He must be our guide and go before, and we must
follow after. Many make strange to follow his call, they will not give up their
names, they will (it may be) go before Reason to Christ is an evil seruingman.
him, or even by him, or cheek by cheek, but they will not follow after. And
wherefore? Surely they will do all with reason. But Christ requires faith;
and reason to Christ, is a very evil seruingman. A great number already taught
in the word, will not follow it, but if any thing proceed from the forge of
their own reason, that they magnify, that they will follow. So Ezech. 20.
certain prophets would not follow God and his word, but their own spirits; and
yet there is no greater ods in the world than between our own reason and Gods
wisdom, as Esa. 55. My thoughts (says the Lord) are not as your thoughts.
Well, if we will follow Christ, we must follow him, not as a great Lord, to
grant us great leases, fat farms, or high towers, but as a man contemned, as
the reproach of the world, as a man full Christ's two crowns.
of sorrows: Christ has two crowns, the one of thorns, the other of glory,
he that will be honored with the last, must be humbled with the first.

CHAP. XII. Of Conference, and Godly wisdom in the government of the tongue.
AS we often speak of things lawful, but yet for want of wisdom to
Conference.
examine the time, place and persons, when, where, and with whom we talk,
Satan labors to make us strict and silent in our speech, when Not to be too
strict and silent, when occasion of good speech is offered.
often we might speak to Gods glory, to the avoiding of which temptation, we
must endeavor to speak when God gives occasion, and that with thankful
acknowledging of Gods spiritual grace, by the motion whereof we speak: as
also with humble acknowledgement of our weakness, who being measured with Gods
justice, we should be found to have stained our speeches and Gods graces with
great corruptions, and to fail in many circumstances. How be it, if we do it
in a single heart, and even because we love Gods word, and in zeal of Gods
glory: we may boldly speak, committing the success which on us (if we
observed all circumstances) did not depend, to the omnipotency of God, to the
blessing of Christ, and to the working of the holy spirit; for we being neither
God, nor Christ, nor Angels, Note.
must not think to prevail of our selves, by our speeches, nor stay until we
think our selves most fit, but commend our hearts to the Lord, who undoubtedly
spares weakelings.

2 Being Christians, we must not stay our selves in our meetings for others to
begin Good speeches.
good speeches, but if God give us any good thing in our minds, let us with
all humblenes put it forth to be examined; if we feel nothing, let us
complain of our dullness and deadness: even thereby we shall give occasion of
good conference. For as in silence among evil men one evil word sets abroch
many, so in deadnes among good men, one good word may quicken many.

3 It were to be wished, that godly men in their meetings would first by prayer
offer up their speeches to God to use them advisedly, reverently, and not
passing their bounds of knowledge: and if they could not speak of any thing,
yet they should ask some thing: if they could not ask, yet they might speak
of the communion of Saints: if they could say nothing, yet at the least they
should complain of the dulnes of their mind; so that of their dulnes and
deadnes should arise quickness and life of speech again. Our speech is
insigne potentiae diuinae, vinculum societatis humanae.


4 We must be careful in using, and watchful in restraining the tongue. David
prayed for a watch before his tongue, and for a porter at the door of his
lips, he would keep his mouth with a bridle, that it should not go riot nor
open often without a cause. The eye glaunceth, our hands slip, our foot treads
awry; yet if we hold our tongue qualified, we shall do the better. It is a
little piece of flesh, small in quantity but mighty in quality; it is soft,
but slipperie; it goes lightly, but falls heavily; it strikes soft, but
wounds sore; it Tenera, mollis and ex^gua.
goes out quickly but burns vehemently; it pierces deep, and therefore not
healed speedily; it has liberty granted easily to go forth, but it will
find no means easily to return home. It is compared with perilous things,
to a sharp two edged sword, to a razor, Iam. 3. 6.
to sharp arrows, to an Adders sting, to the poison of an Aspe, to fiery
coals, and being once enflamed by Satan's bellows, to the fire of hell.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Church.
THe Papist of pride, the Family of love of hypocrisy, and many of
singularity have Schismatickes, and heretics. Who forsake the Church,
Protestants or Papists.
singled themselves from us, as Hymenaeus did. But we are little discouraged,
and less follow it. For if they separate themselves as stones from the
building, and as members from the body, what hope is there of them? The Papists
will say, we forsake them, and not they us. We forsake them in the wall, they
us in the foundation. For our faith was before their opinion, though their
persons were before ours. As Noah forsook the world, as Lot forsook Sodom,
as Abraham forsook Egypt, as our Savior Christ forsook the Pharisees: so
we for sake them, and Christ shall be the judge, who has been the runnagate,
who has been the Apostata.

2 Behold a miracle, heaven made subject to the earth! O what is man that thou
art so mindful of him, not only to give him the rule of the earth, but even
of heaven? Whom the Church does loose on earth, the Lord does loose in heaven;
and whom the Church has bound on earth, he also has bound in heaven. He
does many things without us, Matthew. 18. Binding and loosing in the Church.
yet when we have done this, he will not alter it, nor do otherwise.

3 Albeit the Church be base and contemptible in the world, yet he counts it
as the apple of his eye. The earth, the air, and the heavens attended on it,
and he has made the Angels to serve it. He has committed his treasures to
it. And what be his treasures? Surely, when David comes to value it, he
says that it is better than gold, than much gold, than much fine gold, than
all precious stones. The word of reconciliation, the covenant of grace, the
broad seals of his kingdom, Baptism and the Lords Supper, Romans 3. 1. 2. The
dignity of the church The Church deer to christ
binding and loosing, life and death are left and committed to the Church and
her holy Ministers.

4 The Church is even the quintessence of the world, such as Satan has sifted
to the proof: it is even washed and made clean with the blood and water which
issued out of Christ's side. It seems he forgot to love himself that he
might love us; yea if that one death and suffering had not been sufficient,
he would yet once more come again for us.

5 It is one thing to live where means of pure worship are wanting; another to
be Note. 2 Cor. 11. Means wanting, or superstition set up, how much they
differ. Church of the Jews. Church of the Gentiles. The day of judgment.
where false worship is erected: for the first we are not to fly the Church,
but by prayer and patience to stay the Lords mercy: for the other, we must
depart because of that abomination.

6 The world is as the Lords great chamber, whereunto all are admitted: the
Church is as the chamber of presence. The nativity of the Church is a greater
work then the creation of the world. The world was finished with a Word, but
many days and many years did the Lord travel, before the Church could be
brought forth to his good liking. He shook the earth, darkened the heavens,
turned the whole course of nature, before he had framed and set up the little
Church of the Jews. But in gathering the Church of the Gentiles, the Sun
became black as a pot, the Heavens were covered as with a haire-cloth, the
veil of the temple rent, the earth tre^bled, the graves opened, and above all,
the GOD of nature suffered. But of all, the third gathering shall be fearful:
when heaven and earth shall not abide to see, but shall melte and consume away
at the glorifying of that Church, which the world so contemns: and yet on
this Church hangs the continuance of the world. For certain it is the world
stands, and all the four winds are stopped till all 2. Pet. 3. Toll hanc
and ipsa Angelc^u^ gloria claudicabit.
be sealed; and in that moment that this number is filled, this world shall out
of hand vanish away.

7 In the world we do (as it were) but see the Lords back parts: we see him,
as a thing in a troubled well, dwelling but in the nether and outward courts
of the Temple, but in the Church we see him almost face to face.

8 That mighty Sampson suffered himself to be shaven, and his strength to be
as another man's for the great love of his Church: he shed his precious blood
from all parts of O magnnm vinculum charitatis! quo and ipse Deus alligari
voluit. Diligis me plus his? Pasce oues meas, co^firma Fratres ^ous: symbolu^
amoris, cura Ecclesiae.
his body for it: and that no blood might be too dear for us, with his heart
blood he has testified, how much he does love us, his love and spouse the
Church of the faithful.

9 It is true that the Psalmist says, Psalm. 16. the Lord has no need of our
service, and therefore he has set over his love to the Chuch, there to be
answered unto her in obedidience, and furtherance of his members; there he
would have it seen, how we value his benefits. All blessings are continued on
this earth for the Church sake. The Sun does shine upon the earth, upon the
just and unjust; but upon the unjust for the just man's sake.

10 The Church is the household of faith, the city of the living GOD, the
spouse of the Lamb CHRIST, the kings daughter, the children of light, and of
the living God, the children of promise, and of the freewoman, a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, Primitiae mundi. Municipe^
coelorum. Phil. 3. 20. Ho^tus conclusus. Fo^s signatu^.
people gotten by purchase, the mystical body of Christ, the sold of the
Prince of Pastors, the virgin Israel, the children of Abraham, the elect seed
of God, heirs of grace, joint heirs with Christ, the Sanctuary of the Lord,
the daughter of Sion: the Lords heritage, the people of his pasture, the sheep
of his hands, the temple of the holy Ghost, the price of his blood, the Lords
Eden. Thrice blessed and happy are all the living stones of the most beautiful
building. Confer Psalm. 147. 2. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 9. 10. Phil. 3. 8. Ephesians. 2. 19.
20. 1. These. 2. 19. 20. 2. Cor. 3. 2. 2. Cor. 6. 11. 12. 1. These. 2. 8. Romans 9.
3. Revel. 21. 10.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Confession of sin.
THis is a good affection of Christianity, to conceal a fault; and this also
is a good affection of men regenerate, to testify their faults to all To
acknowledge our faults one to another.
men, whereby they make known their thankfulness, in that whereas by nature
they were thus, by grace they are so and so. Again, men use it to comfort
others, that though they be in their old estate, yet they may receive grace,
if they hinder not themselves, and shut out the grace of God from them. Thus
the children of God are wont to Grace.
aggrauate their sins, that others might have comfort in the like case.
Matthew in the ninth chapter and the ninth verse, shameth himself by the name
of a Publican: and yet if we look to his sin, it was not like the sin of
Peter against the ninth commandment: nor like the sin of David against the
six and seventh commandments, the sin of Paul against the first, as of
them that crucified Christ himself. But that which he concealeth, the other
Evangelists blase abroad; that which they conceal he blaseth abroad. And this
is one argument of the truth of the word: for whereas other Chronicles do Gods
word.
ever commend themselves and their own native countries best (as if you read
the Chronicles of England, you will think it the hest nation) it is contrary
in the word: the denial of Peter is more expressly set down of Mark, than of
any other, yet did he write the Gospel out of his mouth. Paul sets out his
own faults in more sharp measure and manner, than any other can do, Act. 26.
Moses, Genesis 49. seems to discredit his own birth: We see all these were of
God, who is then most glorified when we are most cast down.

2 As the hiding of our sin with Adam hinders mercy; so to testify our
sin to be Hiding sin;
greater than it is, (with Cain) displeases God highly.

3 Confession without yielding and feeling is nothing but a testimony against
our selves: let us then so confess, that it may move us to love the truth.

4 Pharaohs confession is rather in judgment than in affection, in respect of
the punishment, not of his sin, ergo it is not enough: and yet he has profited
further than many of us, which will not confess our sins at all.

5 Whenever we have sinned, it is good to have this or the like meditation:
good How to rise when we fall into any sin. Note.
Lord, will thou call me to judgment and enter thine action with me? How
shall I do then? I will take this order; I will disagree and fall out with my
self. But is there any hope that God will then show mercy? Yea no doubt, for
if the Lord were minded presently to imprison us, he would never by his
prophets forewarne us by a writ, he might use the whole host of the creatures,
to execute his vengeance every hour, but he deals more mercifully with us if
we confess our sins.

6 Naturally we be all slow to confess our sins: we cast short reckoning on
our own faults, Adam said, I have not sinned Lord: he lesseneth his sin in
conceit, saying: The woman gave it me, and I did eat: Job seems to make an
apology, as being unworthy of such a punishment. But we must learn that a
sinner the more he does extenuate and hide sin, the more he does aggrauate
sin, and hasten judgment: the more freely he does confess and judge
himself, the more he is freed from Gods seat of justice. Pro. 28. 13. 2. Cor.
11. 31. 32.

CHAP. XV. Of Conscience.
Look how is our Conscience, so is our confidence: it is a tender piece,
Conscience is tender.
we must beware how we offer any violence to it. For the veriest reprobate has
his reprehender, which if he does not satisfy, it will deliver him to the
Iaylor. From this evil conscience we must be sprinkled in our hearts, first
with faith in the blood of the Lamb, determining that we will never defile
the house of God again: and though we cannot do all good, yet let us desire
all good, for the Lord judges Desire all good. Luke 16.
according to the purpose; not according to the performance; according to the
affect, not by the effect. And yet we must not stay in this It sta^ds us upon
to use the means, that we may be masters of virtues: Hell is full of purposes,
but not of performances Look therefore to thy conscience, for it is a brazen
wall, and as a thousand witnesses often to urge this particular syllogism: Who
so sins must die: thou have sinned: ergo, etc. Adam having eaten of the
forbidden fruit, was in paradise still, but all the joys therein were notable
to comfort his conscience, until being found gasping and panting, he was
comforted of the Lord.

2 We must ever desire the light of Gods loving countenance, which we may be
assured Shipwreck of good consci^nce how da^^^rous.
of, if we keep faith and a good conscience; but if we make shipwreck of
these, the least thing shall greatly amaze us, yea the shaking of a leaf: but
if we have this, nothing shall dismay us. Wherefore let others put their trust
in chariots, yet if we trust in the Lord. we shall not fear what man can do
unto us. This will take away confidence in the flesh, and make us trust only
in God.

3 For examining a man's conscience; the best way is by the law to try whether
he has Examination of the conscience.
a knowledge, feeling, and misliking of his sins or no: whether he has any
fear of Gods judgments for sin, or faith in his promises: and whether by
particular applying of these things to himself, he can show any effects of
prayer, Sacraments, new birth and repentance.

4 We must especially beware of smothering the watchword of our conscience,
when The watchword of the conscience. True peace of conscience. The state of
man before grace, and in grace.
we are bent to sin. Care of a good conscience, breeds comfort in
holiness; and pleasure in holiness breeds assurance of blessedness.

5 We have great peace, but no true peace, until we turn to God: until the
Israelites would serve God, Pharaoh let them alone, but afterward he prepares
for them, brick, lime, and a furnace: so long as we are quiet in sin, all is
well; but if once we defy sin, then the devil will heat a furnace for us:
yea he will rather than he would leese us, give wages to us, as he did to
Judas. Hereof it is, that so long as we have no sense of sin, we can eat,
drink, and sleep quietly, but when once we make conscience of sin, then comes
trouble and vexation of mind, which worldly minded men would marvel at: But
they are at peace with the devil; for were they not at peace, they should be
put out of his service. But does not the Lord say, The wicked have no peace?
Esaias. 57. True it is, they have no peace with God and with their own
consciences, albeit they have great peace with the flesh, and The peace of the
wicked. Mo^e.
world, and the devil. The peace of the wicked is like an harness unoccupied,
to a vineyard never stirred, to a ground never ploughed: they are never
surbushed with crosses, but rust upon the walls; yet far better were it for
them to be disquieted, and have their fallow hearts broken and rent up. The
holy Ghost says, that the just man shall have peace at the last: So that there
is a first peace, and that is a truce for a few days: and there is another
Psalm 37. 37. Note.
peace at the last, which follows our war, and this brings glory and
immortality. Saul would needs have peace with men, and therefore brake peace
with God; but afterward he lost his peace with God and men. The Jews refused
peace with Christ, to have peace with the Romans; but when they had slain
Christ, they lost their peace with God and the Romans also. Wherefore let us
labor for that peace which passes understanding, and for that everlasting
peace.

6 We cannot suddenly and effectually work upon a man's conscience, unless God
permit us sometime to dwell upon his conscience.

7 A man shall never be brought to be jealous over his own corrupt affection,
until the To be jealous over our own corrupt affections.
Lord has stricken his conscience with some fear of his majesty, which
dispelleth al wicked imaginations.

8 We must specially beware of sins against knowledge and conscience: for as of
all the parts of the body nothing is so subject to hurt as the eye: so nothing
is sooner wounded than the conscience: it will not abide any pricking, the
least thrust or violence will impair The eye and conscience tender. Schir^us
ocuii.
it; it is a tender place, and is very tenderness it self. The learned
Physicians say there is a thing that is hard like a web in the eye, wherewith
the eye being affected, even it of al parts being most sensible, is made most
insensible. Such a thing may be in the conscience, so if that once this hard
skin be ouerspred the conscience, that place which of al other in it own
Schir^hosis conscientiae. How the conscience is hardened.
nature is most tender, grows to be most hard; and that hardness proves to be
more hard than the hardness of Pharaoh; and their estate is worse than if they
had never known God, I mean if they have once had a possession of good
things, and after loose it, they have a ^inde on their eye, and of all men they
see the least: for if they loose their tenderness and harde^ themselves, then
God hardens them too, and that it is a fearful obduration.

9 (...)d does not so severely punish particular deserts, but a general
falling into s(...) smaller infirmities, but grosser presumptions: for the
particular sin brings not What sin brings wrath
wrath, but the lying in the sin, and not repenting of it, brings wrath:
which drawing in other sins, withal draws also Gods displeasure. So that
one sin may be said to be spared and also punished: spared, if being admonished
we be humbled, as David by Nathan. 2. Sam. 12. Iehosaphat by Iehu 2. Chron. 19.
2. because in this we seek not to draw in other sins, but to be rid of
this one punishment: where notwithstanding all merciful admonitions, and sower
threatenings, we still lie in sin, and tie sin to sin, and so make away to
Gods judgment to fall on us: Wherefore we may comfort our selves for particular
sins, Note: Simile.
so that in the general course of our life we labor truly to please God. For
as a loving husband does not take away his love from his wife, though in some
particulars of her obedience and duty she fails, so long as she keeps her
love chaste and true to him: so the loving kindness of the Lord will not cast
off his children for some particular weakness or frailty in special
commandments, so long as in sincere love to his majesty, we seek to obey
him.

CHAP. XVI. Of Censure and Correction.
MAny think to privilege themselves from the name of Sinners, by reading
largely and reprehending plentifully the sins of other men, counting it a
compendious way to credit by building gorgeously on another man's discredit and
ruin.

2 Flesh and blood will ease it self; superiors look to inferiors, and
inferiors to superiors, but every man must look to himself.

3 As an house being on fire, if it may be quenched, it is best to Simile.
use water only; but if it be like to endanger and set on fire the houses
round about, it is best to pull down the house quickly: so if offense being
raised, it may be quenched with water, use water, and let the house stand
still; but if fire burst out on every side, then pull it down. When the Viper
will still be a qui non corrigit seipsum, alij corrigent s^ per ipsum. Simile.
Melius est vt pereat vnus quam vnitas.
Viper, and retain his poison, though the charmer charm never so wisely, the
Apothecary takes him, and makes a Triacle of him, to expel poison out of
others: so if a brother will not be admonished, if he will not leave his
poison, make triacle of him; that he that would not take heed of others,
should be made a preservative for other to beware by him: if evil will not be
taken from one in Israel, then take away the evil out of whole Israel, If we
must needs see somewhat dead, it is better to see a dead arm than a dead
corpse. When men will harden themselves, God in his judgment makes them as an
adamant: and when they grow so hard, it is good to cast them out.

4 We are given to display every sin, yea the least in others, and to
conceal and bury We can see clearly intellectu directo but with bleare eyes
i^^ellectu refle^o.
many graces, yea the best in others.

5 Such as be fallen must be restored with the spirit of wisdom and lenity:
Such as be falling must be vpholden by all good means speedily, least they fall
so dangerously as that then cannot be recovered.

6 In an evil report or unjust censures of men, it is not good straightway to
be angry, but to fly to Gods providence, and to desire to profit by them.

7 Because we do not to men that good which we should do, God often suffers
them to report and speak evil of us.

8 Though we may be discouraged to deal in exhorting or dehorting, admonishing
or reproving, or any ecclesiastical and Christian duty; yet being called of
God, we must ask wisdom of him, who will send wisdom to bless his own
ordinance.

9 It is a dangerous thing to have a proud spirit with a vain mind.

10 The drunken peace of hypocrites, must not be suppled with oil, but pierced
with a spear.

11 If we be reproved for sin of man, let us fear the reproof of God. It is
our great Admonition how profitable.
corruption, that we are sooner brought to leave a sin when man does rebuke
us once, than when God does threaten us often.

12 It is a good thing sometime to have enemies. For we often are more afraid
to sin, least our enemies should reprove us, than we make conscience of
sin, least God should condemn us.

13 Although the wicked speak evil of us, let us be content: indeed a good
name is better than a precious ointment, but remember that the Lord had made us
all priests, and therefore let us offer up our good name to his glory, and if
the wicked will bring coals of juniper, let us sacrifice up our good names,
and with Paul let us say, I esteem it the least Evil reports.
thing in the world to be judged of you: it is the Lord that judges, and there
is a blessing propounded for them that are so evil spoken of. But there are
four hundred Prophets that speak against you, are they all deceived? Many eyes
see more than one. True, if it be spoken of the like: for one Eagles eye sees
more than a thousand owls eyes: and as Solomon Simile.
says, One man that fears God, is better than a thousand sinners. And Paul
says, what have I to do with them that are without? God shall judge them.
Upon which words a learned man bids us observe, how the Apostle accounts
evil men as nothing: wherefore seeing the wicked are so vile and so vain, one
is better then many of them, therefore their censures and calumniations not to
be regarded.

CHAP. XVII. Of Ceremonies, things indifferent, and of turning Christian
liberty into unchristian licentiousness.
AS it is a fault to use unnecessary ceremonies which with the peace of the
Church may be left: so it is faulty to leave a good ceremony, which A good
ceremony.
has a good use and no superstition with it.

2 The Lord commanded, Exodus 16. 33. an Homer full of Manna to be reserved as
a monument for posterity. And so it was kept by the Lords commandment, and
therefore not abused to superstition, as the brazen Serpent and Gedeons Ephod:
which because they were without What ceremonies are received and retained in
the Church with profit.
Gods commandment reserved, therefore they were quickly abused. But this Manna
and the Alter which the Rubenites made, having a warrant of Gods commandment,
were not abused. Where we learn, that in bringing in ceremonies and rites into
the Church, we ought to think, that if they have not their warrant from the
word of the Lord they are like to be used without fruit; and in danger to be
turned to hurtful superstition: but if they have their warrant from the word of
God, that the Lord has commanded them, then may they have very profitable
uses in Gods Church. And they shall never be so much abused to do hurt, as
they shall be profitable in the right use of them. And therefore in bringing
in ceremonies and orders we must ask counsel of the Lord, that his word may
be our warrant.

3 The more ceremonies the less truth.

4 This is a general rule, whatsoever separateth man from God, or man from
man, is abrogated: Col. 2. 17. What ceremonies be abrogated.
but whatsoever conioyneth man to God, or man to man, is left still. In this
respect the whole Law is abrogated, according to the rigor of the curse, for
otherwise we could not stand before God: So in Christ now having found
reconciliation we are more bound to keep the law moral then the Jews,
because Gods commandments are more clearly revealed, and greater strength is
now given against sin, therefore nothing is taken from the law that we should
be careless: but the curse and condemnation of the law is done away, that we
may have an entrance to God with boldness. Whatsoever separateth man from man,
is abrogated; and so the ceremonial law is abrogated: that which is merely
ceremonial, is merely abrogated: and that which is in part ceremonial, is in
part only abrogated, as the Sabbath. Sabbath.


5 The Apostle, 1. Tim 4. 1. prophecieth of certain spirits of error, which
should superstitiously Last times.
forbid the use of Christian liberty: but 2. Tim. 3. he speaks of another
sort, who among many other properties should be lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God. The Last days.
former are said to be in the last times, but these in the last days, one
degree further the^ the other, And such be we and our times, long rid from
that superstitious generation: but Eschatais hemerais. Christian liberty,
turned into unchristian licentiousnes.
ready now (as it is said, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.) to add drunkenness to thirst,
which comes to pass for want of circumspectnes in delivering the doctrine of
liberty. And so we fall to make Paul, Galat. 5. and Peter a cloak of our
licentious life. We turn the grace of God into wantonness, (as Jude
speaks.) This then being as it were the common disease of these last and
perilous days: the ministers of the Gospel must stand up as in a gap, and
every one is to be watchful over himself, that he sink not away in these
pleasures, which seem to cheer and bring good to the heart; but such a good
as makes the graces of God in some to come to nothing, and withdraws many
away from Paradise, a place of pleasure, to hell a place of torments. You know
who it was, that seeing so many young Gentlemen Ecclesiast. 11.
follow Epicurus at his first setting up, said the cause was, it was young
men's philosophy that was professed in that school. For this cause Satan
labors especially to poison Bonum iuuenile.
this age, because he knows if this be barren of good, that which follows
is like to be thereafter. Satan and his ministers have for every age, estate,
and condition, a sundry Youth.
bait; laying for Youth the bait of pleasure, for Age the bayte of
couetonsnes, etc. Every man is eaten up with one zeal or other: there is a
zeal of old age, middle age, and of youth. Every man may try his zeal by the
ninth of Esa. ver. 7. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform Zeal tried.
this. It was the zeal of God, that he gave his son for us, his most dearly
beloved son: it is then one argument of our zeal to any thing, when we will
forgo a precious thing, for the thing we profess to love indeed. Esau was
zealous for his meat, when he would lose his blessing for it: and such is our
zeal of pleasure, that we will forgo learning, time, the favor of the
godly, health of body, yea, sometimes our own souls for it. Pleasures.


6. It has bin always the note of false prophets to preach pleasant things,
and for outward matters, as the Priests of Iezabel. And Micah. chap. 2 speaks
of false Prophets, that prophesied of meat and strong drink. Peter says,
they praise liberty: and Paul, They can reason for the belly: All things (say
they) are lawful: but on the other side, Gods children 1. Cor. 10.
have been always in the way of restraining. 1. King 19. Eliah ate, and gave
over* and fell asleep, so that the Angel was sent to bid him eat more. It is
not the f^ult of many. For we have need of an Angel to keep us from eating.
Timothy abstained from wine, and Paul bids him to use it for the weakness
of his stomach. Solomon reclaimeth young men, Eccle. 11. When Jobs children
mean to banquet in course, he fears least they curse God. Basil and Ier^^ns
austeritie in fasting.
The austeritie of the Fathers was very great concerning meats, as of Basil,
and Hierome* that it gave occasion to the superstitious abstinence which
followed. But now the latter times are gone and the last days are come.
Superstition is past, but men glut themselves with all Epicurisme and pleasures
of this life.

7 Christians are neither Stoics nor Epicures: Paul disputes against both,
Act. 17. The Stoicke condemns all pleasure, the Epicure commends all
pleasures. Pleasure is not good according to our election, but in respect of
the object: if the object or matter wherein our Pleasures.
pleasure consists be simply good, then the pleasure is simply good: if the
object be simply evil, our pleasure is simply evil. But pleasures by nature
being good, and bad by circumstance; they are not left as things indifferent to
our election.

CHAP. XVIII. Godly meditations concerning Christ's power against Satan, love
to the faithful: and how he is our wisdom, righteousness, holiness: and of
our communion with him.
CHrist cares for us, we must not fear a strong enemy, because we have
Christ is our Captain.
a stronger Captain. The Devil indeed is a Lion, but so is Christ a Lion, and
that of the tribe of Judah: There is a Lion for a Lion; courage for courage.
The devil is a Serpent, so Christ calls himself the brazen Serpent: there
is a Serpent for a Serpent; wisdom for wisdom; yea a Serpent of brass, to
sting all the fiery Serpents of Christ a Lamb.
the wilderness. But thou say, that Christ is called a Lamb and a worm. B^
not discouraged, that is in respect of his Father, who found him as meek as a
Lamb, who might have trodden on him as on a worm: but the devil never found
him a Lamb, but a Lion. The meeknes of Christ is stronger than all the power
of hell, Ioh. 18. When the devil seemed to be in his ruff, he sends a great
crew to take a silly man: when he told them it was he whom he sought; this
little word cast them down. What shall he do then in glory, when he comes
with thousands of Angels? This then is the conclusion: the devil is strong,
but Christ is stronger, and chaineth him at his pleasure: The devil is wise,
but Christ is wiser, and preuenteth him in all his practices.

2 They that will have a true faith in Christ, must believe in the ends, and in
the mercies Affliction of mind.
of our salvation. The ends are, that Christ is made of God unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Art thou afraid that thou
shall go out of thy wits, because thou fear sin? Are thy cogitations
confounded? See thou no knowledge, no not so much as a litterall knowledge of
thy salvation, but all is doubtfulnes, all is dullness, all is deadnes within
thee, as though thou never knew, heardest, or learned any thing? Now know,
now is the time to believe, that whatsoever knowledge, experience and power
Christ is our wisdom.
of understanding was in Christ Jesus, the same is made thine; he is the
anointing that will teach thee, he is the Fathers counselor, he is wonderful,
he has the knowledge of all mysteries, he is the spiritual interpreter of the
law, unto whom as the Fathers did approach more nearly, so they did see the
power of the law more clearly. He is our wisdom: both the teacher and the
thing taught. Have thou some good measure of knowledge, and yet thy life in no
part being agreeable, nor proportionable to thy knowledge; thou art sore
troubled for not walking in the ways of righteousness, thou feel no
goodness, thou think thy self as a Sere tree without all fruit? Now
remember that Christ Jesus who Seek not for great things in the flesh.
had no holiness by the flesh, by being borne of his mother, who saved great
sinners, and made of persecutors preachers, would not have thee to seek for
great things in the flesh, seeing himself got so little thereby, but would
have thee seek thy righteousness out of thy self in him: who being no sinner
indeed was an accounted sinner, and punished as a sinner for thee; that thou
having no righteousness, might be accounted righteous, and Righteousness.
rewarded as righteous through him. Well it may be, God has given thee to
walk so uprightly, as the world can in nothing charge thee: but thou fear
thy natural corruption, that thou shall not persevere, thou tremblest to
remember how many excelling thee in gifts and graces of the Spirit, have fallen
away from the truth, and think all is but hypocrisy, and that thy
hypocrisy will one day beguile thee, now call to mind that CHRIST is made to
thee holiness, not as new Moses to follow, but as a true Messiah to believe
in, the worker, author, and finisher of thy holiness: So that albeit in respect
of thy self to persevere, 3 Sanctification.
it seems impossible, yet with him it is both possible and easy. What if thou
had a multitude of sins, that thy corruption did swell till it burst? Mary
Magdalen had seven Mary Magdalen.
Spirits, and yet of all women she was most devout, most loving, most honored
to have the first sight of Christ's resurrection. What if thou have bin a
brawned and infamous sinner, so that the name of sin has been notoriously
written in thy forehead? the Lord Jesus called and crowned Matthew the Publican
with the dignity of an Evangelist. What if thy sin Matthew.
had taken a purple die and crimson color in the blood of the Saints? Paul of
a most grieuour persecuter of Christ, was made a most glorious preacher of
Christ. It may be thou fear the corruption drawn from thy native country,
the Cretians were conuerts, and the Cretians.
Corinthians became Christians. It may be yet thine hereditarie, and natural
corruptions cause thee to despair of comfort: consider the Lord can change the
nature of a Wolf into Natural corruption.
the nature of a Lamb, and the course of a corrupt nature in thee to the power
of a supernatural grace. Oh there is one thing that troubles thee, many
promises, few performed. Thou look for peace of mind, and behold a wound
of the Spirit; thou art the Lord of the whole earth, and the heir of heaven,
and yet have not wherewith to help thy necessity: Promises.
thou art a Lord of liberty, and yet put in prison. All this I grant, and yet
in all this Christ is thy redemption; not suffering thee to be overcome of any
of these in thy life, and who lie 4 Redemption.
freeing thee from them in the life to come. Admit that thou werst cruelly
persecuted, cannot he, that made the fire not to burn at all the children in
the furnace, make the fire so easily to consume thee, as thou shall comfortably
bear it? Will not he that made the Lions being hungry, not once to open their
mouths on Daniel, to crush thee so gently, that thou shall willingly sustain
it? Now the means are the Word, Prayer, the Sacraments, and discipline of the
Church. The Word even crucifieth Christ a new in thine heart, Prayer gives thee
a feeling of thy faith, the Sacraments confirm both thy faith and feeling; and
discipline continues us in the obedience, both of the Word, and of Prayer, and
of the Sacraments, and consequently, is a means to continue us in all those
comforts, which by the other means are to be found in Christ. The most holy
have need of Christ's righteousness: and the most righteous of his holiness.


3 Thou must ever beware of two extremities: The one, that thou labor not so
for righteousness, that thou forget CHRIST to be thy holiness; the other, that
thou so travel not for holiness, as that thou should not remember him also
to be thy righteousness. And so behave thy self in both, that thou be most
righteous in Christ, and yet thou must endeavor also to be holy, and though
thou be never so holy, yet know thou stand in need of the righteousness
of Christ. Now to come to these things, thou must diligently attend on the
word, whereby Christ Jesus is crucified a fresh in thine heart, on prayer,
which works a feeling of thy Faith, on the Saints, which confirm thy Faith,
and increase thy feeling.

4 CHRIST has made us inheriters of his kingdom, which he holds by two
titles, Note.
first by inheritance, then by purchase. As he obtained by inheritance, he
reserueth that Christ holds his kingdom by two titles.
title to himself alone, but whatsoever he has had by purchase, he has
given us the title of it. And not only this does he give us, but also the
graces of the spirit, though not to one all, nor to all in one measure. An
afflicted mind seeing one of the children of God, have this, another that
gift, is grieved that he has not all. It is an error, Christ gives not to one
Feeling.
all, but deuideth all among many. But there is one special grace which I
cannot have, and that is feeling. Have thou faith? blessed art thou that
belieuest, and that without feeling. Do you believe? you have a rich gift, you
must not have all. If you have any gifts, it is well, the gifts are divided. Be
content with thy portion, and I say unto thee, that thy Faith without Simile.
feeling, is more precious to God, the^ thy faith with feeling. If by thy faith
thou have made Faith without feeling.
the devil a drone, that he cannot sting, and a toothles dog that he cannot
bite, it is sufficient. Content thy self with thy portion, until the Lord
come from heaven, until he be all in all, and then thou shall have all joy in
all perfection.

5 Two things are necessary, truly to espouse us to CHRIST; the one is to use
the pure means: the other, to use those means with a pure heart.

CHAP. XIX. of Death and Judgment.
Many make no account of the death of the soul, because they feel it not as
they do The death of the soul.
the death of the body. Every man fears a Palsy, an Epilepsie, and an
Apoplexy, because they strike dead: but if a man be in a consumption, where
he shall be decaying seven years, he thinks nothing of it. Likewise if an
house fall suddenly, we say it perishes, but if it moulder away we little
regard it. In Hosh. 5, verse 7. 12. The Lord threatens Simile.
to be a Lion to Israel, and a moath to Judah. Surely, when the wrath of God,
as a moathe has secretly fed on us ere we know it, our souls do as it were
bleed to death. For as he that bleedeth to death feels little, until
suddenly his strength fails; so in the death of the soul, a man does not
perceive how his strength is gone, or ever he be aware. It may be Simile.
the Lord will not be unto us as a Lion, but as a moath, we shall not happily
die of an Apoplexy, but of a consumption, and CHRIST the Savior shall laugh
at our destruction.

2 We can better away to meditate on Death which Satan covers with eternity
following, Meditation of Judgment.
then on the day of Judgment, where we must all make our account.

3 The bare meditation of Death does so far move us from suffering our
delights to dwell on earthly things, as that Reason disswadeth us not to make
any cost about a Tenement Simile.
where we know we shall dwell but a while. Yet such bare imaginations of
Death may build up in the mean time the kingdom of pride in us. Wherefore it
shall be more Meditation of death.
auailable, if with our meditation of putting off this earthly tabernacle, we
think also of putting on the heavenly Tabernacle, and of putting on the royal
robe of Christ's righteousness, without which we shall never stand with comfort
before the great Throne of Gods Judgment.

4 The cause why we beso loath to die is, because we cannot find in our
conscience that Loath to die.
we have done that good thing for which we came into this life.

5 If there be a desire in thee to die in respect of some injury, shake it
off; it is better to Wherefore some desire to die.
be a living dog, than a dead Lion: for so long as thou live, there is time
to repent, but after death there is none. Therefore labor for to feel his
favor in Christ, which if thou do, thou shall never fail till thou come to
him.

6 God deals contrary to the course of our common Physicians, which first
give one Judgment. Morbus magnus magnum remedium. P^dor, Dolor, Timor,
Augustine. Maxima est poena timorem amisisse iudicij.
medicine, and then if that will not serve, a stronger: but God gives the
strongest first. The argument of judgment is the last that can move us. That
argument moves most in Logic which has the best reason and most sense:
howsoever it seems to some, yet sure I am the argument of judgment has the
most sense, or shall have, and may best serve to move all sensual men. There be
three things to move even evil disposed men in that great judgment, shame,
grief, and fear. Let it move us for shame; and if this will not, let us
remember the fear which then shall possess us; if we want this, our state is
lamentable, for then neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor the holy Ghost can
tell what to say unto us.

7 Many are of opinion (that teach without discretion) that it is evil to do
any thing Fac, fac, vel timore poenae, si nondum potes amore iustitiae. Simile.
Cum dicis timeo quid dicturus sum, male times, vane times.
for fear of judgment, but all for love: and if we abstain from any evil
for fear, that we are in a wrong course. I have been of this error my self,
but the holy Ghost is content to use this as a good reason, and will be
beholding to us, if we fear to do evil for judgments sake. Hear what
Augustine says: Do this for fear of punishment, if thou can not as yet
obey for the love of justice. Bernard likens the fear of God to a needle, and
the love of God to a thread: first the needle enters, and then follows the
thread: First, fear keeps us from doing, next, love causes that we do not,
even then, when we can do. This is t^^ means as Augustine says, A timore
bonavita, a bona vita bona conscientia: inde nullus timor, atque ita dulcescit
Deus peccanti, etc. First we are Gods enemies, then his servants, and if we
behave our selves well in his service we shall be made his adopted children.
Dominus ablato timore su^jcit timo^^^, dicturus sum ^lane time.


8 This word judgment I would no man would let it pass without judgment, and
yet there is no word read with less judgment. In the law the title de iudicio
is best studied: and it is a great title. Chrysostom says, if we had that
care which they have that be arraigned before an earthly judge, we should do
well. Though his judgments be as the great deep, as the Psalmist says; yet
they may be brought to four heads, and first into two, the Primum timo^ne
facias, de^n amor, ^^ ve^^s face^e, ^^^^^si possis.
judgment of man, and the judgment of God: the judgment of man, either when
another gives judgment of us, or we give judgment of our selves: the
judgment of God, either in this life, or eternal. Job, chap. 29 speaks of
some young men in his days, that feared his judgment. This fear is to be
seen in heathen men, as in him that ran further into Of the day of judgment.
the Tavern to avoid the sight of the Philosopher. The boys of Bethel, that
wanted this fear, and reverenced not Elisha the Prophet, were so far gone,
that it was time to cut them Verbum hoc iudicij vtinam nemo transi^er sieve
iudicio.
off. He cursed them, and two she-beares came out of the wood and slew them.
But as Lucina says of the consistory of Christians, this is a miserable
Consistory, a poor judgment: every man will plead with the friar, We are
exempted Lord: yet true it is. they Si i^ nobis ea ess^t cura quae coram
terreno iudice sistendorum, s^^^iciter age^^m^s.
that shall judge the world, can best judge, but they shall be judged also. The
second is the judgment seat within us, which God has made to make us esteem
his the more. It is counted an absurd thing for a man to be his own judge.
This is our own conscience. This is Gods register that registreth all things
which we do or speak, and it is also our remembrancer, when we are alone.
Blessed is the man that despises not this judge: no man can 1. Judgment of
man.
have a more severe judge than himself, albeit a man do acquit himself: the
wicked is sometimes secure, but never in safety. This is that, whereby God
would call us home. Every 2. The judgment seat within us.
sinner is his own tormentor: Here be surdo verbera, strokes that cannot be
heard, and yet strokes indeed. Then if there be within them such torments, why
are wicked men so merry? Surely I must answer them thus: Peccator est sui
carnifex: but these are removed Judgment of the conscience.
from the way of sinners to the seat of scorners: and then all is quiet. Every
sinner is condemned in himself, or by himself, if he become not brutish, and
his conscience feared and hardened. And as for young men's consciences,
Augustine compares them to water The strokes of man's conscience.
in a basin, the water is stirred, and there is no face seen: but so soon as
maturitie of years come, then it will stand still, and we shall see our faces,
and cry with David and Job, Lord wipe away the sins of my youth. The third
judgment may be compared to a Young men's consciences.
quarter sessions, that does consist in depriving of commodities, the mulcte is
the loss of Gods grace, an insensible punishment, but so great, that if all
the creatures should Simile.
mourn, says Chrysostom, it were not sufficient, when grace is taken away
from one ^. Judgment. Loss of grace.
man. If we will not be moved with the loss of that, which God makes account
of, he will take away that which we make account of, as by taking away our
preferment, wit, etc. for I account that man to have lost his wit, which is
turned into a Fox, which has nothing What men are beside their wits.
but craft and subtlety. Then he sends sickness, reproaches and hearts grief
to humble us, or some singular sharp judgment on some, of very good hope, and
love, and takes them out of this life, to warn us that are a great deal
worse, to the terror of the wicked, and Judgment*
that they might not see the punishments he is to bring upon the ungodly for
sin. Now for as much as a man in the first judgment is condemned, in the
second quited, in the third repriued: Therefore the Lord has appointed a fourth
judgment, which shall pay them home: and that may be compared, if I may so say,
to the jail delivery, and this is called the day of judgment. In comparison
whereof other judgments are as nothing. Then God will take Vert^s ille iudic
j^dies, in quo omni^ causa ca^it.
the matter into his own hand, then shall there be a new Quest, the^ all th^se
matters that are shuffled up, and evil judged, shall be judged again. Now is
the day of affections, but then the day of judgment: in it we shall lose all
that is to be lost. Now for this day and this judgment, Ven^er, veni^^ ille
dies, in quo male i^dicatus re^ud^cabitur.
that we may have somewhat to move us, being of our selves Very dull, let us
see, how fearful and dreadful it is. In a judgment there are three things,
the action, the sentence, and the execution. For we see the prisoners, first
how they plead for themselves. Secondly, being found guilty, the sentence is
pronounced by the Judge: and after, they are executed. Three things in
judgment* ^. Action*
In earth there are means to acquit for a season, as delusio^ of the Judge or
of the witnesses, persuasion, corruption, favor. For the first, they be
apicesiuris, points in law, they undo all justice, a cau^lling justice: but
apices iuris in calo non excusant. And for the witnesses they * Qu^rks in Ia^:
Apex iuris pro iure ^^m^^e and ^^bt^li, ^pinolaque di putatione. V^pian.
shall not deliver him, for they shall be true witnesses, the book shall then
be opened. No persuasion shall then serve, because God is not subject to any
affection. Thirdly, there shall be no corruption, for though the Judge could be
corrupted, what could we give him, when the whole world shall be destroyed?
Lastly, we must look for no favor, for it is the day of judgment and not of
mercy. The night before the blowing of the Trumpet, there shall be preached
mercy, but then there shall be none: let no man flatter himself, for Note.
so he shall find it. To escape a sentence here on earth is either by appeal
to an higher court, 2. Sentence.
or by re^racting: but there can be no appeal, for who is higher than God:
neither shall there be any reuersion of the sentence, for there shall be no
more sitting, because there is no second judgment. Thirdly, there is an
execution, which is most fearful. And execution 3. Execution.
there shall be, well, let it come, will we say, for a punishment must be ours:
and then what is there to help us to escape punishment, but either resistance,
or if that will not serve, flight; if we cannot fly, patience, or mitigation,
or our comfort is hope: but there is none of all these can stand us in any
stead: for the first, if we were, as Job says, hard rocks, as we are
potshards, we were not able to resist, for if the Lord did but touch us, we
would smoke. But his wrath shall be powered upon us, and who is able to abide
it? Secondly, it boots us No flying from Gods judgment.
not to fly, for the Lord is every where round about us, we are as it were in
a circumfere^ce, the further we are from one part, the nearer we are to the
other. We fly from the God of peace to the God of wrath, there is no escaping:
Christ says, Take the unprofitable servant, Simile.
bind him hand and foot, so that he cannot fly; and Jude adds, with
everlasting chains, and that in darkness; so that if he could break his
chains, yet he could not see whither to fly in the dark. Thirdly, there is
no patience; which ye shall see, if ye consider the example of the rich man in
Luke, who required one drop of water to cool his tongue, of a person, Luke 16.
A description of the torments of hell.
whom he hated deadly; and no doubt they do hate the godly there as much as
ever they did in this life. Last of all let us look for no mittigation: If
there were any mittigation, it should be either in respect of the wearines of
the tormentors, but they are spirits; or by consuming of our bodies, but we
shall continue for ever: or by diminishing of the instruments, but the fire
shall never go out: and that it may not so do, there is a lake of brimstone
prepared to run into it, and the worm never dies. Neither shall there be any
comfort, the remembrance even of that they enjoyed shall torment them.

9 There is a people in Amos and Zephanie, that put the day of the Lord far
off, Against the^ that are either careless or curious in things concerning the
day of Judgment.
but it shall be unto them a day of terror and trembling. On the other side,
let us consider how the world waxing old as a garment, and all creatures
become moath-eaten and worme-eaten: the fruits, stones, and herbs decaying
in their virtues. Against worldly Atheists the Prophet Zephaniah says: The
Lord will seek them, and rather than he will lose them for finding, he will
seek them with a lantern, and search them with a candle. When we know the
time must come, we enquire of it: and beholding God drawing some presently into
the stage, and knowing that others are reserved for the last judgment, the
faithful inquire for their hope, the wicked for their fear. Well, as I would
not have men too curious, Mat. 24 so could I wish them not to be too careless:
the first is ill, the second is worse. The day shall come suddenly, and
therefore neither curiousness nor carelessness is good: only thus much is
sure, it is at hand, but no man could never show the fingers of his hand. Peter
shows, that we must not measure the time after man, but after A worthy
meditation of the day of judgment.
God. Some reason this, some that; but let us remember that, Deuterono. 29. 29.
The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong
unto us. Let no man think by an allegory to reach to that, which the Angels
themselves cannot comprehend. For if one should say, that as there were four
thousand years before Christ his coming in the The ancients erred concerning
the day of judgment.
flesh, so there should be four thousand before he came to judgment, were it
not as like a quidditie as they harp on, and yet both untrue? If we look on
Cyprian and Tertullian, we shall see them to have thought the day to come in
their times. Here the Fathers have roued much, but all like to miss the mark.
Let us know, that the neerenesse is not in respect How the day of judgment is
said to be ^eer^.
of us, but of the speaker, who only knows what is near; and let us content
our selves with this, that in respect of eternity nothing is long, that shall
have an end. When the Apostles then say, it is near, so we may say, it is
near, and no difference: But as the Day was then near, so the Hour is now
near; near, I say in respect of God and of eternity. And as the promise
accomplished was near to God 4000. years before it came, so it is not in the
fadome of man's brain to tell, how many days or years, wherewith God is not
governed, is far or near unto us. The Apostle Heb. 10. 25. shows the time
to be near, and that it is within the view of the eye, because the sacrifices
of the Jews are abolished, the true sacrifices are offered, and the Gospel
more or less is universally preached. But among al reasons this moves me, and
may move all, that now Christ is ready to come, because we see small faith on
the earth For if ever this was, it is now, wherein is not only a defect of
faith, which ever was, but because now men go clean against faith: for now
not only the principles of the faith are not observed, but they are thought
absurd, and Lying.
things clean contrary are prescribed. Is it not monstrous, that now some
teach for doctrine, that a man may lie and forswear without sin or shame?
Seeing that sin is now in Swearing.
it ripeness, which was before but in the ear, could the devil from hell
broch more profound blasphemies? If the regions begin to grow white, and sin
grows ripe and yellow, we must look for the Angel shortly to thrust in his
sickle. Well, whenever the dave of judgment is, I fear the day of the
departure of the Gospel is at hand. Our security is such, that we may rather
say, the Lord has suffered us too long, then that we can accuse God for
Security.
seuerenesse in striking us too soon. Be it then, that as yet the day is not
come, wherein the world shall crackle about our ears; or though we see not our
Jerusalem destroyed: yet we know our day of death cannot be far off, and
quickly we shall come to our doom.

CHAP. XX. Of the shortness of our life, and the meditation of Death how
profitable.
IT is the usual manner of the Holy Ghost, 1. Pet. 4. Iam. 2. John, 12. to
persuade men to godliness, because they have but a quantity of days. This is
such an ordinary The shortness of life.
Argument, that use has taken away the force of it, yet David says, that even
ordinary things by grace move us, and where grace works not, even
extraordinary things move us not. Concerning shortness of life, the heathen
could say, that a man is but a man Anerh emera^
of a day old, and the Philosophers teach that his life cannot be long. But we
will leave all them without the Church, and come to them within: David said it
was a span long Moses and Salamon say, it is a life of days: and I will
observe withal, that Moses, Ioh, David, Solomon, when they describe the life
of man, they can find nothing to rest on as vain enough, whereunto they might
compare it: so base a thing is this life, that it may abide any extenuation in
the world. In regard whereof they have compared it to a bubble, a sleep, a
vapor, and they cume so far at the length, that they compared it to a
thought, whereof Psalm. 90. 9.
we know there may be no fewer then a thousand in one day. Esaias 38 it is
said, it may be spent before night. And 2. Cor. 5. it is compared to a booth
or a shepherds tent, which we see does last but a while. In our daily and
ordinary prayer Christ admonishes us of this point, when he teaches us to
pray, that we may have a portion for a day, as though our life were shut up,
or may be shut up in one day. There are long spaces, which by a Simile.
speedy course are quickly ended; and there be short spaces, which having a
slow moouer, Space short, and motion swift,
are long in going, but if the space be short, and the motion swift, there is
no hope of continuance; and such a one is our life. The Israelites went no
further in thirty years, by their slow motion, than by a swift passage they
might have gone in eleven days: So that one may be going a long journey in a
little time, and a little journey a long time. Our way is short, and for the
manner of our motion in this short way, it is compared to a Weauers shuttle,
and to a Post, and to a shadow: to a Post, Nay, it is not of so long
continuance, for a Post leaves a print of his steps behind him, but a man
does leave no impression, he is still going, and the motion never cease. The
swiftest thing in nature for motion may stay, but man's life does not stay: For
though at the prayer of Joshua the Sun stood still, which is wonderful swift;
yet the time of man's life stood not still, but even then a d^ies journey went
forward. Solomon considering of man's life, called it vain, and then as not
thinking that a sufficient word, he corrected himself, and called it Vanity
it self. But David going further, Psalm. 62. says, man is lighter than vanity
too. If we add this, that nothing befalls us all our life long, but it may
befall us any day, or every day, we shall confess this Life* how short.
life is vain. The calculating of this time is good, but the increasing of our
account is the cause of all evil. Matt. 25. the envious servant was overtaken
in his account, be thought he had many days to come, which he had not, before
his Lord appeared. The Virgins were truly foolish, that dreamed of a day,
which was denied them. Luke 12. the rich man ouershot To number our days.
himself, and was prevented contrary to his account: It is the usual
complaint of the Prophets, that men say, The prophecy is deferred, the plague
shall not come yet; and we say in our hearts, the Bridegroom will not come yet,
our Lord will be long in coming, the burden of the Lord shall ouerpasse us,
and so forth. It is good reason to remember the prayer of Moses, Psalm. 90. 12.
that we beguile not our selves in the computation, who cries, Lord teach us to
number our days. For numbering of people David is an example: for numbering our
money, our sheep, our lands, and our frames, every man can be an example: To
number our days, a rare kind of Arithmeticke.
But to number our days is a rare kind of numbering, it is a strange
Arithmetike, what rearages we are fallen into with the Lord, for our time not
spent to his glory* this is a numbering, wherewith we are unacquainted. Oh that
we knew what it were to account of time, surely this I will say, if there were
many worlds in the possession of some that are departed, they would give them
us for one day or hour, which we have in such plenty, and so little esteem
of. Well, in the numbering of our years we need take no great pain, for Moses
has set it down to be 70. years. If our life last but so long, a little
Arithmetike will cipher it out, and we know it is a matter of no great art to
number our years, even from our first father to this age. A worldly man in
this business would begin to add and to multiply, putting still to the times
past that which is to come, and withdrawing from Psalm 90. 70. years.
time to come, times past: But we must know that all that is past, is to be
subtracted, and to be counted nothing, and the days to come are not to be
added, for an addition must be of a thing existent, but the time to come is
not. But let us make a supposition of that to be which is not, that a man may
write of 70 years, let us, I say, set that down as the gross sum. Half
that time is spent they say in sleep, which the^ we may well detract from the
great number, and then there remains but 35. years. From these we may deduct
14. years How to number ber our days
in our youth, wherein we are unfit to glorify God, or do good to man, and so
there remains sixteen years; and of these sixteen, to set down the days
of sickness, or those times which we sinfully spend in yielding to anger, to
our lusts, or to worldliness, wherein we are as unprofitably occupied, as
though we were not, half of the number would be cut off, and so we should
leave but seven or eight years. But now we have the sum, from whence we
might take out, but not that time out, which is past we know, seeing now it is
nothing; what is to come, we know not, and it cannot be added, time is but
short, and therefore great need we have of God his spirit to teach us. To this
we know, how suddenly death does take from us time to come, Jobs children in
the midst of their banquet were stricken dead; Ishbosheth died before night
could come upon him, neither has the strongest liver any surer charter of his
life. The best way then to reckon aright, Sudden death
is to make the number, which we may take out, and that which we would
substract, all one, and that is none. If in the way we happily find something,
we may take it for our advantage, and see that we use it to God his glory. For
this being set down, that our days past are none, and the days to come none
neither: so that no days past or to come can be counted part of our life, and
consequently have none but the present time, which is very Our life is but the
present time.
little, and as little as a thought, unless we could have a lease of our life,
as Ezekiah in some so^t had of his by Esaias, wherein he had very ill success.
And so finding our time to be none, we shall be most bent to labor to attain
to wisdom. And here we must understand, what manner of wisdom this skill of
counting brings us: there is wisdom of health, and there is wisdom of
sickness, and this is it, which we shall learn. And what is that wisdom?
surely by a continual thinking, that death is nigh, and persuading our
Wisdom.
selves that death is within a minute, what no law, prince, parents or
punishment could do, that death will easily dispatch. By this they that before
had no delight in the word if once they take this account, that every day they
think they draw their last breath, the Death.
word will be full of comfort to them. And then the meditation of death working
above the hope of long life, the wisdom of sickness will be found to be
above the wisdom of health. In this case men will give counsel, that before
could take none, and this is that wisdom of the point of death, and nothing
can teach us better. We see the effect of this in Ezekias, when the talie of
his days was left him, we see his meditation, which was such as the holy Ghost
has put it in perpetual record, we see his behavior most worthy our
meditations. Neither is this in Ezekiah only a well disposed man, but even in
the wicked, as Baltashashar, who seeing the number of his days, and that he
was found too light, begun to quake, and his knees did shake presently, and so
began to be wise. Thus we see an effect both in the wicked and in the godly,
of this meditation most necessary.

2 The readiest way to obtain life is to be content, either to live or die,
and to commit The readiest way to prolong life.
our selves to the Lord, knowing that nothing ever perished, which was
committed to him. Let us be content with the use of life, which the Lord gives
us to repent in, and account it a great benefit, that the Lord grants us a
great time of repentance, knowing that it is a greater benefit, to be a living
dog, than a dead lion: for while we live, there is a place for repentance, but
after death there is none: And therefore those that account it not a benefit to
live, are unworthy of life, or any benefit therein: all these things must
serve to teach us patience, and to refrain our murmuring nature, whenever by
any temptation our flesh is provoked thereunto.

3 As it is a maine point of wisdom to learn to die, so there be many under
rules proceeding How the meditation of death is profitable.
from this. First, it helps our procrastinating and putting off of the evil
day, and our kind of repentance, which is ever in purposes and promises, and
never in practice and performance. We see that men in their journey, if they
think they have day enough they are sl^ck enough: but if they see they have
but little day, so that they begin to number, they ply 1 Simile.
themselves. Wherefore seeing time goes away, when we lay no hold on it, yea
when most sure hold that can be is laid on, we must labor for heavenly
wisdom, and a compendious 2 Fainting of heart in affliction, the meditation of
death a preservation against it.
rule thereunto is to number our days. There is another thing, and it is like
the great Dragon in the Revelation, it has drawn away and deceived the third
part of the world, and that is want of wind and fainting of heart in
affliction, to the remedying whereof it is good to consider, that as we suffer
daily, so we are dying daily, and that which the world afflicts, is drawing
to corruption, which shall exempt us from their tyranny. And here in we take
our mortality for an advantage against them, that seeing we are subject to so
many evils we are also mortal, and after death we shall be immortal, when
nothing shall hurt us. For as we would not be immortal now being subject to
sin and misery, so we shall then not be mortal, when we shall be recompensed
with righteousness and felicity. Now by considering of this short time of
mortality, and of the glory of our immortality we suffer without fainting,
we fancy not many days here, which might discourage us, but we think our
year may want months, our month days, our days hours, and so we are
encouraged. Another thing is this. It is sure we love this life by a rule of
folly, in trusting to this 3 Against the vain love of this present life.
life, that it will be long (for our estimation of a thing grows by the
continuance of it) and therefore if we could be persuaded of the shortness of
this life, it would draw us to the contrary rule of wisdom. But we are all
Damas his disciples, we commend things present howbeit, it were better to have
Moses our Master, who in his time began to number, and yet we know that he
might have been sure that the day of judgment would not be in his time, for
that the promised Messiah was not yet come: we fear it less, and number
nothing so fast, upon whom the day it self may as suddenly come, as upon them,
who tarry for nothing to it, but for the fulfilling of the elect, and the
accomplishme^t of the number of them that shall be saved. So that we both by
death and in respect of the last day, are not to count of any long abode. But
above all there is one principal rule which Christ allowed as an Marie and
Marthaes wisdom.
high point of wisdom in Marie, in that she made so fit a choice of her times
in bestowing them in such a thing, as should not be taken from her, as no time
should bereave her of it, wherein we are taught to think, that those times
which we bestow on God his worship, shall not end within the number of our
days, but they shall have their abiding fruit for ever, and this will comfort us
afterward. But when we are occupied in Marthaes business, we may say, and what
is this? what profit will this afford in death, shall not my days be cut off,
and what will this avail me? So that it is good to be exercised in things
which concern the time which runs beyond the number of our days, and shall
last as long as God himself shall endure.

CHAP. XXI. Dulnes of spirit and of feeling.
SVch is the corruption of our nature, that albeit we have been wonderfully
delighted with Gods graces, yet when we abound with them, we less esteem
them, than when Dulnes when God has inru^hed us with his graces.
we began to enjoy them.

2 We must desire and endeavor to keep our selves from deadnes and dulnes,
and to tie our hearts ever in thankfulness unto God After our meats received it
is good to speak something to the glory of God: If God give any good matter,
to take it as offered unto us of God: If nothing were done or spoken but all
silent, it were good to seek some good occasion of speech, by reading, singing
or speaking. And we may not tie our selves much Good speeches in conference.
to any other means, for accustomable use of any one thing, brings less
reverence. And then must we endeavor specially to stir up one another in good
speeches, when such be present as God makes instruments to teach the same more
effectually unto others: and this the Apostle by his example teaches us, 2.
Tim 2. 2.

3 There is a secret, inward, and spiritual blessing, which the elect feel,
when to the A spiritual blessing.
world they seem accursed: and there is a secret curse to the wicked, when
apparently they seem to be blessed. A secret curse.


4 As it is no small benefit though we have not the bright Sun-shining, yet to
have the light of it to govern the day, the heat of it to turn away the cold,
the effects of it in other To see and feel the shining countenance of the Lord.
works of nature: so it is no small mercy, though we have not the shining
countenance of the Lord, yet to have the guiding of our affections by the light
of it, the possessing of our souls in patience by some feeling of it, and the
fruits thereof in the peace of our minds: although we feel not the present
beams, yet we shall see them shine hereafter; If we have not this joy of our
mind as we would in the day of our vocation, the Lord will plentifully give it
us in the day of our coronation.

5 They may be truly said to have profited well, which believe the word
before they To believe the word before feeling.
feel the effect of it, as the threatenings before they feel the smart, the
promises before they feel the comfort. And such as do not thus believe do
highly displease God. This was the sin of Thomas, which would feel ere he
believed, and this sin is in us all, therefore all must learn to correct it
in themselves. And if we were free from this, we should be free from many
evils.

6 Although a man do not feel his faith sometimes under the cross, as indeed
it falls out often in the best children of God, yet when it shall please the
Lord to send feeling Faith under the cross without feeling.
and deliverance, that man shall see that his faith was great, and that the
Lord did mightily preserve him from falling; yea he shall then perceive that
his faith was stronger, when he had not the feeling of Gods favor, than it had
been at some times, when he had great feelings. Note.


CHAP. XXII. Of Catechizing and instruction of Youth.
THere has been a sect both among the heathen, and also in our age, that
thinks Education of children.
that religion is not to come so low as children; but that they are to be
nourished up boldly, and when they come to riper years, then to be instructed
in religion, and not before. So the neathe^ tell us as we see in the beginning
of the Philosophers morals Ho neo^ ou^ estin ^^koto^ aki oaaes ton etkikon.
as also in the opinion of the Orator, in the defense of Caelius: It is
wisdom to let youth have his course till his heat be abated. But if there
were any moment in the authority of the heathen, the whole practice of them
were to be preferred before one man's opinion. And for See Clement Alexand.
pedagog. 3. book.
their practice, certain it is, that the exercise of catechizing was used
among the Gentiles: for we find it in Porphyries time: It was usual in Athens
for youth to be taught: as also the histories of the heathen do declare, that
the children were instructed: for it was a custom among them not to powle
their childrens heads, until they were taught, and then to burn Porphyr.
principio quaest. Homer.
their hair as a sacrifice to Apollo, who from thenceforth in regard of their
skill, were allowed to carry tabers in their pompes and solemnities. Aristotle's
meaning in that place is, Cyril. wri^ 24. Catechis. Aristotle's meaning of this:
Inuends hon est idon^^^ auditer moralis Philosophiae.
de facto, non de eo, quod fieri debet. Else he is to be called back to his
seventh book de Repub. chap. 17. It is expedient for children to be
withdrawn from evil speeches* Against the Orator standing at the bar to
plead for a lewd young man, his own saying is to be alleged: Offic. lib. 1.
That this age must chiefly be reclaimed from pleasures and lust. Exodus 10. 11.
Pharaoh being requested of the Israelites, that they might go with their
children into the wilderness for to worship, makes a scoff that their children
should go, as though religion pertained not to them. Matthew. 19. 13. When
children were brought unto Christ, that he might bless them, his disciples
forbad them, that brought them; as if Christ and children had nothing to do one
with another. For the first I answer, Moses stands with Pharaoh in that
point, and will not take so much, as he would grant for the old, except the
young may go too. And for the second, Christ opposes himself to his
disciples, granting children safe conduct to come unto him, pronouncing those
accursed, that keep them from him. Matthew. 18. 6 Psalm. 119. 9. The law is not
only given for those of ripe years, but even for young men to cleanse their
ways. The Jews note, there is mention made of children three times in the
Decalogue. And though the rest may seem to admit some doubt, yet in
catechizing, which is comprehended in the Sabbath days exercise, our sons and
our daughters are bound to less than we. Exodus 12. 6. If children be so
busy as to Note.
ask, what is meant by the Passover, the Lord is so far from keeping it
back from them, that he commands their parents to acquaint them with that
Sacrament: and albeit they do not ask. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. he lays a charge on their
parents to see the^ instructed in his laws.

2 And whereas many hold that it is not material, nor to be regarded, what
children do, and that they are not to be examined nor censured by their doings,
though they be wanto^ and childish, they be confuted, Pro. 20. 11. They shall
be judged by their steps* As the blessing of Gods is upon them, that give
themselves to wisdom, Psalm. 127 and 128. whom David compares to a quiver
full of arrows, and to olive branches: so does he not spare those that do
evil, although they be children. 2. Reg. 2. 24. The boys that scoffed Elisha
were torn in pieces with two bears. To this the Hebrew proverb may be
added, in Golgotha are Children punished for sin. Note.
to be seen souls of all sizes, that is, death the reward of sin comes on
the young as well as upon the old. I saw little and great says John, Apoc 20.
12. waiting for their judgment. Christ who has said of himself, I have given
you an example. John, 13. 13. and of whom the Divines rule is, Every action of
Christ serves for our instruction, has given Christsyouth
our children an example of his youth, that is, that at twelve years he was
grown as much in wisdom, namely in the fear of God and in the favor of God
as in years. He allows of the childrens singing Hosanna. Mat. 21. 16. when
the Pharisees thought it a foolish thing to regard the childrens cry. He
shows, that his father makes an account of children, and has no desire that
they should be lost for teaching, and lost must they be, except they come
Children must not be lost for teaching.
to the Church. Therefore he gives commandment, that they be suffered, and
not forbidden, if they have any desire unto him, and therefore he pronounces a
woe upon any, that when such would come to Christ, do scandalize them either
by word, counsel or example, or any other undue means keep them from coming
to him. Ioh. 21. 15. Christ his charge to Peter is not to feed his sheep
only, but his lambs also, and first his lambs, for the increase of the whole
flock depends on the towardness of the lambs, and the lambs being well
fed, less pains need to be taken with the sheep. All solemn promises we
must perform as sure as we can. But in our Baptism we made a solemn promise
of learning the fear of God. The aptness in children to vice, as we may see
by their tractablenesse in any profane or scurrile jests must make us take
advantage, and exercise this Children apt to vice.
aptness in such things that are good, for no doubt, if children can say
bald-head to Elisha, they can say Hosanna to Christ.

3 The office of the Catechist is to make his doctrine easy to enter by giving
it an edge Deuteronomy ^. The office of a Catechist.
in perspicuitie, method, etc. and of the catechized often to go over the
same thing, as a knife does the whetstone, and to repeat and iterate it, till
he have made it his own. This we see in the original words: specially the
Greek (...) from the which we have our English word Echo, (...) is indeed to
sound the last fillable, and such sounders happily there be enough, but it is
to sound the whole after one: and such a repetition is required of the right
Catecumenoi. Catechizing is thus distinguished from preaching. Preaching is the
dilating Preaching and Catechizing, how distinguished. Sums or Epitomes.
of one member of religion into a just treatise: Catechizing is a contracting
of the whole into a sum. Preaching is to all sorts: catechizing to the
younger and rude. Preaching is not exacted to be repeated: catechizing is
exacted. We consider here in these three things. An argument or sum, the
genus, the delivery of it to children: the first part of catechizing, the
redeliuerie of catechumenoi, which is the second part of the catechism. For
warrant in making sums we have Christ, who Math. 22. 37. brought all the
whole law into two heads Ioh. 3* 16. an abridgement of the Gospel is set
down, Cod so loves the world, etc. Eccles. 12 ^3. Solomon draws all that,
that he had said in his whole book of the Preacher, to these two heads. Fear
God, and keep his commandments. The Apostle Heb. 6. 1. reduces all the
principles of Christian religion to these two, Repentance and Faith. As also
the learned think, that this form of teaching is meant by Paul, in his
pattern Hupotuposi ^eche gugia^^onton logon.
or form of wholesome words* which he wills Timothy to have, 2. Tim. 1. 13.
as also by form (...)n didac^es.
of doctrine, Rom 6 17. and analogy of faith. And if we demand a reason
hereof, we may have a Dependence, that we may refer all our reading and
learning to certain principal heads, and so enclose our studies in short
epitomes. So likewise say the Rabbis, that it is as it were a hedge to the
general doctrine, least we be ever in an endless maze. So do the Fathers call
it too. Clemens calls it Crepis* a base or ground plot. Athanasius, Synopsis,
the first draught of a picture. The second reason is the facility, because we
may in shorter time, learn and comprehend them, and such were the Sermons of
the Apostles, when they baptized so many hundreds in one day.

4 And here we must take with us a double prouiso, that we shall remain
before God his judgment seat without excuse, if that we seek not the
knowledge of God, being brought into so short a compendium, in such and so
perspicuous a method delivered. Secondly, we must know, that our sins are
not to make us careless or vnregarding of any We may not be secure after we
sipped a little knowledge in the Catechism. Catechizing before the flood.
more perfect instruction, seeing this catechizing was instituted but for an
easy entrance only, and not to perfect us in knowledge. 2. Pet. 3. 18. 1. Cor.
14. 20. Ephe. 4. 13. Heb. 5. 1^. 13. Catechizing is milk, more exact knowledge
is strong meat. Catechizing is the foorde wherein a lamb may wade; more exact
knowledge is the gulf, wherein an Elephant may swim. Both these are in the
Scriptures, concerning which Christ has said, Search the Scriptures. As for
evidence in catechizing before the flood, Cain and Abels sacrificing is a
sign, which seeing there was no word written, is judged of their father to be
taught them: and therefore they reason probably, that say, without this
catechizing, the word of God could not have continued. After the flood some
say, they had the like exercise, which afterward, Catechizing after the flood
Sibils books
as the learned think, was put in writing, and called the books of Sybille*
which were nothing else but traditions. i. things by word of mouth delivered
and taught. In Abraham's time, Genesis 18 God says, he knows that Abraham will
be careful to teach his family, and for that cause will vouchsafe him
extraordinary favor. If it be demanded, what he taught, Genesis 17. 2. there is
the sum of the law: Genesis 18* 18. there is also the abridgement of the
Gospel? In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. The fruit of Abraham's
catechizing, his son went out to pray, Genesis 24. 37. his servant prays
before his business, verse 12. and gives thanks after, verse. 26 he refuses to
eat, till he had discharged himself of his masters Catechizing under the
law.
message. In the time of the law, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. so soon as the law was given,
the Lord commanded them to teach their children. The practice of this we may
see in Hanna, delivering Samuel to Hesi his instructor, so soon as he was
weaned, 1. Sam. 1. in David, as Solomon testifies of him, Pro 4. 4. Iehoida
taught the young King Iehoash, 2. King. 12. 2. After the captivity, because
there the Bible ends, we must give credit to other histories.

5 If we believe the Rabbis, there were never in Jerusalem from Christ to
Antioch^^, under 400. Houses of catechizing in Jerusalem.
400. houses of catechizing, what time also they made their decree, that their
children at thirteen years should be put to catechizing* And to this order
among them may Paul seem to have relation, Romans 2. 18. where he affirms the
Jews are catechized in the law. Katechoumenos ek tou nomon.
Ephesians 6 4* they are willed to bring them up in instruction. Paul as some
think, sometime bearing this office says, 1. Cor ^ 14 that I may catechize.
For catechized we have, Luke 14. Theophilus: Act. 18. 25 Apollos: 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Timothy. Mark catechizing at Alexandria with great profit was commended by
Philo Iudaeus, as Eusebius makes mention. After Clemens: Who catechized.
next Origin* We have also the catechism of Cyril: Gregory Nis^n: the books
of Augustine, of catechizing the ignorant: and four books de symbolo ad
catechumenos. Also Athanasius De catechizandis rudibus*
his Synopsis of sacred Scripture: and Fulgentius de Fide ad Petrum Diaconum.
In the Fathers time it may be seen by the sixth cano^ of the council holde^ at
Neocaesaria: By the six and seven canons of the council holden at Iberis in
Spain: 2 council of Bra^caria, 1. Can. 4. Tolet. Can. 24. After that, is there
no mention made, till the time of Luther. Touching the great good, that the
frequenting of this exercise has done, this may be added, that Aegesippus
says, that by the virtue of catechizing, there was never a kingdom, but
received No kingdom if not but by catechizing received the Gospel within forty
years after Christ's passion. Coloss. 2. 23.
alteration in their heathenish Religion within 40* years after Christ his
passion. Julian the Apostata, that was thought to be the wisest enemy that
ever the Church had, when he went about to suppress Religion, did not use
torments, but put down schools and all catechizing. Again, when catechizing
was put down, ignorance began to grow. The Papists acknowledge, that all the
ground we have got of them, is by catechizing, as it appears by the Popes
Bull, de motu propri^, before the catechism of the council of Trident, and it
is thought, if ever they get ground of us again, it will be by their more
dilligent exacting of their catechizing. Now, why we may exact the catechism
again, these reasons may serve. Christ his reason to move me to carefulnes in
this: Thou shall render an account, whereon Reasons for Catechizing
we ground this rule, that every one will hear more attentively, that which he
must repeat again; then that whereof he must give no account. Besides, we are
all bound to give an 1
account of our faith, 1. Pet. 3. 15. And if we do it before our catechist, we
shall be able the 2
better to do it before a stranger. Thirdly, because Christ is become not
only our Priest 3
and King, but also our Prophet, and that all this is to this end, that we
also may become Prophets to him (our prophecy consisting in examining the
doctrine we have heard, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. in examining of our selves, 2. Cor. 13 5.
in admonishing our brethren, Romans 13. 14.) it is expedient specially in such an
exercise to witness the same. This also is to be exacted, in 4
regard of our Pastor or Catechist, for that it is requisite the Minister
should have an assurance of his hearers profiting in particular. Forasmuch as
then we see by the practice of the whole Church, that catechizing is a thing
commanded by God, we must know, that whiles we shall be in this holy action,
we are doing a thing well pleasing unto God.

6 Children must be taught precept by precept, line by line, sometime in the
catechism Esaias 28.
to inform them, sometime in histories to refresh them.

7 We must not always measure a man by his present affection, but by his
perseuering See the first part.
action, for many more profit in the end which angerly receive the doctrine,
than they which receive it cheerfully at the first. Note.


8 It is a foul sin, and worthy of public reprehension, publicly to
reverence the doctrine willingly, and privately to gain say it, because it
bewrays us rather of solemnity than of good conscience to receive it.

9 Many reject doctrine presently, as though they made no account of it, who
afterward will embrace it willingly, and after aduisement, and the working of
Gods spirit receive it thankfully.

10 Moses being well brought up, could not be well drawn away, neither by
Egypt, nor when he went thence: which appears also in Joseph, Daniel, and
his brethren. This Education of children.
ought to move us to teach our children in word and action, and afterward they
may have Gods blessing upon that good beginning, the want whereof causes many
men to be punished in their children.

11 We must prevent hardness of heart betimes in children, by godly and discreet
correction See the Sermon of education, in the third part.
and instruction. Children have oftentimes the sins of their parents, and
therefore when they chasten them, they should in wisdom first consider, if
that it were not a sin which they gave them, as it were, which now they are
about to correct, and finding it so, they should first be humbled in
themselves, and so proceed to correction with prayer, in the fear of God, in
wisdom, in love, and desire of their conversion, and with that measure as
correcting their own sins after a sort in their children. For men begetting
their children without regeneration, give a natural propagation of their
sins, without some special blessing of God preventing it; and none in
regeneration begets any with such gifts of nature as they have by grace.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Examples, and how we must not sin upon example, and of
diverse occasions of sin.
Our plain excuses now adays are mosest, it is a custom, sic vinitur, there
be many others that live so. Are not our arguments now adays such, as the
Eunuchs, 1. King. 22. unto Micheah. See all the Prophets which are four
hundred speak good to the king. i. as the king would have them, therefore I
pray thee, say thou so too. This is one argument, and how do ye answer it?
Even as Chusa said to Absalon, that he went not with his friend, because the
multitude was not with him, for where the multitude is, even there will I be.
Here is the practice, but where is a precept for it? I will show you where ye
shall have a precept for it. There is a fellow, a controller of Moses, the
child of Belial, that has a Antichrist.
precept. Deny nothing that you may win the multitude. But, if he had stayed
there, he had not bin clean contrary to Moses. Exo. 23. 2. but he goes
further and says; Though they go wrong, thou must go with them, and do as
they do. Oh that this lead not to perdition: We are naturally inclined to
this; every man is first evil, every one by nature is a Papist, a Machiuelist,
every one is given to follow a multitude. Of this doctrine some may have use
now, and some hereafter. And seeing, as Aeschines says, we must learn that
now whilst we be young, which we must practice when we be old: I shall think
the word of God has it fruit, if any shall beware by it, and practice it
hereafter. First, I note, where the holy Ghost flatly forbids the following
of a multitude, that it is a thing that comes to pass daily: we must not
think the holy De raris non praecipitur.
Ghost gives precepts of those things, that come not to use in 7. years, this
is one chief point in all offices. Plato in his Alcibiades had persuaded
Alcibiades to live justly al his life time: he promises that he will do so. I
pray God, says Socrates, you may begin, and also continue, but I fear least
the sway of the multitude carry you away: and to an Elder he writes, though
the multitude do not change you, yet it may be as rubs in your way. I will show
you a reason hereof, Romans 7. Paul says, there be many good things that I would
do, and cannot, and many evil things, which I would not do, and yet do them.
And why? because there is a law in my members rebelling against the law of the
Spirit. But when there is a law of company coming to, then the case is
dangerous, and in a double peril. Note.


2 There is an use of following, and this word follow is often in the
Scriptures. We must How far we may follow others.
follow with choice, judgment and limitation. The wise man says, it is the
property of a fool to follow universally, that, whatsoever he sees others
do, he must needs do the same That eye is very weak that cannot look on a
bleare eye, but it must be bleared; and Seneca says in his book De vita
beata. Pecora campi.
of the blessed life: We follow the drove like the beasts of the field; when we
think we go to the pasture, it is very like we should go to the shambles. S.
James vouchsafes not to compare us to living creatures, but to the froth of
the sea, which is carried up and down with the water; so we be carried and go
not. The reason why we do Hard to judge, but we soon credit.
thus is, because it is an hard matter to judge, but an easy matter to give
credit. We believe, how we should live we judge not. We may see what their
judgment is by the Logic, which they use: they rest only in examples and
similies, which how weak arguments they be, every man knows, no man will
admit them in disputation. Yet when we come to examples, see what judgment we
show, we take them by tale and number them not, we never weigh them, as he
said. No man would so receive his groats, as we do examples, we Nemo sic
denarios suos.
ought not therefore to follow without choice. We must not plead simplicity,
and say we came but behind: for if we consent, it is enough, though we be not
the foremen, Romans 1. 31. To consent to sin is cosen to the committing of
sin.
we must not only eschew those that do evil, but those also, that consent to
evil, and Ephesians 5. 7. we are charged not to be companions with them. And how
is that? David tells you, Psalm 50. 18. thou see a thief, and dostrun with
him. 1. Tim. 5. 2^. Lay hands suddenly o^no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins, Act. 7. Saul threw never a ^one at Steven, but kept the clothes of
them, that stoned him: and yet the holy Ghost brings him within the compass
of murder. And so because the Jews chose not Christ rather than Barrabas, the
spirit of God says, They killed the Lord of life, wherefore with Augustine I
say* it is evil enough to follow and consent to evil.

3 Many and few be respective words, for so it is said in one place, that David
had many How this word vulgus is to be taken.
sons. How many? seven: and in another place David is said to have a few
soldiers. How few? seven hundred. So in that respect seven are a great many,
and seven hundred a few. Again least we should think a multitude to consist
only of rude and unlearned, and poor people, we must know, that by vulgus is
me^t not only those that have chl^mydes, but those that have coronas also, not
only those, that go in round caps, but them that go in square caps also, and
we may hear as vulgar speeches of the learned, as of the unlearned. The 400.
Prophets although they were learned, yet they were a multitude, and had a lying
spirit in them. And certain it is, they never prove truly learned, that lack
religion, and the true fear of God, their wits serve them but to vulgar uses,
and to discover themselves.

4 The best things have not commonly most voices, and it is a great presumption
that Great things are not always good, and the greatest number is not always
best.
the things are the worse, if they have a common consent. This part is great,
therefore the worse, says Seneca. So Aristotle, great and good is not all one:
the first finder out of man's wisdom found out this, and always after made it
his poesy; The most the worse. He found it by the earth, seeing much
pot-earth, and little to make gold; so there is much pot-reason. And Aristotle
giving a reason of the hardest and fairest, says, first that they be so by
nature: and secondly, because of the multitude of them, that resist it. This is
a common proverb with Lawyers, such as be overcome appeal to the people. This
is espied out of the heathen, and ye^ our Christians cannot see. But let us
come to the scripture, Gal 1. 10. If I Vict^ est prouocare ad populum.
should please men, I should not be the servant of God, i. the most men. The
Angels come by two or three at the most, but the devils are said in the
scripture to come by legio^s, the scripture willing us to fly the wicked,
says fly the world, because they are the most. Hoseah compares the good to
gleaning after the harvest, then the great harvest is the devils, and a small
number the Lords. Again, seeing they are so great a number, they must have a
broad way, but it leads to destruction. Indeed it must be a great way, in the
which most must travel; and the godly have a narrow way, and therefore David
says, Lord show me thy paths, and he looks at the iournies end. In heaven
there is room enough, but hell, as Ezechiel says, must be enlarged; so
dangerous it is to follow a multitude which is always like it self, and ye
may see how judgment passes on their behalf, when it is put to them. There
was a voice put up for making a golden Calfe, and there was not one against it.
There was a voice what should be done with Jesus, and all cried, crucify him.
Another was, whether God should be God, or B^al should be God, and none held
with God but Eliah. Also whether Christ or Barrabas should be loosed, and all
chose Barrabas. And in a good matter, whether Joseph should go into the pit or
no, and all but Ruben consented he should. In religion we can grant, that
universality is no note of the truth: and if any object unto us, what, so many
Princes, so many Nobles, and yet have they not the true religion? we can
answer out of Paul: not many noble, not many mighty has the Lord chosen, but
in our life we cannot be drawn to confess the same. Wherefore let us beware
of following the multitude.

5 Particular examples may be made general instructions, when the cause of
them is general. When an example is grounded upon a general equity, then may
it be followed, but when it has some particular respect and contrary to the
general equity, it may not be followed, though it were well done. Yet that
was not well done of Zipporah, because it Circumcision by Zipporah. Exodus 4.
was the office of a man to do that she did, as appears, Genesis 17. for, in
that the Lord departed, it was rather for the faith of Moses, than that the
thing was right. So was it in the example of Simeon and Leui, who sinned: yet
had the Lord more respect of their fathers faith to crown it, than of their
sin to punish it; yet was it still sin. Therefore when we cannot do well,
as we think, because of others, as wife, friend, husband, etc: let us know
that the fault is in our selves: for if we were faithful, they should be so
far from hindering us, that even by us perhaps they might be saved. 1. Cor. 7.

6 It were a good thing to make other men our looking glass, and in their
falls and infirmities either to behold ours present, or to suspect them to
come.

7 It is not good to bind any to our examples.

8 It is evermore a safer thing to insist in the general rules than in the
particular examples. Examples in Scripture how to be followed.


9 We may not follow every good example in Scripture, and when we follow any,
we must look we have the same spirit and the like affection.

10 Many call evil good, by speaking for it, by not speaking against it, by
defending it in themselves, defending it in others, who are worse than Saul, 1.
Sam. 15. for after a while 1
he bethought himself, he confessed: but these men after they have once taken
upon them 2
to defend a sin, will defend it still, they will dwell in it, live in it,
die in it, go to hell in it. 3 4.
Proctors they are of ill causes; parasites, I would they were only in
comedies, such as sow The defense of sin. qui laudant peccatores.
pillowes, Ezech. 13. and Psalm. 10. such as they Act. 12. the voice of a God:
such as Absalom, 2. Sam. 15. that said that all matters that came before him,
were good. These persuade others to sin, either by show of reason, Genesis 3. or
by show of religion, as Absalom did, or 1
by show of stature, Ioh. 19 we have a law: by fair promises, as the devil to
Christ, all this I 2
will give thee; or by saying, ye shall find more ease, Ieroboams reason for
the Calfe, with a 3
Pilate voice; or if you will not, say as N^buchadnezzar says, you shall into
the furnace. 4
But some of these do say. 1. I never spoke word in commendation of this or
that evil matter. 5
But have ye not heard the common saying, *the thing it self speaks. The
heavens declare 6
the glory of God, Psalm. 19 and yet speak never a word: Their actions speak
louder and Res ipsa loquitur.
plainer than their tongues. These in judgment absolve Barrabas and condemn
Christ, and so bestow on the evil such things, as belong to the good. They
bestow preferments on Preferme^ts.
them, that least deserve, as Jeroboam did the Priests office on the basest
sort of the people: Simile.
and so it is in our times, for many have places both in Church and
commonwealth, which can Impedire qui potest, si non v^tat iubet. Alicna peccata
si feras, facis tua Seneca. Ambros. ad Romans 1. Sunt quidam qui se reos non
putant, si non operentur quae mala sunt, assentiunt autem facientibus,
(assentire enim est si cum possint reprehendere taceant) qui quia fomitem
praebent illorum peccatis, digni sunt vt pari crimine censeantur.
serve for nothing but to be co^sona^ts, always following the sound of their
vowels, having none of their own. 2. Some speak not against sin: when Hely
had let his sons faults pass, God said he hououred them more than him, and
God counts us honored of sin, when we see and say nothing, Psalm 50. When
thou saw a thief, etc. Though we do but stand by and look on, as Paul
did, we are made allowers of the fact: So Peter makes the Jews, Act. 4. You
have killed the Lord of life. We say the gardener is the cause that weeds do
grow, because he lets them grow: And so it may be said in Church and
commonwealth of them which will not rebuke sin, when they may, because they
will not be medlers. 3. But some have a little more care, but yet think it
sufficient to be of Gamaliels mind, Let it alone, if it be not of God it will
come to naught, loath to speak against evil; and so they see it and say
nothing. 4. Or as those which say something, but yet as good as nothing, as Ely
did ye do not well my sons: they speak as a servant to his master softly
because he would not wake him, they hit peradventure the skirt when they should
smite the head, and sometimes miss altogether, or hit those they should not.
5. Or seem to speak somewhat roundly, but be so short witted, or so short
winded, that they cannot speak much, a little they do and soon leave off, as
King Ioash, 2. King. 13. 14. 10. 11. 6. Some speak out of time, when they
first let an ill matter pass, then they speak against it. 7. But some are
worse than all these, which give men some morsel to stop their mouth, as
Aeneas is said to give Cerberus a soppe that he might not bark, or muzzle the^
that they cannot speak, taking away their tongues and livings; or prescribe
what they shall say: as Micah. 2. 11. Prophecy of wine, or as Amazias said to
Amos, Prophecy not against Israel. Amos, 7. 11. 12.

11 We must learn a Logic of the holy Ghost, Exodus ^3. 2. to answer the
topics of the world, which defend their doings by; Others do so, and
learnedner and wiser than you have d^^^ it. And indeed we must not only
forsake a multitude, but we must also add this to dissent from the traditions
of the elders. It comes all to one end: for it differs not, whether we say
many, or one great one as many for if one thing be equivalent to a multitude,
we may say as the Hebrew and the Greek do, that they are al one; ten
shillings and an angel Multi perentiunt vt gra^dines.
are all one. There be that think it is of more force many smite like hail
stones, but great men like great thunderbolts. And if we consider it well, if
one be slavish, the multitude is as a waspe, the great man like a Lion with
bloody ^eeth, and therefore of greater Potentes vt fulmina.
force. If we urge the multitude, a man may caution against them* they are but
sculles without brains: authority is a great scholar, if such a Rabbi be of
the opinion, it is not like they should be out of the way. Men commonly say,
that there are but the great matters of the Church and commonwealth to be
cared for, other matters are but rattels for children to play with: But David
prays as well for the little hills as for the great mountains; and Christ
says, we must be faithful in little, and if we cannot better one talent, the
Lord should do justice if he should put no more into our hands. Elihu supposes,
that in the Rabbis must needs be wisdom, yet after he perceives that the
greatest is not the wisest, but the inspiratio^ of the Almighty gives wisdom.
Kimkie writes, that in their colleges they suffered the younger scholars to
speak first, and to show their opinions, that they might not be oppressed with
the authority of the elders, and then afterward the Rabbis; and this order
Mal^ errate cum Pla^one quam verum dicere cum alio.
is kept in diverse Universities until this day. Many will say, I had rather
err with Plato than speak truth with another, a most profane sentence. And
mark how these men going thus against the holy Ghost do even destroy Logike
it self. For what argument is this? such a one says it, therefore I may do
it? It is not against reason? And to do that which is naught, and then to
affirm it by authority, young scholars have learned to hiss Authorem magnum
sequi est pene sape^e. A. It is rather desipere quod exemplo fit i^ iure fieri
videtur. A. The Lawyers answer videtur sed stultis.
it out, and yet our Rabbis use it themselves, and cannot learn to deny it
when it is used of others. Again in authority we know that it is required,
both that the author be not deceived (for if he be blind, the blind follows
the blind) and also that we be sure, that he will let us know the truth. But
the holy Ghost says all men are liars, and therefore they will deceive, and
our knowledge is in part, and even in that part of our ignorance may the
controversy fall out, and all our goodness is as a stained cloth, and
therefore no warrant is for us in men but in God only, who has all skill and
goodness, and therefore him we may follow, not men; and unless Christ come down
and work among us we may follow no man's example: Cursed is the man, says the
Lord, Ierm. 17. that makes flesh his arm: This Axiom and error was once in
divinity: The Pope cannot err, and therefore the curse of God was on it; we at
this day deny it, and say; Pope, Councels and Church may err. This we say and
hold in divinity, but in moral matters, wherein are most slippes, we have
let in the former Axiom. Here Protestants will set themselves up a Pope, yea
many Popes, but the curse of God remains on it; for flesh is their arm. With
great reason therefore the holy Ghost sets it down. This were plain
enough, if men had not a prodigious spirit of error in them: but for all this,
this is the fig tree still, and they that have eaten the forbidden Patres,
principes and propheiae.
fruit come hither for fig-leaues, Rabble such a one. Look through the books
of the Prophets, and you shall hear the people always answer: our fathers
did it, our Princes gave us leave, our Prophets defended it. Let us resume the
argument of the Eunuch to Micheas, he says: behold all speak good to the
King, for therein lies the force of his argnment: for it is as forcible to a
carnal man to say the King would have it so, as all the Prophets to deny it.
Now I will show you how a King was moved with this argument, that you may see
the force of it. 1. Sam. 29. David must be gone from Achish, to morrow before
day, says 1. Sam. 29 6.
the King, look you be gone. Why, says David, what have I done? thou have
done good in my sight, says the King, neither have I found any evil in thee.
Why then must I go? my Princes favor thee not, says the King, they think
thou art not good. Is that enough? David proceeds and defends himself. The
King replieth; thou art in my sight as an Angel of heaven, but the princes of
my people will have thee gone. Here the King is carried away with his Rabbis.
A strange thing that the King should thrust him out, whom his own heart
justified, for two or three sons of Beliall. Ioh. 7. they send to Christ two
or three to entrap him in his speech: they return and say, we never heard man
speak as he does: this was it only that carried them, Do any of the Scribes
and Pharisees, or of the rulers favor him? But (Ioh. 19.) ye shall see the
strangest thing of al, they would have Christ to be put to death, we have a
law, say they, by which he must dye. The mayor follows, for he made himself
the son of God, the law is Leuit. 24. So that their syllogism might seem
very good, but their minor was naught. Well the law would nothing move Pilate,
therefore they seek a new argument for Pilate, and that is: If you let him go
Pilate, you are not Caesar's friend. Presently against his own conscience he
condemns him to death. Will you not do it, why Caesar will have it so? ye
see then what force is in this Logic argument, and no doubt it will move,
unless we put off both Pilates and King Achish nature.

12 Every sin has two reasons for it, an open and a secret reason; the open is
to blind We have two reasons for sin, and we often bolsterit with authority of
great men, or example of the learned which we must not do.
the world withal: ye shall see it in Judas, his open reason was the poor:
better it is the poor should be provided for, than waste should be made: his
secret argument was the bag, he carried the bag, and paid himself for the
carrying. So that whatsoever they pretend, the secret reason is the bag. The
second argument is made out of the Smiths forge, but scholars cannot answer
it. By Diana we get our gold, says Demetrius, and therefore great is Diana:
So that Diana shall be great, if we can get by het. This is their secret
argument: profit makes it honest. Thirdly, we set down with our selves even to
consume our selves, so we may get. And for this look, 1. Sam. 23. in Saul's
oration: Hearken ye sons of I^mini, can this son of Ishai give you fields
and vineyards, and make you captains over hundreds and thousands? No, no, it
is I that can do it: and will ye then follow him? So that he that can
prefer you, or give you a field or a vineyard either in Church or
Commonwealth, him ye follow. So Balaac says to Balaam. Why come ye not when
I sent for you? am not I able to prefer you? So that is always their inward
argument, whatsoever is pretended outward. Their fourth reason is this. It is
foolish to stand against him: the King will have it so, he will have the
vineyard, so that Naboth was a fool to dye. Let us come to the open reasons
for sin, which are two: Commandment to do the sin, or example for it;
commandment from them in authority, example from the learned: for
commandment you shall see it in Esaias. 36 Rabsakah his commandment, the King
says so, he bid* me do it. Now if he had spoken this of David as he did of
Rabsakah a most wicked wretch, yet had it not been enough for his warrant. For,
if that were sufficient, then were it enough to slay Amon at Absolons
commandment, and as soon as the servants shall have taken witness that
their master gave them leave or bad them they might kill Amon, they might do
it; and because Iesabel commands to slay Naboth, the Elders may by this
reason lawfully slay him, if they be so wise as to keep Iezabels letters to
show for themselves. And if Plato could say, that the Commonwealth is like a
fish, that perishes first at the head, and as a cunnies skin that strippeth
off easily, until it come at the head, and there stays; so always
reformation stays there. The second argument, which is example, ye shall
find, Ierem. 18. The Jews being reproved of Jeremy say, Come, let us imagine
somewhat against him, let us smite him with the tongue. Why? Counsel shall
not perish from the Priests: We follow them, therefore we cannot err. Can my
Lord Pashur not know this, and shall it be revealed to this Jeremy? So in the
Gospel: Can Caiphas and Annas not know this Christ, and shall we receive him?
Nicodemus was learned, and said, you may not condemn this man: Oh: say they,
you must look better on your book: Caiphas he says, you are stark fools,
and see nothing, better it is that one die, than the people perish. Look what
the statutes of Omrie will afford, and Achab suffer, so far God shall be
served: but if Caesar bid me do no more, God shall have no more. At the first
coming to Balaac Balaam thrice sets down a good proposition, I would we
could follow it; I would not for this house full of gold do otherwise: he
thought by keeping this good rule to have been preferred by the King. But the
King says to him, go your ways, I had thought to have preferred you: and
afterward for less than half a house full of gold he wills the King to
mingle harlots with the children of Israel, so to cause them to sin. And this I
see to be general in men, that if they press not, and guide not their
affections by the word, they will carry them away.

13 Every sin has a small beginning. First the devil will crave of us to
yield him It is not good to smother sin whiles it is young.
but a little, but in the end he will come further. He will, and so will his
champions at the first bind us with a little cord, that we may break when we
list: but in the end it grows to a rope, and then we cannot break it. Moses
would not yield for one hoof, because he had no commandment for it. A
marvelous strange fellow, will he not yield a little? what not for so little
as for an hoof? why men think it nothing to yield a little, de minimis non
^urat lex. But a great matter is made of a little prick, and a great tree will
arise of a little mustard seed.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Examination of our selves, and of all things by their issues:
and how to govern the Eyes.
IF when God does cross us with punishments, we do not examine the whole
process of our proceedings and imaginations, we profit not.

2 We must search our own hearts carefully, how well soever others report of
us: for we may speak of our selves of knowledge, when others do speak of
charity.

3 If we will truly examine our selves, then let us set our selves before the
Lord, who shall and will examine quick and dead: for to him we must render a
just account, and then let us tremble and fear, and so try whether the Lord
does allow of our doing: if he do, and we have a warrant out of his word, then
may Heart.
we have comfort though trouble come thereof. But if we cannot tremble nor
cannot see our hearts, and if the Lord look not to us, to show us our hearts,
we have to fear and know that our cause is not right. Therefore when we will
effectually perform this duty, let us set Gods fear before us, which may
subdue our affections and reasons, otherwise our affections will control us,
and our reason will carry away our hearts, which in it has many starting
holes. But if we feel that our affections are subdued, and that our reason
will Affection.
subscribe to those things that are contrary thereto: then let us try our
work by the word; whereto if it be agreeable, then will the Lord allow of it,
though not as perfect, yet in his son Christ. This is the way to raise us
when we are fallen, to strengthen us when we stand, and ever to maintain the
peace of our consciences.

4 It is a blessed rule, to learn to judge our selves, that we be not judged
of the Lord, if we (considering any sin in us) then straightway by the word
learn to amend it. But if we do it not, then certainly the Lord will judge
either in this world, or in the world to come: for sin cannot be allowed, but
must needs be judged. Then if we by Gods spirit be not Sin must have
judgment.
taught to judge our selves, and so to lament our sins, we cannot prevent
Gods judgment, but the Lord will take the cause into his own hands; and then
if we be his, he will not cease till he has brought us to him; and if we
belong not to him, then will it be corruption in our bones, till it has
consumed us.

5 Job. chap. 21. from the seventh verse. to the fourteenth, does describe the
vain conversation Gregor.
and merry li^es (as they say) of impious men. Whereon an old writer says
thus: O Moral.
Job, thou have well described the life of wicked men: now let us hear what is
their end, O Job been enumerasti vitam impr^borum: dic finem quaeso.
whereby we be taught to have a special respect to the end. Philosophy
teaches us to judge of every motion, by the term or point wherein it tends:
we may not so much regard the way, for a man may go through a fair ci^^e to
execution, and that is an ill motion. And again a man may go to a feast
through a blind lane, and this we count a good T^^minum ad quem.
motion. It is our common proverb, That is well which ends well. We must
therefore carefully examine the end of all our ways: A man may go for a time
by the gallerie of Simile.
merry devices, but they help not long, for the end of them is judgment.
Eccles. 11. In the Non qua sed quo.
latter end, we shall see all vain delights come to judgment. Now therefore
let us prevent that judgment (as we be warned) by judging our selves, and the
continual meditations of judgment. This is a medicine whereby if we profit,
it is bitter and wholesome Judgment.
as the treacle: but if we do not, it is a poison bitter and deadly. Let us
remember judgment in the midst of the desires of our hearts, and delights of
our eyes. How we must order our eyes.


6 Let us learn how to order our eyes: for we know in what case Cham was, when
he saw his fathers nakedness. Such are the senses as are the thoughts that
arise by them. The eye is not evil, but we judge of it by the effects, Prou.
17. 1. 1. Sam. 18. Prou. 3. Psalm. 101. 5. if good things can clear thy sight,
use them. Let us make conscience of our eyes: our Savior Noli mihi dicere
pudicum oculum impudicum cor.
Christ says, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: if thou do not use
thine eye well, thou will wish thou had plucked it out in good earnest, make
conscience of motes, Mat. 7. Job says, I have made a covenant with mine eyes.
Psalm. 119 part. 5. Lord turn away mine eyes, least they behold vanity.
Lament. 3. Jeremy cries out, Death has entered into my soul (as) by
windows. And again, Mine eye is my Death* David's song is to be noted: Thy
judgments are ever in my sight. God commanded Lot that he should not look
back to Sodom: but Abraham Oculus videns non videt.
looked toward it, and he saw the smoke ascend. Let us keep our minds well
exercised, and our eyes may go whether they will: for then the eye in seeing
sees not, the mind sees, and the mind hears. But if a man be inwardly
affected, as David was, after his afternoon sleep, we think of things that
never were nor shall be. And yet otherwhiles though a man be in great
contemplation, yet such is our corruption, that if there 1. Impera, 2. Cave. 3.
Tutus eris. 4. Tutior si lignum non aspexeris.
stand an evil thing before us, we must needs look on it. Therefore we had
need make a covenant with our eyes, that is the surest way. We will end this
with that good counsel: Govern thy self, take heed, and be safe: but yet
more safe, if thou do not fasten thine eye upon the tree of life.

7 That we may the better know ourselves, let us learn also to examine and
know our sins well, which are often cloked and covered under nature and
grace: We do not fall at the first into gross sins, but by degrees, as
Christ reckoning the retentiues, Matthew, 22. which keep us from the means, as
farms, oxen, marriage, etc. And Paul reckoning the works of darkness,
peradventure would not satisfy a carnal man in his computation, he makes
mention of banquetings, feastings, etc. These things seem lawful, but
certainly and of a truth, sin lies hidden in them, and these things may turn
to our ruin. Sin is a cunning and skillful suitor, she plays as Harlots,
who seeing and observing the gravity and modesty of former ages, as though
they were very demure matrons, would not at Romans 13. 13.
the first show their faces, as we may see in Thamar: but the world grows
bigger and prouder in sin, they began to withdraw their vailes, and were not
ashamed to become shameless and impudently bold. So sin at the first
modestly insinuates herself unto us, under the veil of things lawful, which
no man can deny, until having by little and little corrupted us, she does
boldly uncover her self in things unlawful unto us. And that she might find
the more courteous entertainment at our hand, she comes not alone, but either
she gets into the company of nature, or she creeps into familiarity with
grace: that being with these, for her companions sake at the least, she may
not have repulse. As Achab said, so says she, I would not have come hither,
but for Iehosaphat. For we know it often comes to pass, that we are content
to admit and receive some for their companions sake, who if they came alone
should scarsely be welcome at our hands. This sin knows well, and
therefore sometimes she comes hand in hand with nature, that is, in such
behavior as naturally we like and are affected with; as sometimes in joys, if
we be of a lighter mould; sometime in grief, if we be of a sadder sod:
sometime she comes cheek by cheek with grace, as our Savior Christ shows
us, hypocrisy, to come in prayer, fasting, Note.
and almesgiuing, etc. It is not like that Solomon at the first lept into
idolatry, nay by degrees his heart was stolen away with the immoderate and
excessive use of things, in their own use and nature lawful. And therefore
the Saints of God have rather chosen to sit a little on this side of them, than
to iumpe and iustle hard by them; as we may see in Timothy and in Elias, 1.
King. 19. who was feign twice to be called upon by the Angel to rise up and
eat Solomon did begin to build, yea he began to build the Lords house, 2.
King. 6. and 7. etc. and yet (as all good writers agree) excessive building was
the beginning of his falling away. He was building the Lords house seven
years, but in building his own house he was thirteen years. This growing
in proportion, when he would exceed the Lords work, this drawing out of his
building was the only thing that the Scriptures have left unto us, as a note
of his falling away, to teach us that by the use even of lawful things our
hearts be Heb. 3 12. 13.
seduced, and by degrees hardened to fall away from the living God. For if we
love a thing excessiuely, our love grows to lust, and our lust draws on to
the often use, and brings on custom, custom at the length brings necessity.
Thus when we find too much relief Villa.
in things, we fall in such a love with Egypt, and in such a disliking of
Canaan, that we will never depart, but we will still dwell by our fleshpots.
Well then we say thus, the farm is no sin: but when the farm holds us
back from grace, and the means of grace, then is it sin unto us.

CHAP. XXV. Of the exercises of religion, fasting, etc. and of the careful use
of the means at all times.
WE must not tarry to fast until the trumpet be blown, and the bell be rung:
He means for religious fasts: and not gainsaying any thing the civil fasts
commanded by law for navigations sake
but we must fall down at the trumpet of Gods word, and at the bell of our
guilty conscience: for without this private exercise we are but hypocrites in
public fasts.

2 Our holy days may be the fittest and most convenient times for fasting
days: because we may then best redeem the time in resting from our calling.

3 All our exercises in godliness must principally respect two things: first,
Gods glory: secondly, our edification and increase of faith and repentance:
otherwise to our selves they are vain and fruitless.

4 Albeit the Lord has appointed ordinary causes, yet he has reserved in
his own sovereign and jurisdiction, the staff of them, the virtue, infusion,
and working of them. For as the Physician prescribing a medicine made with
wine, it is not the bare wine which nourishes, though it be the instrument to
convey the more principal thing unto us, but it is the thing steeped in the
wine that works: so although we have things ministered unto us by the best
means, unless the Lord put in his staff, all is vain. For as we may see
Simile.
some fed with cordial and nutritive meats, notwithstanding labor of a
consumption: so Means.
we shall see others sed with water-grewell, and yet to be very well
nourished. On this manner God works with the means, and thus he can work
without the means: because the Lord would show that he reserueth a power
beyond means. Although he established all things in a mutual course, yet he
brought forth every thing without means: so the light was created the first
day, the Sun the fourth day. Men seeing their corn not to grow, cry for
rain, but herbs and fruits grew before rain. True it is that we look for
things ordinarily now by means, but they began without means: as God making
man The apish imitation of popery in the coniuring of holy water with salt is
ridiculous.
at the first without seed, now will increase them by seed, his blessing
being with his ordinance, and not else. But behold a further thing, God works
not only by means and without means, but also contrary to all means. Christ
when he would restore sight to the blind man, does it with that means which
(we think) would put out a man's eyes, and blind the sight of him that can see:
whereby he shows that even contrary things obey him. Eliah 1. King. 4. to
make salt water sweet, puts salt into them. Such is the power of our God,
who brings light out of darkness, which is the destruction of the light. Use
the exercises of religion for spiritual comfort. etc not for ostentation, etc.


5 As natural men use Gods creatures to stir up a natural comfort: so
spiritual men must use spiritual means for spiritual comfort. For all things
which have a singular good use, may have a singular abuse: wherefore we must
use sanctified things with sanctified hearts, least abusing holy things, we be
given over to a vain mind.

6 When the Lord will have a thing come to pass, he will also grant the
means: so when the Lord will make his people gracious, he will give them good
Ministers and wise Magistrates, and so make them to be feared of their enemies.
Again, when the Lord will make a people odious, he will power contempt upon
Princes, and take wisdom away from the Ministers. Where we see what need we
have to pray for our Ministers and Magistrates. Again, we see that if we
would be gracious and in favor with any, we must look that we have such
things in us as may procure their favor: as when that Timothy was exhorted to
be without blame, his virtues were rehearsed. For the graces of God must only
make us gracious: but if we have not received them, no cause why we should be
gracious.

7 What promise soever we have of God, we must wholly rest on that without
distrust: and yet must we use the lawful means which he has appointed, least
we tempt him.

8 We must learn not to tempt God, for it is not of faith to omit any means,
that may Tote^pt God in neglecting the use of means.
help us out of danger, yet must we apply our means to God, and not put our
trust in them, but in God: which we may try by this, if our hearts be as
careful to feel the forgiveness of sins, to hear the word, to use prayer,
Sacraments, and admonition, as we b^ to be delivered from our troubles, then
have we a testimony of a sound heart: but if we be careless of these, and yet
in trouble will leave no means unattempted, then we may well judge that our
heart is more set on earthly than heavenly things, and we be as yet more
carnal than spiritual.

9 If we have lawful means to get our living we must use them; if we do,
and yet want, we must still depend on God. Likewise in sickness when we may
use the Physician it is well* but if he cannot be had, or if we cannot recover
health by his means, then must we not despair, but depend upon the Lord. So
when the Lord gives us his word, we may not look for revelations, but use it
while we have it: but if the word be taken away, then may we be well assured,
that he will use some means to instruct us. So not despayring when we have not
the means, and ascribing all honor to God when we have them (as Moses taught
the Israelites) we shall be more ready to glorify him in our suffering,
being well assured that thus he deals with us, that he may more speedily and
richly crown our sufferings. And thus does our Savior Christ reason with
Peter, when he drew his sword to defend Christ being but a private man, saying,
Cannot my father send legions of Angels for my defense? as if he said, use no
unlawful means to defend me: for if my father would that I should be
delivered from these, he would also send lawful means to bring the same to
pass: but seeing he depriueth me of all means, and does not work
extraordinarily for my defense, it is his pleasure that I by suffering should
work your deliverance: wherefore I am contented so to do. In like manner did
the three children answer the King: The Lord can aeliuer us, yet if he will
not, we will suffer according to his pleasure. If we could exercise A good
meditation against impatience.
our selves well in this and like good meditations, we might be kept by Gods
grace from murmuring, and laarne to rest patiently on the good will and
pleasure of the Lord.

10 This is the way we must use in trouble: first to seek counsel of God in
his word, then to give our selves to fervent prayer, and after to use the
means which God has appointed, not trusting in them. This did Jacob when he
was to pacify his brother Esau at his return, and thus did the Israelites at
the red sea, they prayed and then they assayed to go through the sea, and
prevailed to the confusion of all their enemies.

11 We must use the means, yet such as are most safe, and nearest hand, which
if they will not prevail, then may we go yet further: but when we use the
means, then also we go to the Lord, otherwise the Lord will infatuate us in
the means, or make them unprofitable; as in Asa, because he being sick, sought
first to the Physicians, and not to the Lord, he dyed thereon. So we see in
Josiah, who though he were a good man, yet because he went to war without the
counsel of the Lord, was slain in the same battle. So is it Judge. 20. they
which had a good cause, were twice overcome in war, because they sought not
to the Lord, but when they sought to him by prayer, Being truly humbled in a
religious fast
then they overcame. Contrarily we see in Ezekiah and other Kings, that
because they prayed to the Lord, and then sought other means, the Lord gave
them notable victories. Otherwise he may deprive us of the knowledge of the
means, or if we have them, yet he will make them without fruit. First then we
must prevail with God by faith and prayer, before that by means we can well
prevail against our enemies. Many wanting this good course, and trusting to
their own wits, and such like, have failed of all their purposes. Wherefore
when we have used the means and be not helped, we must consider that we have
not used the right means; or if we had them, we have used them amiss; or if
we have used them rightly, yet let us consider that our sins have deserved
that we should not profit by them.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the government of the Eyes.
GReat complaint is made of the wickedness of these days, and all the blame
is laid upon the heart. I think indeed it deserves a great part of it, but
the sight of the eye is not to be excused: for the heart is a spring, and has
spouts to send out as a conduit, and pipes wherewithal it is fed, which may
be gathered out of the nature of the holy tongue, where one word Gnain Oculum
and fontem significat.
signifies both an eye and a spring, and it is as commonly taken for the one
as for the other: and therefore Hierome calls the eyes the streams or springs
of lust. Though the heart had no pipes to convey in, yet it would ouerflow,
such is the measure and abundance of corruption which lies in it, breaking The
eyes springs of lust As of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, so of
the abundance of the senses the heart thinks.
forth continually. It is not only true, that from the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks, the hand works, etc. but also from the abundance of the
senses, the heart thinks. Therefore as the tongue must be blamed and that
justly, so the eyes ought to weep, because of the evil which they convey unto
the heart; and so much the rather, for that the tongue does disclose what evil
proceeds into it, but the eye keeps it close, which is a thing more
perilous. Again, the sight of the eye stirs up the thoughts of the heart,
though they be a sleep, when as good things should rather be conveyed by the
eye into the heart, seeing no goodness grows there naturally.

2 The eye is such a thing, that the Scriptures speaking of it, by a synecdoche
(as we say) under this one sense, it comprehends all other things of the same
kind: as under one principal thing bidden or forbidden in the Decalogue, many
other inferior things of the same kind, be either commanded or inhibited. I
will never believe, when David prayed that his eyes might be turned from
beholding of vanity, that he was negligent touching his ears, and regarded
not that they should be open to hear what they would. And there is no sense to
think, that when Job made a covenant with his eyes, he had no care of his
ears. But both of these were holy men, and were acquainted with the di^lect of
the holy Ghost. It is a rule in policy: To watch on all sides, where assault
is made on all sides. And Note.
for as much as we stand in the midst to be assaulted with principalities, and
not only with spiritual wickednesses, but also with worldly wickedness in every
sense, and power of the mind, we ought to defend all ports, and make all the
commandments as Ampliare praecepta.
large as we can: for we know that in a city if one gate be open, it is as
good that all be open. For at one gate it may be taken. So that all the senses
ought to be kept, but especially the eye, Simile.
which order is in the commandments. For though in every commandment God does
but name one sin, yet it is captain sin, and a general sin. And surely
from the senses corruptions are drawn indifferently, yet from the eye most of
all. Take an example, let a man see a strange punishment of God for any sin,
and he is moved: but let relation of it be made unto him, and half the
efficacy thereof is lost. But indeed the example of all examples to make short
is this: The joys of heaven, which are to be revealed to the children of God,
let them be told and preached, as they are preached and Vna gutta, limbus
tantum. Matthew. 17.
taught, it is a marvel to see how soon we are a sleep, yet the least
sight of it seen of the Apostles, did drive them into an ecstasy. Besides,
this sense moves so much the more, in that it goes to work immediately, but
the ear goes to work by means, and stands upon credit, or else it will
not believe, and this credit stands to be examined, and it may light upon
such an examiner as Thomas was. Secondly it is soon gone, though we hear it
never so well, yet we desire to see it. The eye pierces most of all, as we may
see in Jacob, for although he had heard of the estate of Joseph, yet his heart
wauered: but when he saw the chariots it wrought something, and his conclusion
was, I will go down and see Joseph. This is the end of all the senses, to end
in this sense.

3 This is general, that the eye is most forcible to sin, now let us show
that it is most More dangerous to see than to hear evil.
forcible to move to sin. It is dangerous to hear, but ten times more
dangerous to see, for then the means be strengthened: and though the means be
but small, yet there is such a tinder in our nature that it will soon take
fire, and if the eye be dark, a general darkness comes over the whole
body. The beginning of this is to be seen, Genes. 3. Simile.
in the talk between the Serpent and the woman. She sees the tree to be
fair and beautiful, Tinder.
the eye had offended, before the apple went down her throat Therefore one of
the Fathers says, Pluck out that eye: and they note further, that because by
the eye came the greatest hurt, therefore God has placed in the eye the
greatest token of sorrow, for from them come tears. This may be seen in
covetousness, as in Achab, who looking through The covetous eye.
the window saw the vineyard of Naboth, and straight he would have had it, and
if he could have had it by law, he would have bought it. But, because Naboth
would not sell it him, Iezabel would give it him. For adultery is too plain:
for the eye is always the broker, The adulterous eye.
as we see both in Sichem and David. This word, they saw, came always
between this sin and the heart. For idleness and negligence, Ecces. 11. it is
said, he that observes the The eye of idleness.
wind, he shall never be good sower, nor good harvest man. For apparel,
Ezech. 23. 16. the Israelites saw an Assyrian in his painted apparel, and
would needs have the like: so The eye of pride.
that the eye is that which makes the bargain. We say commonly, let us go
see it, the sight of it will do us no harm. This is the devils policy to
persuade us, that there is no danger in that which may most entangle us: we see
how it prevailed in Adam, when he was content to see, and that was Satan's
means, when he tempted Christ to show him all the kingdoms of the world. Well,
we see what danger there is in the senses, and specially in the eye.

4 There is in every man since Adams fall the devils promise fulfilled, that
their eyes should be opened: and this as it was the first punishment, so it was
not the least: and besides this, it is an argument of folly: for Solomon
says, A fools eyes are in all the corners of the world, and a wise man's eyes
are in his head. I looked into the streets, Proverb. 7. and saw a young man,
etc. Look what objects our eyes do see, such are our actions, as it is said
of Jacobs sheep looking on the rods, they brought sorth young colored like
the rods, not Simile.
like themselves: so our actions are like the objects of our eyes. The eye
goes before, and brings the heart after: and as Solomon says, he knows not
that there is a snare. And what follows? even that which Gregory says, that
the innocent beholding, becomes Innocens intuitu^, aspectu fit nocens, quicquid
placet sensui non potest non placere.
nocent or hurtful by sight: and his reason is, for what he beheld
unadvisedly, he cannot forsake willingly: and he adds yet another reason of
this, for that which pleases the sense, best likes us. Here is a sensual
appetite: for as where the pain is, there is the hand: so where our love is
fastened, there our eye is fixed. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, what
then? Surely as this was the first degree of walking, the heart followed the
eye: so is Vbi dolor, ibi manus.
it the second degree, as says Gregory. He that uses the outward eye
negligently, has a blind eye within: and it is a or sound.
second consequent, the heart being corrupted, it does corrupt Vbi amor ibi
oculus.
the eye: for the heart will lead the eye to seek all manner of evil sights
for it. So we become such as are mentioned, Numb. 7. As go after their own
eyes.

3 Again, Gregory here says: Consider what a shame it is for men to sin in
that from Of apparel.
which women are commanded to abstain. The Apostle uses a word, strange and
seldom Bernard, omnia pulcherima ipsi cum sint turpissimi.
used in those that writ since the Apostles time, it is to note the strangenes
of apparel. The law of nature condemns it. Augustine says, He that
exceeds the bounds of custom in outward things, is a very wicked man.
Ezech. 23. we see the judgment of God upon them, for looking on strange
apparel. Zephan. 2. 1. God, says he, will sit in judgment Himatismos.
upon the Kings sons, and then what shall become of the base people? And thus
much for the fashion, now for the cost: for the Apostle forbids also costly
or precious apparel. He that breaks into these expenses of apparel, more
than is beseeming Poluteles.
his state, he is Costly apparel.
a thief. There is yet a third thing (...) we must think that he meant by
this Oi^on^m^^.
the putting on of apparel. It is that whereof a Father speaks, They pray
for one minute, and be an whole hour in attyring themselves. And yet we have
renounced this in our Baptism with all the vanities of the world, which the
sons of Beliall must invent, and we must practice. To conclude, note one
thing in Saint Barnards sermon which he made upon the celebration of S. John
Baptists day, where he speaks to his auditorie on this wise: Whose memory
do ye celebrate this day? Is this ^one in vain delight, or show of gay
attire? what is t^^^ to John? what, Prayer.
you would have us go in John Baptists coat? I wish not that thou be like
him i^ attire, but yet Imo non cupio ^ffe idem, cupio n^ iis contrarius.
I would not you should be flat contrary. Finally, this is the accusation of
Corah and his company, Numb. 16. What will ye pull Gods Prophets eyes out of
their heads? ^o, but we would have them used to the glory of God, as all the
members ought to be.

6 The Seraphins were full of eyes, betokening they see every way some thing to
glorify God. Though other men have indulgencie for their sight, yet the sons
of the Prophets are called seers for the use of their eyes, they must needs use
them. The high places were frequented of the Prophets and Patriarchs that from
them they might see meadows full of grass, fields full of corn, rivers,
towns, and many things, to consider the greatness and Prophets.
goodness of God, that beholding these they might be drawn as David was, into
that meditation, What is man? and as Christ in beholding the lillies, are ye
not much better than they? Matthew. 6. 20.
These hills had this good use at the first, but afterward they were used to il
practices. There was not one of the Prophets that used not this help. Things
past and present (says one) Praeterita and praesentia sunt vmbrae futurorum.
are shadows of things to come. And no doubt though they had special
revelation, yet they used the view of their present estates, and did in
wisdom foresee many things, and we, if we laid well our estates with them,
might be more wise to foresee things to come. The Prophets.
Prophets had their notes wherein they did insert those actions which they saw
in their times, and so they made use of that they saw; besides the reading of
histories, which is also lawful and commended in Assuerus, and Daniel 11.
Augustine makes two questions: What went ye out into the wilderness to see?
water changed into wine? this ye may see and not go thither. Or went ye not
to see the bush burn and not consume? as you may see the The ordinari^ works
of Gods providence most admirable, if we would consider them daily. Psalm.
Malach. 3. 16.
water turned into wine without the desert, in that the Lord brings it
through the vine tree: so this also ye may see daily great fires made to
consume the Church, and it perishes not. What went ye into the histories to
see? There are as great things (says he) in our days done for the Church by
Constantine, as has been before time; there are now as great abominations, as
strange judgments, and so sufficient in every age to prove the Lords arm is
not shortened, and to confirm us in Gods promises, if all the histories in the
world were burnt. If we did (as God keeps a bottell for our tears, and a
book of remembrance for our good works) keep an Ephemerides of the actions
of our time: we might say with David, I never saw the godly begging their
bread: I have seen the wicked flourish, and I beheld again, etc. Thus we
might come by good experience. It is said for her commendation, that she is the
mistress of fools, for that she teaches very plainly. Again, howsoever
Aristotle says, Hearing is the sense of learning, and of wisdom; yet the eye
is the sense of certeaintie: The eye the sense of certainty.
God said therefore, I will go down and see. God saw, says the Scripture. The
wise men say in the Gospel, Let us go to Bethlehem to see. The Apostle Thomas
is discommended for not believing, till he saw and felt; and Mary is commended
for her quick believing: But Plus mihi profuit dubitatio Thomae, quam
credulitas Mariae.
a man compassed with infirmity, may say with Gregorius Magnus. Thomas
doubting has more profited me, than Mary's believing. If we could well see we
should eschew that foolish question, How comes it to pass, that these days
are worse than the former times? which Solomon says, is folly to ask. The
sight of some present judgments are an amazing without knowledge of some of
the former times, and they of the former times doubtful without these. So
there are two uses of this, prudence, and certainty: The third use is,
Prudentia and certitudo.
that the workers of vanity may know that they are seen, which thinking they
are not, say in their secret hearts, who sees? they think they walk in a
cloud, but this would restrain them from much wickedness. But there are two
sorts of the contrary, the one of them that will not set themselves to
inquire, what is amiss, as those that follow Absalom and Ishmael. There be
others that see and will not, as the soldiers: the other are blind, these
blind themselves and the people. There must be one Elias to see, and that to
keep the wicked in awe. To conclude this with Augustine, grant me this one
simple request, which is, that you would come and see, and yet after ye shall
examine it, ye shall find that there is not any one greater thing to be
respected.

CHAP. XXVII. Of faith, justification by faith, of justice, and just men, and
of feeling.
THere is a general faith, that is common to the godly with the wicked, and a
particular faith: the general faith believing that God is, and that he is such
a God as he is manifested to be in his word: the particular faith more nearly
applies the things spoken of God to our selves. This particular, is either of
the Law or of the Gospel: of the Law as an active faith, of the Gospel as a
passive faith. That I call active, which apprehends that which the Law
promises, that is, if we keep every jot of the Law, and continue in it, we
shall live by it. That I call a passive faith which apprehends that, which
the Gospel offers, that is righteousness done by another, and imputative,
not done by us as inherent, as when we seek the doing of the Law not within
our selves, but without our selves, believing it to be done by another, which
we so through faith do attain as if we should fulfill the Law in our own
persons. The active faith was in Adam; and it may be in the devil Faith active
and passive.
and most wicked; and yet none of them having the justifying faith: for Adam
knew, that so long as he kept the will of God, he should live, who at that time
had not passive nor justifying faith, because as it was needless, so it was
unknown to him, no sin as yet being committed: and therefore no obedience of
any other Mediator for the forgiveness of sin required. The devils may have
this, to believe that had they not broken the law of God, they should have
lived and not have seen damnation: so may also the wicked believe; and yet
because neither of these do believe, that they shall be justified before God
by the righteousness of another, covering their unrighteousness, they have
not the true justifying faith. The active faith is either of the justice of
God, or of his judgments: of his justice either in bidding good things, or in
forbidding evil things: of his judgments either in promising life to the
obedient, or in threatening death to the disobedient. The passive faith
respects both the end, which is salvation it self, and the means which
bring unto the end: the end as to believe, that Christ Jesus is made of God to
us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: the means, as the
right use of the word, prayer, and Sacraments, etc.

2 They which believe not Gods word and holy promises, cannot perceive when he
fulfilleth them: Moses believing the promises of the Manna before, did behold
and consider of the truth of all Gods promises when he saw them performed: but
the Israelites Cause of unthankfulness.
not beholding it before, now when God performed it, they knew not what it
meant This we see in the threatenings of God, which when they are not believed,
then if the Lord strike such with sickness, etc. they think it is fortune, or
some other chance, and so profit nothing by it. And so when the Lord helps
out of any danger, and we believe not his promise, made to us before; then we
attribute it to physic, or some other means, and so are never thankful.

3 If we cannot rest by faith in the favor of God, though we want outward
things, it Contentation.
is certain that we never truly esteemed the favor of God: and those never
felt truly the forgiveness of their sins, which having it, cannot be content
to forgo other things: we must then learn to rest in the favor of God
whatsoever it brings with it.

4 This is true faith when we yield to the word and believe it, though we feel
not the Experimenall faith.
effect: for when we believe after experience, this is experimental and has
not such commendations. And this is so also in the threatenings, when we measure
them not by our senses: but when we hear him threaten us for some sin which
is in us, then we certainly believe that he will punish, and therefore we
tremble and study to prevent that wrath. And as we prevent the threatenings, by
giving credit to the bare word: so that is true faith Faith and feeling.
in the promises when we believe them, though we feel not the effect: for
feeling is the effect of faith. Therefore when we are in misery, even then
hearing and recording Gods promises, we must believe them and rest in them,
though we feel not present comfort. And this is the cause why we cannot see
God when he accomplisheth his promise, because at the first we did not believe
his word when we heard it. And this is the cause that sinners cannot yield when
they are punished, but do make a stumbling block of that which should lead
them to repentance. And this is the cause that any of Gods children do profit
in humility before God by afflictions, because they first gave some credit to
the word, though in much weakness and dulnes. But the wicked are so by the
devil bewitched, that they can profit nothing by their afflictions, because
they first hardened their hearts against the word.

5 Noah, Job, Zachary, Cornelius were just men, but we must know the two
Courts of Ius ce^sorium. Ius praetoriu^.
Justice: The first is the Kings Bench, where ye have strict justice, the
other is the Chancerie, Two courts of justice.
where there is a mittigation of that strict course of justice. In the first
court there is none found just; in the second court of acceptance, some are
accepted for just men By his strict justice God requires that we keep all the
commandments, that we have but one end, that we never swerve from God. In his
court of acceptance he requires first, that we have an endeavor to keep all,
a full purpose to have respect to all; to flatter our selves in no sin, but
being told of it, to be ready to lament: this God for his Christ accepts
for obedience to all his commandments. Secondly, for our end if we have a
general intent, though we fail in some, God judges the less by the greater.
Thirdly, if we be willing to lose in sundry cases our goods, and all we have,
rather than displease God. Fourthly, God accepts for continuance, if we
strive to continue, if we fall yet seldom, and rise quickly, and run more
swiftly. In respect of our neighbor, God accepts us, if we keep our
vocation, till for the further benefit of the Church we be called for.
Secondly, if we be ready to commend good things in others as well as in our
selves: and for that no man can be wholly loved, every one having many evil
things in himself, if when and where sin cease, our hatred also cease, and
that we be ready also to give him our helping hand to pull him out. In the
courts of men we may say boldly some men are just, of whom the Scripture says,
they were just in their generation, when they with whom they lived had nothing
to lay to their charge, and if they write a book against them, they might (as
Job says) carry it on their foreheads. And God judges now by Christ, and he
is the Mediator.

6 Faith teaches us to judge of things not according to the show, but
according to the end: for it sees what kind of pleasure brings sorrow, and
what kind of sorrow brings joy in the end. If Moses having the word in
Egypt but by traditions, yet had a clear judgment of things by faith, how
much more ought we to strive to this end, which have the word clearly revealed
unto us?

7 In persecution it is the chiefest grace of faith, to suffer death for the
truth, if need require: but if we cannot attain to this, yet to forsake all
that we have: and to fly rather than to communicate with the wicked Idolaters,
and to dwell with false worshippers, yeeldes a good testimony of a true faith.
For so Christ and his Apostles did, yet some may better fly than others.

8 Every faith is not a justifying faith, but that which continues in
temptation, and Persecution*
brings fruit in patience. Wherefore let none presume on his faith till he
see it tried by temptation.

9 Moses had a weak faith, yet was he careful to be strengthened, and
therefore fled to the Lord for succor: So must we in all our doings and
troubles repair unto the Lord by prayers, so that we come in reverence,
keeping measure, willing to be satisfied, and trusting in the grace which the
Lord gives us.

10 By faith we have the right use of Gods blessings, and by unbelief we are
deprived of the benefit of them, yea they are often turned to our hurt, if we
observe not the rules that God has given. Desire we then to have the pure use
of Gods blessings? let us by ^aith receive them, set our hearts upon God that
gave them, not seeking our own praise, applying them to the benefit of our
brethren. If we have this testimony when we want them, we shall have joy,
because we used them well whiles we had them. But if we be in want, and then
remember we had them before, and our consciences tell us, that we have abused
them, this will deprive us of all comfort, and increase our sorrow.

11 The more familiarly God comes near us, the more we go from him. It is
the To see by faith the secret blessings and curses of God on man in this life.
great mercy of God, to see by faith the inward and spiritual blessings of
Gods elect, and by faith to see the secret curse of God in the wicked.

12 The forgetting of the work of God, either in our selves or in others, is
the decay of faith.

13 If God watch over us when we sleep in unbelief, much more will he do it
when we wake in faith. Decay of fath.


14 He that believes in many means, will also believe without In adversity.
means: Gods benefits are as vailes between him and us. Note.


15 The children of God may ask of the Lord their doubts, so that they
observe: first, that we hold our selves within the compass of Gods truth,
which we must do generally, though we cannot see a particular thing by reason.
Secondly, that we come to ask with Doubts.
reverence and fear. Thirdly, that we do not so much dispute with God, as
power out our supplications before him. Fourthly, that we be willing to be
resolved, and not willing to continue in, nor nourish a doubt in us. Fifthly,
neither must we look for miracles, but be content that the Lord will give us
by his word the certainty of his most holy will.

16 There are three things whereby we may know whether we be in the right way
or no, and they be precious and dear in the sight of them that have a care to
please God. The first is their gross temptations: for many trusting to good
talk, good ed^cation, 1
good company, and thinking themselves well settled, are content to rest in
these means, Three notes of Gods favor.
and travel not to see their inward corruptions, and privy temptations, which
if they be burdensome unto us, and make us (as it were) sick to carry them,
it is a good token. The second thing is by marking our affections, if we love
nothing so much as the favor 2
of God, fear nothing so much as the loss of it, having found it, if we
carefully keep it; and having lost it, if we be never quiet till we recover
it, being content to want all Note.
things to have it, not staying in the possession of all things if we want it,
this is a good sign: for it is good to know the state of our affections,
because, look where willingly Affection.
they rise and rest, there is our state to be seen. Thirdly, we may comfort
our selves (if we 3
fear God) in prosperity, as well as in adversity, and love God in
adversity, as well as in prosperity. For every man can fear him under the
cross, as Pharaoh, Saul, and Balaam, and every man can praise God in
abundance, as who praised him more than Jobs wife in prosperity?

17 As a man's desire to any thing grows or decreaseth; so does his endeavor
and labor Desire.
for the means. If thy desire be strong, then shall not light occasions
withdraw thee from the means, but it must be a violent occasion and let, that
shall stop the passage of thine endeavor and seeking after the means. This may
be a rule to measure thy self by, and to examine thy proceeding in
Christianity. If thy desire to the word of God be but weak, then is thy care
and travail but small: but if thy desire be doubled, then it becomes love,
which puts out of us a vehement and careful travail, and seeking after it,
Love.
and of avoiding the contrary means that may withdraw thee from it, or quench
thy desire. None can hunger but he that feels himself empty: no marvel
then if he have no hunger, which feels not his own wants, seeing that
feeling is the fountain of hunger, as if our feeling be of sin, then our
hunger is after righteousness and holiness. For the feeling of sin, is the
mother of hunger after righteousness. So that where hunger after The hunger
after righteousness. Mat.
righteousness is, there must be also feeling of sin, and where there is
exceeding hunger, there must be needs an exceeding feeling: and on the other
side, where there is a 5.
small and feeble hunger, there is a small and feeble ^eeling, and it is
impossible to be otherwise. For he that feels his own deadnes, wants, and
impuritie in every commandment, it is impossible, but this touch of glory and
dread of the bondage of sin, should breed, and as it were engender in his
mind an extreme hunger and desire of uprightness, and obedience in every
commandment. The children of God have then to comfort themselves, Comfort to
Gods children in feeling their secret corruptions.
in that they feel their impurenes of heart, and want of vprightnes in every
commandment, and deadnes to goodness For this fear of bondage to sin and
Satan, and this feeling of our own wants and impuritie is quicknes, and
living; and this quicknes and life is by the spirit of Christ, and where the
spirit of Christ is, there is life or living, and this is called regeneration
and life everlasting. So that if we weigh the difference of the quickening that
is proper to the elect, that is to say, to hunger after righteousness, and do
examine deeply and weigh that more than we do the feeling of our confused
estate, it is impossible but that we should find great comfort in sorrow, great
light in darkness. I know indeed the reprobate or wicked are quickened in some
sort by the spirit of Christ, But yet Note.
they taste not of this work of his spirit, to wit, of mercy by love of
righteousness: but by the power of it do live so, even in feeling of Gods
eternal judgment without mercy, living continually in hatred of righteousness,
and in bondage of sin and Satan.

18 He that fears hardness of heart if he can but sigh and groan, because he
feels Hardness of heart.
his hardness of heart, it is so much comfort unto him, as it is a testimony
that his heart is not altogether hardened: so that if thou feel sorrow
indeed, although thou weepest not, yet thou may gather comfort, considering
that that sorrow is for sin, with a love and hunger after God: if thy assaults
be distrust, pride, arrogancy, ambition, envy, concupiscence as hot as the
fire of the furnace all the day long: and though Satan lays on oil in great
measure, and out of all measure, that it is of the wonderful strength and
goodness A sweet consolation for a troubled spirit.
of the Lord that thou stand; and though thy prayers be dull and full of
wearisomnes, so that strife and ways also to all goodness be so hard to thee,
that thou can not tell whether thou striuest for fear of punishment or love
of so good a father: yet if thou feel this in thy self, that thou want
fear, and yet desire to love the Lord and to be better, being wearied and
tired with sin, and desire to please God in a simple obedience of faith,
then comfort thy self.

19 The feeling of sin with wearisomenes, as it were a sickness in the body,
is an earnest of our regeneration. Gods children are often diseased, and sore
troubled, In that they cannot make a difference when they are in the skirmish
and agony between the motion to any evil, and the consent to the same: For
oftentimes evil motions do so possess the mind of Gods children, and do as
it were set down so strongly in them, that, though they weep, pray, meditate
(which be the best remedies to cure them) yea though they feel them with
irkesomnes and wearisomenes as we feel sickness in our bodies: yet they lie
there continually without diminishing, excepting delight, etc. let us not
therefore so vex and martyr our selves with disquietnes of mind, because we
are so pestered and stinged with wicked motions and assaults, but let us quiet
our selves, and not suffer our selves to be hindered with sickness of bo^die and
mind, by means whereof we are made so much the more unprofitable to our selves
and others, and to Gods Church. For the godly shall not be freed from sin so,
but that they shall be snared with evil motions, delusions, vain fantasies
and imaginations. The godly are not free from evil motions.
The body of sin and wicked motions and affections shall never be out of us
as long as we live, for they are almost continually boiling and walloping in
us, foming out such filthy froth and stinking savor into our minds, and so
full of poison, it is not only most detestable to the mind regenerate, and
that part of the mind which is renewed by the spirit of Christ, but also so
loathsome that it makes it as it were ashamed and abashed to see into so
filthy a stie and sink, and so greatly discourageth and astonisheth us, as it
makes us oftentimes to quail, and if it were possible would corrupt and defile
the part regenerate: for mighty is the power, and raging is the strength of
sin.

20 Martin Luther says, that as a man may try and know, whether he be
effectually called and grafted into Christ's body or not by this, that he
feels his heart cheared and sweetened by the feeling of Gods promises and
favor written in his heart, so such a man has forthwith regard of his
neighbor, and helps him as his brother, cares for him, The feeling of Gods
promises and favor written in our heart.
lends him, gives him, comfort and counsels him, yea and briefly he is
grieved if there be none, toward whom he may be serviceable, he is patient,
tractable, and truly friends to all men, he does not esteem the temporal
pleasure and pride of this life, he judges no man, he defameth no man, he
interprets all things to the best part. Finally, when as he sees not the
matter go well with his neighbor, as that he faints in faith, waxes cold
in love, he prays for him, he reprooueth him according to his calling, he is
sore grieved if any commit any thing against God or his neighbor, and all this
proceeds from the root and sap of Gods grace, for that the bountifulnes,
love and goodness of Christ has sprinkled and replenished his heart with
sweetness and love, that it is pleasure and joy for him to do good to his
neighbor, and is grieved for his sins as Samuel for Saul.

21 Whosoever is joined to Christ for his justification, must also be joined to
him for his Christ freeing us from the condemnation of sin, will also free us
from the corruption and power of sin.
sanctification. For if we be redeemed unto holiness, and not to uncleanness, why
should we take the members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot? or
why should we make the temple of the Spirit a stie for Satan? Shall we do such
injury to the members of Christ? shall we do such violence to the temple of
God his spirit? shall we rather be rotten impes, and grow in our sins, than
remain in the root, and spring in Christ? If Christ his cross be as a
Chariot of triumph, if Christ his passion to free us from condemnation, was in
the entrance so grievous, in the end so lamentable, what is our unthankfulness
by remaining still in our corruption, to let him loose his labor in all his
sufferings, wherein as we have no care of our salvation; so we manifest an open
contempt of his most precious Passion, well worthy are we to die, and
unworthy are we to live, in that the choice being set before us, we choose
rather to be murdered with our sins, than to be rescued to life by Jesus
Christ. For justly is the reward promised to such as overcome* Revel. 3. 15.
12. 22. that The death of sinnne in us.
is, to such as will not only strangle and press out the breath of sin, and
close up the eyes of it at the fall and death of it, but also follow it to the
grave, and cover it with moules, so as it never rise again. Not that we think
that sin in this life is so wholly martyred, but that the life of sin may
well be weakened, counting it a rebel to regeneration, not a Prince over the
spirit of sanctification. And as a Serpent cut in diverse pieces has but
certain relics Simile.
of poison and remnants of fiercenes in the maimed members, and mangled parts
thereof, and is not able to exercise the like violence to a man, as when it was
whole and perfectly membred: so howsoever some relics of sins remain in our
old, but in our martyred Adam, yet it has no such force or fiercenes to
prevail against us, as when it was in it perfect age, like rather a mighty
Monarch than a poor prisoner.

22 It is usual either in delivering or hearing doctrine, to sever and
disioyne those things which in their own nature are conjoined by the holy
Ghost. Thus some deal in the doctrine of faith. For when it is said, The just
shall live by faith, they forget the former proposition, that is, the just
shall live. For here are two doctrines: first, he that is just must live by
faith; then that he must not live by faith, except he be just. Here must be no
seuering of things, because they may well be coupled together.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Fear.
MAny causes we have to fear: first, for want of perseverance we should 1
leave our estate in so great a danger, that being swept and garnished, Three
kinds or causes of fear.
yet the devil at his coming, should be accepted and make his reenter into us
again. There is another fear, the fear of offense, least by our halting we
should draw others after us, and so weaken their hands and their knees. The
third fear is of comforting our enemies and of 2
grieuing others, that have been our defense: I mean the Angels, who 3
as they are comforted in the perseverance of the just, so they mourn at the
falls of the righteous.

2 True fear has many properties, as first it breeds in us a marvelous
humility, as we see in Jacob who was much afraid of his brother Esau, and
therefore coming toward him, Properties of fear.
he falls down seven times. There is a fear humbling, and it is the work of
God to bring us to himself. And surely the Lord takes great delight in it, and
what is the reason of it? because the Son of God in his humility has done
greater things for us, than ever he did in his glory: for being God and
vouchsafing to be humbled even to a worm, he has done us more good, and
more glorious things, than ever he did whiles he was among Esaias 5. 3.
the Angels. Now the world is full of such proud spirits that nothing can
qualify them. A second quality of fear is, that it is very credulous. This
again we see in Jacob, for when one told him, his brother came against him so
well furnished, he feared greatly, yet disputed not long in the matter. It is
the glory of our age to dispute and gain say a man, and to say surely though
you be of such an opinion, I am not, think as you will, I think thus. So that
our dealings are so full of doubts and so ambiguous, as though there never had
been world before us, or as though now it were high midnight in Popery. The
third quality in fear is diligence: This also we see in Jacobs example, who
was marueilously studious to salute his brother, disposing wisely of his
children and cattle in the best order he could, to prevent his brothers fury.

3 It is a kindly thing to fear at Gods threatenings, and therefore when the
judgments of God were denounced, it was noted as a sign of great deadness of
heart, if the most Fear Gods threatenings.
wretched sinner were not smitten with terror, and he that was in the highest
degree of reprobation, as Pharaoh feared, for it is the nature of an iron rod
easily to break an earthen pot: But for promises to bring us to fear, it is
as strange a thing as it is in nature that thin water should break a body,
and yet some bodies there be of so weak substance, that any Note.
thing will dissolve them. Such is the nature of them, who seeing and finding in
themselves 1. Pet. 1. 23.
a great unworthiness, to inherit such gracious promises of God, are ever
ready to melt away, and to break in sunder, as beaten with an iron rod.
Wherefore if we can thus fear Fear Gods promises.
in love, and love in fear, we may have a good testimony to our own
consciences, that we have a good fear, because tasting how gracious and
marvelous the Lord is in all his Saints, we fear least we should lose so good
and so gracious a Lord.

4 It is good to be stricken with fear, so that we lie not in it willingly,
but being humbled therewith, search our own corruption, and so to be moved to
enquire further after God and his word.

5 The wicked fear not, before affliction comes, and then they fear too
much: the Piety in adversity.
godly fear before it comes, and then their fear cease. For impiety
triumphs in prosperity, and trembles in adversity: but piety trembles in
prosperity, and triumphs in adversity.

6 If Moses and the dear servants of God were afraid when he did appear in
mercy to them, what shall the confusion of the wicked be, when he comes to
judgment? Note*
We cannot be prepared to receive God his mercy, unless we be stricken with
a reverent fear, both because we are his creatures, and also sinful; God is
always God, and is to be feared.

7 Many men marvel how men be so smitten with such fears, and so despair
that they cannot believe: but these never consider the judgment of God in
hardening them; and thus by a carnal admiration are deprived of all profiting
by such examples. In all things we should turn our eyes from man and only
behold God, and know that it is he which makes our enemies to love us, our
inferiors to obey us, our friends to hate us, our superiors to loath us. If we
had this in our hearts we would surely cast off the fear of man and flattery,
and strive to fear God in all sincerity, and to know that if the fear of
God prevail with us, we shall prevail with men, and have success in our
affairs, or see his love in our correction, and in exercising our faith.

8 The people of Israel are said to fear God, when he destroyed their
enemies, and spared them: This fruit we must have in us of all Gods works, as
well as they. They did not Fear mixed with faith.
only fear but also believe, which shows their fear to be godly, for that
fear only is godly which is mingled with faith. Then whatsoever fear we
have, it is nothing, except it either confirm us in the love of the word, or
else do turn us thereunto, that so we may believe.

9 It is the Lord that smites the hearts of his enemies, and gives courage to
his children as pleases him, Joshua 2. 9. Deuteronomy. 2. 25. 28. 18. And if of this
we were thoroughly persuaded, then would we never fear in any good cause, then
could not the policy nor power of men dismay us. Again, we would be wary to
deal against any of Gods children, least while we strive against them, we
resist the hand of the Lord.

10 Joseph might have had many excuses when he laid up the money in Pharaohs
house, as that he had Gods people to provide for, he could not be espied, yet
did the fear of God truly grafted in him, stay him from unfaithful dealing.
It may be noted then, that the fear of God causes obedience, and though we
might seem to have excuse, and though we could escape the judgment of men,
the law is not given to the just but to the unjust. If then the commandment
only do keep us in obedience, we have not received the spirit of God; if
then we will either trust others or be trusted our selves, let us teach and
learn this fear of God. In that Joseph would not deal unfaithfully with a
tyrant, we learn to use justice toward the wicked, contrary to the Family
of love, who because they think all things are theirs, therefore it is lawful
to come by them as they can. In that Joseph would do nothing without Pharaohs
consent, we learn to do nothing without those ordinary means that God has
appointed.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Friendship, familiarity, family and Fathers.
THe friendship with the wicked is such, that to save themselves they will
endanger their friends: as we see in the King of Israel with Iehosaphat, 2.
Chron. 18. 19.

2 We must beware that we never further sin, but if we love Friendship.
God, we must love them whom God loves, and hate them whom God hates, Psalm
15. 4. 139. 21. 22. how dare many then, hand over head, and without choice, be
friends and join in league with Gods enemies? Proverbs 29. 27.

3 We may have familiarity with some, in whom, though there be no great love
of religion, Note*
yet there is no misliking of religion, nor love of heresies: But our
acquaintance must be in outward things, we must beware our league proceed
neither to the worship of God, nor matter of marriage.

4 The sin of the master of the family, indangereth the state of the whole
family, as Family.
we see in Abimelech.

5 It is the duty of servants to covenant with their masters, that they may so
serve them, Servants.
as that they may serve God.

6 When we have met our friends and have done our civil duty of salutation,
we must not there rest, but proceed to talk of spiritual matters that we may
edify one another.

7 He is a devil that is evil among good; but he is good, that is good among
evil.

8 We become often hardened in our hearts in the company of the godly, because
we Note.
presume too much one of the goodness of another. Presumption


9 It is a good thing to have the acquaintance of a good man for a good cause.

10 Moses takes Aaron and Hur with him, knowing his own infirmities, though
otherwise we see he was a man of rare graces and great strength. So it is
often said of the Prophets, that they had ever some with them, and the
Apostles are sent by two and two to preach, that one might help another Christ's
also sometimes takes Peter and John, not that he had need so to do, but
because he would leave us an example, which we must follow, being ready to use
all helps for our infirmities which the Lord shall offer unto us. We must not
stay in our selves but use the advice of others: for this cause it is said,
that two have better wages than one, and that if one fall, the other may raise
him up. Where we see that Note*
when men agree together one grace of God does set on fire another, and the
more the better, if they consent together; for a threefold cord is not easily
broken: yea though we take such to us as are inferior to us in gifts, yet if
they be faithful, the Lord by them may help us: as Hur was far inferior to
Moses, and yet Moses was strengthened by him. Exodus 17. ^2* 24 14.
And where as Moses in prayer takes but two with him, we learn to make a
choice of our company, for that but few being faithful may more profit us and
prevail with God, than a great multitude which have but a show in them.

11 Great is the love of nature, Joseph could not dissemble it, for that he
was feign to be alone, that he might more freely break forth in tears to
his breathre^. Yea even that rough Esau when he saw his brother Jacob a far
off his heart melted in him. And like as The love of brethren.
no affection of love and liking is so vehement whilst it lasts, so no
contention is so bitter and so deadly as that of brethren. A Crystal broken
will never be set together again: and there is no water will prove so
exceeding cold as that which has been once heat. Simile.
Wherefore let men endeavor by all means to cherish natural affection, and
the rather Affection. 2. Tim. 3. 3.
for that the spirit of God prophecieth that in the last days men shall want
natural affection.

12 Fathers we commonly count and call them of whom we are by nature, or
under whom we are by government, whether ecclesiastical or civil: or behind
whom we are in age and in gifts. Augustine consesseth he rebelled against his
father in heaven, when he refused Of Fathers* John.
the instruction of his mother on earth: for though the^ says he) I could not
see what she did, yet now I see, that thou O Lord speak, and not she
alone, and thy instruction was refused when her teaching was neglected.
Needful it is then for fathers to be taught of God, who for that they be
fathers are to be heard wherein they do teach from God. Civil fathers are
carefully to furnish themselves with knowledge, that they may learn to know
when to strike and when not to strike: for if they strike when God does not
command them, what are they better than murderers? If they strike not when God
commands, what do they but charge upon themselves the sin and punishment
of others.

13 That our spiritual fathers had need of God to be their teacher, if ever
they mean to teach aright, who will not grant? upon whom if God vouchsafes
sound learning, it is as water powered to the roots of an Olive tree, from
whence is shed out the moisture to all the branches: or as a dew falling upon
the mountains, where the rain rests not, but Simile.
trickleth down into the nether skirts, and make the valleys flourish as the
fields which God has blessed. Green wits are as green wood, though they are
beautiful to the show, Ignorance of old age.
yet in trial they are discovered; yet if the younger sort be ignorant, the
ancient in days may instruct them: but if the gray heads be ignorant, who
shall read them the rules of instruction? If youth offend, the aged will
rebuke them; but if the aged offend, who shall tell them* If they count it
contempt to be taught and admonished by their inferiors, their contempt shall
confound them with shame of conscience, to see, how in steed of being honored
for their age and years, they grow to be despised for their ignorance and
manners most unseemly.

14 It is a good thing, and a rare, in writing to our friends, to admonish them
of their sins.

CHAP. XXX. How to profit and to examine our selves when Friends forsake us.
IT is an usual Evil, that a man sometimes shall be forsaken even of his own
kind red, so that though he came unto them laying open his pitiful estate,
if he put them in mind of the brotherhood had between them, if he urges
them with their promise, if he sueth in the title of his need, and in the Name
of JESUS CHRIST, if he charge them with the force of natural affection; yet
they are deaffe, and will not hear his moan. Strange, yet an usual evil it
has been heretofore, is now, and will be hereafter. Wherefore it shall be
profitable to learn, how we shall stand affected in this trial before the
Lord. The best way is not, as some have done, to repine at this evil as at a
thing but lately sprung up, saying, Who was ever so forsaken of his friends as
I am? who was ever so unkindly dealt with, the world was never so wicked, men's
hearts were never so hard: but the surest course is to enter into our own
souls, and to look what fruit we are to reap The use of Affliction. 1. 2.
3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
under the hand of the Lord, who by this kind of affliction either punishes
some sin, or proves our faith, or works in us some further mortification,
or stirs us up to a more careful using of the means of our salvation, or
else to a more earnest contempt of this life, and more hungry longing for the
life to come.

2 First therefore, let us examine our selves in this unkindness of our friends
to us, whether heretofore we have not offered some unkindness unto our
friends, whereby God in his just judgment should meet with us, and by
raising us up others to deal unnaturally with us, to punish our unnatural
dealing with others. If herein our conscience condemn us not, let us reach out
this examination a degree further, and let us see whether we have not sought
the favor of man more then the favor of God, whether we loved not our
friends rather carnally than spiritually, and whether we have not been
instruments to them of sinning, or we ourselves lie not in some secret sin
unrepented of. If in any of these To seek men's favor more then the favor of
God.
we be guilty, we are to think, that the Lord by the unkindness of our
friends corrects somewhat in us, either our preposterous and fleshly love, or
our hypocrisy, or our corruption, loving for back and belly. Well, if in all
this our hearts do acquit us, it may be the Lord will try our faith, whether
we love him for his own sake, or for hire, whether we follow him, so long as
our well doing is rewarded, or whether we are careful for the zeal of his
own glory, even in our afflictions to walk with him: although he utterly
uncase and strip us out of all his ornaments. Such indeed is our Faith, as it
is in temptation, such are our fruits, as they be in the trial, and then we
give a clear testimony of our faith to the world, when being destitute of all
help we can behold God taking us up, and say: Though my father and my mother
will forsake me, yet God will take me up. Psalm. 27. when the help of man
forsaking us we doubt not of the help of Angels, when the world frowning on
us, we see the Lord favoring us. To which end the Lord often sequestreth our
friends, far from us, to knit and glue us nearer to himself. For it is a
common corruption in us to stay our selves too confidently in our friends, as
the child too trustingly and wholly to depend on his fathers providing for
him, as the wife only to see and search help in her husband, as a servant to
count his master as his God in relieuing him: which unbelief in God, and too
much trust in man, the Lord to clear the case before our eyes, puts man
from this pre-eminence in helping any longer, and takes the prerogative of the
stewardship wholly to himself, that they that will fetch, must of necessity
fetch at his hands. To this trial the Lord does join the confirmation of our
Faith, as when he makes us exiles and forlorn Pilgrims among men, that we
might be entertained of him, as of a fostering Father, for that after he
ministers to us in distres greater comforts immediately by his spirit, then
ever we tasted of, whilst in our prosperity he let us to be served mediatly
by men. How evident this is, the Martyrs of God can tell us by their writings,
who when all men forsook them, when no man durst speak to them, when their
friends stood aloof off from them, had greater feelings, more glorious joys,
and sweeter meditations from the Lord himself, Sweet joys and feelings under
the cross.
then ever they had in their life and liberty before. What loss then is it to
be an exile in earth among men, and to be a Citizen in heaven among Angels?
What hazard is it when in steed of father, mother, and brother, we are in
league with the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? who thinks it not a
sufficient supply in the eye of Faith to have the momentanie imprisonment of
the body recompensed with the most glorious liberty of the Saints and Angels?
Let the Lord therefore send us by these means out of our strong hold in the
means, seeing without some such working upon us, we would hardly give over
our hold, for that, we are as proud beggars, who so long as they can have
relief and maintenance at home, will never seek abroad. But how does the
Lord by this visitation further our mortification in us? Surely in withdrawing
the Fuel and matter, wherewith before our natural corruption was more
enflamed and made more foggie. How many in prosperity shall we see complaining
of lust burning them, of concupiscence intoxicating them, of anger fretting
them; of glutton^e devouring them, of covetous cares consuming them, and that
so strongly, as if there were no hope to be recovered? How be it when the Lord
has soked and softened them a little in the brine of affliction they are less
stark, and begin to yield, there is a great change and wonderful alteration
in them, their lust is cooled, their wrath is pacified, their concupiscence is
abated, their gluttony well tempered, their covetousness fully satisfied,
their affections are so tamed, and their corruption so subdued, that they
think themselves highly indebted and much beholden to the cunning skill of
affliction, which so wonderfully brings them down.

3 Now let us consider, how under the cross we are made more zealous in the
means of our salvation. How customably hear we, how coldly pray we, how
carelessly receive we the Sacraments, what fear, what indignation, what heat,
what wrath, what repentance does the discipline of the Church work in us, what
majesty appears in our public exercises, what authority and fruit in our
private meditations? But if the Lord rouse us up from this apolexie and dead
numbnesse of spirit by some fatherly correction, how profit we by the word,
how beautiful are the feet of them, that bring the glad tidings of salvation,
how sweet are the promises, how soon do the threatenings work on us, how
zealously will we pray, how glorious are our feelings, what joys unspeakable
in the Sacraments, what fear of sin, what trembling at God his judgments,
what indignation with our selves, does the Church censure work in us? and
whereof comes this? Surely because being driven out of every crannie and
creuis, where we were went to be harbored, we can find no rest, until we
come under the roof of the Lord his house, who in all our dangers, and after
all our rebellions, will not push us out of his door, he will take up such
Lazarus, Gods favor and co^^tenance in affliction.
and not into a spittle house, but into his Arc of comfort and Tabernacle of
consolation. Oh deep sea of Gods mercy, which never can be sounded, that when
men grow to such a Lordlinesse, as they will not hear us, nor see us, nor
vouchsafe to speak to us, he should not refuse to give us free audience, and
by his ready hearing move us to be eloquent and long in our prayers to him,
who as soon as he does but look on us, does promise a release from our
misery.

4 When our friends will not speak to us, the Lord calls to us, he will
enter some long speech with us, and denies us not all the comforts, which the
promises of the Gospel may afford. When our familiar acquaintance will
scarcely lend us a potsherd to scrape off our scabs, the Lord by his Sacraments
reaches out the surest pledges of his eternal good will toward us. But yet
behold another work of affliction, it brings us to the Sacraments.
contempt of this world, and breeds in us the love of the world to come,
whereunto in prosperity we are very hardly brought. For besides that we see
few noble, rich, healthie, strong and honorable men desire death, or to be
weary of this life, be it never so long, if we consider how loath such men
are to depart, how gladly they would indent, that their life and term of
their lease might after an hundred years expired, be renewed for an hundred
years longer, we shall see prosperity will persuade all and ouercomes many
to die in the nest. Nay which more is, affliction can hardly call us away or
knock us off, we grow so deaf, and take hold so fast of the world: For who is
so sick, but even in pain he would rather wish to live the longer, than to
die the sooner? who so clogd with poverty. The afflictions of the Church in
Egypt were Gods rod to drive them forth to the promised land.
that to be freed from his clog would desire to die? If the Israelites panting
and breathing under the yoke of most servile impositions and travels were
hardly drawn toward the promised land of liberty, and easily would have
retired to the former labors of their servitude, what think you should have
allured them out of Egypt, if they had lived there in some preferment and ease,
as did Joseph in the court? what could Moses and Aaron have done to have driven
them out of the place? And I pray you, if we being never so sick, never so
poor, can still be content to have our abiding in this life, what will we do,
if the Lord still grant us friends, leave our conscience untouched, our bodies
unharmed, our goods unconsumed? Surely we would not have leisure to think of
death, much less to die, as our common speeches of our wise, strong, and
wealthy men do show, who, when death deals with them, crieout, what must I
needs away, alas I never thought of any other heaven, I am not fit to depart,
I am very loath to die? Thus it is the wisdom and goodness of God to waine us
from the world by affliction, which as it causes us to find great comfort in
beholding God but even in a glass, so it hasteneth us to taste of the fulness
of comfort in him, by beholding him face to face.

5 Joseph, saying thy servants are men occupied about cattle, might seem to
dissemble, but it is not necessary always to speak all Truth, and they
confessed the principal truth, that is, that they were shepherds, which kind
of men were abhorred of the Egyptians, and this turned to their profit: for
being severed from the Egyptians, they might better maintain peace among
themselves, and be kept free from the corruption of the Egyptians, whereinto
by famili^ritie they might have fallen. This teaches us that we should not be
ashamed of our kindred, though they be contemptible in the world. For Joseph
being a chief ruler in the land of Egypt, yet confessed all his fathers to be
shepherds, he would not have his brethren change their trade, though he might
have gotten for them great preferments. Our of all this may be gathered that
the Lord works a contempt of this world in the hearts of his children, and
that they had rather be doore-keepers in the house of the Lord, then to dwell
in the tents of the ungodly, we ought likewise not to be ashamed to be
called the people of God, the Disciples of Christ, no nor yet Precisians, and
such like names as are commonly given to Christians. This may teach us, that
the mean estate is always best* so that we ought to give God thanks for it,
and not to be ambitious, for they that would be great in the world can hardly
be religious. But because many will be called Notes of brotherhood.
brethren, which be no^ so indeed, it shall be good to set down some notes of
brotherhood: and the first is to help one another in need, yea, though it be
with danger of our lives; therefore it is said that a brother is made for the
time of adversity: the godly brethren hazarded their lives for Paul, for those
that sought Paul's death, would likewise have slain these if they had known
them. There are diverse examples of this in the Scripture, as Moses and Paul,
who wished themselves accursed and wiped out of the book of life, for their
brethren. Rahab although but a nouice in religion, yet ventured her life for
the espies: Jonathan for David: David for the people of Israel: Obadiah for
the Prophets, and CHRIST for us all, leaving us an example that we should give
our lives for the brethren. Hester for the Church, and Judith for the children
of Israel, and Paul rejoiced for the afflictions which Coloss. 1. 14.
he suffered for the brethren; but we are so far from giving our lives for
them, that if two pence would save their lives, they should not have it, so
loose is our love, and so cold is our Deceit in contracts.
charity. But if this be a great thing and hard to come to such perfection,
let us see the lesser marks, and first even the beginning of love, which is to
abstain from doing harm, which Paul commands, saying, let no man defraud
his brother in any matter: but we are so far from this, that in bargaining
and such like, we soonest deceive our brethren, because they believe us
easily, and take things on our word; insomuch, that although they Matthew. 18 3.
will say, I could serve you no better if you were my Father, and perhaps they
say as they think, because the god of this world has blinded their hearts,
yet is their fraud so manifest, that it is a common saying to say, I had rather
buy of him whom I never saw, then of my brother. We are commanded to forgive
one another even seventy times seven times: but we will be meet with him
seven years after, and if by order of friends, or co^straint we Revenge.
be moved to forgive, yet we will not forgive, we will forgive the fault, but we
will not forget the matter, nor affect the person offending us. Abraham in the
13. of Genesis bought peace of Lot, with the loss of his right, because they were
brethren: but amongst us every word does breed a quarrel, insomuch, that that
which was wont to be said of little children, is now true amongst us: concord
is seldom seen amongst brethren. If we cannot find these marks in some
measure in us, nor yet an earnest desire to attain unto them, we cannot say
that we are truly loving brethren. This was an argument moving the brethren to
help Paul, because they knew his need: but it is an argument to dissuade us
from helping if we see Note.
any in need, and therefore rich men are commonly trusted, but poor men are
not so; and if at any time we trust them, yet it is with such gain, that
although they should die in our books, yet they should not die much in our
debts; for we should well have paid our selves, and yet many times are they
cast into a loss by some, who although they are in Note Gods judgment.
great poverty, yet will seem wealthy, and go brave til they have spent all,
and so become bankrupts. And thus because they helped not those whom they know
to have need, they loose their goods upon those whom they thought to have been
wealthy. The brethren did not tarry till Paul did ask them, but willingly, and
of their own accord they helped him, but we must have much ado to obtain a
little benefit; and yet readiness in helping is as good oftentimes as help it
self. They brought him to Caesaria and sent him to Tharsus, here appears
their great care which they had for him, in that they ceased not to do him
good, neither would leave him unprovided, and there sent him to Tharsus where
he was borne, that both by defense of his place, and also by defense of his
kinsmen, he might be kept from his enemies. And here we learn not to be
weary of weldoing, but to make one good turn the beginning of another. The
love of his country, and the care he had in profit, caused him to go to
Tharsus, although a Prophet be without honor in his own country, whereof
there are two reasons, first, because they know him, and therefore look for no
great things of him: secondly because of emulation, but this is a prouerbiall
speech, and therefore not always but commonly true. It is common with men
rather to displease God than their friends: and so to regard their friends
that they forget God their best friend. Adam would not seem to deny the
taking of an apple of Eve for fear of discourtesie, Simile.
but let us learn to please God and displease wicked men: that as the poor
man said (of whom Ambrose writes) that he knew the master was not pleased with
him, because the servants would not look on him, so the wicked should know
that the Lord is displeased with them, even by the looks of the godly.

CHAP. XXXI. Of godliness, and by what means we must draw near to God.
IT is a fearful thing when the exercises of godliness have no power with
us. And it Prayer.
is wonderful to see how they profit best in knowledge which spend much time
in prayer.

2 Every day must have a days increase in godliness.

3 God is precise in judgment though he tempereth it with mercies: So we must
be precise in godliness though it be mingled with infirmities.

4 Seeing the Lord has joined together the means of godliness and godliness it
self, let us not separate them, either with the superstitious Papists, resting
in the work wrought, Papists rest in the work wrought.
as in prayer, thanksgiving, hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments,
keeping of the Sabbath, etc. (all which things must be leuelled to the
increase of our knowledge, and building up of a good conscience) neither with
frantike heretics despise the means, as though without them we could live in
obedience to God, or love to our brethren.

5 It is an easy thing to dissuade men from holy days, but it is a hard thing
to bring men to the true observation of the Sabbath: it is easy to dissuade
men from popish shrifts, but it is hard to bring them to Christian conession of
sins: it is easy to withdraw men from superstitious fasting days, but it
is hard to bring them to the true use of fasting: It is easy to remove the
papisticall feasting days, but hard to bring in the godly louefeasts.

6 As the Lord gives the wicked a taste of hell in this life: so does he give
a taste of heaven and of his goodness to his holy children in this life: for
godliness has the promise of Gods love to be manifested and found of the
faithful both in this life and in the life to come. Of the truth of Gods
promise we must consider thus: If we look well to our small obedience, and
manifold transgressions, we shall not think it much, if we feel his fatherly
corrections: It may be that ever since we have given our selves to Gods
service, we are more afflicted diverse ways. Then if we consider that we
cannot look for these promises in our selves, because we have not done the
commandments as we ought; or if we believe in Christ and through him look for
the promise which belong to godliness, even then we may see, that for weakness
of faith, and coldness in repentance, and slacknes in our sanctification, we do
justly feel the want of Gods sweet promises.

7 We shall not accuse God of hard dealing, if we consider how many ways he
blesses us, and in how few things he humbles us: and if we think how many
sins we commit, and how few he punishes, how few duties we do, and how many
blessings he gives us. Let us never marvel why we are often or much
afflicted, why we have not Gods promises fulfilled unto us: nay rather let us
for ever marvel at the goodness of God, which so plenteously rewards our
small obedience.

8 We must not say with Peter, Lord I am a sinner, depart from me; but, Lord I
am a sinner, come near to me, and draw me nearer to thee. They that will not
draw near to the thorn of Mercy in this life, shall draw near to the throne
of Justice in the life to come: so By what means we must draw near to God.
they shall go from the East of Gods mercy to the West of his justice. And if
the Lord has sanctified your hearts, ye must know, that we draw near to God
by means. The first means is prayer, we go to God by prayer, not by paces:
Prayer is a sacrifice to God, a refuge to man, a whip for the devil. The
second means is hearing of his word: if we will Non gressib. sed precib^itur
ad Deum. Oration est Deo sacrificium, homini subsidium, Daemoni flagellum.
have God hear our prayers, it is meet God should claim thus much of us,
that we should hear his word. If we will say, Lord hear my prayer, he must
say, my son hearken to my words. The Lord utters his affection in this, O
that Israel would have heard my commandments. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says
Christ, how often have I called and thou would not hear: let all men know
that there has been no word from our birth to our death spoken to us, but in
way either to our salvation or damnation. The third mean whereby we draw near
to God, is by the Sacraments. The word it self is an audible word, the
Sacrament is a visible word; the commandment is flat, 1. Cor. 11. Do this.
Esaias. 55. Come buy and eat. Matthew. 11. Come ye that are heavy, etc.

9 Great is the wrath of the Lord; if we look to strength, are we stronger
than the Lord? That we can neither suffer the wrath of God, nor fly from it,
the best is to yield unto it.
Do we think to shift and escape his anger, or that we can abide the
furiousnes of his wrath? That we cannot escape it, it is plain, for the Lord
is every where; if we run from him, we run as in a circle, the further we run
from one side, the nearer we run to another, and still we are in the Lord his
compass. If we run from the East, he will meet us in the West: the Lord has
a chain for us, and will hold us in darkness, so that easily we shall not be
able to escape. Now for making our part good with the Lord, we are not, as Job
says, rocks; or if we were mountains, we should smoke, when the Lord does
blow on us: we are but potsherds, and the Lord has a rod of iron to bruise us;
and such is the power of God, which we shall try in our destruction, if we
will not try it in our salvation. What shall we then do? Surely, having so
mighty an adversary, it shall be good to seek peace and reconciliation with
him. For as this is comfortable, he shall be our Advocate, which is our
Savior, and he that is our Savior shall be our Judge; so this is as fearful
a thing, that he shall be our accuser which is our Advocate. Yet therein is the
Lord merciful, that he does not bring upon us a sudden Outlawrie, but he
fore-telleth us of his suite, and therefore it is good to be reconciled: and
for our reconcilement, because the first part stands in a confession, we must
acknowledge that we have offered as much violence to the law of the Lord as we
can, and that so we have forfeited all our benefits, our bread, our sleep, our
apparel to the Lord. The confession of the whole plea is lost, if we confess
not all, otherwise we are in Adams case to be condemned, who would hide his
fault; and in the Confession.
estate of the damned, Matt. 25. who being accused, did plead again, Lord,
when saw we thee? or heard we thee? etc. There is no standing out with the
Lord; but seeing we have lost all, we must confess all, that for knowledge the
pap is still in our mouths, and in respect of Knowledge.
our lives, we are certainly fellonious usurpers of his creatures; and so
promise that hereafter we will do otherwise: but if we stand out (I say) with
the Lord, nothing is to be Psalm. 32. 45.
looked for but eternal condemnation, mourning, and woe. And as we must
confess this, so must we stand against our selves, and so go up into the
chamber of our own conscience, and award shame to our selves: and having such
an hot controversy with our own souls, the Lord will remit all.

10 We must learn to love the Lord for himself, and not for our good: and let
us learn not to indent with God, as if he will give us riches, or health, or
power, then we will serve him, We may not indent with God.
or else not; for men cannot away with this indenting with them: but let us
say, rather, Lord take away my sins, and as for other things, Lord do as it
pleases thee. Thus David did, when he was so disquieted in his kingdom by his
son. Let us desire this heart of God: for he has wrought even in sinful
flesh to see life in death, health in sickness, wealth in poverty. And this if
we believe, we may see the wonderful work of God, as well as our fathers
have done.

11 Many worldly wise men suspects us of lightness of belief, when we can so
soon credit We pause to pass in heavenly things though we be guided, but we
run fast enough in earthly things though no man guide us.
the Word: but let no man think we can be too credulous herein, seeing every
jote therein is as true, as if it had been from Christ his own finger, or
uttered with his own tongue. Deliberation is a goodly thing to a man indeed,
but yet reason will let a man be credulous enough, and as hasty as an horse
rushing into the battle, unless it be in matters of religion, and of
conscience, and then we fear that Christ would seduce us, and we deal with
him and his preachers, as though they were dangerous fellows. And therefore,
though Gods commandments be never so plain, yet they must go under the
examination of reason. And because worldly men say either with Thomas, Show me
by experience this: or with Nicodemus. Show me that by reason, and I believe
you: God can have no dealing with us, Oh is it not marvelous that the lump of
foolishnes should call into question the Truth of God 'which is Truth
himself, and dares not mistrust the word but of a friend, of one Simile.
that is in some authority, though smaller credit above him? And yet they say
Faith is too Faith.
hasty, it should take a greater pause, A deep point of policy, to use
deliberation. Well, Faith is not to morrow, it must be presently: Christ gave
not so much respite to the young man, as that he should bury his father. And
surely, if we knew all, there is great reason of not staying n ithese matters.
There will be ambassadors to stay our well-doing, there are fellows will use
a dialogue with us, and surely if we will needs shake hands with the world, if
we will bid the flesh farewell, and take our leave of profit, it will be
violence, rather then a habit at first: For these are such eloquent perswaders,
that if a man admit their orations, he shall soon be plucked back from the
right way, or it is a marvel else.

12 There is a great reason of honesty, that we will not obey God, if he
requires our We cannot serve two contrary masters.
obedience, we have other callings calling us away; we have a good liking of
this, that Caesar commands us to wait upon him in the house of exchange.
Does Christ not want a Christian, as well as Caesar does want a custom?
Surely, we must needs have leave of Caesar to serve Christ. Caesar is not
greater than Christ, and therefore even by demonstration, Christ must be first
waited on. As for those that think, that the worshipping of Baal and of God
will stand together, and that we may serve Christ and Caesar, profit and
religion: the error for the grossenes is not worthy confutation, for it is a
manifest halting. The very commandment shows us, that we must be knit to
God, as a man is to his wife: It is a possession in private and not in common;
if we do not so, jealousy will arise. But may not God and Caesar be served
together? It may be so, if they both command one thing: but I would wish a man's
eye in the obedience be still upon God. For surely if God and Caesar be
followed in one thing; it is hard to say, how we stand affected, whether we
follow God or Caesar. And for this cause the Lord is feign often to pull off
the viz^rd of hypocrisy herein, that when God and Caesar have parted
companies, it may be seen how many thousands go after Caesar, and how scarce
seven follow the Lord. And if when God needs, his glory needs; when his
glory needs, his Church needs: it is sure, that rather than the Church
should need, Caesar must tarry and give place. It is beter that Caesar should
want an auditor, than Christ an inheritour: if Church and commonwealth want at
once, it is better the Commonwealth should want, than Christ should be left
destitute of servants. Let us therefore wait on Christ, not only a mile or two
out of the town, but even to the rivers of Babel: and not only so far, as
we can with the C^pernaites conceive Christ with reason, but even to the
resisting with blood, not Christ as a King, but as Christ to the bar, we must
not with Peter follow along to see, what will become of him, but hard at the
heels to the bar of judgment, and to bear his cross with Simon also if need
so be, even through the lane of reproaches, though we see many pillars to fall
away and to become flat Apostatacs through the rank of false opinions, and
though iniquity so get the upper hand, that there seems no religion to be
left.

13 Then we may be said to walk after Christ, when as it is said Job, 13. we
have trodden his footsteps, when our steps stand as Christ his steps, that is,
when our paces stand as Christ How we must follow Christ
his paces and not contrary to Christ, but agreeing with Christ in well doing.
The best sign for our government is to have Christ and his word in our eyes.
But some through the blea^ed sight of their consciences are afraid, that Christ
should look behind, and see them for going backward, yea if they do but
dream of him, if they see but Paul or some good man, they are afraid. But if
we have the peace and testimony of a good conscience, we will desire that
Christ would epsy us out, as he did Nathaniel, and others of his Saints.

14 There be some notable marks, whereby we shall know, whether our travel
be to Certain indices or notes to know whether we journey to heaven
heaven or hell. First, though a man be so close, that he will not open the
way, whether he is purposed to travel, yet a man shall epsy his intent by
marking, whether he sends his carriage: if our carriage follow the flesh, to
the flesh we go; if it follow the spirit, to the spirit it will carry us,
Galat* 6. If a man will conceal his intent, yet one may discern it, by his
iniquiring of this way or that way. If he ask, how he may go to Canaan, and
which 1
is the way through the wilderness, it is an argument he is going to the
promised land. Thirdl^, 2
though he would keep his journey never so privily, yet he is bewrayed, if
when a man 3
speaks against his Country, and dispraiseth the Prince or people thereof, he
begin to be Simile.
grieved, and take offense at it So if when men disgrace God his word, speak
evil of the way of the Lord, reproach his Saints, we find our selves moved
and not able to contain our selves from reprehension, it is a token, we are
going to heauen-ward.

15 Oh that men would fear and follow the Lord: well, follow we must one way
or other. Seeing we must follow Christ, we had better follow to salvation than
to destruction.
If we will not follow the Shepherd to the fold, we must follow the Butcher
to the shambles. If we will go to the shambles rather than to the fold, we are
beasts indeed, and as the case is with us, worse than beasts. But men here have
gotten an old distinction, They say they will one day seek the Lord, that is,
when they are not able to turn their sick bones on their beds, but seeing
they offer their old sinews to the Lord, he will leave them, and they shall
seek, but they shall not find.

CHAP. XXXII. Simile.
Of Gods free Grace, Justice and Mercy, and how we may try our love to God.
GOd (says the Apostle) is a consuming fire, Hebrews 12. 29. Fire and water
are merciless, who shall quench him, when he burns? there is nothing so
cold as lead and nothing so scalding, if it be heated: there is nothing so
blunt as iron; if it be sharpened, Simile. Simile. Simile.
nothing so sharp: there is nothing so calm as the sea, in a boistrous
weather nothing so tempestuous: nothing so merciful ^s God, and if he be
provoked, nothing so terrible to sinners. And if his mercy were seven times
more than it is, I know and am sure, that he is provoked. Well, as the Lord
will have his power known in creating the world, and his wisdom in governing,
and his truth in his word, and his mercy in redeeming mankind, so necessarily
must his justice be known in punishing, especially those, who seeing his
creatures mark them not, feeling his governance acknowledge it not, having his
word regard it not, enjoying his mercies inful measure, wilfully resist them
all* If we so lie under sin, and fancy to our selves the Gospel and
promises, and mercy, we deceive our selves, for as those that have the fruits
of the spirit, have no law written against them; so they, that Fruits of the
spirit.
have not such fruits, have no Gospel written for them. It is not the unjust
man, that shall live by faith (for he lies under the law) but the just, Gala.
3. Romans 1. 17. Heb. 10. 38. Might not a man, think you, pen a Psalm of as
many verses, wherein the foot might run in this tenor, For his Justice
endures for ever, as David had done of his Mercy, Psalm. 136. The Lord will
not part from any drop of his mercy to them which first have not bin Mercy and
Justice.
swallowed up of his judgments, which have not labored and been heavy laden,
which have not been locked up in hell for a season, and felt for a time the
fire thereof in their bones, which have not been baptized with the baptism of
their own tears. He that feels not these things in some measure here,
elsewhere shall he feel them. It is the judgment of Abraham. The devils
policy in youth, in health, in prosperity is to sing us songs of God his
mercy: but in age, in sickness, in tribulation, upon thy deathbed, he will make
such reasons for his justice, as we shall never be able to answer. Wherefore
the Lord has (to make it more terrible in our eyes) put upon it the name of
his most wrathful indignation, fierce and heavy displeasure. It is not for
us, as we do, to put the remembrance of this far from us, or to shift it
lightly by turning over to a Psalm of mercy, but to terrify our own souls
with it, and to cast our selves down with the trembling consideration of his
judgments. Of one example without a precept nothing is to be concluded, and
therefore in great wisdom that men at the last gasp should not utterly
despair, the Lord has left us but one example of exceeding and extraordinary
mercy by saving the thief on the cross The thief on the Cross
by faith only: yet the perverseness of all our nature may be seen by this, in
that this one serves us to loosnes of life in hope of the like, whereas we
might better reason, that is but one and that extraordinary, and that besides
this one there is not one more in all the Bible; and that for this one that
sped, a thousand thousands have missed: and what folly is it to put our selves
in a way, where so many have miscarried? To put our selves in the hand of that
Physician, that has murdered so many, going clean against our own sense and
reason, whereas in other cases we always lean to that which is most ordinary,
and conclude not the spring of one swallow. It is as if a man should spur his
ass till he speak, because Balaams ass did once speak: so grossly has the
devil bewitched us. And yet, if we mark in that example which the devil so
often tempts us with, we shall see even in that little time Simile.
he lived, sundry good works, as many as in that time and case would be
required: first, prayer, secondly, confession: thirdly, glorifying of Christ:
fourthly, humility, remember me* fifthly, Notes and marks of faith in the
thief on the cross.
reproving of his fellow: sixthly, acknowledging of his own deserts: seventhly,
patience. And it is to be thought by these few, that if he had lived, he would
not have been behind any of the Saints. The root being holy, the branches must
needs be like unto it. My sentence is, that a man lying now at the point of
death, having the snares of death upon him; in that straight of fear and pain
may have a sorrow for his life past, but because the weakness of flesh, and the
bitterness of death does most commonly procure it, we ought to suspect our
selves if we never sorrow till then. And therefore let us store our selves with
good things against the evil day come upon us, for our life past: for as that
man, which in his health and good success The joy of a good conscience under
the cross. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
has been diligent to fear God, and to do good, feels in his sickness an
unspeakable comfort, which he would not miss for all the world, and a mighty
boldness to speak unto God, toward whom he knows he has not been unkind,
does not fear at all: so that man, which whiles the world prospered with him,
never thought of God, nor regarded his word, nor the preaching thereof, when
the visitation of the Lord is upon him, when God shall take his soul from him,
his case is most miserable, feeling no comfort, nor daring to speak to God,
whom he has neglected. And sorrow such a one never so much, yet he Sorrow.
doubts, and must needs doubt, for that he knows not, whether his remorse
be of the loath somnes of sin, or for the fear of death, and whether he be
humbled before the Lord, or before sickness. It is good policy to print his
judgments first in our bowels, and to diet our selves more sparingly with his
mercies, least making up our sins in the remembrance of his mercies, they
break forth and flame to our confusion in body and soul everlastingly,
Eccles. 12. Psalm. 73. Heb. 12. Romans 11. Thy judgments are as the great deeps.
Then to fear God when he shows mercy, and to love him when he executes
judgments are two hard things, yet necessary. Howsoever God does now
forbear, he will not do so always, How to prepare our selves against the day
of death and judgment.
but he will set him down in his judgment seat and throne of justice, and
our chief care must be, how we may appear without fear and trembling before
him. This is it that we must think of at midnight, what we shall answer that
dreadful Judge, when he shall ask for our account. Let us set him before our
eyes, not as our fond brain is wont to imagine of him, but as the Scriptures
describe him. When he will arise to command the Angel to blow his trumpe:
such a God as the Seraphins hide their faces at his glory; at whose presence
the mountains smoke and melt away; whose wrath shall shake the foundations of
the earth; who ouertaketh the wise in their policy; who will not account the
guilty innocent; at whose pureness all our innocence is as a stained cloth;
whose justice the Angels themselves dare not call for; whose judgment when it
is once k^^dled, burns to the bottom of hell. Let this God take his place,
let him try our hearts, and To appear before God without a m^diator how
fearful.
examine our thoughts; let him call for the account and take his reckoning: let
us think how we shall stand before him quietly with peace of conscience, who
is it that can do it, Esa. 33. 4. let him of us come forth? Alas none shall
dare to do it. If the Lord in his own person should appear unto us without
Christ a redeemer, we should fly from him with horror and fear, and never be
able to stand in his sight.

2 He that searches the majesty of God, shall be overwhelmed with glory, but
he that searches out the mercy, how much more shall he be overwhelmed of ^^?
His judgments be as a great deep, but the deep of his mercy swallows up
that deep. Wherefore well said Chrysostom, Great is the hell of my sins,
but greater is the deepenesse of thy mercy Gods mercy.
O God. The Scriptures attribute to Gods mercy all dimensions. First, depth; it
fetched David's soul from the nether most hell, ergo it reaches thither.
Secondly, breadth; for Psalm. 103.
that he sets our sins us far from, as the East is from the West.
Thirdly, length; for it extends it self not to the clouds only, but to the
stars, which (as Job says) are not clean in his sight, yea even to the
Angels, in whom he has found folly, so that but for his mercy they could not
abide his trial. Nay God is able to forgive us more, than we are able to
sin. And indeed mercy is the gate of the Almighty. By no other quality of
his can we be suffered to have entrance or to approach unto him. All other
things has the Lord done in measure, number, and weight, saving his mercy in
our redemption, wherein without measure and beyond all number and weight he was
merciful: two drops of blood had been sufficient, or one cup of his blood,
but the whip pierced his skin, the thorns his Christ suffered in soul.
flesh, the nails his bones, the spear his heart, and his very soul was made
a sacrifice for sin.

2 When we loose an outward benefit, we must not so think of it as of the
loss of Gods Grace.
favor: but what do blind people regard Gods grace? So they have plenty of
corn and oil, they respect not the loss of their souls: whereas if all the
creatures of the world, The covetous desire of riches.
should weep for the loss but of one soul, it were too little. Yet our
people, so they may eat of the Lords bread, and enjoy the fat of the earth,
care not whether the Lord show a lightsome, or a fearful countenance upon
them. Wherefore because we set so little by that which the Lord sets at so high
a price, the Lord will take from us that which we esteem so highly, and bring
upon us some sudden desolation.

4 We must ever desire the first fruits of the Spirit, but having attained the
first beginnings 2. Pet. 3. 18.
of Gods grace, we must ever wait for the increase of it by degrees.

5 When we have received mortification and sanctification as hansels of Gods
mercies, then may we hope for heaven: for they that have received grace, shall
also receive glory.

6 The graces of God are not in his children as morning mistes, but as well
builded Simile.
towers to continue all assaults. Preseuera^ce. Gifts of the spirit.


7 Diversity of gifts should not make us disagree, or to envy one another, but
rather should bind us in love to embrace one another, that so we might be
profitable one to another.

8 The Lord has such respect to his glory that he will give gifts when he
might justly punish, therefore we ought not so much to rejoice in the possession
of earthly blessings: for the Lord gives many blessings to stop the mouths of
unbelievers, and to call sinners to Romans 2. 4.
repentance: which if they neglect, then assuredly the Lords wrath will be more
fierce against them. The wicked have no cause to rejoice, that the Lord smites
them not, for he lets them prosper for a while, that their condemnation may be
more just when it comes. Try thy self thus: if thou profitest by Gods
correction, it is a sign of grace: again, if by his patience thou take (as
a good son) occasion to repent, and do study to come out Gods patience.
of thy sin, it is likewise a good argument of Gods favor.

9 God is slow to wrath, yet let us ever remember that albeit he suffered
Israel long, yet at the last he destroyed them all, that none of the
unbelievers entered into the promised land. Wherefore we may not conclude, that
because the Lord punishes not as yet, therefore he will not punish at all: but
confider that all such as respect not his mercies in time, shall at the last
feel his justice.

10 The thing loved is much desired and sought after, whereby we may take a
trial of How we may try our love 1 to God, or rather to the world.
our love to God, or of our love to the world. First look, what we love
indeed, we spend much time in it, and can be content to afford hours, days,
weeks, years, yea and age^ too in it. And yet with all the contentions we
may, we get not to the worship of God, David's seven times a day, nor his
morning, noonetide, and evening exercises, hardly we afford the Lord his
Sabbath. Secondly, we bestow our thoughts and our affections much 2
and liberally on the thing we love: the Apostles were so troubled with bread,
that they could not understand Christ speaking of the leaven of hypocrisy.
Thirdly, our love to a 3
thing is showed, when we are skillful and painful in commending the thing
loved. The Spouse in the song of Solomon was very perfect in setting forth the
parts of her beloved: she knew the time of his going, she was acquainted with
his attire: she was ravished with his beauty: she was privy to his coming to
her. Men show forth their love to earthly things in their great skill in buying
and selling, Amos. 8. in the signs of heaven and colors of the sky Matthew.
16. in our statutes and penal laws. Micah. 6. but in the law of God they be
scarsly wained. Fourthly, a man shall see his love by his great zeal, whereby
he is carried to bring 4
the thing to that he loves, as Esaias 9. 7. when the zeal of the Lord is said
to bring our redemption to pass. Certainly, every man is eaten up with one
zeal or other. The godly seek gain by honest means if they can, but rather
than the wicked will loose their gain, away with honesty, away, say they, with
Christ, as Judas. Fifthly, the great rejoicing which 5
we have, bewrays our love, as David does, Psalm. 4* 7. after that he had the
thing he desired, the countenance of the Lord, he says, he had more joy of
heart, than they of the world had, when their wheat and their wine did abound.
But immortality, the blessing of the right hand, is less esteemed among us,
than riches, which are the blessings but on the left hand, Prouer. 3. Blessed
indeed are the people, which are in such a case, but more blessed Psalm. 144.
are the people, which have the Lord for their God. Sixthly what we fear to
forgo, that we love 6
to have. Pilat cared not to forgo Christ, but he was afraid to loose Caesar's
favor. Lastly 7
we love that well, which we are grieved to part with, so did the young man in
the Gospel show his love to riches, who having a discipleship, offered
himself freely; but when he saw he should forgo all he had, he rather
forsook Christ than his riches. We must look where we love. The purest thing
mingled with an impure and base thing is made most corrupt, as gold mingled
with dross, wine mixed with water, what more precious than the soul of man
remaining pure? what more base being corrupted with the mixture of the vilest
things, than it? The world knows no good but riches, which are yet not so
purely good, for God himself possesses neither gold nor silver, and if they
were things merely good, he would not want them, because he has all good,
that is, those things, which are always good.

11 Christ is not as a Well locked up or dry spring head, but an open and
plentiful Zich. 13. 1.
fountain, from whence run streams on every side to the lowest valleys,
even the pleasant rivers of grace.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Godswrath, and justice, and mercy.
THere are three things which do slake our pains in this life, mittigation,
hope, and comfort, but none of these can help in hell. For the first we know
the rich The pains of hell are endless, cas^lesse, and hopeless.
man could not haue^ drop of water. In this life, it may fall out, that a man
that whippeth us an whole day long may be weary, but our tormentors in hell are
spirits, and therefore never weary. Again if such whippers in this life
should never wax weary in whipping us, yet it may be they shall kill us, or
at the least leave us nu^^ and senseless, but in hell though our bodies
continually burn, yet shall they never consume. Thirdly on earth, though
neither tormentors wax weary, nor we tormented be consumed, yet the whippes
and instruments would wear and waste, and should have some ease that way: but
hell fire is unquenchable, and the worm of conscience insatiable; and
therefore no hope of mitigation. But what comfort is there in hell? if the
sight of the pleasures lost, which they might have had, if the beholding of our
enemies advanced into that glory, which we could not deny to them, and wish
for our selves, if the entering into pain and shame even before our
adversaries, whom we hate, and in whose sight we would be better esteemed, do
increase the pains of the sufferers, then all these show there is little
comfort in hell. First the damned shall be within the hearing of this, which
they have lost, Come ye blessed of my father; and the godly shall be within
the hearing of this to the damned, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. The
wicked indeed shall remember their pleasures, they had on Tere^t.
earth, but to the increase of their woe, for it is a double misery to have
been happy, and now to have lost it. The old man in the comedy says, I have
a son, nay, alas, I have had a son. The wicked, I say, shall wish then,
that they had heard the word of the Lord, and that will be another discomfort.
Last of all, they shall be in the hand of the devil their enemy, and he
shall torment them even in the sight of the godly, whom they hated as their
enemies; the devil played with them in this world, but he will not play with
them in his kingdom, and therefore there is no comfort. The last help is
hope, and but for that, they say, the heart would burst, and surely for any
hope in hell their hearts may burst indeed. Oh, says a heathen man hoping for
release in time, God shall also give an end to these evils. But here is our
hope of end, for the inhabitants of this place are immortal, so that though
they have but one good thing which is immortality, yet even that is such a
thing, as makes their pains the greater: what avails it to know these
things, if the Lord does not keep us from them. Fear them therefore before
hand, and ye shall escape them; neglect them, and ye shall fall into them. No
man is so deep in hell as he, that least thought of these things. And if the
speech of this be so vnpleasa^t unto you, what think Note.
you, will it be to them that shall feel it. Well, though we were not told,
and if I should hold my peace, the fire burns still, and if ye neglect to
hear of it, by experience ye shall feel it.

2 When we are to speak of the displeasure of the Lord, we are so become
humble suitors Of the wrath of God.
to God, that he would reveal more to the hearts of men by his spirit, than
the mouth of man is able to deliver. For the terms of wrath and fire are not
able to utter the depth of the judgments of God, though for our capacity he
can use no words more vehement to us. For as in expressing the power of God,
the highest name we can reach unto, is to call him King; so to express his
anger he often challenges to himself the title of wrath, whereby he shows
to us nothing else, but that he is purposed to plai^ the part of an angry one,
as if indeed he were angry: and though it be true, that we find no such
affections fall into the Lord, yet because we cannot otherwise imagine how he
should be revenged on the ungodly, he is content to instruct us herein by the
name of an angry God. And indeed it is the purpose of the Lord in such places
to show his justice to me^, but because to say the Lord is just, moves too
little, he sometimes says he is angry, to move us more effectually: out of this
attribute of the Lord we may make our profit. First nothing in the world, no
kind of word sets out the vile nature of sin more than this does, to say
our sins make the Lord angry. It carries some force to say, that sin is the
work of the flesh, to call it the work of darkness the work of the devil,
and all these are effectual: but none of them is able to come into the balance
of comparison with this one, that it moves the Lord to wrath, because though
it be not possible, that God should be angry, yet if it were possible, If any
thing cause the lord to be angry, it is sin.
that any thing should do it, it is sin. Secondly, I would have no man
henceforth persuade himself, that God will be a proctour of his sin, or that
he will give him pillowes to ease, bolsters to hold out, or curtains to cover
his sin, for sins move the Lord to wrath. He could not leave sin unpunished
in David his chosen, nay he would not spare his whole Church the people of
Israel from punishment, and therefore he will not bear with one particular
member. Leave men and come to Christ, who though he had committed no sin, yet
because he took upon him our sin, how was he punished: though he lived in all
obedience, first in heaven, and then in earth, yet when he came to death, how
bitter was that cup of wrath to him? If God then did not bear with sin in
his Son being but imputed unto him, he will not be a bearer of us in sin,
having to the full committed it, but we may well make our accomptes, come
sin, come wrath. Thirdly, if the Lord be angry with our inventions, which do
not hurt him (for though kings did incampe themselves against him, he would
laugh them to scorn) then had we need to be angry with our sins, because
they will else throw us down into hell. If this word Wrath now will not move
us, surely it would not move us to see the mountain of smoke, as that of Sinai.

3 Grievous is the pain and intolerable is the the grief of hell fire, to be
burned is the Why the anger of God is often set down by fire.
most grievous and painful death that can be, it is terrible to every part of
the body for a man to feel his blood and his fat to drop away from him. If we
were threatened to hold our hand over a fire of wood, it would make us do any
thing, yea things unlawful to avoid it without Gods especial grace assisting
us: but alas this is nothing to hell fire, and yet we will not avoid sin,
which will kindle a fire unquenchable, and our bodies shall never be consumed.
Nabuchadnezzar had twenty seven provinces, Daniel 3. and yet but three men
amongst all them refused to fall down to worship the golden image for fear of
fire. But we need not go to Nabuchadnezzars time, we may look back but into
Queen Mary's time and see many that for fear of fire did undergo things
unlawful against their own conscience to their despair. And yet this was but
a material fire, but of the Lords fire we must conceive otherwise. In Esaias he
says, he will have it made with pitch to make it noisome to our members, and
he will have a river of brimstone to feed it, that it shall not be drawn dry.
If this be the reward of our neglect, why do we heap to our selves, an heap
of chafe; If fire come, why will we be as stubble* If this argument, this
fiery argument will not cause us to fear, nothing will cause us. If (as it is
said) in the school nothing moves more than that, which has both reason and
sense, then surely fire may Of three things which may keep us from sin. 1
Shame. 2. Grief. 3. Fear.
move us, which both reason and sense do cause us so to fear. More plainly,
there are but three things in the world, which will bring a man from
wickedness, shame, grief, and fear: Shame prevails a little now adays,
because there be so many wicked, that will cover another shame: and grief is
put to silence, for if that come, we say it is an humor, and whether it be so
or no, they will drive it away, if they can, with merry company. But when it
comes to fear, no mirth will serve the purpose, as we see in malefactors
condemned to death, no mirth will make them merry. Nay the most sluggish beast
the Ass, and though ye beat him, until he die, ye shall not get him to go
into the fire for fear, and yet we more insensible than any beast, will not
be moved a whit. And this fire of the Lord is sudden, Simile.
and continual in that day, when no Tertullus can stand us in stead to plead
for us, no bribe will be able to speak for us, for that will be a terrible day
for all bribers. But suppose he would take a bribe, what bribe will thou give
him for the sin of thy soul? The whole world is not enough, but though it
were, the whole world shall be destroyed, how then can thou give it?

4 If we will be truly provoked to mercy, first let us look to the Lord
himself, whatsoever Why mercy is to be loved.
he can do, there is mercy with him. All his ways, says the Prophet, are
mercy: he has stepped no where, in heaven, in earth, or in the seas, but the
Lord has left some print of his mercy behind him, if we could follow him in
those paths he went in. Secondly, the earth does not only receive this print
of Gods mercy, but repaies mercy to us again: and surely, if the creatures
should not be merciful to us, men were in an evil case. Now because Mercy is
either in giving or forgiving.
all mercy consists either in giving or forgiving; and there is no mercy
but it is in one of these two, therefore in respect of both these we shall see
how the Lord esteems it. First, for the mercy of forgiveness, Matthew. 6. our
Savior Christ his advise is, that if we please God in this kind of mercy,
even in the immediate worship of his name, he is content to break off al his
right to himself, that we might pay this debt of mercy to our brethren, which
is more acceptable to the Lord, than any kind of sacrifice whatsoever. And
surely al our sacrifices tend to this one sacrifice of mercy, and therefore
mercy is better than all other sacrifices. So that this pention is so grateful
to the Lord, that performance of this shall stay all other. On the other side,
when this is not done we see, Matthew. 18. the bringing of our selves in debt
with the Lord, even to the sum of a thousand talents does not so much grieve
him, as the retaining of this pension from the Lord, where for the servants
debt no manner of evil words are given, but all is forgiven, but after when
this servant denies the pension of mercy, then the Lord takes the matter hotly,
and the other debt did not so much grieve him as this. But to examine these
things in the balance of our own reason: Pension of mercy to be showed and
paid to our brethren.
if two men are to pass by a place, where lies no small danger by reason of
the hot pursuit of their enemies, and one of them going over by a bridge
escapes, and when this other is to escape by the same means, he draws up the
bridge after him, as not content the other should be delivered with him; we
would condemn this fact. The same is our case: we escape sin the common
enemy of our souls, only by the bridge of mercy: and now Simile.
we are escaped safely, our brother is to come over the same bridge, and we
pull it up, this Note.
is a singular inhumanitie, and a high point of profound malignitie, though the
Lord indeed will make him a new bridge of mercy, howsoever we show our
malicious mind. Now to come to our selves: whether is it not usual with us to
sacrifice with Caine, and yet to knock Abel on the head; and whether we say
not Lord forgive, but we forgive not: we forget, but we forgive not; we
forgive, but we forget not: as it pleases us thus to Giving.
distinguish? and let these things speak whether we have mercy or no. And for
giving, which is the other part, that it be certain, that God shows his will
herein, that he would Mercy to the poor.
have our bowels opened to the poor, because he might have made all rich, as
well as one rich, but that he left some poor to try us. He had enough in
store, and could have made the poorest equal with the richest, but that he had
met with us, that we need not to complain, and say (as some might happily have
done) we want some, to whom we might show our thankfulness. The whole earth is
the Lords, and what can we give him, our weldoing extends not to him, he
needs it not, we can do him no good, but for his sake oh that we Psalm. 16.
might do good to men. For this cause I say, the Lord has given the poor a
bil of his hand for the receiving of his right, which is due to himself, in
these words: Whatsoever men do to one of these little ones, they do it to me.
Neither has the Lord only showed his liking of this kind of mercy, he has
given us reasons why we should so do, as Luk* 6 Give and it shall be given to
you again: these are brethren, and therefore inseparable; if we give, it shall
be given us again. If then we will drive away famine from the land, we must
give, so that with this sacrifice the benefit of the whole country is
purchased. But beside this, Matthew. 19 it is said, Give to the poor and ye
shall have treasure in heaven. So that we shall not only have mercy, if we
show mercy, but the Lord himself will show himself exceedingly thankful to
us for the same. And yet we see our diffidence herein: And as the seed is not
the grounds that receives it, but his that sowes it; so that, which is bestowed
in mercy, is not so much his, upon whom the gift is bestowed, but his that
bestows it. So here is another reason, we must give because we have received
it, the Lord requires nothing but his own, he requires nothing to be given,
but that we have received of him, and therefore we see of them that received
talents, the Lord requires nothing to be repaid but his own. There is and has
bin these many days a complaint against the pastors of the land, because they
feed as though they fed not, and for this there is great hatred against them
sprung up from the people, which though it be a just conceived wrath, yet I
think we measure the^ not by the right measure, A talent of riches.
that is by another measure than we measure our selves by; for we have a talent
of riches, as they have a talent of knowledge, wherein we are as slack to
perform mercy to the A talent of knowledge.
poor, as they to the ignorant; so that in condemning them, we condemn our
selves. For as it is sure, that the harvest is great in spiritual things, and
there are but few laborers, so in That which goes for current and good payment
in this world is not current in another.
respect of temporal things there is as great an harvest, and the laborers
are as few, because as the ignorant people are the harvest of the learned
Ministers, so the poorer sort is the harvest of the rich men. Another reason is
this, because we cannot retain, it is therefore a good policy to give, and to
make us friends of the wicked Mammon. We cannot carry any thing with us from
hence, have we never so much: here it is gotten, and here it is gone: and
though we could carry our gold with us, yet when we come in another world, that
which is current here will stand us in no stead, for it will not go for current
there. Well, admit, these things could do us good, yet we cannot carry them
safely with us, for there are many robbers will meet us in the way, and
therefore we must follow the manner of them, that go by pirates, they carry not
all they have with them, but they commit all to others of their friends by
writings and bills, which we see to be used of our exchangers: So then we must
carry with us only our bills, which will stand the spoilers in little steed,
though they light upon them. And surely the Lord has made the rich his factors
and exchangers here on earth, and seeing the Lord has given us a bill of his
hand for that we commit to the poor, we may safely make our claim to all, for
this bill will go with us, and shall be read even at the judgment seat,
when Christ himself shall say, Look what ye have done to one of these, ye
have done it to me. So that it is good to show mercy, because otherwise we
cannot long keep that we have: and surely if that which is spoken of mercy in
the world should be cut off, a great part of the Scriptures should be don away.
But among many reasons this may move us to mercy, that in the time of judgment
the Lord will be content to leave off all other actions of knowldge, and truth,
etc. and come to this one of mercy. And albeit the Lord may challenge the other
too, yet because the special clause of judgment shall be concerning mercy, we
must specially look to this. To apply this to our selves I need not, I cannot
accuse men, all men's mouths will condemn themselves, the Preachers of the word
need not to bend their brains to find out an accusation for this point,
because all men can do it; and what is more usual than this, men's devotions
grow cold. And indeed there is greathardnes of heart, there is much
complaining, but little redressing, and therefore, seeing the land does accuse
it self, I accuse it not.

5 This is the difference between the punishments here and those in another
life? here no Of the punish meant of the wicked.
vehement punishment is permanent, there the punishment is everlasting and yet
most vehement. Alas that there are no more fit terms to express it. But small
persuasion will serve, and a twine thread will draw him that belongs to God: but
if he be a child of reprobation, a cable rope will not serve; and though he
should see the smoke and the mountain of fire, yet will he turn and sowse
himself in the mire of sin like a sow. Take a man in a fit of a burning
ague, and ye shall hear him utter such words, and so protest of his pain, as
if it Simile.
were v^s^fferable, but this is another manner of age, and shall vex us more
than all the burning agues in the world, and yet it shall continue. Paul
alleges a very plain reason why there is so little mercy among men. Every
man seeks his own, and we seek not the things one of another* We forget we
are members one of another, and therefore the Lord needs nothing but our own
mouths to condemn us. For seeing we call God Father, I would gladly know, by
what title we call him Father. There is no reason but that Christ is our
brother, and he has made us the sons of God: for there is no fatherhood in
God but by brotherhood in Christ. But how is Christ thy brother more than to
another, seeing he has done as much for another as he has done for thee?
Well, if another has as good a title to Christ as thou, then he is thy brother
too, and if he be thy brother, I say to thee, as Malachie said of the
fatherhood, If God be thy father, where is his fear; so if he be thy brother,
where is thy brotherly love? But Christ has yet another reason, we are not
only brethren, because God is our father, and Christ our brother, but for that
we are as nearly knit in conjunction, as the lims and members of the body. So
that the cause, why we show no mercy is, because we cannot persuade our selves
to be members. Of the primitive Church and the faithful congregations gathered
by the Apostles it is said, there was but one heart, one will among them, and
therefore no doubt but one body; for there can be but one heart in one body,
and it were monstrous in one body to have two hearts, The law of members is,
that look what one member receives, is receives not for it self alone, but
for all the rest too. The eye it sees not to defend and help itself alone,
but it sees for the hand, for the foot, and for the other parts of the body.
And so by the law of members, if we have any thing, we must bestow it on the
whole body, and as well on the foot as on the head. Even so does one member
receive the benefit of another, that as the eye sees, so all sees, as the
hand writes, so all write; and we know the least benefit or hurt which is
in any member is ascribed to the whole body, as if but the finger ache, we say
we have an ach; if the nail be hurt, we say we are hurt; if the foot be
whole, we say we are healed. Then if this affection be not in us mercifully to
impart one to another, as one member is serviceable to another, mercy is not
in us. If we be grieved for any, it is but a complaint of the mouth: we can
give him a Lord help him; but Christ did not only see one so, but he wept
over him, he wept not only, but touched the very leprous, yea and he healed
them. Well, if there be no mercy in us, with what face can we come to the
Lord, and say, give us a kingdom, let thy kingdom come, if we deny to our
brethren the gift of so much as of a piece of bread: and how can we look up
to heaven with any hope to come thither, if we have laid up no store there
before hand? God scummeth away the dross of his Saints by Crosses, yet
breaks not his holy covenant with them, but performs it, through many
tribulations which they deserve and pull upon themselves. When the Lord
threatens, we are often driven into a secret murmuring and impatiencie of
spirit, but we must know that his minae be as medicinae, the means of the Lord
are medicines. And we are too nice Christians if we cannot abide to be
threatened, seeing God his judgments are often greater mercies, than even the
continual and ordinary mercies themselves. Nay because the Lord would not
destroy us, he threatens us, he has not delight in the death of a sinner,
and therefore he threatens death unto us, because he would not have death come
upon us. For as the mercies of God are judgments to some that abuse his
mercies, so the judgments of God are mercies to others, because they cause them
to observe his will, and to enter into a new league with him. And this is that
the Apostle says, all things turn to the best to them that love God; all
things, the very melancholy of the devils, even hell fire: for the bitterness
of threatenings are fore-warnings to the godly, that they should not be
destroyed with the world in the end.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Teaching us why we are specially to keep watch and ward over
our hearts.
SO corrupt is the heart, as being the fountain of all sinful actions, Albeit
this meditation concerning the keeping of the heart, be past in the fourth
part, Tit. Of meditatio^s on Pro. 4. v. 23. yet for that here we have some
amplificatio^, and some difference in his manner of handling this argument, I
thought it less offense to give thee both (good Reader) than to deprive thee
of either of thim.
that although we should never have patterns of impiety, yet our own heart
would school us sufficiently to the way of destruction. Reproved then be
their Doctrine, who think that a man is not naturally inclined to evil, or
that nature is not wholly inclined to sin, but that by example and allurement
man is corrupted and infected by others. The occasion of evil may be outward,
but the cause of it is inward, not of others but in our selves. And good
reasons there be therefore, that we should still have an eye to our hearts.
First, our hearts does carry with it most commonly all our senses, so that
nature taught men of the world, that the eye sees not but the heart, it is not
the hand that touches, but a certain force proceeding from the heart, and
exercised by the hand; and seeing nor sense left in the body. From hence it
comes, that great sounds and strange noyses are nothing heard of, our ears
attending upon our hearts, and our hearts being thoroughly occupied about some
other object. From hence it is that goodly shows, able to ravish the sight
with delight, are not so much as seen of us, our eyes being wholly restrained
about other things whereabout the heart is occupied: yea from hence it is, that
we stumble sometime on the plain ground, and our feet do fail us in most
fair places: our feet attending on our hearts, and our hearts being carried
vehemently unto some other matter. Although then we ought to keep with great
care our eyes, our ears, and our hands, with all other parts of the body, yet
it stands us in hand to keep diligent watch and ward over our hearts, by
which all the other parts are moderated and ruled. Another reason why we
should have special regard to our hearts, is because they make or mar all
our actions. If the heart be pure, all our affections are pure, though Christ;
through some defectes be mixed therewith: if our hearts be not sound but
corrupt, then the things in their own nature good, by us are made impure and
corrupt. It is without all controversy, that it is our corrupt nature which
corrupts us, either to be slack in weldoing, or to leave a good thing
altogether undone, to be so prone to euil-doing, or to rest too securely in it
being done. And albeit, many occasions may be pretended to stay us from good,
which may seem to carry some show of good, yet they are deceiving
corruptions, and full of rottenness at the core, as experience proves. Some
are kept back from catechizing of their family, because they would not be
made the by-talke of the people, they would not men Fabula vulgi.
should talk of them, and tear me them a precise company. Some go aloof and
walk along from pure zeal in good works, that they might retain their
liberty in buying and selling, and so better take order for domestical
expenses, which they think would fall to the ground, if God should be purely
worshipped. And indeed every thing creeps under color of a good thing, and
they will turn out nothing naked, but with one ragged reason or other,
although their pretenses be of an ill die, or their reasons not able to keep
them from any injury of the weather whatsoever. They are carried away with the
deceiueablenesse of sin, their corruption deceives them, they are beguiled
with the devils Causam pro non causa.
sophistry in putting that for a cause which is no cause at al. But this
hypocrisy of heart may appear not only in not doing of good, which we should
do, but also in doing of good otherwise than we ought to do. To leave sin
in it own nature is a commendable thing, but if we do it for fear of
punishment, or for shame of the world, rather than for conscience of sin, it is
not at all praise worthy. The adulterer may restrain his loathsome and
sinful action, not for that he fears to defile himself with sin in the
sight of God, but because he would not be known to have sinned in the sight of
the world: the thief may surcease from actual theft for fear of the law, and
to avoid the gallows: but neither of these have repented of their sin, though
after a sort they have left their sin. This is manifest, in that they leave not
every sin, as true repentance does, without all exception or dispensation,
but only those bloody faced sins, which civil discipline censureth with
shame and sufferings, as murder, treason, adultery and theft, making no bones
to commit sins as grievous before God, though not so punishable before men, as
are swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, lying, drunkenness, and such like,
which sins if they were worthy of imprisonment by law, either men must change
their accustomed course, or all the prisons in the realm would not be able to
receive the offenda^ts. Such men learn the common statutes and penal laws of
the land; the laws of the Lord, the statutes of the highest they will learn
hereafter. If they had a conscience of sin, then it should be in universal,
not in particular, because one sin is as grievous to the Lord as another, and
no sin must have a placard before his presence. Other will leave sin, because
they have been in service so long, and spent their body so much in sin, that
now (not that their action is Conscience of sin.
lamed, but because their ability is gone) they for fear of some sickness
will leave it, but if they might run through a new body they would run
through their old course again. Others have consumed all to feed and cloth
sin, and therefore now because their purse constrains them, not because the
law commands them, or the curse fears them, they count it for husbandry
to stay a while. Others being somewhat politic, thinking it good to get some
profit, that may give longer life to pleasure hereafter, for a while bridle in
their wantonness, whiles they have gotten some sure hold of their inheritance,
and after, so soon as they have brought with sorrow their fathers old age to
the grave, recompense the devil with their hot pursuit of sin, much more
than they lost in their former sparing of sin. Others when either for deadnes
of nature, or want of ability, or fear of man they dare not, or cannot commit
sin in their own persons, yet they draw over as much pleasure as men in
their case may do, by commending and chronicling of their own sins past, or
by laughing in their sleeves at the artificial sinning of some other present.
They can laugh at sin heartily, whereby they show they cannot mourn for sin
heartily: they make a mock of it, and therefore bewray they have little
conscience of it, and Note.
therefore they die in their sins, howsoever they have left their sins To
deal carefully To laugh at sin what it argues.
in Gods worship, and faithfully with man, are things both commanded and
commended; and yet to do them without zeal of Gods glory, and with a care or
our vain glory, rather to win credit to our selves, than to gain credit to
the Gospel, is neither commended nor commanded. And yet how many beguile
their own souls hreein, it may appear by so many frequenters of the word,
and so few fruitful hearers of the word: if they profit not, it grieves them
not; if they remember it not, they ^est at it; if they cannot Carnal
Protestants.
speak of it, they scoff at it, and yet they think they be great
protestants. Many goodly and godly things we may seem to do before men, and
be thought to be petty Angels come out of the clouds, and yet being impoisoned
at the heart with vain glory, the Lord has no delight in us, our own hearts
even in these glorious works do accuse us, our consciences do control us,
and without repentance, God that is greater than our conscience, will in the
end condemn us* Contrariwise, be our action never so beggarly for want of
ability, never so deformed for want of beauty in the eyes of man; yet if it
comes from a sincere heart, sound and sincere in the eyes of the Lord, it is
acceptable, and through Christ accounted righteousness unto us. If then for sins
sake we leave sin, and leaving Note.
sin repent of sin, and repenting of sin leave sin, though the lees of it
remain in Of good affections and desires.
us; if for righteousness sake we labor for righteousness, though an
essential righteousness be not inherent in us, though we do not all good we
love, but in love desire to do it; though we leave not all sin we hate, but
in hatred of it labor to resist it; the good we do is accepted, the good we
desire to do is imputed; the evil we leave is discharged, the evil we desire
to leave shall not be imputed. True it is indeed no man can say, my heart is
upright, I am pure, if he measure himself by the rule of the law, which thing
whosoever sees not by his manifold corruptions, as yet he sees nothing as he
should see: yet the children Romans 7.
of God may say, their hearts are right within them, when by faith in Christ,
and a pure purpose to approve themselves unto God, their hearts are purified,
so as they labor for the death of sin, though the whole body of sin be not
slain in them, and labor for true righteousness, though the man of
righteousness be not fully fashioned in the^ This doctrine then has two
especial uses, the one to humble us, the other to comfort us. Good cause we
have to be humbled by it, seeing it teaches us, that the cause of sin is
still in our selves, and cannot be charged upon any other, as the cause thereof.
For if our corruption Look most of all temptations and griefs on thy
Corruption natural.
were not, neither Satan by fear and tyranny, neither the world by preferment
and glory, neither the fleshly delights by subtlety, neither our enemies by
their fears and tyranny, could ever prevail against us* Christ Jesus was
thrice and vehemently assaulted, yet because the Princes of this world could
find nothing in him, and all his temptations were as a little arrow shot at a
brazen wall, no corruption being in his heart, no guile being found in his
lips, they nothing prevailed against him. Adams heart was corrupted before
Adams Temptations.
hand had sinned. Satan does offer, we do yield unto our temptations, he is
the occasion, but we are the cause of our own woe. The fond sophistry and
lying logic of thieves is here to be withstood, who think they wash their
hands from all sin by crying, woe worth such a man, that ever I knew him; for
had not he constrained me and allured me to sin, I might have been far
from this. Again, great comfort is in this doctrine, by giving us this
assurance from the Lord, that how weakly soever we walk with God, so it
Simile.
be sincerely, it is his good pleasure to account of us for good. First the
devil (if we have our hearts upright with God) that we will be adversaries to
our own corruption, that we may be fouourers of Gods glory, he shall be but as
a Surgeon, which lanceth our impostumation to preserve life, howsoever he
purposed to have gored us to the heart and to have deprived us of life. Let us
see this in Joseph and David both men of one mould, renewed by one spirit,
allured to one sin. Joseph a young man unmarried, for his person beautiful,
for his authority a governor of his masters family, for his fitnes to
commit sin, provoked by his own mistress; yet grace restraining his
corruption, he withstands her to the face, he resists the occasion, he
fears, but subdueth his own corruption, and so by Gods goodness obtained a
gracious issue out of his temptation. David a man now stricken in years, not so
dangerously assaulted with the occasion of sin in respect of the distance of
the place, suffering the occasion offered to his eye, to join in league with
that corruption which was in his heart, was suddenly snared, slauishly
yielded, and was foully conquered. David's adultery.
The woman was object to his eyes, his eye opens the way to his heart, his
heart corrupted his hand, and so that sin grew to age, and was perfitly
accomplished. In what measure Note.
we are regenerate, in what measure we withstand our corruption, in that
measure we are Temptations.
sure to prevail against our strongest temptation. And look how we fail in
these, so we lie open to yield to our temptations whatsoever. Now to come to a
more narrow trial of our selves: we must search out and epsy our corrupt
nature, either by our afflictions, or by our affections. Such is a man as he is
in temptation. If trouble do not ouer-turne him, How we may try our selves by
our afflictions and affections.
if fear cause him not to fall, if temptation cause him not to deny the
truth; then his heart is upright, then has he cause of comfort: but if for
fear he faint, if for troubles he turn away, if in his temptation he forget
his trial, and betray the truth, his heart is not upright with God, he is in
the gall of bitterness, he gives occasion of grief to others, and matters of
humbling to his own conscience. There is a certain disease common to all men,
to suffer their eyes to wander, and not to lay the rain upon their thoughts,
but letting them range We must watch over every motion of the heart, and
occasion of the eye.
without check or controlement to all sin, and lightness of mind. Thoughts
breed in us, or stir in us a tickling delight and desire to sin. This
Ecclesiast. 11. Solomon goes about to stop, but because it cannot be brought
to pass in the children of perdition, therefore in that place he does clear
himself of their blood, by bidding the^ walk on in the thoughts of their
hearts. Of this a father speaking thus, I did walk in the Cloister of mine
heart: He makes the walk of his heart much like the walk in a cloister, that
is in a secret place, Est quaedam cog^tare voluptas.
where no body sees or hears him, but only he of whom Augustine speaks.
He that sees thee, when the candle is light, and when the light is out in like
manner, him fear. There is Spatiaba^ in clausti^ cordis m^^.
also a walking of the eye, which is compared to that of David in the top of
his turret, and to a gallery or place of prospect to see far and near into the
world. A disease incident to this age who cast their eyes into all corners of
the earth, suffering them to seize upon any qui cum lucerna splende^ videt te:
cum lucerna extincta e^^ videt ^e, ipsum time.
object whatsoever, whereby they find matter to work upon* Briefly we are not
to yield to our affections, or if we have yielded we are not to kindle them, we
must not gather sticks (as Jeremy speaks) to keep in the fire. The reason
is this, weeds will grow fast enough, and the suggestions of Satan
entertained and accepted being offered, are sufficient to condemn us. Immistae
cog^ationes.


CHAP. XXXV. Where is taught how we must narrowly watch over our heart, and
over our affections for many causes.
Two heads of many sins.
THe walking in the ways of our own heart and of the lust of our eyes are the
two heads of all wickedness, our inward motions, and our outward Bernard, quid
est cortuum, nisi voluntas tua?
occasions must both breed in us a careful conscience and wariness. In the
Proverbs, Prophets, and Apostles we are bidden to restrain our heart and to
make a covenant with our eyes and the outward senses. Ni^^l itaque punit Deus
nisi voluntatem, t^lle ha^c and ^nternum non erit.
These things are confessed daily, and amended slowly, whereof follows that
transgression of the law and that universal sickness, that we daily confess,
there is no health in us, which all comes from the ways of our own hearts.
This word walking has relation unto an allegory. For imagine we have here no
natural city, Heb. 11. as we have not indeed, our country being Paradise,
from which Two ways. The first way of Gods Commandments. The second, way of
our own hearts.
Adam fell by transgression, and we being here as banished, as Augustine
calls us, have received a new title in Christ, who was content to set over
his own right by purchase unto us. Whereupon it is presupposed, that we have
the natural affection, which every man has to his own country, thorough a
wilderness, wherein are many ways brought shortly to these two: of the one
David speaks Psalm. 119. I will run the way of thy commandments; and this is
the right way, we may well run in it. The second way is the way of our own
hearts; and this is the evil way, whether it be by the right hand in sinning
outwardly and in sight, or in sinning secretly, on the left hand. If we mean
to come to Paradise, Three things to be considered concerning our way
we must leave this way and walk the other way, for this will lead us to
judgment. Eccle. 11. 9. In this way are three things to be considered,
alluding to the peregrination of the Israelites through the wilderness. The
first is the little light shining in a dark place, 1
which answers to the word, in steed of which we have a false light, the
desire of our own heart. The second thing is a guide, which is Christ, and the
Saints, that are gone 2
before us, upon whom we must look, as the author to the Hebrews wills us;
to which answer our false guides, when we say, we will follow the steps of
our forefathers. The third Heb. 6. 12. 12. 1.
thing is the company in the way, which are the great store of seducers to
lead us out of the way, the Devil chearing them forward. It is a sign
therefore, we are in the wrong way, To follow the multitude.
if we do nothing, but that we see the greatest part of the world does. How il
soever the way be, and wheresoever it lies, every man's way is right in his
own eyes, Proverb. 21. and we will defend whatsoever we do. There is a
searcher of the heart, who says, Esaias. 55. your Note.
ways are not as my ways, and because there be wrong ways. Ierem 18. Let
every man turn To follow our own lusts.
from his own ways, these evil thoughts, 1. Pet. 2. 11. are said to be the
devils Soldiers, and to war against the soul: they follow their captain,
and we follow them, and then you may easily know, whither we go, Ierem. 17.
There is a wickedness said to be in the heart of man, and that not easy to be
espied, but it is a subtle wickedness, and the subtlety thereof is
unsearchable. This is every man before he be regenerate. Isaiah says, The heart
of man to God is, as the clay to the Potter. Indeed says he, it is clay to
God, but wax to the Devil, Lutum Deo, sed cera Daemoni.
that is to say, it must have much tempering, and great ado to bring it to
God; but in Satan's shop, very pliable to any work he shall put it to.
Although we never saw any evil example, nor were tempted at all outwardly, yet
our own hearts would teach us wickedness. It is mine own heart, that is the
cause of sin in me, and it is folly to say, woe to that man, but for him I
had never fallen thus, and therefore if the issue of mine own corruption be
stayed and stanched in me, it is God that restrains mine own heart, or else
I should run into all wickedness, whatsoever the gallows punish. This must
bring a man out of love with himself. By this we see how wicked speeches those
be, let him do what he will, and I will do what I list, but there is no
mention of Gods will. Basil, when he had persuaded himself, that if he could
be in the wilderness, he should be happy, and serve God more devoutly, being
out of the company of men; when he came thither, he said, I have forsaken all
things, but I retain mine old heart still. If this evil were not, all evil
temptations could not prevail against him. For Adam was not overtaken with the
temptation, until he was corrupted in his heart. Therefore it is said. Ierem.
4. wash thine heart. This filthiness of the heart was so great, Gen 6. that it
was feign to be washed away with that great deluge, and now water will not
serve, it must have fire to purge it, Proverbs. 4. watch and ward over thine
heart, keep it with a great many 2. Pet. 3. 14. 15. 16.
of locks. Our heart is a wandering thing, it is like the mill, that is ever
grinding, still setting us a work with more commandments, than ever God gave
us. If we follow Gods Simile.
way, there is some end, but if we follow our own way there is an endless
maze Ierem. 4. the heart must be circumcised. It is a little member, it will
not serve a kyte for a meal, and Note.
yet all the world will not serve it, there is so much superfluous matter in
it, it had need be circumcifed, Cast down thine heart, says Esaias. It must be
plucked down, and kept in some work. A good way, the way of the heart is not,
but how it lies, it is to be considered. The first entrance is the thought,
either by occasion or by his own motion. The Scripture deuideth them into two
sorts, iniected and ascending, both naught. Iniected be Immissae and
ascendentes.
those, which the devil casts in, as he did into the heart of Judas:
ascending be such, as rise out of the heart, which do breath out. Of these our
Savior Christ speaks to his Two kinds of thoughts. John. 13.
Disciples, why do thoughts arise in your hearts? The second thing that makes
thee walk easy, is when we are well affected to it, and will entertain it,
and stay to talk with it. Then there is a lingering delay to stay in it, and a
man's conscience tells him, it is evil, and he leaves it, and comes
straight to it again. Further when a man conceiueth a pleasure in these
imaginations, so that the very sent of them delights him; for they carry
Simile.
the smell of them in themselves; and even as the ravens will not go far
from the The ravens will not go far from a dead carcass.
dead carcass, though a man be with it, they will be sure to be within sent of
it. After comes a desire of taking fruit of it, by wishing, I would I might, as
also a consent of the will, and that is with God a full action, as Christ says
to Judas, what thou do do quickly when as yet as he did act nothing
outwardly. Next follows the endeavor and devising But delight still to be in
the sent of it, even so do we with sin.
by all means possible to bring it to pass, as Iezabel did to bring Naboth to
his death: The^ ensues the act it self, that is the sin of the hands or of
the feet, and then perhaps we do it twice and often. Then comes a benumbed
conscience, he forgets to be sorrowful for it, it pricks him not. Lastly
follows, I will stand to it, then men will call light darkness, and
darkness light. We may add boasting in sin, say what you can, they will
not do 6
it, they will do it to spite you. This is the chair of the wicked at their
iournies end, and 7
because they should not be without a cushion, if you will have any thing else,
the next is Scala Inferni.
damnation. Peter says, Their damnation is nigh. This is the measure of the
age of Satan; this is the ladder, or these be the steps to hell: yet God does
not mark every declining of man, but as the Apostle says he ouerlooketh them,
and they are but in the regenerate to humble them, and to make them confess
the grace of God. Touching these thoughts, let these be two rules, what we
shame to speak, let us be ashamed to think, he that sees our thoughts
knows what we are. I remember in the new History of Scotland, there is
mention made of a controversy between Scotland and Ireland, for a certain
Isle between them both. After much ado they put it to the determination of a
wise Frenchman, Simile.
whose judgment was, that they should put a snake in it, and if it lived, the
ground should A controversy concerning an Island between Scotland and Ireland.
belong to Scotland. I speak it in this respect, that if these poisoned and
venomous thoughts do live in our hearts, it is a sign, our heart belongs to
that country, which they appertain to. If they die presently in our hearts,
it is well. It behooves us to have a present striving against them, and if
they yet remain, an indignation, a fear and a crying to God to tell him, that
we are troubled with them. Here we must outreach, and vnteach a foolish speech,
that is common amongst us. Thought is free: No, thy cogitations by just title
be the servants of the Lord. Bernard says, Justly does he challenge my heart,
which gave his own heart to be pierced for me. Therefore we must use them
wisely, we must walk no longer after our own hearts, but we must strive, and
that before reason be corrupted, for then it is hard to restrain. There must
be a washing of the heart. This is the burden of the Lord, as the Israelites
were wont to say, when they went to Ieremiahs Sermon, this fellow will have our
thoughts. Faith must lay violence on reason, for what is faith but a
contrariety to reason? Faith contrary to reason.
and what is hope, but a conararietie to experience? But we must have reason to
determine as well as the word. Many will not be Christ his Disciples, because
they must follow Christ, they will be master with him. But David says, lead
me O Lord. Me thinks, when Hope contrary to experience.
I read his speech he stands as if he were blind, and holds out his hand,
and cries, lead me, Oh Lord.

2 This is the beginning of a conversion, to forsake our selves to follow the
Lord. Paul, Many will say, If I can fetch it within the compass of my brain,
I will believe it.
when he was unhorsed, said, Lord what shall I do? The laylor when he was
moved, and saw the prison door open, said: what shall I do? what shall I do
to be saved? The Jews being pricked in heart at the preaching of Peter, Act.
2. said, Men and brethren what shall we do? At John's baptism every one came
and asked, What shall we do? Where we see reason under faith, and experience
under hope. Many can commend this or that point in a sermon, and say, it was
well handled, because it agrees with their corrupt affection. God must
command what we will, and then we will obey him. But this is the trial, to
obey against our This man may cast the Bible in the fire for any profit he
reapes by it.
own inclination; else God shall obey us, we shall not obey him. Some will set
down their conclusion, as Benadab, did, 2. King. 20. 18. Ierem. 42. 6. The
vile hypocrites said they would do whatsoever God commanded them, whether it
were good or evil: but in the next Chapter, when he had bid them, they say:
This never came from God. Others there be, which will not take counsel with
Micah, but with such as please them. For there be many Preachers which loose
and cast down, as fast as others build: Of whom if a man should ask counsel,
whether he should go to the devil or no, they would say, Go and prosper. But
these I dare say, are condemned of their own conscience.

3 There are many circumcised to Princes, not to the Lord: they are the
circumcision Of the circumcision of the heart.
of the King and of the Queen: they leave many gross sins punishable by
imprisonment, but for others as great but not penal, they pass over. And
there be many, who having been sinners, can recount and talk of sin with a
delight, who show that their hearts never bled for them, and that there is yet
a foreskin remaining. There be some also which will come to the Church, and sit
before the Preacher, like to the people spoken of in Ezech. who are desirous to
know the will of the Lord, and yet if they were examined at the years end, they
have profited nothing, here is a foreskin remaining. Last of all, when God
makes men profit, and they grow into some practice of the means, and they
can talk as godlily, as if they were perfect: and after all this they become
secure, their prepuce or foreskin grows again, and this is most dangerous.

4 Moses in Exodus confesses of himself, that he is a man of uncircumcised
lips; so it seems there is an uncircumcision of the foreskinne of the lips.
And Act. 7. Steven calls How we must circumcise the foreskin of our hearts.
them men of uncircumcised ears: there is then also an uncircumcision of the
ears. Ierem 4 they are commanded to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts:
so there is an uncircumcision of the heart. By the foreskinne it is the manner
of the Scripture to understand whatsoever grows within us, which is an
impediment to us in doing good. A learned writer says, there is a foreskinne
in our ears, which the devil shuts when we should hear any good thing,
and opens when any evil speech is offered, that we may be corrupted thereby:
so in our lips he draws together the foreskin, when we should speak any
good, and opens it when we speak any evil. Such a foreskin is there in our
hearts, which be uses at his own pleasure. In our confession we say, that
therefore we do the things we ^ought not to do, and do not the things we
ought to do, because we follow the devises and desires of our own hearts. And
there is an universal leprosy, whioh has so ouer-growne us, that there is no
one sound part in us. It is a hard matter to a worldly, or fleshly minded man
to be persuaded of this? for every man thinks well of his own ways, but the
Lord ponde^eth the heart, Prou. 14. And Esaias says, chap. 55. Our ways are not
the Lords ways, and therefore they shall never bring us to the Lord. And
Ierem. 10. the Prophet makes a proclamation on the Lords behalf, If any man
will be saved, let him leave his own ways, etc. If we will see this more
plainly, let us see Genes. 6. how the Lord looked on the heart of man, and he
saw it was set on evil, and that even that thought that was farthest off was
set on evil, and not only set on evil, but wholly evil, and evil all the
day long, and all the night long too if ye will. Micah. 2. and Ierem. 17.
nothing is so evil as the Verse. 9.
heart: for the heart of man is evil above all things. Therefore needful it
is that this foreskinne be taken away: not the heart itself as God created it,
but the foreskinne of the heart, which is a fruit of the first rebellion. For
surely unless this heart be altered, let the word be preached, and say the
Preachers what they can, all is in vain. And assuredly this error is in all
heretics in the world, that they are persuaded of some pure naturalities in
them still. And therefore if men will be fruitful to hear and receive Gods
word, we must labor to circumcise the foreskin of our hearts. Now the first
way to take away this foreskinne Thoughts not free.
is to restrain our thoughts, and not to be deluded with the doting opinion of
the world, to think that thoughts are free.

5 If the heart be set on a thing, no reason can be made but we have a fetch
beyond it, and no persuasion so strong but we have crinkes to go beside them.
The Lord is well pleased with their intents, which prepare their hearts to
seek him.

6 When the heart is upright, though there be some fault: yet the Lord
respects more the faith and vprightnes of the heart to crown it, than he
does the fault to curse it: as appears in Rebecca and Jacob when they stole
the blessing, etc.

7 Paul says of himself, that till we knew the meaning of the last
commandment, The tenth commandment.
Thou shall not lust he thought well of himself: and surely we shall never
know the law of God a right, except we know the heart is wholly evil. And we
must know withal that the tongue is a world of wickedness. And if the tongue,
which is but an instrument of the heart, be a world of wickedness, what is the
heart whereof al proceeds that the tongue speaks; Albeit there were no
devil in the world to tempt us to evil, nor any evil wrought to take The
spa^ne of finis is in every man.
example by, yet there abides enough in the heart to corrupt the whole man.
For there is no evil in the wickedest man of the world but it is in me, and
would appear, unless the Lord did suppress it.

8 He was desirous still to keep himself from deadnes, and tried his heart
with thankfulness, by speaking somewhat (after meat received) to the glory of
God, if God gave any good matter into his mind so to take it, if every one
were silent, then to raise up some good occasion of speaking by reading, or
singing which were so used, that when other things came in place to the
aforesaid end, they were surceased from, because customable sticking to any
thing brings less reverence and profit. And among other things he was very
glad to speak somewhat to such, whom he thought after, God might make
instruments to teach it to others more effectually than he could express it,
which thing he said we should learn of the Apostle Paul, 2. Tim. 2. 2.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of hearing Gods Word.
TF the Psalmist (Psalm. 94.) could make his argument, He that has planted the
ear, shall he not hear, much more may we argue thus: He that has planted the
ear, shall not he be heard? Shall not he hear, says David, shall not he be
heard, say we? And surely in his creation he planted the ear to this end, and
therefore by the title of creating us he 1. Creation.
has good interest to the ear: but if the title of creation will not serve,
yet in respect that he preserves us continually, which we call his
providence, that interest may serve: but if that serve neither, yet Adam having
through 2. Prouide^cs
sin alienated himself from God, his soul, his body, and so his ears too:
by the right of Redemption the Lord having purchased us a new, and buying every
jot of us again as 3. Redemption
it were at the second hand, in this right he may surely claim our ears. Now
if he may claim them, as they be his, and in truth they be his, then must we
hear him: or if they be not his, and by no right appertain to him, then we
are not the Lords Israel. But if we be the Lords, then I say the Lord has
said, he cannot abide, that a candle being light should be put under a
bushel, and that our ears, which appertain to him; should be put to no use:
which if they be, they little or nothing differ from a carved image, who has
eyes and sees not, ears and hears not. He will not have us come to the
Church, and the word beat and beat upon us, and no more stir us than it
does the pillars or seats we sit on, wherein we show our selves to be but
idol Christians, or counterfeite professors. Then if we must needs hear,
the next thing to be inquired of, is the special subject or object of our
hearing. We can hear a noise as of the beating of the air, of the wind, of A
sound.
the thunder or such like, though it be not a voice: but alas a bare sound can
do nothing. Secondly then we hear a voice. but this is common to us with
beasts, and what can the A voice*
bellowing of oxen or the bleating of sheep do us good? So then neither a
noise nor a voice is here to be stood upon, which can do us no good. How then?
there is yet a better thing, and that is a word, wherein one may express the
excellent meaning of his mind to A word*
another, and man may open himself to man. Well, then a sound is a thing
inferior, a voice is somewhat more excellent, but a word is without question
the best of all to increase our knowledge. Now if the word be the most
principal, I would gladly know of him, that is farthest from God, if there be
any word better or more worth the hearing than the word of God. Then if we
ascend from a sound to a voice, and from the voice to a word, and from a word
to the word of God, we see the word of God to be most principal, and good
cause there is why it should so be, the speaker of it is above all creatures,
and therefore The word of God.
his word must be above the word of all other creatures. Whereunto if we join
but the consideration of our reverend regard in hearing but a Prince or a
meaner Magistrate, how Simile.
we listen, mark his speech, scan and stand upon every word he speaks to us,
to see what most concerns us, this will surely condemn us for our negligence
and carelessness in hearing the word of the Lord. But seeing the word is the
best thing, we will draw out another reason, which is, that we then best
employ our ears, when we hear the word, and in hearing can say: Now I hear
the best thing that I can hear, this is the sweetest sound, and now mine ears
are put to the best use, I hear not only a sound but a voice, a word. and the
very word of God: so are our hands best employed, when they are receiving the
sacraments, our eyes when they are reading, our feet when they bring us to the
house of God. When we thus have once set our selves in work we may well say,
All that I have, is in their best estate, and put to the best kind of duty,
because our senses and the parts of our bodies are about the business of saving
of our souls, and about the business of the Lords glory. The Heathen said,
that the goodly ornaments of the world and frame of all things, was most worthy
the seeing, as though a man were borne, and came into this life only to
Hearing the word of God, is the best hearing.
take a view of them, and so to depart without having any use or profit of
them; and though he never felt the power of the Sun, or the sweetness of
flowers, or any other thing: much more may I say so much of the word, though a
man should never have benefit by it, yet so good it is, of it self, that it is
most worthy the hearing, though it be nothing but heard. But besides our
hearing, the Lord has joined a special profit to the word, as either the
saving or condemning of our selves, so that the word is therefore more
carefully to be heard, because it is accompanied with such a benefit as the
saving of our souls: God (says John) so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten son for us, that whosoever believes in him; should not perish,
but have everlasting life. But how shall we believe, says Paul, Romans 10. if we
hear not? how shall we hear without preaching? and how shall they preach,
unless they be sent? So that it is preaching that brings hearing, hearing
breeds believing, and by believing we are saved, 1. Cor. 1.
and so howsoever the jolly fellows of this world and others account thereof
to be but madness or foolishnes, this same foolishnes of preaching, says
Paul, brings salvation; Preaching.
this foolish thing, (I say) of preaching, and this slender thing of hearing is
the way to salvation. But yet a degree further. Naaman refusing the
commandment of the Prophet concerning the washing himself in a river, which
was not at home in his own country, his servant says unto him, Father, if
he had commanded thee a greater thing, would thou not have done it? and why
then is it much to wash in this river? So may we say of the word, If we will
not do so much as hear the word, which is so easy a matter to do, what
would we have done, if we should have climbed up to heaven to have fetched it
from thence, or dug to the hels to fetch it thence, or crossed the seas to
have had it thence? But the Lord, says the Apostle, Romans 10. has dealt more
mercifully for us, and provided better for our ease, we need not take such
pains as to go up to heaven, or down to hell for the word; but it is brought
even to us, and preached familiarly: and therefore in respect of the right that
the Lord has unto us, in respect of the best employing of our senses, in
respect of the dignity of the word, and in regard of our easiness in hearing,
we must needs hear the word. Another argument is this, because, when I
called upon and stretched mine arm daily to you, says the Lord by his
Prophet, and ye would not hear me: cry as long as ye can cry, I will not
hear you. But if we do hear the Lord, he will hear us, and communicate
unto us the graces of his holy spirit, and whatsoever is needful for our
salvation. If then the matter stand so upon our obedience to the Lord, that we
shall reap so great a benefit, because he requires but even by the law of
nature, to do to him, as we would have him deal with us; it is good equity,
that if we will not hear the Lord when he speaks, speak we never so loud or
long, we should not be heard of him. The last reason is this, when Mary was
occupied in hearing our Savior Christ, and Martha was busied in ministering
things about her house, Christ says flatly, Mary has chosen the good part,
and why? It shall not be taken away from her. Marthas part in death shall be
taken away, and come to naught, and so may we safely say of all our things
concerning our trades in this life, they must cease, and when death comes, they
shall have an end; but Mary's part shall not be so, that is, whatsoever faith,
love, or obedience we have attained by the word preached, it shall abide by us
with peace of conscience in this life, and afterward it will accompany us even
to the kingdom of heaven. But Martha was Martha for Christ, we are Marthas for
Martha, we are all for the world, but this shall be taken from us Every man
may therefore safely reckon thus with himself: Surely, all my pain, my
profits, my trade, and all will end in death: this is not the good part,
therefore I will hear the word, and this shall never be taken from me. So that
as in the former we are made partakers of the omnipotency of God, if we hear
his word: so here we see we shall communicate in the eternity of God, if we
choose Mary's part: but if we prefer the other, we must go; but our part must
tarry after us, and be taken from us. Good cause then have we to hear the
word: but who is he that thinks himself happy to have the word, or thinks
not himself more happy to get a good bargain? who being in a journey or
sick in his body, thinks it a special cross, and finds in himself a
grief that he could not come to the congregation of the Lord?

2 Many reading in the sermons of the Prophets and Apostles, how they exhort to
the hearing How we must hear the word.
of the word, marvel at it. And if at this day we be spoken so to hear, we
can say, Why, we sit here for no other end, we came hi^her for that purpose,
our feet made have to hear, and therefore it seems to be a vain speech.
Wherefore we must understand, that this word ( hear) has a further meaning
than so, Ezechiel chap. 3. says, Let him that has ears to hear, hear: so
that there are two kinds of hearing, else this had been a frivolous speech.
We must know therefore that (Job. 42) there are two hearings. There is an
hearing of the ear, and there is an hearing of the heart: there is a speaking
to the ear, and there is a speaking to the heart. ^o^ said* he heard the
Lord but with his ears, with his gristles only, and afterward he heard the
Lord better, and that was with the hearing of the heart. We must learn then to
draw up our hearts up to our ears, that so one sound may Note these four
things.
pearce both at once. But to hear with the heart there are four things to be
performed: the first is set down, Eccles. 4 17. Look to thy feet, when thou
go into the house of the Lord. And 2. Chron. 34. because men did not prepare
their hearts in their houses at home, or by the way abroad, all was in vain,
they lost their success in heavenly things. The first thing 1. Preparation
then is preparation And coming to the Church, every man is to deal thus with
himself: I shall now go where I may sit among reprobates, least therefore I
should set on more on the bill and beadroule of my sins, I will prepare my
self, and pray in serious 2. To hear all that is taught us, and not parcels*
manner, and earnestly for the grace of God to teach me The second thing is,
that we must hear the word as good Catholics, that is, we must not hear the
word by parcels and by clauses as we list, and give our ear until it come to
our special sin, and sit quietly till our body be touched: but we must
hear universally as well the things that mislike us, as the things that please
us. We must be affected to hear the word, as the people were to hear the
Lord in the mountain, who said; Speak the Lord what he will, we will hear
him. This is a good kind of hearing, and it pleased the Lord so well, that he
said: Oh that this heart were always in this people, etc. We will commend any
that will please our humors, and preach such things as follow our appetite. As
if oppression be spoken against, and we be oppressed of some, this common place
is very plausible to us, because it is against one that has injured us. Or
else we come to the word as Herod came: Let John speak as much as he will, I
will hear him: but if he come to this, that I may not have my brothers wife, I
will not hear him. But if he come to teach the Lord to speak, and to teach
him wisdom, and prescribe him to say this, and not to meddle with that, we
shall never hear fruitfully. A third thing is continual hearing: the word is
a rare thing, therefore 3. Constancy in hearing.
we must have a continual hearing. Will ye hear how God has taken answer
for this? it is said, Psalm. 95 Heb. 3. To day if ye will hear his voice. This
we know is read to day, and to morrow, and every day, and so ^or ever, and yet
all is but to day. We cannot exempt our selves, this binds our hearts, and
will have us hold out, as long as it is said to day. So then as we must pray
and be prepared to hear, and come with a purpose to hear universally, 4. A
desire to practice the thing we hear.
so must we hear continually. Yet we must add a fourth thing, and that is,
we must bring a desire to practice the things we hear. And every man must
come thus affected: I have prepared my self to hear, I will hear all, as
well that which is misliking, as that which likes me: but beware of this last,
come what come will, I will not obey. But if we vow not to hear, to lay up in
our memory, that our memory may call upon our conscience, and our conscience
call upon us to put it in practice, we cut off the sentence by the half: He
that hears the word, and keeps it, is blessed: and keeps it, here is a
conjunction copulative, and in no case we must leave it out. And there is good
reason it should be so: for as Augustine says, The word is compared to an
hammer, to a fire, to a sword, and not for nothing. The hammer bruiseth, so the
word must soften our hard hearts; the fire purges and purifieth, so the word
purges our gross affections, and purifieth our hearts; the sword pearceth,
and so the word divides between the marrow and the joints. If the Hebr. 4. 12.
word works not these effects, it loses his power. The word is a word of
power, and let every man reckon with himself, If in hearing the word I draw
not nearer to the mercy of God, I shall draw nearer to his wrath, if not to my
salvation, sure to my destruction.

3 We often hear the word, but not as the word of the Lord, and therefore we
hear it We must hear the word as Gods word, while it is day
but in part, because we think it is the word of Esai, of Peter, or of the
Minister, we think it is Hose, or Paul that speaks, but not the Lord. Well,
if we will tarry until the Lord himself come, we shall not hear nor see
him, until the heavens roll up together as a scrole, and a globe of fire
consume the face of the earth, until the Sun be turned as black as a pot,
and the sea boil as a pot of oil, and then we must rather give an account of
our hearing, than stand to hear again. Well then how are we said to hear the
word of the Lord? First we must know, that Christ received a commission from
the Lord, This is my beloved Son, hear him. Here is his commission. Then our
Savior Christ being to go to his Father, left a commission with his Apostles,
Who so hears you, hears me, who so receives you, the same receives me:
but who so refuses you, refuses me. So that to hear the Ministers is to
hear Christ, and to hear Christ is to hear the father; so that to hear the
Ministers is to hear God. And the words of Hose, and of Peter, they be the
Lords words. And all this word sent from God shall be as effectual by the
mouth of the Ministers, to convert, as if they were spoken by Christ himself.
And we know that Christ being the Minister of circumcision, converted not all
his auditors, nay he converted but a few of his hearers. Peter converted more
at one sermon, who was but his Apostle, than we read that he himself ever
converted all his life long. But if it will not be, but still we think it is
the word of the Preachers, surely by our own imaginations the Lord will punish
you, that is, it shall be unto you a man's word, Hosees word, or Peter's word,
not the word of the Lord. And then if we hear it not as the word of God, but
as the word of man, it will never do us good, it may breed some little
purpose in us, but it will never breed in us any great practice to our comfort.
So then if we hear it but as from men, we shall ^ot in our sin, and so lie
still, until the Lord find us out in the searching day of his judgment.

4 Because the doctrine of accusing, condemning, and threatening, is a scripture
unwillingly It is good to hear of the threatenings as well as of the promises.
received of men, and we shall see in most of the Prophets so long as they
prophecy peace, and speak of heaven, of grace, of mercy* they are willingly
heard: but if at any time they strike on the other string, the people would no
longer hear, but often break forth, and say, prophecy peace unto us: because (I
say) the people having made a league with death and hell, cannot abide to hear
such unsavory and nipping speeches, it must needs be, that the Lord sometime
use speeches of quarrel and controversy, and of his falling out with the
people. I know that besides that it is the general corruption of nature, it is
a special fault of these times and of this age, that if the Minister of God
thunder out the threanings of God, he shall be straight discharged to be a
Minister of Christ, he shall be now Simile.
the Minister of the Law and of Moses. For the words of grace, mercy, and
salvation are sweet words, and men can well away to hear them: but the Son
of God has not always a stream of milk and honey running out of his mouth,
but sometime a two edged sword, Apocal. 1. and it is as profitable for God his
children sometime to have a song of Sinai, as a song of Sion, and then
specially is this requisite, when the mercies of God come not by the That is in
Prosperity*
hynn, or by the peck, or by small portions, but by the Go^^er, by the Ephath,
and in full measure. Because then we may be drawn into forgetfulness, and
therefore least these things should cloy us, it is good for every ma^in the day
of peace to think of the day of controversy, and in our most quietness to know
the Lord has an indictment and an action against us, though when this age is
ripped up, we shall see the Lord his indictment rightly framed, and his
^isiprius, justly put up against us: yet when the day of the judgments of God
be threatened, we must not say they appertain to strangers, we must take the
action Why the Lord often threatens in his own person.
to proceed against our selves.

5 Though the Ministers take the Lords quarrel in hand and judge his cause, as
the Lord bids Ezechiel to avenge his quarrell^ though the Prophets, I say,
do this, or if they cease to do it, the very stones, and creatures shall do
it against unbelievers; yet as other times we see in the Prophets how al cease,
and the Lord himself pleads the controversy. Though therefore we could arm
our selves and make our part good against the creatures, and could shift off
his Prophets; yet the Lord himself entering his action against us, we had need
now diligently to look about us: for as Paul says, God will not be mocked, we
must not dally with him. Now the time when the Lord will do this, is when no
man else will plead for him, and that is partly for the negligence of his
advocates the ministers, and partly for the untowardness of the people, who
regard not the writs of his Prophets, but the Lord must be feign to come As in
public calamities.
himself. Woeful experience proves now a days, that if the ministers of the
Lord rebuke us, or if any man shall take upon him to admonish us, we are ready
to rebuke them again, and to set them to school too. When we see this
wilfulnes in the people, that speak the Prophets what they will, they can
securely shift them off, and though writs come never so thick they care not
for them, they think their feet shall never slip, and being taught they will
teach again, being rebuked they rebuke again: when it comes to this, I say,
the Lord cease to deal any longer by his atturnies, but he will descend, and
plead his own controversies. On the other side, because there be some
Prophets who cannot be admitted to plead, and others they will not plead
though Preachers.
they be admitted, but say with Balaam they will neither bless nor curse: and
some if they do speak they have Heltes spirit, and say nothing, but O my
brother, you do not well to do so, you must do otherwise, they have not
Hoseahs spirit to tell them of their sin to their faces: I say when it falls
thus out, that he that rebukes the world shall be stung, and have a swarm of
Bees, or of Waspes about him, who will not only show the tongues of Shemei,
but will set the Prophets to school: or they so deal with the Ministers, as
they did with the servants of him that let out his vineyard to husbandmen, some
they kill, some they beat, and as they deal with the messengers of David, in
cutting off their coats, and their beards to disgrace them, then the Lord
himself has a controversy with the people to plead against them.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Humility and pride.
WE cannot obtain God mercies in special measure, unless we use to humble
ourselves in special means.

2 Other men's faults must humble us, and draw us to prayer: other men's graces
must encourage us, and cause us also both to pray and to be thankful for them.

3 The greater gifts we have, the flesh is the prouder, and Satan Great graces
the readier to assault us, were it not that the Lord did humble us, sometime
to prevent Satan's work.

4 Aaron was the elder, yet he gives place to Moses the younger, reuerencing
Gods graces where he found them, and contenting himself with that measure of
grace which God had given him.

5 Moses coming out of the Kings court could not have suffered such tumults
and rebellions of the people as happened, therefore forty years was he
humbled, and so trained up that he might have compassion on Gods people, and be
more fit for government. So Joseph and David were first humbled, then were they
made rulers of the people. When we be truly humbled, God makes us more fit for
some weighty calling: for as a green piece of wood put in a building will
shrink, but being well seasoned it holds up the Simile.
building: So it is in man before he be humbled, etc.

6 Ordinarily when God most comfort, he most humbles before.

7 Pride is in four things: first, when we think we have a thing, and God wot
it is not 1. Pride.
so. This comes of self-love, as when we are delighted with our own
conceits, doings and saying, as a foolish father thinks his own bird to be
fairest. Secondly, when we make our account our gifts are more worth than they
are, looking on them through a false spectacle, as when one having some little
obedience or small grace, thinks himself able to resist any thing, presuming
on the grace bestowed on him. Thirdly, when we know we 3
have such a thing, but we acknowledge not from whence: Yes, I wis (say such) I
know that God gave them me, even the father of lights: Oh, but the idle
spending of them, our wresting of them to our pleasure (for which if we be
rebuked, then we say; what, is it not mine own, may not I do with it what I
will?) show plainly how we stand herein affected. Fourthly, when we glory
in the gift, but not in the giver, Luke 18. The Pharisie thanks 4
God, yet Christ calls him proud: Nothing more usual, than in words to
rejoice in God. Wherefore let us strive to beat down this pride which so
dwells in us: O this is the work of God to humble us: and let us remember,
that till we be truly humbled, we have no part in Jesus Christ.

8 The nearer Pharaoh was to destruction, the more fiercely he dealt with Gods
people, where we may learn, that when the wickedness of the wicked is at the
ripest, and they in Ripenes in sin Genesis 5.
their most flourishing estate, then is their destruction nearest at hand.
Examples are Belshashar. Herod and others, who in their greatest pomp
perished. Let us learn then, when we wax proud, to fear destruction, for
the Lord resists such. And that we may avoid evil, let us prepare our
selves in humility to serve the Lord: for he gives grace to the humble and
meek, and fills the hungry with good things, whereas he sends the swelling
proud, and rich in their own blind conceits, empty away.

9 When the Lord gave Manna to his people, he gave them rules to use it,
teaching us that all the creatures and gifts of God, are given man with rules
to use them, that all may Rules for the right usage of the creatures and of
Gods blessings and graces received.
serve to his glory that gave them: contrary to those which say; it is our
own, we may use it as we will. One rule was this, that all should labor in
common, that one should help another, where we see that all the gifts of God
are common (as Paul speaks, 2. Corinthians. 8*) what gifts then soever we have
received, we may not seek our own glory by them, but the profit of our
brethren, and Gods glory: we may not be proud of Gods graces, for God is
not indebted unto us, but we must remember we have received them for our
brethrens sake, to whom we be debtors: for God has so provided that they
which have less, by them which have more, may not want the things they have.
This holds in riches, in learning, in godliness, and this will pull down
all pride in our selves, and contempt of our brethren: for the more a man has,
the more he is a debtor, and therefore if a man learn not to wash his
brethrens feet, he has learned nothing. Wherefore though all men would have
duties done to them, but themselves would do few to others; yet let us
consider this, and then shall we use that strength we have, to make our
brethren strong with us; not that I should have less, and he more, but the
Lord gives me now, that I may do him good, that at another time he may do
the like to me. Whatsoever good gift then I have, I must not by it take
occasion of pride, and contemning of others which want the same, but rather I
must so apply the same to others, as that they may become rich in our riches,
learned in our learning, strong in our strength, and always find help in our
abundance.

10 First; it is a good argument to make us humble, when we know that all
things are 1 Arguments for humiliation.
given us, and therefore Paul uses this as a reason, to take away all glorying
in our selves, saying: What have thou which thou have not received? etc. The
gifts of God of themselves do not puff us up, for they are good: but the
corruption of our nature takes occasion thereby to be proud, either when we
think we have greater gifts than we have, or when we think ours to be
greater than other men's: and so lift up our selves over them, and think that
they should be in subjection under us. Again, the greater and better the
gifts are, the more do they puff us up. For what is better than the knowledge
of the word, and yet it puffs us up? Seeing then that pride does ever follow
the gifts of God, which yet are good, and given to a good end: and again,
seeing that every man has received something of God, all men ought to take
heed to themselves least this pride do not ouerwhelme them. But those more
especially are to take heed, which have received greater gifts, because more
easily they may fall. And this sin of pride must especially be taken heed
unto. For even in good things this will be ready to assail us: but other
sins are commonly in the doing of other things. Secondly, although Gods
children be ever 2
assailed with this sin, and albeit it does commonly come with the gifts of
God, yet is it not such a sin but that it may be overcome, and therefore when
we see our selves assaulted with it, we must not quail, although it were not
possible to have the upper hand of it: for we see that the children of God by
grace have from time to time overcome it, as even Paul himself, we see a man
having received rare gifts, and yet confefleth of himself, that 2. Cor 11.
he is not worthy to be called an Apostle: and in another places names
himself a servant and helper, which because he spoke unfeignedly, therefore it
is true that this sin ruled not over him. Again, Moses brought up in the
Kings court, guiding the people of Israel to the promised land, seeing God face
to face, yet was a very meek man, yea, the very meekest man Numb. 12. 1.
that lived upon the earth: and so was David, with others, which having
received singular gifts, yet remained meek and humbled, because the grace of
God overcame their corruption: and all these examples do take away all excuse
from us, if we do yield and be overcome with the same. Thirdly, the means
which God uses to cure this Pride in his, is generally the knowledge of their
own corruption and misery: for if we rightly know 3 Means to cure pride.
that, it will minister matter enough to humble us: yea, if we look unto our
first estate, even there we may be humbled: first, because we were made of
dust. Secondly, seeing our state was subject to falling and change: Nay, if we
look to the state in which we are by grace, we may learn humility: First,
because we stand by grace and favor: secondly, because many infirmities are
in us: but most of all, if we behold our state by Nature; for there we see
nothing but destruction, because we be the children of wrath. Thus Paul was
Romans 7.
humbled by beholding his natural corruption: but it was no light
consideration which he had of it, but a deep meditation, as is manifest in
that he calls it the Minister of Satan, a prick, etc. Paul when he saw
his corruption rebel, he therein did behold 2. Cor. 12.
Satan as our Savior Christ did, when Peter tempted him, because as Peter
says, he goes about continually, seeking sometime by our corruption,
sometime by other means to destroy us; and therefore he did more diligently
watch and arm himself against him, as it behooued him, being besieged of so
mighty an enemy. This therefore is the cause why we are overcome with our
afflictions, because we make but a light matter of them, and do not watch and
arm our selves against them. And in that Paul says, the Minister of Satan
was sent to buffet him, he shows what power the devil has, and that he can
do nothing, but as he has license granted from God, as appeared in the
story of Job, and other places; and yet Satan buffeted him, that is, after a
most contemptuous manner used him: where again we see what account Paul makes
of corruption, when he compares it to this spightfull dealing. Again, when
he calls it a prick or stubbe, he Simile.
shows how it grieved him: for as a man that has a long journey to go among
stubbes, will soon be weary; So Paul, considering his continual journey
which he had to go, wherein his corruption did still prick him, did show by
this speech that it was grievous unto him.

11. He said, howsoever he would not deny duties to any inferior,
superior, or equal; Humility.
yet none ever went to his heart with inestimate love, (so as he made an
inward account of him) but such as had some feeling of sin, and some grief
for inward corruption: See 1. p. counsels.
For he could not see how otherwise men had any thing but in Knowledge. Nay,
he thought where profession of the Gospel was severed from practice and
conversation, that their knowledge might be more perilous then profitable.
And among other gifts of GOD, he thought Humility to be a virtue, most
beseeming the Gospel and Christianity, which did appear in this, in that
hypocrisy did often shelter Hypocrisy.
it self under it, which it would doubtless never do, were it not a virtue
most commendable. Of two sorts of pride.


12 There are two sorts of pride, the one of opinion, the other of action: the
one is mother of heresies, the other is the worm of riches. Of the first sort
are they, who say not Matter heraeseon, Vermis diuitiarum.
with Moses, Lord what am I? but they say in their own pride, Lord what am not
I? They do not make dainty with Jeremiah to groan, and to say, Oh I am but
young, etc. but they are bold as the brier, when all others, and their betters
refuse; they cry, I will rule over all: of the other sort are they, who once
being conceited, lash out all their riches in excess of diet, in vanity of
apparel, and such like, and then they will be proud as the Italian, newfangled
as the Spaniard, drunken with the Grecian, gluttons with the Muscouite, cruel
as the Tartarian. Our Fathers by Gods appointment are said to wear skins, and
are commanded to go in garments of Camels hair, we, as though we would correct
the Lord Pride in apparel and strange attire
for some insufficiency in his work, devise strange attire. Of one beast we
have the skin, of the other we have the furre: of one bird we have one feather,
of another another feather. We carry a pearl to shine on our finger, and a
burden of silk to glister on our backs, yea, we were the very excrements of
some beasts, and then we think all this is of our selves. And that which is
more, we give not rest to the dead, but we borrow of them to set on living
bodies; as though the Lord had not perfected his work in it, unless we our
selves make the work more beautiful. And yet more monstrous is that, which
makes me marvel what our proud dames mean to set up signs in their
forheads Tauerners Pride of women which set up signs in their foreheads.
indeed have signs to call in all that go by, freely to come in, and there to
have entertainment; and what can be thought of our signs on women's heads, but
that they mean to make tauernes of their bodies, to entertain whosoever will
come to them? Well, if neither the Prophets can prevail, nor Preachers can
profit to the taking away of this pride, I will say, that as the Lord will not
let his spirit always to strive with man, so will he not let his word always
strive with man; but they shall die in their sins, in which now they lie in
peace, and without all reclaim they shall go to the Hels, with which they
have made a covenant.

13 Man seems to be great, he is (...) they call him (...), he is naturae
miraculum, mensurarerum omnium: but better things about man than these,
Augustine reduces to four letters of his name, the 4. parts of the world,
(...), A. (...) A. (...) whereby he would signify that it was either a
Compendium of the whole world, or that he had dominion of every part of the
earth. Besides, Adam is said to be the son of God, even by adoption. I
confess it to be a great dignity, but then we must know that it is rather in
the great goodness of God, than in the worthiness of man: and all these
titles which he gives to man, as that he calls Magistrates Gods, and
Ministers Angels, and the Apostle says, Ye are a kingly Priesthood: these do
not so much declare the excellency of man in himself, as the great goodness
of God, that he should vouchsafe to communicate some part of his excellency
with man: yet man must not so suffer himself to be flattered of Satan, that
he think better of himself than he should, or less reverently of God than he
ought. The devil feeling the fruit of his former pride, when he would needs
try how well Gods seat would become him, he would feign have brought man
also to the same presumption, that he, whose felicity he now did envy,
being found in the same fault, might have tasted of the like punishment with
him. And without doubt al men should have done, had not God of his great
goodness otherwise provided for man. But what is man, that God should so
wonderfully provide for him, leaving his own Angels unprovided for, I mean
those that were his Angels, before they fell? Surely if we consider man not as
he is in Christ, but in his own nature, we shall see what he is, not a God as
he would have bin, nor as an Angel as he shall be, but such a thing as may
^eare any (...), or extenuation that can be devised; yet our corrupt nature is
ready to dispute with God, and we will not fear to say unto God as Job said
unadvisedly, chapt. 13. Who is he that will plead with me? then speak thou,
and I will answer thee, or let me speak, and answer thou me: Thus Job
challenging God to disputation, was ready either to answer him, or to reply
upon him. But what art thou O man, that disputest with GOD? And indeed when
God being provoked to disputation, had disputed with Job a while, and had urged
him very sore, Job could Job. 39. 37. 38.
answer him nothing, but this, Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I
will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more.
Alas then, what is man, either in wisdom or in worth? In wisdom (though as
Zophar* said, Man would be wise, though he be but a young Asses colte) what is
he to GOD? In strength, nothing: for though the Lord had need, as he has
not, what could man help him? Man is not great in view, nor a rock in his
flesh, a little pain does trouble him, a small disease does cast him down* a
little affection carries him hither and thither, and though he overcome all
these, yet he is weak to resist death: and if we could do the Lord good, I
think he would not use us, because we are by natare ready to take part and to
join hands with the enemy against God himself. Again, man's time cannot be
great, being but a spanne long, and yet a little Emot will be long in creeping
the space of a spanne, this time is the time of a post, bird, arrow, or
thought; a post has but a small time, a bird in her flight has lesser, and an
arrow less than that, but a thought has almost no time at all. And in my
judgment, besides all this, there is great reason why God should not make any
account of man, if it please him to use lege talionis, because that man does
not make any account of God: and seeing we esteem not God, I see no reason why
he should esteem us; and that we do not esteem him, this shows that we
prefer before him our profit, our pleasure, and all. Our parents left him for
an apple: Ahab had rather have Naboths vineyard than have him: we all like our
pleasures better than him generally: we will not stick to sell bodies and
souls for a little thing, and indeed for less than Esau sold his birthright.
But of all places to show the mercy of God in choosing us, and our vileness
being chosen, the Apostle (^. Cor. 1. 27.) 1. ta mora to^ ^osmou. 2. ta as there
e 3. ta ag^ ^. 4* ta exouth^^^m^^a. 5. ta me ^^ta
brings in five notable tokens of them whom God has chosen, whereof four
are very base, and the fifth is less than nothing: 1. The foolish things of the
world* 2. the weak things of the world, 3. the vile things of the world, 4.
things that are despised, 5* things that are no^.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of hypocrisy, and hardness of heart.
HYpocrites turn the inward side outward, the godly turn the outward side
inward: the hypocrite begins where the godly man ends, and the godly man
begins where How hypocrisy differs from true godliness.
the hypocrite ends: the hypocrite gallopeth into great shows at the first,
godliness proceeds in holiness by de grees, as being troubled with a great
house of sin, which they are feign to draw after them.

2 We must not profess all outwardly, which is within, Simile.
but as good merchants, keeping somewhat rather in the Hypocrites like
bankerupts.
storehouse of our hearts, than as bankerupts which spend all at once, or make
a show of all in our shop.

3 In Pharaoh ye shall find these special notes of Hypocrisy: Trial of our
joy after affliction.
Take this death from me, one^y this once. So many being in distress, have
more prayed for the release of pain, than for the forgiveness of sins, which
cause the pain. And therefore such being released are nothing the better, as
may often be observed. Contrariwise, Sickness.
if we be grieved more for sin, than for the punishment, and can well bear the
punishment, so that the sin were taken away, then it is a certain sign that
we shall live uprightly, if the cup of affliction be taken from us: and
assuredly it shall be taken away, or else recompensed with some spiritual
grace. Note well.


4 The drunken peace of hypocrites must not be ^oupled with oil, but pierced
with the two-edged sword of Gods word, to the discovering of the secret
corruption of the heart.

5 It is the temptation of the godly, to fear whatsoever they do, they do it
in hypocrisy: They that s^e their secret hypocrisy with grief, shall do
well.
but they are to know for their comfort, that therefore they be not hypocrites,
because they see their hypocrisy; which kind of hypocrisy in them, is not
the gross deceiving which is in the wicked, but that secret corruption of
nature, which mixeth it self in the best actions of the godly. Neither is it
possible to leave this sin wholly, as long as we live, but to see it and
mislike it, is all that is required, and can be performed of us. The godly do
not desire to seem to do any thing better than indeed they do it: neither
Godly simplicity.
do they desire to seem to do that which they do not. And whenever they
do epsy any weakness in themselves, they mourn for it. And this desire of a
perfect sincerity, and mislike of privy hypocrisy, is unto them a sure zeal
of their salvation and sanctification in Christ.

6 When men suffer themselves to be deceived, it is to be feared they will be
hardened. Hardness of heart.
Let us remember that (Gods grace assisting) sin may easily be conquered of
us, when it is young, but we may easily be overcome of it when it is old.

7 It is easy to fall into hardness of heart by continuance in evil customs
without remorse: we see then it is a good thing to be moved betimes, and often
to be moved, for it is a precious thing to have a melting heart; as contrary,
a dangerous thing to have a hard heart, not yielding to truth. Let us not
harden our hearts, least the Lord also come to harden us, Heb. 3. For many not
altogether abstain at the first, yet yielding to sin, become obstinate
altogether at the last. Admonition is a means to keep us from it. We should
then be ready to give ear to good counsel and admonition, and be willing
also to admonish others. It is in vain to control the outward senses, without
the rebuking of the heart.

8 Exodus 10. 1. the Lord says of Pharaoh, I have hardened his heart: because
Pharaoh had a long time hardened his own heart (as is recorded in the former
chapters) therefore here the Lord is said to harden it; that is, wholly to give
him over to the devil So man is said to harden his heart, when he will not
hear Gods word, the devil when he governs us, and Psalm. 95. Romans 1. Heb.
3. Peccatum paena peccati. Psalm. 69. 27.
the Lord when he leaves us in Satan's handling. Man then is guilty of this
sin, and the Lord does justly harden for the punishment of former sins. The
Lord is said to harden, as he is said to lead into temptation, and that is
when he withdraws his spirit from us, and leaves us to our selves, and then
we stay not long till we be hardened. Pharaoh had many plagues, yet this is the
greatest, for if his heart had not been hard, these would have had an end: but
this hardness made the other but tas^s of hell, because we do less fear this
great plague than many other. We ought to correct this in our selves, for the
children of God must fear this more than any other plague. For if we do but
fear worldly punishments, so do the wicked: but if we do fear hardness of
heart, and other spiritual punishments, then we may be sure Gods spirit has
wrought that fear. If we covet worldly things, this do the Heathen, Matthew. 6:
but if we desire the light of Gods countenance, Psalm 119. and 4. and 67. this
do Gods dear children. Wherefore as we labor for these things which our
nature desires, and fear the contrary, so let us labor for the light of Gods
spirit, and fear least it be quenched in us, or else decayed: as when we fear
poverty, we labor to be rich; and when we fear sickness, we labor to
prevent it: so let us labor for our souls, so long as we feel a taste in
Gods word, fear his judgments, and be comforted in his mercy: if we labor to
increase the graces received, the Note.
Lord no doubt will work with us; but if this be not in us, it is to be feared
least the Lord will harden.

9 All men are naturally evil, so that if the Lord give not light and
softness of heart, we may all be justly hardened, and this is as just as other
judgments of God are. When any thing is spoken in the Word which touches
another, that man will greedily snatch: Again, if there be any thing that may
cherish them in their sins, that they note, but that which concerns their
amendment they utterly forget. And this shows that we are the cause of our
own hardening: for when the Lord cannot prevail with his word, then will he
leave men to themselves, and then they stay not till they come to hardness. We
must not stay till the Lord strike us with punishments (for if we be hardened,
we shall not perceive it, and therefore the case is so much the more dangerous)
but so soon as we feel any coldness or dullness of spirit, then let us fear
and stir up our selves, that we may continually gain some knowledge and
feeling: and thus may we provide against hardness of heart.

10 First, the hypocrite desires rather to seem than to be, it is said such
cry, Lord, 1
Lord, they are most glorious. Secondly, he is more busy about the outward
work, than 2
about the spiritual and acceptable manner of performing the same, Mat. 23. 27.
Thirdly, he works his salvation securely and coldly, not with fear and
trembling, as Phil. 2. 12. not striving with his rebellious lusts, nor longing
after the gifts of regeneration, nor forgetting that which is behind,
endeavoring himself forward. Philip. 3. 13. Fourthly, he has 4
no resolute purpose to endure, but is wavering and unconstant in all his
ways, not cleaving Marks of hypocrisy.
to the Lord with purpose of heart, Act. 11. 23. Fifthly he is more careful to
stop the gross sins, than to damme up the fountain, without sense of the
conflict of the law of 5
the members and the spirit, as Romans 7. 24. Sixthly, he is stirred to do well,
by some worldly 6
reason liking his fancy and fleshly appetite, not constrained by the mercy
of God, as Psalm. 1 30. 4 Romans 12. 1. or by the love of Christ, as 2. Cor. 5.
14. Seventhly, he does more 7
often regard the fear, favor and praise of men, than of God, and his private
commodity, than that of his brethren. These are his characters, and yet
eighthly, he hides many 8
things under the cloak of popularitie, and guilefull affected clemency. So
did Absalom hide his unnatural treason. So did the troublers of the state of
Rome with their Leges Agrariae. Ninthly under the cloak of keeping company
with those, upon whom we may 9
bear our selves bold, and which may back us, when we have done evil.
Tenthly, under De agris populo diuidend^s, Liui^s l. 2.
the cloak of clinging to their company, which are good men and are well
thought of, not to better our selves, but to credit our doings the more, and to
make us more commended 10
to the people, as Nouatus did upon his confessions. Eleuenthly, under the
cloak of law, 11
and execution of justice, when some other wicked affection is the cause of
their doings, and the law but their pretense, as Iezabel in putting to death
Naboth, did it not for the 12
vineyard, but to see justice kept, and as the Lords of Persia against Daniel.
Twelfthe, under the cloak of religion, zeal and conscience, when deep in
their hearts they hide some other meaning, as Simeon and Leui in procuring the
Sichemites to be circumcised, as Absalom in making the shadow of his
conspiracy the performing of his vow in Hebron, as Iezabel making the way to
bloodshed on the innocent by the proclamation of a fast, as Caiphas adiuring
Christ in Gods name to make them know who he was, that way to take him.

11 Hypocrisy is seen when sin most lies dead under a cloak, and most
lies in a closet, wherewith God is displeased, that when we make no
conscience of sin in close places, our privy sins shall break out in
public places.

12 The holy Ghost, Ezech. 24. 6, compares hypocrites to a pot that outwardly
seetheth, but within the scumme remains. And Hoseah in his 7. chapter
compares them to a Simile.
cake, whereof the one side is well baked, and the other side is plain dow.
And Christ compares them in his days, to such as wash the outside of the cup
and platter, but leave the inside filthy. Our common similies whereby we
resemble these men is a course cloth, having a fine list.

13 When two gentlemen ride on hunting, it is hard to discern each others
hounds, because they are mingled together, which afterward is more easily
done when the hunters are severed: even so, so long as God and the world walk
together, it is hard to distinguish between the heirs of the one and of the
other: but when they are severed by the cross, it will surely be seen who be
the children of God, who be the heirs of the world.

14 In natural men we find these marks: first, that natural men measure
others by 1
themselves, so did these brethren judge of Joseph. So does the world judge
hardly of Gods How natural men measure others by themselves.
children, because they are ungodly themselves: so those that think to correct
or admonish in anger, think that others do so too, because they come of fashion
to the Church, they think so of others. When we are ready then to think
evil of others, let us take heed we be not so our selves, and let us learn
to leave this, for the sin is great. For first, we bear false witness
against our brother. Secondly, we be enemies to the grace of God in them:
because in this our corruption, we cannot judge well of them. The ready
remedy is to pull out the beam out of our own eye, and to judge charitably
of others. Secondly, a natural man does more abstain from evil, for man than
for God: and so will it be, till 2
the fear of God be settled in us, to teach us Gods providence in things to
come, and his judgments in things past. This was with Esau, because the days
of his father were at hand. So many are now restrained by the magistracy,
which otherwise would do evil: so long as it is with us thus, we are but
hypocrites, and not regenerate. The remedy is, to consider Gods providence, to
commit vengeance to him, to overcome evil with goodness: and then shall we
do things for conscience sake, and not for fear. Thirdly, the torments of 3
Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. Prou. ^8. To fear me^.
an evil conscience, is the punishment of sin: the wicked shall fly, when
none pursues: whenever then our conscience does trouble us, let us know
that our sins are in us* whereof we are not purged. When we fear men, it is
either for the want of the assurance of Gods merciful providence, or
forgiveness of our sins, or for that we have done the like to others: as
Caine thought every one would slay him, because he slew his brother. If we
have not done them harm, and yet fear as Abraham did Abimelech, then it is
the want of Gods providence, which rises of the want of the forgiveness of our
sins: for if we fear the creature, it is because we are not reconciled to
the Creator. The remedy of Fear and the remedy of it.
this fear of men, is to learn faith in Christ, for the free forgiveness of
our sins and the assurance of his providence: then shall we say, we fear
not what man can do against us: yea, then shall we deal uprightly with
others, so that if then others deal euilly with us, and we pay them the things
which we never took, we have the comfort of our conscience and are blessed
because we suffer for well-doing.

15 In manners, men will first listen to wicked counsel, then take pleasure in
their company, till at last they communicate with them in their evils: an^ as
they grow in liking of those evil counselors, so do they loathe those that
give good counsel and despise them: yea, when the Minister speaks privily
to them by admonition, or openly out of the word; they think he speaks of
purposed malice and hatred against them: and so shut their ears, and harden
their hearts when any thing is spoken for their amendment: but if a word be
spoken which concerns another, or else may cherish them in their sins, that
do they greedily snatch and lay hold of. All which shows that men are the
cause of their own hardness: for when the Lord cannot prevail by his word*
then leaves he men unto themselves, which stay not till they come to hardness.
This must teach us with fear to examine our hearts, to prove what love of the
truth remains in us, and what liking we have of lies, what hearts we bear to
those which give us wholesome counsel to reclaim us from sin, or whether
we rather incline to those that feed our ears with such words, as may serve
to nouzell us in our sins, because the child of GOD may come to this through
often infirmity: but when he sees it, it is time to bestirre himself, and
to fear least those fearful beginnings do bring him at the last, utterly to
fall away.

16 The first means to keep us from hardness of heart, is to fear it long
before: for if we once be fallen into this, then are we past all sense and
feeling, and cannot perceive it, and therefore our case is more fearful and
dangerous, as those are which fall into some great disease of the body and know
it not. Again, if we be not of hardened hearts, then the word may work with
us, and all other afflictions may have their effect, and so have a good end,
but if our hearts be once hardened, then all our plagues are unfruitful unto
us: yea they are nothing else, but even a taste of hell, and of those
punishments which are and abide for ever. So had Pharaoh many and great
plagues, yet because his heart was hardened, he profited not, but ran on
forward till he was utterly destroyed. But Job, whom the Lord had not yet
forsaken, profited by all his miseries, and had a good and joyful issue, and
escaped from them. Therefore the children of God do fear it more than all
other A hardened heart, a greater plague than any of the plagues of Egypt.
punishments, and had rather be plagued with all the miseries of Job, and the
botches of Egypt, than with an heart that is hardened. It goes not well with
us then, when we fear wordly and bodily punishments, more than we do hardness
of heart, and other spiritual punishments, for even here is a difference
between the wicked and the children of God: for the wicked are ever greatly
troubled for fear of outward afflictions, but the spiritual punishments of
the soul do never a whit affect them. Contrariwise, the children of God do
above all things dread spiritual punishments, as for outward troubles, they
are content to bear them, and are grieved no otherwise for them, than as they
are signs of Gods displeasure, this is a good note to try our selves by. The
second is a true desire and love to have a melting heart, to be often touched
with the word, and with David to desire the understanding of the word above all
worldly treasures, and the light of his loving countenance Psalm. 119.
above all earthly help or treasure: for the worldly men do greedily hunt
after worldly things, and think themselves best at ease when they enjoy them,
we must then not be like minded to these men, but earnestly desire the former,
and then it will be an undoubted sign of the spirit of God. The third remedy
against hardness of heart, is to join to the fear above named, and continually
to labor and strive against it, in using carefully all those means which may
serve thereunto, and as in our nature there is a continual desire of earthly
things* so should we continually be moved to pray, that in spirit we may
daily labor and strive against it, and as the husbandman, fearing poverty
because his goods decay, or his ground brings not forth his fruit, does
labor more carefully to lay up against the time of need, like unto Joseph
when he was in Egypt; and as the ma^^ Genesis 41. 56.
fearing sickness, because his natural powers are weakened, or his stomach
waxes weak, will by Physic and other means labor to prevent it: so we
must do against hardness of heart, for so long as we feel taste in Gods word,
to be humbled by his threatenings, and comforted by his promises, if we strive
and contend to grow in grace, the Lord no 2. Pet. 3. 1^.
doubt is with us. But if we wax weary of the world, and can feel not taste
in it; if we cannot be terrified by his threatenings, nor affected by his
promises, then is our case dangerous, and we have good cause to fear least the
Lord will harden us: therefore must we in daily hearing and reading of the
word, labor to come to some feeling of it, and in our quiet state, whiles the
world is with us, lay up such things in store, as may be able to comfort us,
when our ministers are removed, and the world taken from us. But many will be
like Joseph to provide for the dearth, but they will not store themselves with
spiritual food against the time when the word shall be taken away. Now if
through infirmity we do fall, and the light of the spirit be darkened, and
our hearts begin to be hardened, then let us call to mind our former practice
which we have had in the word, and remember the care we had to keep it, and
it will be a great help to recover us again. For David no Psalm. 77.
doubt was very well helped in his greatest conflicts, by the remembrance of
those places which aforetime he had read*

17 When as in receiving of meat, the meat that nourishes, is changed into
us, it is far If we apply* we must apply to the heart.
otherwise in the chirurgerie of our souls* For in receiving of the word and
of the Sacraments which feed the soul, they are not changed into the qualities
of us, but we are changed into them. It is the folly of the world now adays,
and the evil that troubles, not only the base people, but the great also and
the wise, that they think they must give sap and juice to nourish the word,
rather tha^ that they should suffer their wisdom to be maintained by the sap
of the word, and they will set the Lord to learn of them. Well, in applying
there is a great reason we apply to the heart* It is the principal place for
God to work on, it is the usual place that Satan most inue^gleth, and
therefore it must needs have a plaster* And here we inquire not only Esaus
heart, who said in his heart, the days of mourning for my Father will come
shortly, then I will slay my brother Jacob* Genes. 27. 42. but Sarahs heart
too, who hearing she should conceive in her old age, laughed in her heart,
etc. So that they must come to this cure, Esaus mourning heart, and Sarahs
unbelieving heart* ^ea and with them, all hearts. Apply the plaster to any
place save to the heart, and it will do no good. If the disease come from the
heart, as all sickness of sin does, lay to the hand the plaster, or to the
foot, or to the face, though it heal in one place, it will break forth in
another, because unless the heart be well purged and cured, it will still
minister new matter of corruption into every part of the body. We are not then
to be healed at the ear as we think we may, and yet many will not so much
as be eare-wise: we must not be healed in the brain, for many will go so
far in hearing, that they may be braine-wise: but we must be cured at the
heart, for it is required we should be heart-wise. Well, many will come so far
too, as they will conceive and judge well of things, so that they grow
tongue-wise, and can discourse and talk well of things, but yet for that the
heart is not truly touched, they are as vain in sin, and as much subject to
pinching sorrows for sin as any other. Great cause then the fountains be
stayed, and the principal parts plastered: for if there be a world of sin
in the tongue (as Saint James says) then there be a great many worlds of
wickedness in the hear^^^ there be a beam to be sound in Mark. 6.
the eye of one hypocrite (as Christ admonishes) then there is a whole sta^ke
in the heart.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Heresy, and many corrupt kinds of knowledge, and how the
devil pester^th the Church with evil teachers.
WE must humble our selves to see Heretics do more for vaineglorie, and for
their s^ct, than we will do ^or Gods glory, and for his truth.

2 The nearer heresy comes in likeness to the truth, the more Heresy.
dangerous it is.

3 It is a dangerous thing to have a proud^ spirit, with a vain mind, for
Note.
the^e sins lead men to heresy.

4 The ^^ue^ seems to be very strong: for as the wise conclude, if they that
are courageous, In what thing and how far the devil may be sai^ to be strong.
were also politic; or they that have wisdom, had also courage, none could
stand with them. Wherefore these are dismembered in men, but in the devil they
^un^^e both together: for he is both courageous as a Lion, and sub^ill as a
Serpent. This is he that foiled all men from the first Adam to the last man, in
whose hand all the ^athers were no stronger than vanity: and in this age he
has made the high pinacles of ve^^^e the Iowe shrubs of the earth. Besides
this combination of strength and wisdom, beside this proof of his courage in
all ages, Christ himself, who is his enemy, says ^e is strong, Luke 22. 20.
Nay, I will add more, Christ that overcame him, pronounces ^^m to be a sh^^^d
enemy. If he has ^een strong, he is more strong, both because the world
waxes shorter, and we grow securer. In these latter days, the more the d^u^^
rages, the more his strength increases; for anger is the whe^^^one of
strength: the elder the world waxes, the more the devil rages: For as he
plaieth with me^, so he practices with the world, he la^eth his sorest siege
in his last assault when death begins to moderate ^im. And no marvel, for
if he take a foil, or suffer the repulse in our life time, he may recover with
ease, and come again with some hope; but because in death, either now or
never, he must bestir himself, he follows with all force. Secondly, he
rages the more, for our security or little accounting of temptation, and not
serious b^thinking of the matter, makes him the stronger; so as o^^ negligence
Omnia facit diabolus non tam potentia sua quam negligentia nostra.
does inarme his diligence. He is strong enough without a^^our and yet ^o be
sure he will put on armor too Goliath was strong, and yet he go^ armor, which
shows great diligence; we are weak and ^eede armor, and yet seek it not,
which shows extreme negligence. Thus diligent is the devil. Sow no tares nor
cockle, and yet in the fallow it will grow Simile.
fast enough; but he cannot content himself with that growth, but he will sow
also, yea and plough too, because he looks for a plentiful harvest. This is
his good hus^a^dry, though his crop would be good of it self, yet he will sow.
No marvel then though Peter co^tenteth not himself to call him a Lion, but a
ramping Lion: and John terms him not only a Serpent, but an old Serpent,
having by experience gotten a perfect habit: and Paul asc^ibeth to him not
only darts, but fiery darts. The armor of this enemy is partly the
revelations of flesh and blood, partly the corrupt example of the world. The
devil has a motion in us, and straightway it seems a revelation to flesh
and blood. Do evil, says the devil; do so, says the flesh, and strik^s
the matter deeper; do so as Preachers do it, says the world, and this
pierces to the bone. If we could wring out these two pieces of armor, we
Examples see before. Ther^ be four special companions of sin.
were strong. Now the devil as a Prince, John 13. 14. possesses not always
in his own person, but by lieutenants and ambassadors, who take up the title
of his soul to his interest. This deputy or vicegerent is sin, which takes
us up as tenants for the devil: and this deputy is accompanied with four
Tetrarches: The first is ignorance, where with when he had taken possession of
our fathers, they might keep good houses well enough, and have many gifts
indeed, for he knew that for all that, they were never the nearer to
salvation. 1. Ignorance.
Secondly, if the devil sees knowledge must needs come in, and ignorance must
2. Error.
needs go out, he sends out Error, which must make men if they will needs be
knowing, either Trinitaries, or Arria^s, or Anabaptists, or such like, who may
live well indeed, and make a great show of godliness, but all for his greater
aduan^age to win the more souls. Thirdly, Worldliness succeeds, who dares
play his part even upon them that have pure knowledge, whom neither Ignorance,
nor Error could prevail against: 3. Worldliness.
but if these prevail not, then comes Hypocrisy, and he will sift us, and
search us to the quick. If an Angel from Heaven should withstand us to the
face, we dare boldly pronounce, that ignorant, erroneous and worldly men, such
as will take order for God; when their barnes are full, and all Hypocrites,
have surely unclean spirits breathing in them, 4. Hypocrisy
Ephesians. 3 2. 3.

5 There are many kinds of knowledge: The common course of the world is set
Of many corrupt ki^d^ of knowledge* and what is the right knowledge.
down, Micah. 6 26 Ombries statutes are sought for knowledge of Law-points.
Christ, Matt. 16. complains of another kind of knowledge: Ye see in the
Evening, the sky is red, etc. but know ye the face of the Heavens, and are
yet ignorant of the knowledge which brings everlasting life? A third kind of
knowledge there is spoken of, Amo^ 8. 5. and Prouerhs 20. where a kind of
people had a grace in making of the Ephah small, and the Shekle great. We have
learned a trim part of knowledge to trippe men in buying and 1
selling. Another knowledge there is Ecclesiasticus 30 24. when people keep
much ad^e 2
about keeping of bullockes, and that so far, as they first prefer them:
but God and his 3
kingdom are sought for afterward: Indeed these things are lawful for him
that has first 4
affected his own soul to seek the kingdom of God, but to make the knowledge
of God come after, is preposterous.

There is another knowledge, and that is of the law of God, which men make so
small account of, that the Lord complains by his Prophet: how he has taken
pains to write the mysteries of the law, and men think it a strange thing; the
knowledge of God his word is hard to them. Well we must enter one way or other,
and therefore it shall be profitable to search and survey the ways. One way is
set down Ephesians. chap. 4. 17* where the Apostle 1
planting true knowledge forewarneth of going away in the vanity of their own
mind, neither by adding or detracting, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and. 12. 32 Apoc. 22. 1^.
nor by cutting out the book in pieces, as in Jeremy. This way is more flatly
set down, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Ye shall not ^oe whatsoever every man thinks good in
his own eyes: that is, if ye ever purpose to thrive in heavenly knowledge ye
must not say: Me thinks this is good, or that is good, but ye must fetch all
from the fountain of the knowledge of God, which is warranted. A second way is
2
chalked out, 2. Chron. 17 3* 4* where the Lord begins to commend Iehosaphat
for walking uprightly after his commandments, not after the manner of Israel.
But we walk after the trade of Israel Be it spoken therefore to the face of
all flesh, what man soever walks thus after the trade of Israel, his blood be
upon himself. The third way is sounded 3 Example.
to us, 1. Pet. 3. 17. 18. Because we persuade our selves to walk well, when
we walk after example, because thus, and thus did our fathers walk. Peter
meets with this way, and says, Christ has redeemed us from the traditions
of the fathers. This way would the woman of Samaria have walked, John 4* had
not our Savior put her into the right way. Let us learn to walk out of the
way of custom, and to come into the way of God. Though all the world go this
way or that way, yet let us say with Josh. chap* 24 13. I and my house will
walk aright, and so shall we grow from knowledge to knowledge, until all
appear^ before God in Sion. We must not then make Gods word a stranger, because
we will have it thus, if it be according to my reason, or according to the
fashion of the world, or according to my forefathers, but setting these aside,
let us grow in the word of the Lord. There is another thing much hi^dring this
knowledge of God, that is, when we have a glimmering sight we cast of al
guides, and yet in worldly things we have no end where should be an end: our ^ns
are never gray headed, but in heavenly knowledge we quickly make an and, where
should be 4 Preseuera^ce.
no end. Many can be content to know, but Paul would not have us children in
knowledge, and therefore writing to the mother city of good learning he runs
still on this point with the Corinthians, know ye not, know ye not? a speech
of a reprehension. Sometime we shall see in his allegations no Prophet, no
book, no Chapter, no verse named, a greater matter, a high knowledge they had
without all quotation, we have Prophet, Book, Chapter, verse Note.
named, and yet no knowledge. Yet these are the times, that Daniel chapter 12.
4. speaks Knowledge.
of the increasing of knowledge, and Joel chapter 2. 28. says, that the Lord
will not drop but power out knowledge on all, not on the Jews alone; but
Esaias more plainly, chap. 52 8. reports that we shall see eye to eye, and
chap. 62. he says that the knowledge of Confer Zach. 12. 10. Joel. 2. 28.
with Esaias.
the men under the Gospel shall be greater than the knowledge of the Priests
in the law: if we should be such, we had need to begin betime. Well it is
an hard saying, that this knowledge is required of us, but it is true, and we
shall surely be met withal. Look on the Primitive Church, and ye shall see
women so desirous of knowledge, that they would be so eger of it, that they
would be asking questions in the Church, so as the Apostle was 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
feign to moderate them. But we need not this moderation, of whom Esaias
speaks more truly, that precept must be upon precept, line unto line, there
a little, and there a little, and all littles make but a little with us, Esaias
28. 10. A wonderful thing. Ministers cannot now adays bring out of their
treasury things new and old, because they must still teach principles. Well it
is a note of reprobation still to be learning, and not to be learned, to be
still at the dug, and never to be past our A. B. C. But to do ill, we have
wit at will, Iere. 4. 22. we refuse the running water, we choose puddle water,
but for the pure water we neither have it, nor will have it.

6 Every Church, every commonwealth, every University has both land and
dunghill, The devil pestereth the Church with ill teachers and blind guides.
howsoever we shuffle them togther, making the land, where the dunghill
should be, and the dunghill, where the land should be, because we consider
not, that we have the charge of Acheldama. i. of a field, not of Judas blood,
but of Christ's blood. And hereof it is, that sin is the rankest corn in this
field, which shall never be otherwise, until we cease making husbandmen of
the shreds and dregs of the people. But it is Satan's policy not to strike at
every shrub on the hill, but at the trees of Libanon in mount Sion, from The
flock of Christ is bought with Christ's blood
whence should come sound and sure timber to the building of Salomons Temple.
He knows it is more dangerous to poison the fountain, whereof all drink,
than the cup whereof one drinks: and therefore he has well provided the
Ministry to be but a spring whereat all the wild Asses quench their thirst.

7 Men must look what follows of sin: Heathen men say that a man differs
from a beast in this, that he sees things to come in his actions, saying. What
shall I get of this, or that? or what will become of it, if I do it? I get
this commodity, etc. A beast is only carried to prevent things, does that
which is before sense: some of them perceive somewhat, as the weather; but that
is not by discourse of reason, as man does, but by instinct of nature which God
gave them at the creation. The same difference is between the spiritual man
and the carnal; the carnall-man sees what will follow, but goes no further
than this world, and compass of it, as what profit or harm will come by this
or that: the godly goes to the word, and sees what that speaks of life to
come.

CHAP. XL. Ofthe judgments of God, and how just he is in judgment, and how
his promises and threatenings to Israel, appertain to us.
LEt the wicked rebel as they will, and think how by their subtilties they
may escape Gods threatened judgments for a while; yet they shall be pursued
from far, and shall taste the heavy hand of God, both fearfully and
wonderfully: as we see in Achab 2. Chron. 18. 33. and others: wherefore let the
judgments of God ever humble us, for if they do not humble us, assuredly they
fall upon us.

2 It is a good property of faith, to fear the word when we see not Gods
judgments: So believed Noah before the flood came. So feared Josiah and he
had peace; so feared Ahacuck, chap. 3. This if we do we shall escape
punishments, as those did; but if we do not, then we cannot escape.

3 As there was not one of the Israelites perished, so was there not one of the
Egyptians See death and judgment.
escaped; which is a type of the last judgment of God, wherein as not one of
the wicked shall escape, so shall there not one of the godly perish.

4 We may not doubt, albeit we see not Gods promises forthwith accomplished:
neither must we be secure, because we see his judgments and threatenings
delaied, as they did in Ieremies time: for though he tarry a while, yet will
he certainly come at last, and that more speedily to us than to them, because
our sins are greater, for that we have greater means of knowledge than they
had.

5 They that mock long at Gods judgments, will mock in the end and be
mocked: wherefore it is good to pray for inward reverence, before God sends
outward vengeance. When the Lord accuses and judges us to show himself just
and innocent, he will have none other to witness against us than the
mountains, or the heavens and the earth: he will come to no court on earth but
to his creatures, and his servants have used the Micah. 6. 1. Esai. 1. 1.
same proceeding, as Moses calls heaven and earth to witness, nay we are to
call to witness the stones in the wall, the timber of the house, that they may
give their voices on our sides, that we have told them their sins, and that
we have spoken to their consciences, The Lord is just when he does judge.
and then the very beams of the Church and stones of the wall shall be
witness of this controversy. So that though men would bear one with another,
yet the mountains, the heaven, and the earth shall give up their voice, that
God has not come suddenly upon us, but that he forewarned us. It were a great
matter if a man should be judge in his own cause, yet the Lord so rules the
matter, as that he will condemn none, but such as first shall see their just
condemnation. We shall have all things laid plain and orderly before us, as it
is Psalm 50 so that we shall be driven to confess Gods plea to be just
against us: for howsoever men can daube and deceive their own conscience,
howsoever they can smother and choke their own sins and delude men; yet in the
day of wrath, the sealed book, the sealed book shall be opened, and the
recorder in our own conscience shall give sentence unto it, and then the Lord
shall win and recover his action at our hands, and we shall yield that he is
just.

6 There are places in the Scripture, where the Lord is a comforter, and there
are places, How God is an accuser and an acquiter.
wherein he is an accuser: the places where he is a comforter show such persons
or such times, wherein the Lord by his accusations has so far prevailed,
that the people were humbled thereby. The places wherein he is an accuser,
import such times and persons, to whom the Lord has showed many comforts and
benefits, but they have been unthankful, as are we in our times in our Realm,
and in this place. For it has been the wisdom of the Lord always after his
threatenings taking place to remember mercy, and after his mercies contemned to
send out his threatenings, as Hose. 4. 1.

7 The manner of the ancient Church has bin, that wheresoever mention was made
in The promises or threatenings of Israel appertain to us.
the word of the children of Israel, the Christians took that specially to
appertain to themselves. But now adays in our age the case is far
otherwise, we are so loath to be accused, that our manner is to account our
selves to be accused in nothing, but there where the Lord has as it were, by
name spoken unto us, and if the Lord has written no prophecy specially to this
land, then we think nothing concerns us. Howbeit, as Paul says, Romans 2.
That they are not only Jews, that are Jews outward, but they also which are
Jews inward: so I say, that they are not only the children of Israel, which
came out of the loins of Israel, but who so truly lay hold on the promises
made unto Israel, are the true children of Israel also. But not to stand long
on this point, I say, look as Moses is more inferior than Messiah, and as
Jesus is better than Iosuah, and the kingdom of heaven better than Canaan, and
the blood of Christ more precious than the blood of bullocks or of goats; so
are we better Israelites, by faith taking hold of the promises made unto
Israel, than they that descended only out of the body and loins of Israel. So
that if any will lay claim to the promises of Israel, he must acknowledge
himself to be the child of Israel: but if any will let go his hold on this
promise, he must also exempt himself from being the child of Israel. He may
well be of the line of Cain, Cham, or Esan, but the other he shall not be. And
then if we will be the children of Israel in their promises, we must be the
children of Israel also in their accusations. And surely there is good reason
why we should so be, where as Jacob had two names, the one Jacob, the other
Israel, we read very seldom in the Scripture that the Jews are named by the
children of Jacob, but called for the most part the children of Israel. For the
name of Jacob being given him at the time of his nativity, and the name of
Israel being assigned him by the Angel for a name of benefit, because he
wrestled with God, the Lord herein insinuates, that the children of Israel,
that is, the children of his benefits, must with a special care hear his word.

7 The not observing of the Judgments of God, makes us so loath to love his
mercy, and so slenderly to fear his Judgments.

8 It is a natural thing to reform our selves whilst Gods Judgments are
upon us.

CHAP. XLI. Of Joy and Sorrow.
HE is not far from joy, that sorroweth either for want of good things, or for
sense of evil: for the true way to godly mirth, is to feel godly sorrow.

2 When we have greatest cause of joy for well doing, then it is a good thing
to fear most our unthankfulness, and our self-love and our secure unkindness.

3 Gods children not cherishing a continual sorrow, have often an excessive
sorrow. Sorrow.


4 When a man is most merry, he is nearest danger. Mirth.


5 We shall sometimes feel by experience, a terror suddenly come upon us, when
we Melancholy.
are alone, or vehemently to strike us in the night, being sent of God to
humble us: the Physician will say it is a melancholic passion, but I say it is
the power of Gods presence, preparing us to prayer, or some such like service
of God: which when we feel, if we fall down before the Lord in prayer, we
may find an unspeakable joy following it, but if we cherish it with evil
surmises, it may bring us to further inconveniences.

6 The way to godly mirth, is to feel godly sorrow.

7 The people murmured at the red Sea, yet the Lord forgave them, and healed
them: Again they murmured at the bitter waters, yet for his promise sake, and
the faith of some, he pardoned that sin also, and helped them, and brought
them to sweet waters and Palme-trees, fit to camp under. Where we may behold
how the Lord tempereth their sorrow with joy: for his children sometimes must
feel his favor, and sometimes feel it not. He lets them see his
goodness many ways, and his heavy hand but seldom, and therefore we ought
to bear it more willingly. Again, we may learn that we are the fittest to
receive mercy, when we have felt his justice: and when we have found his
goodness, we must take heed of security, for when we are past one cross,
he can prepare another for us.

8 By many means come we to joy, says Chrysostom: the wise men of Greece
wished men to rejoice; and the Poet says, Without joy life is no life. So it
may seem joy is life's Chairein ano charas bios ou bios.
life, and therefore men seek it so much. He that auoideth not something that
is not evil, must needs do much evil: In riding, we will not ride so near
the edge of the ditch as we can, but leave a good deal between, least both
our horse and we fall in. This is our policy in riding, I would it were so in
living. It is not Christian wisdom to go as near evil as we can. Well is
mirth evil then? Too much use of mirth is naught. We must not study for
mirth. If it be not a present jest, it loses his grace, Deuteronomy. 29. If he be
thirsty he will drink till he be drunken. Those things we desire too
much, we will keep too To add drunkenness to thirst. Verse. 19 Non noti sumus
ad lud^
fast, we came not (faith Tullie) into the world to make merry. One says,
when ye would be merry, this you may do, but make no occupation of it. It
is the worst end of a good wit to invent mirth, and yet we see daily, how many
think this is their portion in this life. Ambrose gives them a fit name, he
calls them superfluous creatures, and so they be: for the world if they were
gone, were well rid of them. And Hierom says, God cast not man out of
Paradise that he might here build him another, but that with swear, etc. our
recreation must not be thus, to make it our profession to move mirth and
laughter, a very Idolarie, if one may call it so. This joy is but a bastard
kind of joy. Hilarie says, it one laugh when he is going to prison, every man
will count him a fool. So if we will rejoice, let us rejoice in that that
cannot be taken from us, for when those things perish we must perish also.

9 I find mention in divinity of two kinds of joy, the one lawful, the other
qualified with circumstances. The first, Chrysostom calls angelical joys,
and Hil^ry calls them joys of the Palace, or such joys as are in the court.
These are the best, and in these we may be secure, if ye separate not joy from
the glory of God. There be four angelical joys. The 1
first is the touchstone, whether we rejoice truly or no, Psalm 1 7. Let me
tongue clean to the roof of my mouth, if I forget, nay, if I perferre not
Jerusalem in my murth! Gods glory flourishes most, when the Church
flourishes, and therefore that is the true joy: but there are some that can
fatte^ their hearts, when Jerusalem lies in the dust. The second joy is
angelical indeed; 2
so our Savior Christ calls it when a sinner returns to the Lord, then the
Angels rejoice, and this also is a safe joy. When the prodigal Son returned,
his Father did well to receive him with such joy, though his brother did hang
the groine at it: and one of the Fathers says, though it were but a homly
speech, that it was the best calfe that ever he killed, the best piece of veal^
that ever he bestowed. At this day there is but small turning of ^inners, and
small rejoicing for it, and I think this to be the cause of that poverty, for
that they being come home, none will give them a ring, a gown, etc. Luke 15.
The third joy is. Psalm. 3
122. I reioyce^ when they said, come let us go to the house of the Lord
First, to rejoice in the means of salvation, as in Sermons, in Preachers, and
such like; this is angelical, and David's joy: I rejoiced when one told me
there was a Sermon in the Lords house, and said, come let us go. A Father
says, thou make have to a banquet, but not to the Temple: thy mirth is not
good, thy life is not good. Thou can watch al night in dicing, but not in
meditation. The fourth kind of joy, is Proverbs 22. 25. In the rest a man may
counterfeite a rejoicing, 4
but this passes all hypocrisy, which is the joy of the just, to do
righteousness, judgment and equity. Show thy conscience all the goodly things
in the world, it shall not rejoice at them so much as at one good work. This
joy will never depart, their works follow them, and so shall the joy of them.
The Apostles went away after their whipping, and rejoiced, not only that they
could suffer scourges, but that they triumphed. What joy soeu^er we have else,
if we think upon judgment, then we say unto our mirth, thou art madness,
Ecclesiast. The second kind of joys Petti^ joys Bitter sweet joys.
chap. 2. The second kind of joys, Chrysostom calls petty joys: Hilarie
terms them the solace of prisoners, who eat and drink for a while, but
shortly the judge comes and condemns them, and they are executed. This
Solomon called bitter sweet joys, Proverbs 14. 13. This is certain, every
one will have the one or the other: if they cannot get Penelo^e, they will be
suitors to her maidens: these be seeming joys, and we think Seeming joys.
them to be great, because we know no better. For if we knew the joys of the
righteous, we would laugh at these vain joys. It is noted in Cain, after he
had lost his place in Heaven, he got him as good a place in earth as he could.
Iubal he found out organs to make his Grandfather merry. What is it then
unlawful? I will tell you what the Fathers said concerning it: The believer
can never find time for laughter. Hilary says, that whatsoever we love in the
world, we take thereby occasion of laughter in prison; and this is frenzy. If
these men lived now, they would be accounted precise fools, Storkes, blocks
without affections, for these be the opprobrious speeches which the wicked use
against good men: but if any man can rejoice in Psalms and spiritual songs, if
he can find an hony-combe in the word, and with David can da^ce before the
Lord; God forbid, that I, or any should play Michol to mock him. Nay, I will
say with Moses, I would all the Lords people were as these be: and took
pleasure in these things, for thus we ought to be, and I will say with Paul,
would to God you would practice these things which I teach But where the Spirit
is carnal (as Bernard says) where there is a mouldie soul, a dry heart,
where the Spirit is turned A mouldie soul, and a dry heart.
into flesh, there men love these petty joys, and bitter sweetes. But yet
(not to foster any man's imperfections) the Church has children of perfect age,
she had babes, yea, even such as are in their lump like the Bears whelpe,
we cannot come from Beersheba to Simile.
Bethel at one step. These actions in themselves are not unlawful, but ^^fles
are for babes which the Church bears with, until God provide better sor us,
not commanded but permitted, as Paul, when he was a child, spoke as a child,
and we are all in the estate of children, 1. King. 11. Salomons men that went
to Ophir, did not only bring gold and silver, necessary for the commonwealth,
but Parrats and Apes for children.

10 The true rule of mirth is set down, Ephesians. 5. 4. it must not be rotten
mirth, mirth of 1. Aischrotes.
concupisce^ce, to speak plain, such as is obscene and scurril mirth,
corrupting good manners, concerning which Bernard says, if it be a shame to
hear, let it be a shame to speak. ^* Morologia Eutra^eleia.
Secondly, the mirth may not be Dymic^s, pricking mirth, quipping mirth, and
^aunts, to please our auditors with. The third thing is, that it be not without
reason, unreasonable Si pudeat audire, pudeat dice^e
. 1
mirth, feather-mirth, when there is no cause to be merry, when a man has a
conceit of himself, to which Paul opposes thanksgiving, that our mirth may
be gracious. And thus much for the first kind of corrupt mirth. There is a
second kind, Ierem. 15. painted a^^gos.
out: I sit not in the assembly of mockers, because of the company, which is
noted, Hos. 7. 2
When that Kings would be merry, they must have an hick-scorner, and a common
jester Eucharistia^. Tauernemirth.
to come among them, this is Tauerne-mirth, and the fools cannot else be
merry. So then our mirth is evil when we make not choice of company.
Thirdly, not using of the right time, is vicious here, Job. 21. 13. They spend
their days in wealth, and suddenly they go done It is his Catastrophe.
into the grave. It is that whereupon Augustine says: I would that men did not
only leese 3
their time, I wish they might not loose body and soul also, Exodus 30. They
sit done Ducunt in bonis dies suos, and to puncto temporisibunt in infernum.
to cate and drink, and rise again to play: But Eccles. 3. Weeping is first,
afterward loye. Ezekiel. 9 The Mourners are marked with the Lords TAV. We
make our studies-labours and trades, a parenthesis to our play; whereas our
play should be a parenthesis to our labors. Lastly, measure and manner must
be observed, Proverbs* 22. A Fool 4
when he laugheth, lifts up his voice, but the wise man is scarce heard: it is
like the fire of thorns, a little fire and much cracking; so in a fool much
laughter and little cause. We may not as Fools, tire our selves with laughter:
seeing thou must stand before the bar in judgment, how is it that thou can
so laugh? says Chrysostom. And Hylarie says on quum debes assistere iudicio,
quomodo sic rides?
Psalm 137. All our joys in this life are as the waters of Babylon. We must
rejoice in trembling, Psalm 2. If we have not this we keep no order in the
rest. Remember to observe these rules.

11 In our pleasures we are especially to beware, that we take no pleasure in
pleasures, Men must not be mirth mongers, (that is) men must not study for
mirth. And what is Take no pleasure in pleasure.
the reason? Surely, because where there is an exceeding and over much desire
of a thing, there is like to be an exceeding, and over much use of the thing,
when we have it: which is our reason against ambition and covetousness: for
riches and honor in themselves being How far we may rejoice.
good, by an excessive desire and use of them are made naught. The end of our
mirth must not be only to bring pleasure, and that pleasure may bring joy: for
then we shall rejoice to rejoice, and this is Idolatry. For it would be
prejudicial to our rejoicing in God, for whatsoever has an end above this
end, is dangerous. One says very well, if my body Note well.
be but a strainer for meats and drinks to run through. If I serve for none
othervse, but to make report of the sweet and sower taste of this or that,
surely my life is not worthy of life. Again, we must beware in our mirth,
that we have not a care to please our hearts, our hearts being unsearchable
pittes, if they follow natural things, they grow to be too natural, and
therefore they are sometimes to be pressed and imprisoned, until they smart,
least having too much liberty, they cause every vain in soul and body to
smart in the end.

12 Youth especially is to take heed of pleasure: for though fire be good, yet
in flax or Young age is a dangerous age
tinder it is not good: So though pleasure be good, yet pleasure in youth is
not good. We need not plow for weeds, they will grow fast enough in the fallow.
But some will take pleasure in youth especially, and they purpose to become
good, and to live gravely hereafter, and to behave themselves solemnly
afterward. This is to make a covenant with the devil, as the devil said to
Christ: I will come out, but the time is not come yet; so we will leave pleasure
when the time coms, and in the mean time he keeps us in a purpose, wherefore
there are more in hell than in heaven. Young men make their sins of a double
die, crimson sins, they become a disease of the bones, and custom is turned
into a necessity: whereupon diverse say, I would feign, but I cannot leave
them, whereof where one does recover, forty rot away. If Satan can make our
youth an unprofitable age, all the ages after hardly any good to be looked for.
For if he once nippe the blossom, where is the hope of the Autumn? where may
we look for fruit? Well, if we will needs use pleasure, we must set down
some measure.

13 The devils rules never have exceptions, but God his Saints must learn
restraint; We may use pleasure, but with restrai^t Affections.
we must never make our hearts the stewards of our affections, that our
thoughts wander not in them, and least in desiring things too much, we exceed
when we have them. There must be the least appetite of those outward things,
because there is the least use of them. If a man cannot want them, he will
abuse them, when he has them. It is true that Ierom says, Verecunda initia
suntomnis peccati.
Their original or beginning is honest, but their growth and greatness is
deformed: and that also, Sin is very reasonable at the beginning and very
shamefast. Thamar went first to play the whore with a veil before her face,
but now with an open face. First honest recreation, and then a pleasure of
vanity* recreation before labor, to play before we study. We use pleasure,
but to no good end. So Elies boys would have the fat without any reason.
Judas could see the absurdity of this: To what end is this ointment spent
wastfully? we use such things too much or too long, whole days from morning
until night, til we be set on fire with them We come to be too effuse. Nabals
feasts are like the feasts of a king, he being but a country farmer.

14 This is a general rule, wantonness is the beginning of sin: we see in
Esau, to what Wantonness ends in wickedness.
great profaneness his wanton pleasure in hunting grew: So in the Scriptures
there can be found none other beginning of Salomons fall but this, that 1. Reg.
5. when he had spent seven years in building the house of God, he spent
thirteen years after in building an house for himself. This was scarce a good
property to bestow thirteen years on his own house and seven years on Gods
house, and the Apes and Peacockes that he brought into the Land, set the
people on such vanity, that they vanished away in their wanton thoughts.
Idleness and trifling be the callings of Gentlemen now adays, as also
needelesse expenses, 1. Tim. 5.

CHAP. XLII. Of Inuiries, offenses, and controversies.
WHen an injury is offered thee, the Lord does try thee, what love, Injury.
patience, and meekness is in thee to bless them that curse thee, which will
follow if thou be the child of God: contrariwise if thou requite evil for
evil, then does the Lord show unto thee the corruption, which thou must
labor to pull out of thee if thou will overcome.

2 When we see that others stand in need of our help, and we are Help.
able to help, the Lord requires our obedience.

3 Meditations of GODS promises and providence, will drive from us all desire
of Revenge.
revenge.

4 We must not tarry until others reconcile themselves unto us: but as God
does rather oftentimes, by heaping his benefits than pouring his plagues upon
us, show us our sins; so must we rather by courteous dealing than severe
handling, show others how they have offended us.

5 The more Pharaoh restrained, the more Moses stood in the thing that was
commanded; Offenses small sins.
contrary unto those which making a mingle mangle in religion, yield in some
things, but we must not yield a lot of that the Lord requires, although in
worldly matters we ought for peace to yield one to another. In religion it
skilleth not how little the matter seem, for which we do contend. The least
thing that God commands is great in the Matthew. 5. Number. 20.
sight of God: and Gods children have been punished for small offenses in
appearance, as Moses and Aaron for grudging were debarred from the land of
promise. Josiah was slain because he asked not counsel to go to war, which
may teach us to beware of the least offenses. It ought not to be condemned nor
counted preciseness not to give consent in the breach of the least thing,
though we may bear them (when they cannot be redressed) but not with consent.

6 Shall we be contentious? I think no nature is so mis^reant, that it does
delight How far controversies are permitted in the Church o^ God Fia^ pax as
fiat lux.
in contention: if any delight to dwell in Mesh^ch, as David calls it, I
would he had a tabernacle there: if any delight in contention, I wish no more
harm, than that he may be never without it. What then, shall we blot out
controversies? That were to teach the spirit of God wisdom. Could he not as
well have said, let there be peace, as let there be light? ^ay, God has
ordained there should be contentions, and not only permitted them, but says,
they must be, and such as be about the waightiest matters in truth called
heresies, 1. Cor. 11. Then it is a dream of idle brains, that any good can be
received without controversies, and as the Prophet Esaiah says, without the
barking of some dog or other. It is not so in evil things; they are received
with silence: what then shall we play the pots, and ask the potter a reason of
his doing? Albeit I like not that humor Wherefore controversies and heresies be
in the Church.
of men, which will search out the reason of God his doings, when they know his
flat will, yet in this we may, because he has set it down. There be three
reasons, first that those, That are steadfast may be approved, we will have it
in this. As Satan did to Job, God called him, what say thou of my servant
Job* Lives he not uprightly? No grandmercie, said he, for he has all
blessings of thee, but take away them, and then etc. Secondly, 1
there are cities to be governed, and to that end we must use our talent. John
reproved 2
the Scribes and Pharisees and came to reprove Herod. Samuel reproved Ely, and
came to reprove Saul, that might have smitten off his head. Thirdly, that the
Devil may have the 3
greater overthrow, that as God triumphed over him in Job, so in our constancy
he might do the like. Then controversies are necessary. How then is it, that
God is called the God of glory and peace? that Christ is called the prince of
peace? the Gospel, the Gospel of peace? the Ministers, the Ministers of
peace? of glad tidings and unity commended so general? Surely it is the fault
of our age to deliver the word by halfes, and so I say, that he that teaches
peace to be good simply without exception, teaches an error. Therefore peace
must be peace in truth, and for this cause Christ says, I am the way, the life
and truth: for to have contention with such as hold not in him, is no breach of
peace. Nay the wicked among themselves have no peace, it is but truce, they
have couenanted with hell for a time, a day, a few years, or as the rearme of
their life, and then is great and everlasting debate, we may see it in the
first agreement among the wicked. The serpent disputed with Heua, until she
had yielded; then all was quiet until the evening, but then Truth and peace
go together.
came one and brake the truce. Separate peace from truth, and peace is no
peace. The reason therefore is set down, Ps. 138. Lord thou have magnified thy
truth above al things, therefore above peace. And that I fall not into that error
aforesaid my self, I will tell you what truth is. We think we are at peace,
and have unity perfect among us if we be of the same religion, and we agree,
that we must, and will be all Protestants: but the fathers have al distinguished
truth into three parts. See chap. 71.
First, truth of doctrine in religion: Secondly, of life in our conversation:
Thirdly, of justice in giving preferments. Unless a man has al these, he has
none of them: and if in all these be peace, I will seek and ensue after peace;
as says the Psalmist: if any offend in these, I will not have peace with him.
We know, that veritas doctrinae has had witnesses martyrs; so have the other
two, though they send us not to heaven in a fiery chariot: but an evil name
which every man for their stakes must provide to suffer: we must be in this, as
Christ, when he kneeled before his father in the garden. If ma^s salvation may
be wrought, let this cup pass; if not, thy will be done. So if a man should
hold us a cup of the wrath of a multitude, or a mighty man, we must say, if it
be possible, the truth may be defended without this; then let this cup pass:
but if it cannot be otherwise, let me drink the dregs and all. So that God
himself in such cases is the author of dissension. He will have dissension,
he swears, Esaias. 59. that he is angry, for that none will make dissension
in taking part with the truth. GOD the Father may seem farther off. But even
CHRIST the Prince of peace himself, Mat. 10. says: I came not to bring peace,
but a sword, that they which consent in wickedness, might stick no longer
together: And Psalm. 94. David says, Who will take my part against the wicked?
That was a voice of dissension (if ever there were Flabellum.
any, even that which Tullie calls the fan of dissension. Augustine says,
this is nothing but a question between the Counsel, and the Tribune, they
will agree with the inferior magistrate against him, that is as far above
him, as the Counsel is above the Tribune. Therefore when there is dissension
we must not be dismaide. It is foretold, Esaias. Sedition.
5. 24. Jeremiah is feign to cry, my Mother has borne me a contentious man.
The Israelites said, we shall never be quiet till Amos be from among us. Even
the Devil himself charge our Savior Christ with it, Art thou come to
torment us? And the less dismaide shall we be, if as a learned father says:
first, if we prayed against it: secondly, if we have desired to join In
dissension, what we must observe.
peace and truth: thirdly, if we have felt a mourning, for that there is
dissension: fourthly, if we be ready to yield a reason of that we do: fifthly,
and will (for quietness sake) confess a fault, where there is is none. They
have one great argument, that it breeds no offense 1 2
so to contend. This troubled many in the primitive Church, leaving many good
things undone, which otherwise they would have done; till at the last they
concluded in a council, 3
which has bin held of all fathers, schoolmen, and Divines hitherto, and I
pray God 4 5
it may be so of us. It is better that an offense arise, than that truth be
forsaken: and thus much of controversies.

Many now a days in giving voices, have a pretty wise policy, because it is
so evil a Vtilius scand^lum nascitr, quam veritas deseritur.
thing* I will give no voice at all, hold you content, such be (...),
neuterpassiues, indifferent men, that will do neither good nor evil. These
are odious unto the Lord, Zephani, 1. 12* If there be any man, that says, I
will neither do good nor bad, or has set down We will either do as we list,
or not do any thing at all.
that rule with himself, I will, says the Lord, seek him out with a
lantern to a strange judgment. They will say, as it is Ps 12. Our tongues
and lungs are our own, and therefore we may speak, as we list, and when we
list. By this they show, that they have neither Logike nor Divinity. The holy
Ghost says, thou shall not give thy voice. If the precept be affirmative, it
binds semper not ad semper; but if it be negative, it binds but semper and
ad semper. The like precept is, thou shall be no usurer: well, I will not lend
at all, but thou must lend, and yet not lend to usury. Thou shall not take the
Name of the LORD thy GOD in vain. Well, I will not swear at all; yea, thou
must swear by his Name, and yet not take it in vain. Thou shall not bear
false-witnes: well, I will bear no witness at all; yea, thou shall Of giving
voices in civil, or Ecclesiastical assemblies.
bear a witness, but yet not a false witness. So I will not give my voice at
all; yes, thou shall, and yet not to a Rabbi, or a multitude. The reason hereof
is, because we were born to bear witness to the truth. Therefore was I borne
says Christ. Whereupon Augustine says, this belongs to all Christians.
Fulgentius a good and holy father says, when Truth is endangered, both he
which denies it, and he which holds his peace, do betray the Truth. Well, it
is said, thou shall not answer, and therefore we hold it not needful to give
our witness to the Truth, except we be asked and entreated. But is it not often
said in the Euargelists, Then JESUS answered and said, when no man spoke unto
him? Hereupon one said, Truth demanded it in his Conscience. As GOD is said in
Esaias, to hear us, before we call unto him; so will he have us to answer him,
before he speak to us. Psalm. 5. David tarieth not to defend the innocent, till
he be entreated; takes no reward to do right, being rea^ie without desiring.
As we have two kinds of sins, sins of omission, and commission, and Psalm.
128. if they put but their hand to wickedness, touch it with one finger, and
not put to their shoulders; so is it not only unlawful not to do good, but
also not to work together in good. And as the man that lusts after a woman,
commits adultery, but she is clear: so those that give not witness to the
Truth, though it prevail, have to themselves overthrown the Truth; and those
that have given witness to it, though the Truth fall, to them it stands. But
that is flat without all exception, He that is not with me, is against me. Yet
some have answered this place unto me in private conference with that other
place, He that is not against me, is with me: So then, if ye give a voice, and
not against the Truth, ye are with it* Mark, of whom Christ speaks, of one
that was no disciple, that had not given his name to Christ, of him Christ
says: If he be not against us, he is with us. As if one be of another land, if
he be not against the Prince, he is with him; but if he be a subject, if he be
not with the prince, he is against him, and shall sustain the punishment of a
rebel. Who they be that prevent, and what it is to prevent others.


8 If we would know what it is to pervert, we shall see it in Augustine. De
vera religione cap. 34. to put out of order, as it were shuffling the cards to
place a deuce with a King, to bring in that which should be kept out. Now what
is order? that the worst be subject to the better. Then those are perverse,
which place the worst above the best, which place them in great callings, which
are unworthy to be among the base people. To them it is said, cease to do
peruersly. None peruerts another, but first he peruerts himself; and those
that pervert themselves, pervert their rules or their ends: their rules, as to
prefer man's laws before Gods laws; their ends, as preferring temporal
things, as this case, this gain, before eternal: now and then at their
leisure thinking of the chief end of all, but preferring the other. Even as
the crab going backward himself, persuades al other fishes they swim wrong:
so these being perverse themselves begin then to shuffle the cards, then they
will have men be of their minds, or they will turn justice into wormwood,
that it shall be as bitter as wormwood to the good man to do justice: for my
part I would Achab troubled Israel no more, though Eliah bear the blame.

9 He said that when he considered how Noah, Moses and others fell in their
latter days, and how the most excellent have fallen; he most earnestly prayed
that the Lord would take him out of the world; before that his life should
bring any offense to the Church of God.

10 Jacob and Esau cannot agree in one womb, Sarah and Agar cannot agree in
one house, Isaac and Ishmael must not dwell together: there is no agreement
between the children of God, and the children of Belial.

11 Moses was angry, and is commended for it, so that every anger is not
condemnable, Anger.
but to be angry without a cause and without measure. Some men will be angry
for their own cause, and very hot; but in Gods cause they will not be angry
at all: this is a fleshly anger: but when men sin either to the dishonor of
God, or their own destruction, then to be angry is a good anger, if the
salvation of our brother does move us thereto, not our own injuries: for we can
bear with patience, injuries so far as privately it concerns What injuries
are to be borne.
us, but when it touches GODS glory, we cannot but be angry. Some are angry
for every thing, and in light matters, and yet not in weighty matters; then
let those men take heed, for these are very faulty. But if we be like the
Lord, not marking what is done amiss, nor being angry continually, that we had
rather be loved than feared, and according as the matter is, so is our anger;
then is it good: otherwise it is not to be allowed; for as the Lord does use
more means to cause us to love him than to fear him; so ought we^o do, and
to be more careful with love to win, than with anger to compel. The Lord
is slow to wrath: and anger rests in the bosom of fools, whereas a wise man
will repress anger. Then let our anger be according to the fault, a light
fault, a light anger, of To win with love.
small continuance, but we must believe the Lord to be greatly grieved with
great sins. In Gods cause some men are moved, when themselves are also
touched; but if themselves be not touched, they can be quiet: but when their
brother is hurt, though God be dishonored, they care not. If we see our
selves moved but then, when our selves are touched, let us suspect the want of
faith, of love, and zeal of Gods glory, and think we stand too much to our
o^ne praise: but if we cannot be content when the things do not touch us, but
even the glory of God does move us to anger, then is it good, and of God:
Though some be our very friends, yet we can be most angry with them when they
favor us; and when they displease us, we can remember the old love, and so
still mingle anger with love: and if I can be angry with whomsoever I see the
same sin in, then is it also of God, and to be allowed: and indeed true
Christian anger will sooner be to his friend, than to his enemy. Again, when
we can first begin with our sins, and be more angry for them than for
others (for no man can ever be angry for other men's sins, which cannot be
angry for their own) and this is that which Christ says; Cast the beam out
of your own eyes, etc. But when our anger first begins with our selves, and
that there is no sin which we would willingly rest or favor our selves in,
then if we be angry with others for the same sins, this is of God; if we
cast the first stone at our selves, and if the sin be in us, we strive
against it; if it be not, we fear it may be, and therefore study to prevent
it. Again, when our anger does let us from doing any duties to them which we
are angry with; then is anger to be misliked: but when we are ready to show
all duties to them, as to pray for them, and all other duties of love, then let
us have here a testimony of good anger: but if it make us to have a troubled
mind, though it be for a good cause, it is to be respected: for the works of
Gods spirit in us, do not hinder one another, but rather do further; and if
we were cold before, and yet now shall be quickened to prayer and other good
exercises, this if we find, it is a note of good anger. Again, our anger for
the breach of Gods commandment, is joined with a compassion over them which
have thus offended, because of the wrath of God which hangs over them; thus
was Christ angry and sorry, Mark. chap. 3. and also when he wept over
Jerusalem, and Paul, 2. Cor. cha. 12. ver. 21. faith, he should be humbled when
he comes with a rod to them, and therefore he describes fleshly anger,
that they were puffed up, 1. Cor. 5. Romans 15. We should support the weak, and
be so grieved, as though we had done that they have done. When we see the
sins of others, we must be so grieved, as if we had done them our selves:
Christianity has grief, flesh has joy in the sight of the sins and
infirmities of other men.

12 Worldlings being poor, look only to the injury of men; and being sick,
look Worldlings know not the God of providence.
only to the means; and in whatsoever trouble they are, they are like the
dog that looks to the stone, and not to him that throws it, because they
know not that the Lord is the healer, but think it is by fortune, and not Gods
providence; and therefore they look not to God, nor their sin at all, or else
look only to the angry countenance of God, and Simile.
so come to miserable ends. Therefore it is a blessing of God to see, that for
his sins a man has any trouble. The contrary comes to pass by the
ignorance of Gods providence, which must by faith be believed, as the creation
is, and therefore a man may see, and yet believe not Gods providence; for God
has time, and all things that in time come to pass, be in his hands, Eccl. 3.
So both must necessarily be believed, for they are both the first article, and
one without the other cannot be believed* Then let us believe that he is our
healer, and therefore when we are stricken, let us look if we have walked
well in our calling, then is it for our trial, and in the end we shall have
everlasting joy: but if we want a good conscience, then let us know it to be
for our sin; therefore look to the law, where we shall see, though not the
particular sin, yet one of these which God has ordained to keep us from
sin: as we shall see it is either for that we have not heard the word, nor
prayed, nor been thankful, or not received the Sacraments, or else done these
for fashion, and not in truth, and these are such sins as the Lord will
punish: as Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. Though there were many other sins, yet if
they had used these aright, they should either not have fallen into these sins,
or else he would have given them repentance, whereby they should have prevented
his judgments.

CHAP. XLIII. Of judgment and folly, and of judging, reproving, and praising.
THe Devil when he cannot at the first corrupt affection, he will begin to
corrupt Judgment.
judgment, and then affection.

2 We may be convinced in judgment, and yet not have our minds changed and
renewed, for that comes only when our affections are reformed into the due
obedience of that which we have in true understanding.

3 When we defer to have that in affection, which we have in judgment, it is
the just judgment of God, to deprive us of that which we had in judgment.

4 We may not judge of any thing by any one action, neither may we judge
suddenly, Judging.
but tarry Gods appointed time, for he will manifest all things in their
appointed time.

5 We must beg of God the spirit of wisdom to discern the dealings of men:
for the wicked do often the same things, and in the same manner that Gods
children do, but yet not with like affection: we must take heed therefore, that
we condemn not the good, nor Learn wisely to consider of Gods works
justify the wicked.

6 We be blind in judging of Gods works: and hence it comes to pass, that
we run headlong to destruction, in seeing those things that seem to be good
unto us. This ought to move us to pray unto God, that he would inlighten our
minds, and reform our judgments, that we may wisely consider of his works.

7 A man may have a good wit, and yet be subject to the secret curse of God.

8 A good wit not sanctified, is a fit pray for the Devil.

9 There are diverse kinds of folly. Solomon says, A wise man is not a
stranger in the Of folly diverse kinds.
congregation of the Lord: so then this is a foolishnes, not to come to the
congregation of Gods people. In Paul's time it was said, be not foolish but
redeem the time: th^^ then is 1
also folly to loose time. In the time of Moses and Iethro, to give authority
and titles in the 2
highest degrees to them that deserve them not, by Iethroes judgment was
folly, and we 3
do in these times the very same. Well, all these are fools which can do us no
harm, those that are alive are no fools, so long as they can do hurt. And
such as help us to preferment, we call them wise whatsoever we think of them:
there are two kinds of fools, one a sot for ignarance, or a crased fool, as
he that has a disease only. There is another fool, and he has the carkase of
folly, and he may well be called the child of folly: This is stinking folly,
and brutish folly. Chrysostom faith, Better to be found a beast than to
become like a beast, for the first is of nature, the last is of sin. If it
be foolishness to be ignorant Praestat nasci iumentum, quam compar^r. ^ume^t^.
of that we should do, what great folly is it to know what we should do,
and do it not? And who would think such folly could fall into any man, that
he should know it to be folly, and confess i^, and yet do it?

10 There is is a sect in our age, which say every one is a sinner, and so will
never be reproved of any sin: they say, every one has enough to look to
one: so was John counted a fool, an austere fool; and Christ a popular fool:
for indeed, because they meant to follow neither of them, they counted them
both fools Christ compares them to froward children, Luke 7, and we may
compare them to ^oule gamesters, if I be not deceived; Judging and reproving.
who, when they have lost all, and have the last cast in their hand, and see
that it is naught also, rise up in a chafe, and fling down all, and say, that
there has been foul play played, when the fault is only in themselves. So
these, when they are reprehended, say, all is naught, and bring others into the
compass of their own folly. Therefore as they preached against iusticiaries
before time, that all were sinners, none that did good; so now we must preach
against Libertines, that all are not unrighteous: the holy Ghost in all times
Against Libertines.
has called some by these terms, righteous, wise, holy, though not before the
judgment seat of God, yet in walking in their calling, in doing right, and
laboring to observe the word. All is vanity, for that all they use sometimes,
the Preacher said so, but he never said, all is vanity of vanities. There is a
difference between a sin, that Esaias compares to a coard, and that to a
car^rope; between Ezechias his boil, and Lazarus his botch; betwixt Paul's
prick in the flesh, and him that was wounded in the way between Jerusalem and
Jericho: one of these may heal another: a mote may pull out a beam, though a
beam may not pull out a mote, else there should be no sin reproved.

11 We can easily say, their foolishness, their sin, their unthankfulness.
This is the We are too censorious in the sin of other, and too remiss in our
own.
fittest Pronoune that we can use, we have many notable things in our selves,
which we count folly in other men; as in Judah has Thamar played the whore,
burn her; but when he saw the scaffold, the case was altered. There is
difference between burn her, and I am to be blamed; sinners are to be blamed.
This is that we learned in Philosophy, we can see intellectu directo those
things which are in others, but we cannot see intellectu reflexo and understand
our selves: for our own faults we had need of an Eunuch to look out.

12 We may be bold with those that are dead: so said Lucian; Anger and Envy
had Envy when it dispraiseth.
killed all wise men, for in anger and envy we will account none wise: favor
and flattery had killed all fools; for we will for those two affections
account all wise. So when ana flattery when it praises must be ^ad in
iea^ousie.
Pilate lived he was counted wise, but now he is dead, Pilate was a fool. So
of Demas and Sobna. This is the triumph of wisdom above folly; that as
wisdom is justified of her children; so foolishnes is condemned of her
children. They condemn the same things that they do. Herod so long as he
lived, was accounted wise, and was a King, and John Baptist a fool; but now
both be dead, Herod is a fool, and so confesses of himself, and John Baptist
is a Saint. So was D^^^s Cla^dius Nero whilst he lived wise, and Paul a fool;
but now he is Nero the tyrant, and Paul holy S. Paul. The reason of this is,
for that we are led by present things. So long as we live together with
them, fear and hope are stopples for our mouths, so that no man can hear,
what he is indeed being present, till he be dead and gone from among us. They
that follow shall pronounce the truth of us. Christ says, Rejoice when men
speak evil of you, for so did your fathers of the Prophets.

13 Gutturall praises must not be given to God. It is an easy thing to
afford a good The best kind of praise is not in word but in deed to commend.
thing a good word, to cry Euge macte virtute. The Prophet says, the wicked
are only mouthed men, they sprinkle it with a little court-holy-water: it is
pretty ship, but they will not go in it: they cry, Lord, Lord, but yet they
do nothing. When the women cried out to Christ, Blessed are the pappes that
gave thee suck: No, no, says he, Blessed are they that hear these words and
do them. Let the work speak and commend it self, not he that when he hears
a good thing, straight breaks out into glorious praises, his affection is so
hot: but he that is so stricken with it, that he is past praising; so musing
of it, that the sent of it appears in his life long after. They count Paul a
wise man, but behind the door they laugh as Sarai did. Socrates. Praise me
that I may see it: for our praise is, to give a testimony Lauda vt videam.
that we like it, but this is the best testimony, if we follow it; for if thou
did think it to be true wisdom, thou would follow it.

14 Universities are the Lords Lebanon, from whence timber is to be felled for
the building of his Church, his quiuers, as Esaias says, wherein are hidden all
his chosen shafts, the sons of the Prophets: and as I may say, the bays or
works from whence salt is to be dug with whose verdure the sacrifice is to
be seasoned.

15 Scholars must make a good bending of their studies, and be virtuously
brought up: first, that they may profit the Church* and attain more easily to
the knowledge of the Scriptures, they may not want humane arts. Secondly, if
they be virtuous and godly, they shall have more authority to preach, when men
have nothing to lay against them: sinful men blush, and get not nor have not
that authority that others have.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of knowledge and ignorance, and how to seek God, and of Satan's
sophistry, etc.
KNowledge and other gifts of God not sanctified keep us from the sight of
sin, and persuade us that they will excuse us from wrath to come, until our
sins be pulled out by the ears.

2 Knowledge must go before obedience, obedience must follow after knowledge
with all chreerefulnes.

3 The Egyptians by all Gods wonders might have known him, but they considered
not his works, so they refused knowledge; therefore the Lord by a great
destruction would make them feel that he was God indeed: which may teach us
to get knowledge, while the means are offered, for if we will not know him
while he shows himself favorable, we shall certainly know him to our own
fearful condemnation.

4 All our disobedience comes of this, that we know not the Lord. And
wheresoever the word of the Lord is, he will move those that be his to
believe, though he did the same things from the wise of the world.

5 There is none almost but at one time or other do seek God; though the
common How we ought to seek God and how many seek him peruersly
sort, at the last cast in extreme danger, when health and friends fail
them, go to him. But Malachie says, GOD is a King, and will have his
Senioritie: and in this order of seeking many good men are deceived, for so
they deal not falsely, they think they may scratch woridly riches, but the
Lord will not have us take the silver of worldly things, before gold of
godliness; Neither must the servant first wait some hours on himself, and
then on his master, but contrarily; because as there is a seeking, so in
seeking there is an order: And this is Gods prerogative to be sought first
Matthew. 23. he is a fool which thinks the gold of the temple, that is riches,
better then the Piety of the temple, which sanctifiethriches* Salomons chair
must be our direction. Abraham sought obedience before his own country Joseph
and Moses sought GOD rather then Pharaoh: but we seek preposterously, giving
youth to pleasure, old age to God, we make our eldest children Lawyers, the
second or youngest, divines; whereas our fathers made the firstborn to seruein
the Priesthood. In our contracts, we first seek wealth, and then religion; a
cursed match: well, while we thus seek God, we shall never find him.
Wherefore let us seek God in his word, and that not in a piece of the word,
but in all the word: not making conscience of some sin, and yet ^etaining
other sin, God will not be divided, nor quartered in qualities, because he
is indivisible in substance. Many use a restrained obedience, and the world
has ever a placard for some sin. Such a one was he that would have a
dispe^sation for kneeling in the house of R^mmon with his master. Ananias
would keep some part to himself, GOD will be sought totally in respect of
his Word, as also he requires an universality in seeking of himself. We
must not seek God and the world together, we must not have two strings to our
bow: having one eye on the word and another on the world. We must not think
if we have God it is well; if we have him not, it is no great harm, purposing
a piety to out felues, so long as we be in the Church, and promising to our
selves immunitie being out of the Church.

6 Samuel the first builder (we read) of Colleges: calls his College
Naioth, that is, 1. Sam. 19. 18. Schools.
even beauty it self, where must be no deformity, for a small spot in
beauty, is a great blemish. Again, Colleges are as Epitomes of the
Commonwealth, as Athens was of Greece; and what a thing were it in an Epitome
to find superfl^^tie. Universities are the eyes of the Commonwealth, and a
mote in the eye is a great trouble. Briefly, Universities be the Lebanon of the
Lord, from whence timber must be fetched to build the Temple. They be the
Conduits, to derive water into the whole land. They be the Rocks or Bays,
where Salt is prepared to season. They be the polished Saphires to garnish the
house of the Lord.

7 It is a part of the Devils Sophistry, as in good things to sever the
means from the The Devils sophistry disioyneth things conjoined by the Lord.
end; so in evil things to separate the end from the means. David joins
both together, Psalm. 119. I am thine, O Lord save me. The Devil persuades
us, God will save us, but makes us never look to that I am thine. In evil he
bears us in hand, we may use the means, and never come to the end, and so
clip off half: as when he can suffer this. Eccles. ^1. 9* Rejoice O young
man, he would leave out this, But thou shall come to judgment, But these has
God joined together, and neither the subtilty of youth, nor any wit of man, nor
all the Devils in hell can separate them; the pleasures of the flesh, and the
judgments of God: as to our first parents, Eat ye shall not die: to who me
some Solomon might have said, if it seem pleasant to you, eat it, but death
shall come. So in these two that Ezechiel Pleasures.
has joined: the ease of the Pastor, and the blood required at his hands; he
might have said, Go to, build you tabernacles, where you may take most profit,
and give ear to wealth: The wisdom of God is apparent in all the ^^rd and yet
in some place more then in aenother.
yet God shall bring you to judgment. God with an Adamant chain has knit the
pleasures of this world with judgment, he that has one must have both.

8 There are many places most effectual, and worthier meditation, than others
in the Scripture, wherein Spiritus multum spirauit, for I think that the
Spirit not only blows where it lists, but also when, and in what measure
he lists. As in some places, namely Psalm 45. and 49. 1^. the Lord calls
as it were a congregation of all sorts and conditions, signifying some great
point of wisdom; that he requires so great a Theater. The ancient
expositours say this wisdom is, where this word Selah is ^ound* For whether
it signify, Diaphthalma.
as the seventy Interpreters say, a great pause, that the verse going before
may be meditated on; or a repetition, as Rabbi Abraham says, that that verse
for it excellency should be twice sung, or both, as Tremellius; it must
needs signify great wisdom and matter in the verse.

9 These days shall not continue always, but there shall come a day wherein
the conscience It is a fool^, choice to choose earthl^ things before, and rather
then heauen^^ things, and to make God the last, and least part in our desires.
shall be dismayed, a day of death, wherein we will not care for riches,
beauty, learning, praise, or estimation. And yet there be some that care not
for this: which love as Tully says of Verres, silver better then heaven, they
think it a greater matter to live in a beggarly estate, then to loose their
souls. But this is folly, proved by two reasons. First, thus do the beasts:
Balaams wisdom, and his A^es wisdom is all one. For the Ass which has but a
soul of one life, and when he dies, his soul vanishes into the air, if he
have a good pasture, and then get a Lions skin to make the beasts of the field
afraid of him, and can kick one with his heels, and make him lie before him,
this is a beasts honor: but the honor of a man is greater, which has two
lives, to whom this life ought only to be for the surety of the soul; and
rather a way to another life, then a life it self. This has been answered by
the Fathers; I will deal so with the world that I may remember God, but a
learned Caelarum Arge^^um.
father says, Thou must put in first and more, or else leave out, I will
remember God Deceive not thy self, thou give all to the world: God will not
only be served, but in his order. Malachie calls him a great King, and
therefore he looks for the first service, and Daniel calls him the Ancient
of days, a great Senior, and therefore he will be served before his Iuniors,
Luc. 17. The servant that had labored all day, is not bidden first to eat and
Prius and plus.
drink, but to serve his master, and then to take his repast. Contrary is
our practice, as in marriage, we look for beauty and riches first, and then
after our religion comes in for a corollarie, we will not be much against it.
Jonathan must carry Saules armor, and Mephibosheth must look to the Arc. We
make choice before God: we bestow our first years on our selves, and then the
rest we bestow on God. Those are vain men which will first seek the
adjectives, and caetera, then the kingdom of GOD. Augustine says, if thou will Covetousness, in the ministry.
needs, thou may seek, but thou shall never find. I have heard and known
amongst us those, that would make accounts first to be well provided for, and
then they would serve God in their callings, who having gotten three hundred,
or four hundred by the year, then have bin further off then they were before.
The second reason is, if any man be so foolish, he shall yet be more foolish,
he prefers the shadow of these transitory things before the eternal things:
they shall loose both the shadow and the thing it self, as Aesops dog did.
Riches have two ends. 1. Either to leave thee, 2. or thou shall leave them.
Augustine says, they shall have an end, either their own: that is, they
shall leave thee, as Jobs goods did him: or thine, thou shall leave them, as
the glutton in the Gospel: but that which is worst, when they shall have left
thee, yet the sin whereby thou gottest them, shall remain with thee* Genes.
chapt. 4. Sin sleeps at the door, it is quiet all thy life long, but when
we go out of the door of this life, it shall compass about our heels and
our hands, and we shall never be rid of it.

10 Knowledge of the word is as necessary an art for Christians, as the art
of Husbandry is necessary for Husbandmen. Men can say, they can learn nothing
of the Preachers, but to love GOD above all, and our Neighbors as our selves:
and as for this lesson, they say they are not now to go to school. But this
is as much as if one should say, Husbandry Objection of the multitude against
knowledge answered.
is an easy thing, and there is nothing to be learned there, but to Sow,
Plough, and Reap: and yet to set his hand to any of these without knowledge of
the trade, he is altogether foolish. Well then, as in this, so in all other
Arts we will confess that we cannot come to the practice of particulars
without knowledge of the principles: and yet come to the great Art of
Knowledge, which is the maine profession of all, and needs most teachers and
best scholars; and we think we can learn that with sitting still, and
taking of our case. But there is a knowledge of the world, and they that come
to be our schoolemaisters to that, they shall be had in high estimation.
Howsoever we account of knowledge, the Prophet says, that under CHRIST our
knowledge excels the knowledge of the Priests; and in Paul's time, the women
were so full of understanding, that the Apostle was feign to take order that
they should not speak in their open assemblies, where they would needs be
speaking. The holy Ghost, Colos. chap. 3. would not have Howsoever o^r fathers
were merciful, just, etc. yet they were guilty of ignorance, and the people
of our time contrary want mercy and justice.
the word of God to dwell in us beggarly, thinnely or strangely, but
plentifully: and surely without this knowledge we know nothing to do as we
should do it. And for this cause in the former age, though the devil could be
content men should be as merciful, and as true dealers, as they would; because
they were guilty of Ignorance, and wanted knowledge to direct them herein: yet
now because knowledge is come, he cares not how unmerciful and deceitful men
become, nay now he takes away mercy, and truth, and knowledge, and all. The
reason is, because we make no more precious account of knowledge; we can be
content to sit at home by the fire, rather than to come abroad to hear; or
if the devil give us leave, and we get so much masterie of the devil, that we
come to the sermon, yet sleep ourtakes us, and we are as good as absent; or
else if we be waking, we go away before it be done; or if we tarry, as soon
as we be gone we commit all to forgetfulness. And so if with want of knowledge
we be merciful and true dealers, it is but after our own brain, and because
the Lord has not planted, the Lord will root it out. The end of all is, if
men will not grow in the knowledge of God his will, they shall never come to the
knowledge of God, that is, they shall not know God his mercy, God his truth,
glory and blessedness, neither will he ever know us. For as without the
knowledge of Gods will, there is not, nor shall be any knowledge of God, so if
we know not God, God will never know us.

11 When we shall be joined to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
then shall we know, as we are known, then shall all tears be wiped from our
eyes, then shall our infirmities be taken from us, then shall we dwell with the
Angels, and with all the hosts of heaven in most happy blessedness it self.
We see now by this chain, not forged by our own brain, but framed out of Gods
word, that he is indeed blessed whom God chooses, whom Christ redeemeth,
whom the Spirit renews, whom faith stays, whom the word, Prayer, Sacraments
and Discipline buildevp in the Lord, in whom faith breeds peace, peace
sincerity, sincerity love, love a fear of displeasing, and a care of
pleasing God, in whom this care strives to a mortification in poverty of
mind, this poverty coming from a mourning heart, possessed in a meek
spirit, and aspiring to true righteousness, all these things being joined with
that sanctification which lamenteth the sins of others, and relieueth the wants
of others, knowing to use prosperity and adversity as pledges of Gods favor:
and undoubtedly looking for the kingdom of heaven in the life to come. If any
of these linkes be missing, the chain is broken, if any of these members be
wanting, the body of blessedness is lame and dismembered.

CHAP. XLV. Of Miracles, and how God works without and with means, and how
we ought to attend on the means.
THe Miracles that were wrought in the Church, were partly in mercy, and
partly in 1. King. 13. 5. 6 His hand was dried up, and restored to him again.
Signs which draw men from the true God and his word.
judgment, as in turning Iereboams hand into leprosy, and into clean flesh
again: but the miracles against Egypt were only in judgment.

2 Signs are given to confirm us in the word, and are not more excellent than
it; if then they draw us from the word, we must hold them accursed as well as
the false Prophet, Deuteronomy. 12. That which Paul speaks of tongues, 1. Corinthians.
chap. 14. is true of all miracles, which are signs to believers, which may
teach us not to desire them: for if we believe not. Moses and the Prophets,
neither would we believe if miracles were brought from heaven. So is it in the
Sacraments, which are ordained to nourish that faith which is engendered in us
by the word, and therefore must not be separated from the word, nor esteemed
above the word. For we shall then profit truly by Baptism, when we, in and
by the word, shall believe 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.
the washing away of sin, and get power to mortify sin daily within us:
and then shall we profit by the Lords Supper, when we believe all the promises
of our Redemption, wrought by Jesus Christ, and shall be united into his body
daily more and more by the word.

3 Pharaoh did ask a sign, not for any purpose to yield thereunto, but if
they could not do any, he might have the greater advantage against Moses and
the people. So the Scribes and Pharisees ask a sign of Christ, to whom he
answered, the adulterous generation seeks a sign: So many in these days
ask proof of many things in religion, not that they mind to yield thereto,
but if they cannot have such proof, as will stop their mouths, they may more
quietly continue in their error. We must learn to leave this kind of
questioning, which is seldom granted for good, and let us so frame our
requests, as that they may be reverent, and we may have a desire to rest in
that which is granted.

4 A wonder may move us for a time, but commonly it lasts at the most, but
for nine days: and we shall never gather any fruit thereby, except it does
prepare us to profit more effectually by the word.

5 Some think that the miraculous Manna was not so strange, because it is to
be found Manna miraculous.
in these days in other countries. I answer, not of that color, not of that
property: Therefore this was a miracle, as may appear by these reasons
following. First, because it was never seen before, and then came at Gods
commandment. Secondly, because neither rain nor fair weather did let it.
Thirdly, because as soon as they came to the borders of the promised Land it
ceased. Fourthly, because if it were kept till the morning it stanke, but on
the Sabbath day it continued sweet, albeit gathered the day before. Again,
when it was reserved in the Arc, it putrified not. Fifthly, because it followed
the Israelites, whither soever they went. Sixthly, because it fell in such
abundance, as that it sustained so great a multitude.

6 At what time the Lord first sent Manna, the children of Israel being
ravished with the love of it, called it Manna, that is meat prepared of the
Lord: and herein they acknowledged the goodness of the Lord. This Manna is
first commended for the color, it was as Manna.
white as the precious stone called Bdellium. Secondly, for the taste, tasting
like fresh oil, Numb. 11. 7. Thirdly, for that it was Angels food, or meat
prepared by Angels. Psalm. 98. And yet for all this, when the people had been
accustomed to it, they loathed it, and set light by it, wherefore their sin
was the greater: The reason of it may be this. This Manna was given them, not
only to be food for their bodies, but also to be a token unto them, that
seeing the Lord fed them from heaven, they were not to settle themselves on
the earth, but to look for their inheritance in Heaven. So many therefore as
did rest in the bodily food, not respecting the thing spiritually signified by
it, they were soon weary of it. So is it also with us, for albeit all the
blessings of God be very dear unto us, and of a great price at the first
receiving of them, yet when they are common, the best blessings are lightly
regarded. If it be so in earthly things, which are agreeable to our nature, how
much more will it be in spiritual things, which are so contrary to our
nature. And hereby the great corruption of man's heart is discovered, which will
not be moved but with novelty. As for example, the sun if it were but
seldom seen, how glorious a creature would it be accounted, but because we
have the daily use of it, therefore very few of us regard it. Nay, the word of
God which is his arm to draw us to salvation, when it has been a little
while among us, it is a thing smally esteemed; whereas contrariwise in those
places, where it is newly recovered, they flock together far and near; and
will make it their talk and songs, and whole delights. The like reason is of
the Sacraments, and other blessings of God, which while men do use of fashion
and custom, or else do rest in the outward thing, not looking into them, nor
beholding the spiritual grace offered by them, it cannot be but that they must
needs fall into a superstitious abuse of them, or else despise and loath them.

7 Our Savior Christ gives two notable titles and commendations to the
exercises of the Church, Matthew chapter 7. verse 6. he calls them, holy, and
precious. First for holiness, we know there is no sound holiness, but in the
Lord, or of the Lord, and therefore it was said, holiness to the Lord; it was
the inscription of Aarons miter. And it is said in the Gospel, that none is
good but God, that is, none is essentially good but God: the word, the Angels
and so forth, are holy, but in respect rather of some thing received than of
their own nature; and so the word is holy after a double manner, either for
that it comes from God, who is perfitly holy, and it is of the nature of him;
or else for that by it we receive holiness and are made holy. For the first it
is sure, that the lawgiver does always impart to the law something of his
own nature, and therefore among the heathen, look what kind of men set down
the laws, the law had a smacke of their disposition. Solon a very moderate
man, his laws were very moderate, and tasted much that way. Draco his laws
were severe like to himself, and therefore they were said to be written with
blood: So are the Lord his ordinances, they coming from the holiest of all,
carry from him in them a sensible relish of holiness, and are united to the
nature of God. And as the law comes from one holy, and so teaches holy
things, likewise comes holiness into our hearts by applying them thereunto,
our hearts of themselves not being holy; and so the law having a quality of
God himself, it has it not for it self alone, but for us. In this respect as
the law is lively, so it is a quickening law making alive; as the word is wise,
so it makes wise; as it is holy, so it is a sanctifying law making us wise.
For preciousnes the Scriptures stick not and cease not to set a price of the
word, as Psalm 19. and 119. David compares it to spoils, a thing full of
precious things, wherein are things of great price. And yet for that in spoils
are things of all value, some more, some less precious, after he compares it
to gold, then to fined gold, afterward to much fined gold, yea to thousands of
gold and silver: and not contenting himself he joins to gold, precious
stones; and least yet he might say too little, he compares it to all manner of
riches. The reason hereof is this, that for as much as the soul of a man even
of him that perishes, is precious, and the soul of every good man more
precious; then the soul of the holiest, Christ Jesus is most precious. Now for
as much as the Gospel has it foundation in opening of the sign of the blood
of Christ: therefore the Gospel in a singular degree of excellency must needs
be most precious.

7 When some penitent sinners are executed for theft, we see they are more
grieved for whoredom, than for theft, because it brought them to theft, but
most of all they sorrow for neglect of the word, which has made them most
loose in all their life. Seeing then this is warranted by the experience of our
times, let us take heed we neglect it not, but see the Means to keep us from
sin.
want and neglect of these means to be the cause of other sins; but if we
will not do this, the Lord will punish sin by sin, which is most fearful:
for this is the only means to keep us from sin, to hear the word, pray,
give thanks, hear admonitions, receive the sacraments, with reverence and in
truth. As these means do keep us from sins, so do they recover us from
them when we are fallen thereinto, as when great trouble is upon us, poverty,
disquietnes: and against these the word of God does give a remedy, teaching
us, that as it came by Gods providence, so he must take it away, contrary to
the family of love, who denying the providence of God attribute it to outward
causes. Example of a man which said his sickness came by Gods visitation, they
replied unto him, did you not take cold? he answered, that is but a means to
serve his providence, so the family left him. For we take cold often, and yet
are not sick, because the Lord has all things in his hand, to dispose at his
pleasure, and then shall we rest in this, when we are certainly persuaded of
this doctrine. Psalm 32. The Prophet says, that before he acknowledged his
sin, moisture was turned into drought, but when he confessed, his punishment
was taken away; so Job. 33. when men will not profit by his word, then the Lord
will seal this former doctrine by a correction, which if we profit not by, it
will lie so long on a man, that his bones shall stick out: being in this case,
if the Lord reveal him this, he shall be restored to his former state. It is
plain, that the cause of these corrections is the neglect of the instruction
of God in his word, which if we would thoroughly give over our selves unto, we
might be sure that no presumptuous sin should prevail against us. But if we
esteem not the word of God, or receive it so as that we profit not by it, then
let us not marvel though the Lord do visit us, and that in great mercy too,
if we can be brought so highly to esteem of the word and of prayer, as of
nothing more.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Magistracy or Government.
AFter that Iethro, Exodus 18. 21. had told Moses a better course in the Confer
Exodus 11. 21. with Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
government of the people, he describes what manner of men they should be:
and to the properties which are there set down, there may be added three in
the first of Deuteron. verse. 13. 1 Magistrates must be men of wisdom.


First then, Magistrates must be wise: that is, skillful in all those causes
which shall come before them, otherwise, if they be not men of knowledge, they
be not fit for that place. Yea, though they be well minded, and willing to
do good; yet if they have not knowledge of those things which they must deal
in, it is not sufficient. For as in handicraft matters a good man is not
straightway a good Artificer: So, and much more is it in this weighty calling.

2 Secondly, it is required that they be endued with prudence or experience,
for Sapientia How wisdom and providence differ.
and Prudentia do thus differ: that the former is the general comprehension
of knowledge of things: the latter is the experience of that knowledge in
particular actions. Experience in other things does show how necessary this
property is. For we see in 2 Magistrates must be prudent men.
Physic and other Arts, many by much reading to have obtained singular
knowledge; so that they think with themselves they could do great matters,
yet when they come to have the use of their knowledge in some particular
maiters, they are oftentimes behind hand, and their knowledge for want of
experience does soon fail them; the reason hereof is this, by reading they
get the knowledge of general rules, which when they are applied to particular
cases are altered by circumstances, and many exceptions may be made against
them. So that in all Arts and Sciences this is generally holden, that so much
is thoroughly and soundly known, as is known by experience. It is necessray
therefore that a Magistrate be not only a man of knowledge, but also that he
be well experienced in the matters that be incident to his calling.

3 The third property necessary for a Magistrate is, that he be of a good
heart and 3 The Magistrate must be a man of a good heart and courage.
courage. For although he be able for his knowledge and experience to deal
in any matter, yet if he have not a courageous heart to go about them, the
others will little profit him. And if we consider with whom he shall deal,
and in what matters, how he is subject to the rebukes of those that are above
him, to the hatred of his inferiors, and to the evil speeches of all, then
we shall easily see how needful it is for him to have courage, that he may
proceed in his calling, and with nothing be discouraged.

4 It is fourthly required, that they be such as fear the Lord. By this
fear of GOD 4 The Magistrate must be a man fearing God.
they shall both examine their courage whether it be good* and also they shall
moderate and rule it by the same fear. For as courage when it once passes the
bounds of knowledge and experience, does oftentimes prove to be but a heady
rash boldness; So likewise, if it be not seasoned with the fear of GOD, it
does often end in oppression. This fear of GOD, with whomsoever it
prevails, does cause them to abstain from doing of wrong to any, as Joseph
reasons with his brethren; I fear God, therefore I will not do you wrong:
as contrariwise, wheresoever it is not truly planted, no sin so great, nor no
wickedness so grievous, which men for their pleasure sake will not easily be
brought to commit: as Abraham, Genesis, ^0 answers Abimelech. Therefore must
Magistrates evermore set the fear of God before their face, as Job, chapt. 31.
does witness, that he himself did, that thereby they may both make a
conscience in doing Justice, and also be kept from doing wrong.

5 Fifthly, it is needful that they be true dealing men: this true dealing
has first respect to the M^g^^rates themselves, that whatsoever they spe(...),
The Magistrate must be one that to ^^^ to de^^^ truly and to walk uprightly.
The Magistrate may not respect persons.
and what they promise, they be careful to perform, and that (...) they
think. This simple and upright dealing does pur^ ^a^e (...)re unto a
Magistrate. Secondly, it has respect to the case that they (...) to (...) that
they take pa^^es to search out the truth thereof, and give righteous (...)
r^quireth. For as the Lord judges according to right, so ought they (...)re
his Ministers. Therefore they must not further the evil cause of a good ^^^
though otherwise he be good; neither must they hinder the good cause of any
man, th^^^gh otherwise he be evil: they ought not to be careless of a
stranger, because he is a stranger, neither must they go busily about the
evil cause of their friend or neighbor, because he is their neighbor or
their friend. To conclude, they must neither behold the person of the rich nor
of the poor to pervert judgment for their cause, but give true judgment
without respect of person.

6 Sixthly, they must be haters of filthy gain. Covetousness is the mother of
appression 6 The Magistrate must hate filthy gain. The difference between
oppression and extortio^. Gifts.
and extortion, which do differ in this, that oppression has the color of
^^^^ and law, and extortion is when man gets by hook or by crook and
cares not how, so he may have it: but these two are not only here forbidden,
but even the lou^ of ^^^e; and rewards, which are of such nature, that they
will blind the eyes of the prudent, and sloppe the ears of the righteous. Yet
is it not altogether unlawful to give gifts and rewards, for Solomon says,
that a gift in the bosom pacifieth much strife, and if it be ^^^^ly bestowed,
it prospers whithersoeuer it turns. Again, Mordee^y and H^sters ^east is
mentioned with this commendation, that they sent gifts every man to his
neighbor: but when they are given with corrupted purposes, or received to
pervert right, then are they of all men to be abhorred, but specially of
Magistrates.

7 The seventh and last property of a good Magistrate is, that he be well
known to all 7 The Magistrate must be a man well known, and well reported of.
men: and this has respect to all those that went before; he must be known
then to be endued with wisdom and experience, to be of a valiant and
courageous heart, to have the fear of God before his eyes, to be upright in
his dealing, and a hater of filthy gain. So Paul would have the Ministers to
have a good report even of those that are without. And surely it is great
reason that they should be well known, or else they shall hardly have any
credit with us. For the weakness and corruption of our nature is such, that
when he who is not well known unto us shall speak as sound a truth, and
deliver it peradventure more plainly; yet does not his word bear so much
cred^t with us as another whom we know, and have some experience of. For our
natures do for the most part suspect strangers, and we are loath to commit our
selves and our matters to them we know not. Wherefore to the end that
Magistrates may bear credit among us, it is very meet that they should be
well known and their gifts also.

8 This doctrine must teach us first to consider what calling the Lord has in
mercy placed us in, and whether we have gifts answerable to our callings, that
we may thereby be brought to pray unto the Lord that he would give us that
which we have not, and increase Use of the former doctrine.
that which we have, and evermore supply that which is wanting. Secondly, it
serves to teach us to give due honor to those in whom we see the true
properties of Magistrates to be, and to acknowledge their lawful calling.
Thirdly, that in all our elections we make choice of such Magistrates as are
endued with these properties. Fourthly, that we may pray that such Magistrates
may be profitable where they are, and that the Lord would give them to such
places as have them not. And last of al, that the Lord in mercy would vouchsafe
to give these properties to all Magistrates, which now are set over his people,
and to furnish them plenteously therewith.

9 When the Lord gave the Israelites water in Rephidim, he named the place
after their sin Mossa, and not after the miracle that he wrought, that they
might both see his mercy, and be also put in mind of their sin. And this
ought Magistrates to do in punishing sin. The Lord had often before forgiven
them, and now when they had sinned most grievously he punished them, so as they
might still perceive his mercy. So ought the Magistrate to rebuke the people
for their sin, and let them know it, yet so as The Magistrate must temper
love, mercy, and justice together.
they mingle mercy and love with justice. And this ought to be also in the
discipline of the Church, all means must be used, and al kindness showed, so
that the fault be reproved, before we come to the last means of
excommunication.

10 As every one is higher in degree, so ought he to show a greater measure
of faith.

11 Joseph says, God made him a father unto Pharaoh, that is, a Ruler: for so
it is after Discipline.
expounded, and ruler of all his land. So Eliakim the Ruler of the people is
called a Father, because he should not have such a care for himself, as Shobna
had, who neglected the people, The Magistrate is specially to care for Gods
glory, and the safety of Gods people.
and hewed out sepulchers for himself, but should specially seek for the
glory of God, and the safety of the people: and so did Joseph win the
hearts of the Egyptians by his courteous dealing: he went not about to provide
any thing for his children after him. By this we are taught what manner of men
our Magistrates should be: for if they have a special love to their country,
self-love will be decreased: but if they be given to heap up for themselves
and their posterity, the love of their country will be quickly shaken off.
And this is to move us to pray for our Magistrates, and also in our selves to
be profitable to others so much as in us lies: for we are not borne (as the
very Heathen confess) Psalm. 16. 3.
to our selves, but for the benefit of others also. The want therefore of the
feeling of this, may serve us for a trial of our religion and godliness.

12 The Lord often does us much good when we see it not, he gives us many
benefits and blessings by his Ministers and Magistrates which we perceive
not, yet this is a punishment when we cannot see the means whereby the Lord
does us good: and therefore we must take heed to this, for when the case is
thus, it is dangerous.

13 This is to be noted generally in Christianity: it is a small matter to
receive religion, when plenty of all things do come with it. And so in
particular callings we see: who would not be a Magistrate or Minister, so long
as he may be in credit, and have all obedience yielded to him without trouble?
But if contempt come with affliction, how few Contempt of Magistrates
be there that will stand and abide in their callings, to give God the glory
in looking for that issue which he thinks good? Who would not be a married
man, if all his life might be as the marriage day? but when a man is married,
he must provide for his wife and children, yet with heed that he do nothing
with an evil conscience for them. Again, for that a man must forbear the
manifold infirmities of his wife, and overcome them with wisdom: how few are
there that will continue in marriage, giving God the glory? So is it in the
Magistracy and Ministry.

14 Exodus chap. 16. 27. 28. it is written, that there went out some of the
people to gather Manna, but found none: whereupon it is said, that the Lord
reproved Moses in these Note.
words: The Lord said to Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments?
Moses had not profaned this Sabbath, but the people, and not all but some: yet
the Lord rebukes Moses, because this people were committed to his charge. Thus
we see what weighty accounts the Lord will require at their hands, who have
the oversight of others, they must give an account for them. Again, inferiors
must be often admonished, not to despise The sins of the people imputed to
the Magistrates and Ministers.
the government and instructions of such as the Lord has set oner them, but
willingly receive them, and carefully follow them. If any be so careless, that
he respects not his own health and welfare, yet let this move him to some
further consideration of his doings, that by his negligence he puts other in
danger, and is hurtful to those that are set over him. This the Apostle Paul
also wills the Corinthians wisely to consider, 2. Cor. chap. 12. verse 21.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Matrimony, and of the duties which belong to that state.
GReat dangers follow them which join in affinity with sinners, as we see in
Ieboshaphat for joining himself with Achabs house, 2. Chron. chap. 17.
Affections agreeing in good things.


2 It is an holy token of an holy unity between man and wife, and that they
be married in the Spirit and not in the flesh, when their affections agree in
good things.

3 Iethro in marrying his daughter to Moses had no respect to worldly
preferments, which he saw Moses wanted, but only to the rare virtues which he
saw in him: This ought we to observe in these times, first to make such a
choice for our Chosen in marriage.
daughter of such a one as may be a special guide and helper for her to the
kingdom of heaven, and then to take other things if they come, but not to
seek them: God blessed this act of Iethro, for he had the worthiest man then
living. And Moses had a great blessing to have such a wife, as was brought up
in labor, that so she might the better suffer with him in adversity, and
provide for her self in state of necessity. This respect men ought to have in
marriage, least taking such as have been brought up delicately, they shall not
be able to bear the cross when it comes.

4 It is most like, by the words of Zipporah, Exodus 4. 26. Thou art indeed a
bloody husband unto me: that Moses to please his wife did omit the Sacrament
of Circumcision. This may teach us that we are to honor our wives, albeit the
weaker vessels, because 1. Pet. 3. ^. 7. How far the husband is to honor his
wife. 2. Sam. 6. Job. 2.
they be heirs of the same grace with us, and must keep love and peace in
outward things so we at no hand in matters of religion must yield unto them,
least we honor them more than God, and so we shall cause a punishment to fall
upon them and our selves. It was the cause of many troubles in Jacobs family,
to love Rachel more than Lea. But David and Job did wisely in withstanding
their wives when they sought to withdraw their minds from performing duty
unto God.

5 When the Lord makes any one man more excellent than another for gifts
outward or inward, he tries him whether he will seek Gods glory, and the
profit of his brethren: which fruits if they ensue not, then thus does the
Lord let him see, that this is his corruption which he must labor against. For
example: does the Lord give thee wife, riches, or God gives the blessing of
holy marriage to make men more serviceable unto him.
any such benefits? he does it to make thee more fit to serve. So then, has
the Lord, given thee a wife? Look to her, as the Lord has committed his own
creature to thee, so thou be fit to be a guide unto her, going before her in all
honesty and godliness. Again, he does try thee whether thou will rest in her
love, and whether thou will use her company soberly, not effeminately: he
tries thee whether thou will be covetous to care for earthly things in her
behalf. But these and the like fruits, the Lord does show thee the corruption
which thou must labor against.

6 The Lord gave Adam a wifeto try him withal, and if he had not yielded too
much unto her in the time of temptation, no doubt he might have been a great
help that she might have been recovered, and neither of them both have so
fallen. For had not he yielded unto her he might have continued still in her
innocence. Thus then the Lord tried Adam, whether he would continue in his
obedience or no: likewise does the Lord at all times try men in marriage
whether they will continue in his obedience, and labor to win their wives also
to the faith of Christ. So in like manner the Lord tries the wives whether The
subjection of the wife to the husband how God requires it.
they will be in all things subject to their husbands, as Sarah. For what gifts
soever a woman has, yet not being subject to her busband, they are nothing.
For even in man's innocence she was subject, and after the fall it was laid on
her as a punishment: so that if she be not obedient she cannot be saved. Yet
the Lord other whiles also tries whether she (...)er sobriety and wisdom
will as it were break the crookedness of her husband: (...) the Apostle
teaches, that the wives must adorn the hidden men of the heart, that (...)
husbands (albeit then not converted to the faith) might be won by the honest
1. Pet 3. 1. 2. 3
(...)ersation of their wiue^: how much the more then ought those who have
Christians (...)eir husbands, by their means bring them forward what they may*
in the profession (...)ue godliness? But if they be disobedient, and will
requite evil with evil, or with (...)e, they do what in them lies, to
overthrow the faith of their husbands. And thus (...) Lord tries wives also,
whether they will continue in his obedience. Again, he tries (...) whether
they will rest in the love of their husbands only, and be contented
there(...)* The love of the wise to the husband.
yea when they see their husbands hearts turned from them: for if they will but
only (...) when they are beloved, they declare that they only love themselves
and not their (...)nds: for they ou^ht thus to consider, the Lord has turned
my husbands heart from (...) because I yielded not to him that duty which I
ought, therefore I will not hold on to (...)se still, but now I will rather
love him more, to see if the Lord will by these means (...) his heart again.

7 When Zipporah became troublesome to Mose^ in his calling, he left her with
his fa(...) for a time: so she deprived her self, by her disobedience, of his
comfortable presence* Wives must help their husbands in Gods affairs 1. Cor.
7. 3. 4. ^
(...) ought to teach wives ever to help, and not to hinder their husbands in
the Lords af(...). And like as that holy man of God received his wife again at
his return, notwith(...)ding all her former faults: so must all the sons of
God, i^ there be any separation for (...)e and for just causes, receive, and
entertain, and retain their wives again.

8 Husbands must have a fatherly care, as principally of the salvation of his
wife, so al(...) her good health and welfare in this life: and to this end give
her all the good instru(...) and direction that he can. This lesson may well
be given to all: Be m^st moderate in A good lesson for all.
(...) things which thine appetite likes best, and check thy too much
greediness of an earthly (...)* and thou shall find this to be good physic
for the body, and a wholesome pre(...)iue for the soul.

9 A certain young man having without consent of friends made a contract, he
would Consent of parents.
(...) marry them, until before honest witnesses they had faithfully
co^ditioned that in time (...)marriage they would confess their fault against
the glory of God, their superiors, and (...) whole Church, which should be
done at that time that the father is wont to give the (...)gin in marriage.

10 A young man having over slipped in love, and intended to marry without
consent (...)gouerours, he did not contract him, but admonished him: and at
the day of marriage (...) used to the parties to be married this discipline:
First, as they had privately confessed (...) faults to their governors
especially offended: and craved pardon: so he caused them (...) confess their
fault to the Church, and to ask forgiveness, desiring all to beware of the
(...) offense, and requesting their prayers for them, that this sin may so
humble them, (...) they may more warily walk without offense the residue of
their life.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Ministry.
ALthough the Lord has promised a special blessing to the public ministry
of his Not to tie God to one mean for the breeding and increase of faith.
word, yet we must not tie wisdom to one ordinary mean, either of beginning
or increasing of our faith: but if any at any time shall have more effectual
feelings by ^riuate conference, let him not contemn nor neglect the public
ministry, but with all ^oly and humble thankfulness yield this souerag^^tie to
the Lord, that he is to dispose his ^fts, when, to whom, and where it pleases
him.

2 They that teach not themselves, are unfit to teach others: and the cause why
men profit not in the word is, because they pray not to have their hearts
stricken therewith.

3 In all essential points of the Ministry, we must in no case follow man:
but in accidental circumstances Christian love suffers many things, so that
on the on side we What to break in our Ministry.
tolerate not too much, and on the other side suffer too little.

4 Like as if we moderately streine a woman's breast, there will issue pure and
wholesome milk, and by violent wringing of it, we provoke blood also, and
unwholesome matter to Simile.
come forth: even so in our modest and natural applying of the word we yield
the wholesome and pure milk of Gods word, but in our immoderate wresting of it
we strain out our own corruptions, and deliver vnpure doctrine.

5 When neither Ministers rebuke sin, nor Magistrates punish it, there it
cries to To pray for the Ministry.
heaven that God might punish it. Woe then be to them who think themselves at
good quiet, when their sins cry out for vengeance in heaven, albeit they
live in great peace on earth.

6 It is a fearful thing to lose the company of the godly. And though the
world think they are at good quiet, yet when Noah and Lot that rebuked their
sins are departed, then are men most fit for Gods judgments to fall upon them.

7 Where a people heartily desire by prayer the ministry of Gods word, the
Lord will send them faithful ones, and will multiply his graces in them: but
because people are so full of carnal security, the Lord sends them such as
either for ability cannot, or for affection will not deliver the word of God
unto them.

8 The Ministers of God are more discouraged by the disobedience of their own
people, than by the maliciousness of their enemies, be they never so mighty.
But let Gods ministers Not to offend a godly Minister.
know, that they must ever have some to refuse the^* but let every child of God
take heed; that he offend not his godly Minister: and if he has offended, let
him with submission seek to please him: for as Paul says, If I be sorry who
can make me glad, but those by whom I have been made forte? And let the
Minister of the Lord remember, that the fruits of his labors amongst the
people, be as it were the life and crown of his ministry: so Paul teaches
also in his own example: I do live, if Christ do live in you.

9 The Israelites murmured against the Lord, though they seemed to repine but
against Moses and Aaron. Christ says, He that hears you, hears me, etc. So
long as the Ministers of God trust not in themselves, nor do any thing of
themselves, but that whereunto they are called and ordained: if they be
resisted, the Lord in them is resisted; and if we refuse such, we refuse the
Lord, 2. Sam. 12. But when they be not ordained of God, nor bring not the word
of God with them, then the curse cause less shall not fall. But if we be
assured of their calling, or persuaded of their doctrine: or if doubting and
searching by the Scriptures we find it true, then if we obey not, the Lord is
highly dishonored.

10 It is necessary that the Minister of God do very sharply rebuke the
people for their sins, and that he lay before them Gods grievous judgments
against sinners: for so the Apostle commands: Rebuke them sharply, that they
may be sound in the faith. And again, Tit. 1. 11. 12. 13. Ioh. 16. The Minister
must reprove sins sharply.
it is needful for the people that they have their consciences touched, and
their hearts made known unto them, that so they may come out of their sins,
and prevent the heavy judgment of God.

11 The Israelites were sometime at their wits end, and therefore could not
pray: so that they had a singular blessing to have Moses to pray for them. So
had Lot when Abraham prayed for him: So had the Israelites when Samuel,
Phineas, and Elias were ready to pray for them. This must teach us to set much
by Gods servants among us, which pray for us, and not to have them in small
account. Eccl. says, The godly in prosperity is not regarded, but in
adversity they are sought unto. And indeed they are our chiefest help, as is
said of Elias, that he was the chariots and horses of Israel: and this is not
only profitable for whole countries, but for every particular man, that when
he cannot pray, but has (as it were) his heart and tongue fast looked up, yet
then Gods servants do pray for them, that after they may pray themselves.
Wherefore let us ever be ready to pray for others, though they be wicked, and
have done no duty to us, yet it is Gods grace that we stand, that we might
reach a hand to them; and though they have rejected us, and deal evil with
us, yet let us do our duty unto them, as Moses did for this people, though
they were ready to stone him; and so did Samuel pray for the people which had
rejected him; so that nothing must cause us to leave our duties to them, but
ever labor to have our hearts upright with God, whereof this is a good note, if
we can pray for others though they have wronged us. And that we may do this, we
must set the glory of God before our eyes, which will teach us not only to love
and do good unto them which love us (for so do the harlots) but even to help
them that hate us. Therefore when the Lord will have a punishment brought upon
us, then will he take the godly from us, as he took Lot from Sodom. And
therefore in such cases we have to fear dangers.

12 With what provision the mighty of the world build their castles, and with
what consultations the Kings of the Nations proclaim wars; with the same
provision, and with the The weighty ca^ing of the Ministry requires a wary
entering into so high a dignity.
same consultation, and with no less, should we take the calling of the
Ministry upon us, which is a masonrie, and a warfare both at one time, as
master Beza well notes, Ephesians. 6. 2. continually like the builders under
Nehemiah, holding the trowell in one hand, and the sword in the other: The
groundwork hereof, flesh and blood has taught us, and set it down for a
corner stone in all serious consultations, that whatsoever is, must be set
down once for all, even for all the life long, never to be called back
again; That same had need be well breathed upon, and be long in setting down.
And this is not only heathen wisdom, Advtrumque pa^ ati.
but Salomons wisdom, a man filled with understanding, even one of his
Aphorisms, Prou. 25. Prepare thy work without, and make ready all things in
the field, and. But behold a Semel constituendum, diu deliberandum.
greater then Solomon. Luc. 14. before whom all heathens wisdom, all man's
wisdom is foolishnes, yea brutishnes, even Christ Jesus the only wise God,
who not in generality, but in this particular case of the ministry
straightly charge and commands us, that not the best of us all be so
hardy, as to lift up an Axe, or to stretch a line over his building before we
have been at Ephrata, and in the woods, to see that our provision be great
enough, before we have set down, and as it were (kept straight Audite with
our selves) and cast all our Reckonings over again, and be sure we have
sufficient to lay the last stone, as we lay the first. If we do not thus,
charges will arise more then we think, and we shall not be able to hold out
to the end. And if we be not, why then all that behold us, all the world, all
the Angels in heaven, CHRIST himself, shall laugh us to scorn, Christ
himself shall have us in derision, this fellow must needs be building, etc.

Oh it goes sore when CHRIST, whose Face was wrinckled with weeping, and the
shadow of death was on his Eyes for our sins: when that Christ who in the
days of his A good admonition to such as purpose to enter the great calling of
the ministry.
flesh offered supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5* When that
Christ, who in the bitterness of his soul lifted up his voice over Jerusalem,
and cried: Oh if thou ha^st but known at the least in this day, what belonged
unto thy peace: and so was saine to lift up the rest of the Sentence with
tears, as it was, and as not being able to speak on for weeping, the tears
coming down so fast, that they interrupted his speeches, and made them
imperfect; When thou CHRIST shall laugh at our perishing, and take delight at
our destruction. Yet this will he do, and more also, if we shall be cold or
careless in this business. Attendite vobis.
And therefore sift your selves narrowly, ye that purpose this work, gage the
bottom of your thoughts, and be sure that it is the Shepherds voice that
calls you in, be sure that your gifts are answerable. For he that brings
to this building, either untempered mortar, or unskillful hands, building he
shall build, and a tower he shall build; but not Sion, but like the tower of
Shilo, Luc. 8. to fall down upon him, and to crush him In matters of great
wisdom Christ uses both gravity and wisdom to make us more diligent in
hearing, which also teaches us the right kind of hearing.
to pieces, and all to fitters. This may find us matter to think of, when we
are alone, and may strike us into cogitations, knowing, that our nature is
blind, and believes easily her own fancy; and thinks her self called,
when she is not, least happily we should not be careful or fearful enough,
and so become guilty of contempt of this great commandment, which is the
highest treason against the eternal GOD, and a matter of most fearful
condemnation. Our Savior CHRIST in his sermons and speeches, besides his
sharp exordiums* claspeth up many things with his Selah, and with his
vehementepiphonema, which he uses never to set to (mark it when ye will) but
in matters of great charge, and in such savings of his, as he would have to
pearce and divide between the joints and the marrow: He that has Ears to
hear, let him hear. In effect, it is thus much, he that planted the ear,
he planted it for himself, and for his own sayings planted he it, he it is
that speaks, shall not he have audience? Even the Lord it is that speaks,
shall he speak to the wind? God forbid. Our ears are not ours, none of our
members are ours* his they are, even CHRIST'S, he has bought them at an high
price, and from him we have them and we have them for none other end, no^ by
no other condition, but that we should hear, when, and what he would have us
to hear. And let him be Anathema, that suffers any of his sayings to fall to
the ground. Put Anathema, Ma^anath^. to him and his ears, that shall not
regard his saying. This sealed saying and two edged exhortation, which Luc.
14. he uses to teach the foundation of the Ministerte, which is the foundation
of the Church of God, which is the foundation of the whole world. And those
mark well, if there be any among you that has ears, and is willing to
employ them well, here he may do it. This is a faithful saying, and of all
most worthy to be remembered: and therefore he that has ears to hear any
thing, let him hear this. And he that hears it not, or hears it with no
regard, the days shall come when his ears shall make his heart ache, and when
for not hearing this he shall hear another sentence, a glowming fearful
sentence, such a one as who so hears it, both his ears shall tingle. Zachar
7. Because I cried and you would not hear, you shall cry another while, and I
will not hear you for ever. And therefore hearken unto me, that God may
hearken unto you, Iud. 9. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. When
such fresh and well fenced exhortations come, we must make this use of them,
that the holy Ghost is not wont to make a beam of a mo^e, he talks of mint
and annis, as of mint and annis, he uses not so much as a figure, but where
the matter deserves ten. And therefore when the holy Ghost falls to
amplify, we are to think Acroas^e.
there is some great matter no doubt, and there is more in it then we take: and
if no speech of his be idle or empty, we are surely to think, that his
epiphonemacs least of all are so, and that they especially are, Yea and Amen.
And therefore seeing such a thing is no ex^tericall matter, but an acromaticall
point of doctrine of the holy Ghost, seeing he alters How dull man is in
hearing the Word.
his usual kind of speaking, we can do no less, than alter our usual
manner of hearing, and prepare both ears and hearts, and all the powers of the
mind to entertain it. Besides, when our Savior Christ waketh us with this
watch word, it must teach us, that we are wondrous dull of hearing, else why
should Christ call on thee to hear which came forth to no other end but to
hear him? or why should God in another place bid Es^y lift up his voice like a
trumpet? Would not a softer sound serve? But as I said, we are dull and that
so dull, that when the Prophet cries to the Altar, 1. King. 5 Oh Altar, Altar,
hear the word of the Lord, the Altar heard and cleaves in sunder: but when
he cried to deroboam he heard not. The very stone heard, that had no ears to
hears and one that had ears heard not. Thirdly, this use we must make of it,
that this hearing must go further then the ear, and that we must not hear
the word, as we do a matter of course, or talk of a strange country without
any affection or longing to it, it must go further than they can. For well I
wo^e, that you can hear me, and I doubt not, but that they then heard him, and
Jeroboam heard the Prophet, but as Job says, with the hearing of the cry. But
it is not that hearing, which is better then the fat of rams, it is not that
hearing that the Lord ^^keth pleasure in. Else how comes that strange phrase,
Ezech. 2. Let him that hears hear? The hearing of the heart.
But as there is a speaking to the heart, so there must be a hearing of the
heart also, and then we hear with our heart, when we fetch up our heart to
our ears, and our sound pearceth them both: then we hear with the heart,
when we hear not only with these hollow gristies, but we hear with the
Spirit, and we hear with the understanding also: and then we hear with the
heart (says Augustine) when it is with us and with the Word, as it is with
the Fish and the bayte, if she take, she is taken. 42. Hom. in Iohanne^.
Capit, and capitur. Sermones Dei si caniuntu 1, capiunt.


So, if we take the Word, we shall be taken, and if it be taken of us, it
takes us. God his Word when it is taken, takes again, and if we feel not
our selves taken by it, let us not dream to our selves, we have not it, we
have not heard it as we should do. And take this for a sign after the Sermon
ended, we that are present, shall return to our business and chambers, know
it assuredly, and think of it alone, when you are by your selves, that the
Word spoken now has entered into you, if it so has wrought in you, and so make
you to bethink your selves, that ye make as it were a new sermon to your
selves* when y^^ be alone, the Lord has blessed you, and you have done well.
If it has done you no good, and it has been heard without feeling, as though
you cared not greatly for it, it has detected your corruption, and accuses
your own consciences, your hearing is turned into sin, and this shall serve
to fill up your enditement, and to make your condemnation more ^ust against the
day of the Lord. For let no man ever think, but that every time he hears the
word, it works in him either to better or worse, there is no qualifying of
it, there is no altering of it. Enter it will, be thine ears never so
uncircumcised, it will surely enter, and one way it will be effectual, and
thou shall depart from it either a more reverent esteemer, or a more desperate
contemner than thou came. For this word shall never go forth in vain, but
the work, that is appointed for it to do, it will assuredly bring to pass.
Seeing that we have such dull ears, let us pray heartily that it may please the
Lord, to say eppathah to our ears, and hearts, that the word may have easy
passage into them. And this grave admonition, I trust will move us, if we have
not set a double lock to our ears, and quenched the grace of God already in
us.

14 The dealing with an allegory as it is ridiculous if it be too far
pursued, as many How we are to deal with allegories.
do, who, when they have gotten an allegory by the end, ring it so deep,
that oftentimes they turn the clapper: so it is dangerous, if it be not warily
handled, insomuch that even the Fathers themselves, as he that reads them,
shall mark, by pressing them too hard, do often times give blood in stead of
milk.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Ministry.
IT is to be feared, that the price of the Ministry will daily decay Of the
high dignity of the Ministry, and of the great indignity which some put upon
it.
and fall less and less: well, how base soever it ^eemeth in the eyes of men,
how low soever the world account it, when it is at the lowest, it is good, and
I protest good enough for any, and too good for some. But it is dangerous with
all (which comes often to pass, too often, if it pleased God) if it chance (I
say) to be tainted any way, if his preaching be flash, and have non ore taste in
it than the white of an egg, for lack of learning, or if it be not thoroughly
powdered with salt, that it may give grace to the hearers, and make their
souls thirst after the water of life, for lack of zeal, or if this life have
no salt of the covenant, and no part of him be sauorie, his case is very
dangerous: he is subject to the curse, his ministry is denied a blessing.

2 The Minister of the Gospel must not prophecy peace to himself, nor of a
fruitful Preachers must be prepared for trouble.
vine on the walls of his house, nor of olive branches round about his table,
nor of wife and children, he must not dream that he is carried on Eagles
wings, and that all the sheaues in the shocke shall fall down at his sheafe,
he must not imagine of drinking wine in carved bowls, of keeping a great
house, he must not think he shall go to his grave like a ricke of corn,
he must dream of evil favored kine, of troublesome friends, of hard times,
of the willowe trees by the waters of Babell, of exile, of dark prison, which
needs no interpretation, that his sheaues are threshed with an iron flaile,
and that her grave is made him in a woodstocke: to be short, his mind must
not run of getting and keeping, but of forsaking and forgoing, if persecution
come, we must If we will profes Christ we must bear the cross of Christ
though^ be an heavy yoke to flesh and blood.
trudge.

3 If Christ and his Gospel should go from us, we must follow him, we must
go sing the Lords song in a strange land: and this is not all. Those that love
thee best, whose souls are knit to thy soul, thou must forsake. O my father
Abraham, and O my son Isaac must part, thou must forsake thy father which begat
thee, and bring his gray head with sorrow to the grave, thou must forsake the
womb that bare thee, and the tears that gave thee suck, let the mother lack
the staff of her age, the children of thy loins must thou leave fatherless;
and the wife of thy bosom a widow to the wild world. Yet this is not all:
thou must stretch out thy hands, and let another man gyrde thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not. And yet there lacks one thing: Satan's great motive,
skin for skin, that for which a man will give all that he has to redeem
his life. All these things will I give thee (says the devil:) all these
things will I take from thee says Christ, we must be ready to leave them all,
or else we are not for him.

4 By this time all is almost marred. But flesh loves ease, and it grieueth
her that God and Mammon are no better friends, and we could be content every
one of us to be Dives, whilst we be alive, so we might be Lazarus when we be
dead: we could willingly go to heaven, but it would be in a convenient
broad way then, but in such a way* where we might drive a sumpter-horse
before us. This is a disease where with we are all tainted, as that wily
Serpent knows right well, and such thoughts as these does he make often arise
in our hearts; Seeing other estates live the days of heaven, glut themselves
in the pleasures of this world, and that the world sets them in her lap, and
makes them her cockneyes, seeing they wax wealthy and fat, so that as Job
says, they have collops in their flancke, seeing them clothed in soft
raiment, flaunt it out, and seeing them carry the crest alofte, and to have a
great range, and not such straightness required of them; and seeing them never
to drink of the waters of troubles: we straightway think, it is no better
then madness to abridge What thoughts Satan does suggest into men to dislike
their callings.
our selves of these delights, and to become a Pillar of salt. As for this
estate (say men) it is but a dead melancholic calling, but a dumpish kind of
life, no joy of heart, we must live in it like petie-Angels, as if we dropped
out of the clouds, or else we shall be offensive. But especially this
temptation may come unto a minister; for often we see when all is done, great
learned Augustine shall get but little Hippo; but if it be so you come to get
Carthage, to be a Priest of the highest chair, sit you never so well, ye sit
not fast: and see the gyrts be sure, that hold you in your saddle. For if the
Sun go down, and it be a dark night, that all the beasts of the field
creep forth, whereas other callings may make a little elbow-roome for
policy, and reserve themselves to an indifferent Interim, and it will be well
taken, yet these men, these must be killed all the day, and be counted as
sheep appointed to be slain. The Devil will hold the sponge of vinegar and
gall too at their noses, the Flesh is queasie-stomacked, and cannot away with
these poudered meats, she must have it fresh.

5 It is our fault too much to commend every trifle, our tongues are our own,
we call Outreaching and raging co^mendations must learn modesty and measure
of the holy Ghost.
evil good, if one be not an open offender, so that he draw not his sin
after him with cart-roapes, though we see neither zeal nor fear of God in all
his ways, we tremble not to call him a good man. In our flattering lips we
speak nothing but superlatiues, and think otherwise we commend not a thing to
any purpose. But in the Dialect of the holy Ghost it is not so, he is no giver
of titles, and yet this much of his mouth is more then seven swelling
hyperboles from a vain man. This word (good) is his emphasis, and in this word
he expresses matter of most high commendation. If we should take upon us to
speak of the workmanship of the Lord, in the creation of heaven and earth, and
the Hosts of them, both, would we not use the statelyest words in all our
store? Nay, could we find any words stately enough to express them? I tell you
nay; but they are able to swallow up our understanding, and to make our tongues
cleave to the roof of our mouth. And yet the holy Ghost reporting the
creation of them all: as of Light, which is (says Job) the Lords rose of A
description of God his work.
estate; of darkness, which is the swaddling bands of the Day, the out-going of
the Evening and Morning, and declaring how he powered out the Heavens like
molten glass, and set up the firmament as a water over us, how he laid the
beams of his chamber in the waters, how Light.
he railed in the proud Seas with bars and doors, and planted plains in the
midst of it, Darkness.
how he lighted those everlasting Cressets, the Sun and the Moon, and gave
charge to the Stars not to fail in their watch; telling how he created the
clouds to be the bottles of heaven, and divided spouts in them for the rain;
how he laid up his treasures of Snow and of hail, and prepared the Forge for
his Lightnings and Thunder, describing the creation of Plants from the Cedar of
Libanus to the hysop that grows by the wall; of birds, from the Ostrich to
the fly: of beasts, from Behemoth and Leuiathan, to the little Eme^; And last
of all, Man, the County Palatine of the whole world; and of the passing
Wisdom in his reins: these works be highly to be commended, if any thing be
to be highly commended; to be magnified, if any thing be to be magnified: in
all these the holy Ghost neither rises nor falls, but this word serves him
throughout, and God saw it was good: and why not excellent good, but that we
might know his word is mighty in the simplicity thereof, and that what he
calls good, is excellent good. Yea heaven and earth may be glad of it, seeing
the word of God, whereof one jot is of more price then they both: that the
word, Hebr. 6. is called the good word of God, and to stop the mouths of
them, that will teach the holy Ghost Rhetoric, Christ himself, John 10.
entituleth himself no otherwise but the good Shepherd. And good was thought
good enough for him, and do we yet require a more stately commendation?

6 The Calling of the Ministry is an alluring Calling, and, as I may say, a
Calling that calls men unto it, a lovely Calling, such a Calling, as the
beams of it are able to ravish A pithie praise of the calling of the
Ministry.
an eye: yet some being to marry this Virgin, think her but hard favored,
and therefore before hand will be sure of a good portion with her, or else they
will none of her: but she is full of grace even down to the feet, in their
eyes that love her, and full of Majesty and terror even to the dust of her
feet, unto al them that despise her, which more respect the reward than the
work: but this I confess withal, that our eyes are so dazzled with the golden
stone, and the horsseaches daughter, Give, Give, cries so in our ears, and
ever since Adam did eat the apple, all the mouths of his posterity are so
out of taste, that we can neither hear, nor see, nor taste any thing that good
is. True it is, that if we look upon this calling with an eye of flesh, it
looks even like Christ for all the world. Esaias. chap. 53. like a withered
branch, and like a root in the dry ground, and there is neither beauty nor
favor in it, that we should desire it. I am sure the eye of a carnal man can
see no good in it, unless it be good to clean unto the Lord: or it is good
for me that I have been afflicted: and such like, which are like pills, and
will not (to die for it) down with a carnal man. Well, Christ says this
Calling is good. We see, what is thought in heaven of this Calling. Howsoever
it be shut up in contempt of the men of this generation, that though they say
not, it is not good, yet by shrinking from it, they proclayme so, louder than a
trumpet, that they think it is not Labralactucas.
good. Let them laugh, we know, that even an Ass, if she could laugh, would
laugh at any, whosoever he were, that eats not thistles. Let them judge, when
man's judgment The sacrilege of our time in Church robberies, oh that the
learned would more preach it, and write against it.
is done, we shall receive the fruit of a better Fountain. Let them spoil
Churchliuings, and devour the Lords portion, let them swell with disdain, and
burst with contempt against us, a blessed contempt it is, that fashioneth these
days of my vanity into the similitude of the age of Christ. Christ does not
only say this Calling is good, but he has magnified this Calling in his own
Person. He himself says Paul Roman. chapter 15. verse 8. was a Minister of
the Circumcision with us. The Princes themselves have no greater honor than to
ouersee the Church. The best day that ever David lived, was when in a linen
Ephod, he daunced before the Arc, and that was the day that he weepeth and
pants to remember, Psalm 42. Solomon the wisest, richest, mightiest, and
most glorious among the sons of men, Ecclesiastes or Preacher was the crown
and beauty of his honor, and above all titles of kingdoms, and countries,
this was most honorable, Solomon Psalm* 42. Ecclesiastes.
the Preacher. But what are men, or what are Kings or Princes in respect of
Angels? Yet even these glorious Spirits, the whole host of Angels, whether they
be Dominions, Principalities or Powers, the highest Honors they have, the
proudest Title they boast of, is to be Heb. 1. ver. last*
Ministering Spirits. If he be an Angel, he has no greater glory. And who art
thou? and what is thy fathers house, that can farm unto thy self greater
Honor than to serve the Lord in this business? These arguments might move us,
but above all arguments take this: The Son of God, before whom even the very
Cherubins cover their faces, spent his life in this Calling, and shall a piece
of clay, a man, a stinking worm, so far exalt himself in his birth, in his
riches, in his wisdom, personage or blood, that he shall think it a disgrace
to consecrate all his life to the ministry of the Gospel? Can flesh puff up
it self so far above the Saints, above the Angels, above the Lord himself,
or if he do, shall he not be rewarded? Yes surely, for if the Lord would keep
silence, the very creatures themselves would be revenged of him.

7 We must desire that which is truly good, for there are many kinds of good:
There Diverse kinds of good.
is Isachars good, Genes. chap. 49. Isachar an Ass of great bones couching
down between two burdens, sa^e that which was good, and was content to
bear. Howsoever many bigboned Asses lay them down between a pair of
burdens for ease, hastening only to auoy de the burden and the heat of the
day. There is Demetrius his good, the siluersmith: Sirs, ye know that by this
craft we have our goods. For we know, that the labor is nothing so great now,
as it has been, and that in these days, a clus^er of the common or civil
law is worth an whole vintage of divinity. There is Balaacks good, Numb.
chap. 22. I purpose to do thee good, to promote thee. There is Peter's good: Be
good to Speak pleasing things and serve the time.
your self. ^or we know, if he dare say to the King, thou art impious, he may
carry John Baptists reward for his labor, and send his head for a second
course. And yet there is a better good. For we must not, says Syracid, Ask of
a woman, touching whom she is ^ealous nor of an ambitious man touching
thankfulness, nor of an^ireling for the finishing of ^ work, nor of the men
of the world touching the things pertaining to God: for the world is a great
favorer of the heresy of the Libertines, and if we fall to counsel with
flesh and blood, we may do to the book of God, as Ieconiah did to the
Prophecy of Jeremiah, cut it in pieces with a penknife, and cast it into
the fire, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 1.

8 Whatsoever is written, for us it is written, and if it be written for us,
and for our sakes, A modest preoccupatio^ in speaking of the Ministry.
Let me hear (says David) what the Lord will say concerning me, and so we
must attend to hear the Lord: what he will say concerning us. As for me,
although I do but sit and mend my nets, and have no part nor fellowship in
this business, being unworthy to be matriculated into the high calling of the
Ministry, yet feeling my soul has chosen the tabernacle of the Lord, for
his portion, and seeing the day may come, that I may keep a door in the same,
as the Lord lives, before whom I speak, he knows that in his fear I speak
to this end, that by mine own mouth I may be stirred up to prepare my self to
this calling: and that all you as Augustine said in his case (when it was as
mine is now) hearing what my desire and purpose is, may pray to God for me,
that I may have power and strength given me to perform it.

9 In providing for the Ministry, good men would be preferred. God can do
much they say, he may make them able. It is like Saunders argument: God is
omnipotent: Ergo What care to be had in admitting any to the calling of the
Ministry.
there is transubstantiation. Nay he has enabled diverse well. In the
wilderness, when meat could not be gotten, he rained quails, but in Canaan,
when they were in case to provide for themselves, that provision ceased. Many
simple men at the first coming of the Gospel, were stirred up, when the
Universities were the greatest enemies of his truth, but now when he has
restored to us the plenty of Canaan, we must know, that the date of that
extraordinary calling in our days is expired. Objection.
Yet he may do well. True, he that casts blindfold may hit the mark: but
yet no wise man will lay any wager on his head. O^us est vel ipsis Angelis
formidandam. Bernard.
If I might see a fiery tongue sit on his head, I would say somewhat. After
his receiving up into glory, when he ascended up on high, then he gave gifts
unto men, such gifts as on their Coronation days Kings are wont in great
abundance to scatter among the people. The Rarae and eximiae virtutis negotium
est, and humana facultate superius. I. Ca^u.
Conduits ran with wine, and all the cocks with rose water, and his Missilia
new coin of gold and silver by handfuls were thrown amongst them Such were
the gifts of tongues, prophesying, healing, all knowledge, and other graces.
Now although he give us all things liberally, yet he continued not his largess
daily, as at his inauguration. We must not look always to have the like MAN
for gathering it up, but return to our occupations: How respect must be had of
if ^ mealling to the Ministry.
and let us remember the Lords steward must be fraught with all store, new and
old, fit to entertain the son and daughter of the great King of heaven*
Prophesying the sign of learned men. Numb. 11. 25. Even poor Bez^^^l and
A^oliab before they could make curtains, and work in blew silk, yet for so
much as it belonged to the Lords tabernacle, they were filled with the Spirit
of God in these mechanical hand^-workes. Esaias. 6. 7. his ^iam in ipso Christo
prius spiritus quam legatio* o^um ^^am aren^.
mouth was touched with the hot cole, and then sent, verse. 8. ^erem. 1. 9*
his mouth is tou ched with the Lords hand, and he was bidden go and cry. chap
2. 1. of Christ this question was asked, John. 7. 15. How knows this man the
Scripture? their testimony is of him Ioh. 7. 46. Matthew. 7. 28. he speaks with
power, and what this exceliencie is, may appear by Many arguments of Christ's
excellency in all knowledge and learning.
his disputation with good scholars, as it was likely, Luke chap. 2. verse 46.
by his Hebrew Ephathah, whereas their vulgar speech was Syrian, by his perfect
and often quoting of the Scriptures, and the Thalmud in discourse of the
traditions of Corban, and the other of the gold of the temple etc. by Herod's
great expectation, and questioning with him of many things, Luke chap. 23.
verse 9. by Sadduces and Scribes, putting ^^^th hard questions, as of the woman
having seven husbands, of paying tribute, and his stopping their mouths, and
by teaching by Parables, which was the learning most accounted of in these
times, and as yet amongst the Jews best thought of: by the desire that the
Greeks had to see him, which came up to the seast, John chap. 12. verse 21. by
the counsel of his brethren, that he should get him abroad, and show himself
to the world, thought to be famous. By his own testimony, Behold a wiser than
Solomon is here: by Nicodemus, John chap. Ioh. 7. ^. Mark. 3. 2^.
3. verse. 2. which confesses him to be a Teacher sent from God. M^tth. chap.
13. verse 51. The Apostles daily taught by Christ the best Schoolmaster for
three who eyeere together, and yet more, were commanded to tarry and wait
for the promise of the ^ather, the Comforter to be sent. Apollos through his
learning, a great help to the Apostles, Act. Paul's learning and knowledge in
humanity.
chap. 18. verse 24. and 28. Paul was brought up at the feet of Gam^l^^l, a
per^^ct Pharisie, Act. chap. 21. verse. 3. an expou^der of the law, though rude
in speech, yet not in knowledge, 2. Corinthians chap. 11 verse. 6. in converting
Paulus Sergius a learned man, Dio^^si^s A^^opagita a great Philosopher,
disputing with the whole troop of the Stoics and Epicures at Nugae in or^
^acerd* ^s quasi blasphemiae sunt: ^oe-d^ ^ou^tur ad ri^u^^ oe-dius mo^et. Bern.
Athens, read in A^^atus, Epimenides, Menander, made Foelix to tremble with the
force of his eloquence, was thought Mercury for his eloquence at L^^aonia, by
the notable course and vain of all his epistles, not inferior to the writings
of any of the ^ea^hen, Festus thought him to be mad with much learning, Act.
chap. ^6. verse 24 he w^lled Timothy to bring his books and parchments from
Troas, 2. Timoth. chap. 4. verse 13. by Peter's testimony, 2. Pet. chap. 3.
verse 16 according to the wisdom given unto him. Timothy was Futurus Pastor
Ecclesiae ^alis eligatur, cuius comparatione ^aeter^ merito g^e^^ dica^tur.
^^er. ad Ocean.
perfectly taught in the Scriptures from a child, 2. Timoth. chap. 3. verse 13.
in so much as he had prophecyings going before of him, 1. Timoth. chap. 1.
verse 1^. nourished up in the word of faith and good doctrine, 1. Timoth. chap
4. verse 6. charged to give attendance to reading and learning, and to continue
therein, 1. Timoth. chap. 4. verse 16.

10 Every thing in the Sanctuary was double to that which was common, as the
Shekle, the Cubit: so ought it to be with the Minister. Tri^les in the
Ministers mouth are blasphemies: laughter in him is unseemly, and to move
laughter is more unseemly* Al^ Vehementer ^n^re^at* attd^t tet^c^, sin minus
vehementer audit frigidus.
will cry and say to them in their infirmities. Art thou become weak also as
we? A^t thou become weak like to us? Esa. chap 14 verse 16. Genesis ^7. 22.
Chrysostom. in Act. 2.
Thy voycetruely is Ia^obs* sweet and soft, but thy hand is the paw of ^sa^,
rough and hairie Let such a one be called Pastor of the Church, as in
comparison of him, the rest may be called a flock. H^^r^^. ad Ocean. And it is
the Canon which the very Papists use in electing of Ministers, Distinct. 25
Whosoever of Aarons seed had any b^emish in him, should not prease to offer
before God, neither to come near the veil, neither to stand by the Altar,
Leuit. 21 17 Unless he will Hier ad Greg. lib. Epist. 9. quid in te miratur
multitudo, si sua in te recog^os^at, si ^^^^^e respiciat, quod vlt^^ ^e inuen
at, ^^ quae in se erube^ca^; in t^ que^^ rener^ndum ar^^tra^^^ offendat*
Cyp^^an ^^ epist ad Haeret. Consulen^^ de via, si ^^am in Dieauerit, alia ipse
iuerit, non indicantem sequaris sed euntem.
depart from iniquity, let him not once name Christ his name: his mores will
be beams* John Baptist is too straight, Christ is too loose, and his disciples
wash not their hands before meat. Elisha has a bald pa^^, and one thing or
other stands yet in the way: ^e delights not, or he ^^ifies not. Does Gods
Minister rebuke sharply, then is he too sour; if he admonish mildely, then is
he too cold. A Bishop (says Hierome) must be of such knowledge and holmesse,
that both his gesture and motion, habit and atti^e, must (as it were) speak
of his gravity, his words and actions must be instructions to his people. And
H^^rome says, what shall the multitude commend in thee, if they find their
own d^for^i ties in thee? If they find nothing which is not in themselves? If
they find that in thee (whom they think to reverence) which being found in
themselves would make them blush? Ministers are the Lords messengers, and they
must not carry with them (as did Vvias) a letter for the knowledge of such
things as serve and tend to their destruction. Damnant se ipsos sua vo^e qui
sui similes ^^ferno d^mnant, with their own words do they condemn
themselves, which do condemn such as be like themselves in the hels. If I
ask a man of the right way, and he shall point at one way, and himself will
go another way, I will not regard his words, but follow his steps. Well, as he
is an adulterer, that with a desiring eye looks on the beauty of his
neighbors wife, albeit that woman shl remain chaste; so are they murderers in
doing, as much as in the^ lies, to kill by their Iewd example, the souls of
their brethren, although the Lord by his mercy preserve them from contagion. An
evil Malus Minister Nisus diaboli.
minister is the devils hawk, he is the devils best factour. Surely Sermons
confuted by an evil life, are like to milk turned in the seething. By
preaching they hew timber out of the thick 1. Cor. 9. 29. The evil life of
Ministers how dangerous.
trees, by evil life again, they break down the carved work, and with axes
and hammers, Psalm. 74. But whereunto shall I compare them? They be like to
spittle-men, perfect in the ways they never went, directing others, lying still
themselves. They be like Heralds at Arms setting their armies together by the
ears, they themselves never strike one stroke, like to marks in the high
ways, which rotte away themselves whiles they stand instructing others in the
way, or to bells calling other to the places where they never come, to black
Simile.
soap making white, and remaining black; to blunt whetstones, which sharpen
other things but they continue dull; to rough ragged files, smoothing all other
things, themselves remaining rough and not changed; to Noah's ship-wrights,
which make the Arc, but themselves were not saved in it.

11 When a certain man had put Master Fox in mind of one, on whom being
afflicted in mind God blessed his ministry, and asked him if he were yet in
his remembrance, yes, said he, I forget Lord and Lady, but I remember such.

12 A certain man said that in our age many Ministers were like to servants
who had long lived under a good Master, so as they had gotten some competent
stock, upon the Simile.
increase whereof they did so much attend, that they neglected and forgot their
ancient care for their master.

13 He observed that some speaking against eloquence, did savor much of an
humane spirit in their preaching, which is as evil or worse. For eloquence is
not simply forbidden, Eloquence in preaching.
but when it waits on carnal wisdom, for otherwise joined with the power of
the word, and demonstration or evidence of the spirit, it is effectual: but
humane wisdom, very barren and destitute of eloquence is evil.

14 It were necessary in the church of God, as Iosuah ministered to Moses,
Elisha to Eliah, Samuel to Ely, Gehezi to Elisha, Baruch to Jeremiah, the
Disciples to Christ, Timothy to Against such as are negligent in the
Ministry, who by distinctions allow their sin, but we must do that which is
without all controversy, not intermingling it with bastard distinctions.
Paul, that likewise every learned godly Pastor should train up some young
scholar, to commend him the better, and to enable him the more in the Church.

15 The climing Canons of the Pope were the cause of this mingling of Civil
laws with Divinity. First, Odia restringere. Fauores ampliare: that is, you
must restrain every commandment of God, for they call those Odia. As, Feed
my sheep, we must distinguish of that, by that old distinction: either by my
self or by another, and sometimes by my self* these are the promises of God,
which they make so large, that they marvel, how one that is conversant in the
Scriptures can be but a wicked man. But David says the contrary Psalm 119.
Lord thy commandments are so broad that I am astonished at them: and the
promises are set forth with so many conditions that they shall find them very
narrow. C^phalus as I read, who was an Atheist, when he was young, coming to
be old, said, what if there be an hell, what if there be a punishment? So when
we have made us a commandment to our selves, out of that Pas^e, feed, then at
length we shall come to say, what if Christ his meaning was not sometimes, and
by another? Then they would give that they got, and a thousand times as much
more, if they had it, to be rid of that, if peradventure. In a doubtful
precept, note that which is less. Austin has this rule: This sense is good
Precepts large and promises nar^^w.
and godly, and so is that, hold both, for fear of quidsi, what if I took
the wrong sense? In a matter of controversy, remember both ways. Who would
not be their scholars, who may be so indifferent? but it is not so. There is a
rule out of Seneca: I do the rather allege him, because the fathers took
many things out of him, and I suppose Interdum and per alium. Si forte.
there was in him something above nature. One wrote unto him to know, how he
might know riches were not the chief felicity, and that virtue was. He sent
him word, that whether virtue were or no, is was never doubted; but whether
riches were, it has been a Senecas commendation.
controversy, choose that which never came into controversy: So whether to do
our duties That Ministers must not be absent from the flock and perform duties
by substitutes.
diligently, be good or no, it was never doubted, but whether by another, or
sometimes our selves, it was doubted of in the most ignorant times But this
subtle dispuring, as Paul calls it* will prove foolish, and this shifting of
things by distinction, unless they be grounded on the word of God, Austen held
it wisdom to acknowledge a fault where is none? the wise man faith, I was
afraid being sure of the truth, I dread all my doings: this is the reason of
the regenerate man.

CHAP. L. Of Gods promises, excellency, and truth of Gods word, and how ^he
wicked abuse Scriptures.
IT is a thing worthy the standing on, to consider how the Apostles out of God
his propromise, The promise of God ought to spur to obedience.
deduce arguments of obedience, as among many, 2. Corin. 7. when the Lord
having promised, that whether we abide in our houses, he will dwell with us,
or whether we will go abroad, he will walk with us, or if we be afflicted,
he will receive us: out of this promise the Apostle brings a conclusion, that
we should therefore cleanse our selves. This would see me a strange
consequence, that seeing we are cleansed, we should cleanse our selves, for
some have made a clean contrary conclusion, laying, we are cleansed, let us
defile our selves, seeing grace does abound, let us sin. 1. Corin. 7. The
Apostle in the person of the godly, reasons thus: the time is short, let us
therefore use this world, as though we used it not. The same Apostle out of
the same premises, in the person of the licentious liver, frames a clean
contrary conclusion: as 1. Corin. chap. 15, Tomorrow we shall die, therefore
let us eat and drink, let us use the world, because we have it, let us
stuff our selves with pleasure, because our time is not long. So runs the
tenor of their conclusions. Because God has mercy enough in store, and
Christ his blood cleanses us from our sins, therefore faith the carnal
Gospeller, least the blood of Christ should want matter and metal to work
upon, let us wallow in sin, for Christ has blood enough to cleanse us. Well
the Apostle, I say, reasons in a contrary manner, Christ has washed us, let
us not therefore defile our selves again, and that which is more strange, he
deduceth fear out of the promise. Wherefore for our use we must learn,
whether in reading and hearing the promises of God, the same mind be in us,
which was in Paul, when he said, and said truly, that he had the Spirit of
God in him, and nee that draws out this conclusion of the promise of God; We
are raised, therefore, we will raise our selves, let that man know he is of
the same spirit, that the Apostle was. But he that concludes on the other
manner: We have promises, let all go where it will, that man must suspect his
estate, he makes not a good conclusion. And as that, so this is true, the
nature of God his promises, is not to be a placard to sin, but a persuasion,
a motive, an inducement to holiness of life, and to the fear of God. So that
they that use the promises, as they do, saying God is merciful, Christ dyed
for us. The Lord will forgive us, and so stuff themselves with promises till
they have made them a pillow for sin, they abuse themselves. True it is, that
the sweet Psalmist says, Psalm, 131. Mercy is with God. What? Not to make
bold with sin, but to fear him. Such sophisters then show by their reason, of
what spirit they are, and to whom they belong, that is, to the devil. For
seeing it is of the mercy of God, he is become a great preacher and publisher
of God his promises, and ye shall not have a promise, but he will allege it,
he is a greater enemy against Moses* and against those that urge the law,
calling them Moses his Ministers, and Doctors of Despair, and all to this end,
to sow promises unto us, that we might take no thought: but still make this
conclusion, Christ has died, be bold to sin. It is good therefore for a man
to watch himself, whether in hearing the promises of God he has a cold fear
coming on him for his unworthiness, which if he have, that man may hope well
of himself. For the nature of a promise from God, excludes security, and
therefore it must end in fear.

2 We pronounce that the nature of a promise excludes deserts, deserts I say,
not debt The promises of God are not of any desert, but free.
(for so we should hear of it so often as mention is made of praying,
rewarding, and rendering) Against the Papists we say therefore there are two
debtes, the one of desert, as hire is due to a labourer, for he has deserved
it: the other, a debt of promise, which is as well to be rendered as a debt of
desert. For example, because I would make it plain, when Two kinds of debts.
the daughter of Herodias daunced before Herod, he in the vanity of his brain
made a promise of giving her any thing she would ask, even to the one half of
his kingdom: and Note.
after for the ^endering of his promise, he made a conscience of his oath. Now
no man I suppose, that is of any valor, thinks that this vain exercise
deserved half a kingdom, in his Against merit of works.
valuation (for it deserved rather another thing far worse) but the debt that
is due is not of desert, but of promise. She could not come and say, give me,
because I have deserved, but give me, because thou have promised. No more can
we say unto God, we have done this, pay us, but thou have promised to us,
therefore grant us what thou have promised, though nor to us immediately, yet
to Christ by desert, and to us for Christ his sake by promise, thou have made
it a debt: and to go yet more narrowly to the nature of a promise, it is
rather paid to the promiser, than to him to whom it is promised, as one of the
fathers says, God paieth his promises to himself, and the accomplishment of
it most respects himself.

3 The nature of a promise is not presently to yield the thing promised (for if
we had that, we have not a promise of a thing to be performed, but a
performance of a thing, that has been promised) we stand in faith, and
receive in hope, and whatsoever we are, we are but one hope, which is our Or
rather t^nure.
tenant, and takes up our possession of things to come for our behoof. Our
life says Paul is hid with Christ. And it appears not, ^aith John, What we
shall be. But the best that may be made of the wicked, is here to be seen to
the uttermost. And seeing our life is in Christ, all that are on the stage of
the world, it is known, who they be, namely the wicked, but whatsoever is the
price of the godly, it is yet hid in Christ, we have nothing, but the hope of
it. Now least some should say, if we have nothing but in hope, it were better
to have some thing certain. To them I say, we do not speak of a promise
from a man. The Apostle says, the Lord is faithful. If the life of a Christian
be compared to a warfare, then hope is our helmet, Ephesians. chap. 6. If it be
compared to a seafaring, then our hope is as an anchour, which we must cast
into the sea with them, Act. chap. 28. to stop our ship in dangers, until
the day appear. Lastly this is our stay, God is faithful, he has promised,
therefore he will surely perform it. First he speaks the Hope.
word, then he promises, that is, says it double: In blessing thee, I will
bless. Then he adds an oath: As I live, says the Lord, I will visit thee:
and yet more, he has left us pledges, further to assure us of the truth of
his word: if neither his word, his promise nor his oath will serve us, we have
nothing but promises: for concerning riches, glory, country, and such like,
God his children often want them. Come to God his grace, and to peace of
conscience, Gods children want often peace of conscience.
which one would think they should have, they often have them not: but faith
they have, the promise they have, every thing else they have not: still they
have the promises, them they have: Our faith takes hold on our sins pardoned,
on the assurance of the life to come: these we have without peradventure, we
have the other things but by peradventure. The best things we have we possess,
and have them by hope, and they that have outward things, are beholden highly
to God, but they be not his best blessings.

4 Howsoever some think but meanly of God his promise, yet nothing is more
worthy The promises of God are a great treasure, and must make us tha^k full.
our consideration and thankfulness. That that is, 1. Sam. 18 18. in the
speech of David, when one told him, that Saul was disposed to give him one of
his daughters in marriage, may here be noted, for what, says he, seems it
small to you to be a Kings son: what am I? or what is my life? or the family
of my father in Israel, that I should be the son in law unto a King? So may
we say, what are we? or what is our life, or the family of our father, that
the Lord should vouchsafe to make such promises unto us? David made no light
account of his promise. To set David in our case, and Saul in the Lords, David's
case was far better than ours. For by reason of his victories he had deserved
well of the country, and therefore worthy to be considered of Saul: again,
though he should have had Michol to wife, he was not for this to be heir of
the crown, and yet he says seems it to you a small thing? Then I say, if we
could come to make the comparison between Saul and God, who is the Saul of
Saules, and prince of Princes, in whose respect all the Princes of the world are
but wash pots, and Cyrus is nothing to him, he unto whom the Angels are
subjects and servants, and to whom heaven and earth stoop down, what analogy
would there be betwixt him and Saul? On the other side, that we may stand in
stead of David, if the Spirit of God would show us our unworthiness in a thing
far above the promise of David, we would say, or we should say, what are we?
what is our fathers house? that the Lord should have respect to us? were not
our fathers Amorites, drowned in superslitious idolatry, carried away with the
love of the world, sold unto sin, and men full of ignorance? what was in our
fathers house? for ourselves what are we? have we not been deriders of the
word of God, or hearers of the Lord speak to us, with far less reverence than
we hear a mortal men? what is there in us? I think not of the worst, but he
that can best express his mind and meaning, cannot express our unworthiness.
My stammering speech cannot utter i^, we must conceive more of it, and know
that there is nothing in us, or in our fathers house, that the Lord should
vouchsafe us such mercy. It must not seem little that we have the word, and
are compassed about with so many promises, we must read them with humility,
and then no doubt we shall read them with thankfulness. The Apostle says,
When the Angels look at the mystery of our redemption, they are wonderfully
astonished, they can never look enough to see the unspeakable highness of the
Lord, and the great gulf of our unworthiness; to behold the ods between his
grea^nes and our vileness. It needs their conceauing, which if we could also
do, it would swallow us up to see the Lord bestow his promises on such
unworthy wretches. When the Lord shall not only make promises in general, but
in particular, not only real but personal, not only conditional, but free,
not only temporal, but eternal, who can go through them all? But setting
aside these great promises and benefits of his word, of his Spirit, he has
promised that Blessed i^ the man who^ God chasteneth and teaches him in his
law. Psalm. 94 ^ 20
even our very corrections * shall do us good. Setting these apart with all
the care of his Angels, and ministry of all creatures, he says, he will so
narrowly look to us, and take charge of us, that he will look to the hairs
of our head, nay, Leuit. 26. he will look to our kneading troughes, and which
more is, Psalm. 41. he will turn our beds, couches, in the time of sickness. A
strange thing, that the Lord should thus do with us. In the heathen histories
we read, that because a certain Captain came to wash his soldiers wounds,
they could not praise him enough. Then if God the Captain of his whole Church,
the God of glory, shall Simile.
so narrowly look to us, as to number our hairs, to take care for our
kneading troughs, to turn our beds, to swaddle our wounds, these are able to
amaze us, and to set us in a wonderful taking to see so great kindness.

5 God will be with us wheresoever we dwell: he will go with us wheresoever
we go. He does not rule us, as Pharaoh did the Israelites, to set us to make
brick, and to fetch the straw our selves but look what he bids us to do,
he gives us strength and substance to do. And for this work when we have done
it, which is very homely, this wisdom passes our conceiving. Behold what
promise was made of half a kingdom for so vile a service of Herod's: so for a
broken service he makes us a promise of heaven and earth, not a^ they be now
(which if it were so, it were too good for the best) no, he will break up
these frames, not to destroy all, but to renewall for the comfort of men. So
great is his mercy, that as a Father says, that God his children having tasted
of this in the life to come, do as it were mourn, and are grieved with
themselves, that their repentance was no greater, and their thankfulness no
more, whiles they were on earth, and he that has done best, as Abraham, David,
or Paul, they repent they have done no more good.

6 The promises of God are free in themselves, in respect of the part going
before. First, Gods promises free.
there is nothing at all in us to move the Lord to promise any good to us. That
we may look on that first and great promise made to Adam: when the Lord after
his fall had charged him with his sin, he does not confess his sin, which the
vilest malefactors often do, but he charge the Lord again, that he was the
cause of it, and makes his liberality the patron of his iniquity, and so very
miserably sets it over to the Lord* Even at this time and immediately upon such
behavior the Lord makes his promise to him, that the seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpents head. Here is no cause of a promise in Adam, he(...)o
condition goes before. It is true also, that God made choice for his mercy of
the v^^e^s people of the earth. Take but the Historiographers, and those that
write for the Jews, and s^tting aside all inward gifts of mind whatsoever,
and come to their gifts of the body, their The Jews or Hol^ue^ described and
how God found them.
outward shape and lineaments, and for the very mass of their nature, of all
people they were most unseemly and ill-favored, they were a pernicious and
monstrous people, and as far from al gifts even of nature, either of judgment
or wisdom, as was under the Sun: nay it were too homely to give them the
name, whereby some have set them out. Of these people the Lord makes choice,
and makes the first promise to them. So that this is also a free promise,
nothing com^ to it to move the Lord to make it. And yet to these people the
Lord promises, Leuit. chap. 26. 12. I will walk among you, I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people. Again, in the reign of Zedekiah, when the
measure of their sin was come to the brim, when they were in the estate of
the Perezites, Hiuites and Iebusites, the Lord makes another promise with the
same people, greater than the former, Ierem. 31. 1. saying: He will be their
father, and they shall be his sons and daughters. So that God his promises
are ^erem. 31. 1.
free in respect of the matter antecedent, but in respect of that which
follows, they were made with a condition, and that is, that we be holy. But
for the most part men herein deceive themselves, for as they hear, that it is
a free promise, so they make it a free promise after. There is no inducement
indeed, before he makes the promise, but afterward he binds it with a
condition. For it stands in the promises of God, as in his threatenings. In his
threatenings there is no condition going before, they are absolutely pronounced,
as that Jonas. 3. 4. Yet forty days and Nini^ie shall be overthrown. And
that to Ez^kiah, Esa. 38. Put thine house in an order, for thou shall dye, and
not live. Yet there is somewhat follows after, as Unless ye repent, which
sometimes is expressed, but if not expressed, is always to be understood.
For never any threatening so strongly was pronounced from the Lord, Conditions
annexed to promises, either understood or expressed.
but this, Until we repent, if it were done, would break the force of it, and
turn it back again, as the Ninevites repented, and the Lord turned away his
fierce wrath. Ezekiah wept, and the Lord gave him length of days. So how
flatly and freely soever the promise made to us, yet this condition follows,
We must be holy. Thus we see how Gods promises in respect of themselves,
before they be made, are sure yet not as the wicked imagine that there is no
limitation.

7 That the Bible is the Library of the holy Ghost, it may appear: first, for
that it sets The Bible is Gods Libra rye; arguments to commend the
excellency of it.
1
down the infirmities of men, without all flattery, as well as it commends
them for their virtues, Gens. 49. Numb. 12. Secondly, the matter of it is
altogether heavenly, and nothing, 2
nor any part thereof sauoureth earthly: it yields to no one affection or
other, but opposes it self to all. Thirdly, the form, the dignity of the
s^ile, and majesty of the sentences in it is such, as it cannot be fully and
wholly conceived and uttered of any man, and it is always more powerful in the
matter than in words. The Apocrypha going 3
about to express the excellency of it in Greek, is a very cold and
barbarous thing. Fourthly, of all things it moves affection in the readers;
and pierces into the secrets of the 4
hearts, which you shall never find but for some little time, and straight
vanishing away, in other writings of the profoundest Philosophers that ever
were. Fifthly, of all 5
it is most ancient: and many good thing: in Philosophers and Poets are fetched
from this. Sixthly, all the prophecies set down by diverse writers with one
consent are accomplished, 6
so are none of the devils oracles. Read that of Jacob, Genes. 49. that of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. of Ethan, Psalm. 89. Esa. 45. Seventhly, the wonderful
preserving of this 7
book from time to time, 2. King. 22. so that it has not perished, whereas
many other books of great price and estimation are utterly lost. Eighthly, that
there has been such a 8
continual and universal consent of this book from time to time: and because
all the heretics and labors of them that would withstand and confute this,
still are soyled and brought to naught. Lastly, the constant death of wise,
sober and meek Martyrs, whoeuer 9
in their deaths for this, have had a plain distinction from the deaths of
other frantic and witless persons.

Many places of Scripture, says the Apostle, 2. Pet. 3. are perverted of the
ungodly, and you shall see the wickedst man talking most, and making much of
one kind of Scri^ture. How ^^p^^u^ m^n a^use Scripture, to their own per^^^^n.
Among Heretics, Arrius of this, 1 My Father is greater then I. M^richeus of
this, 2 He was found in the form of a servant. Montanus of this, 3 I will send
you another Comforter* Papists of this, 4 Thou art Peter, Vbiquitarij of this,
In whom the God head dwel^ corporally. Familists of this, 5 The kingdom of
God is within you. And evil men the Epicures abuse this place; That which
goes into the belly defiles not the man etc. The carnal 1 Pater n^eus m^or
me.
professors this: If he has predestined us, he will also cail us. Those that
under the name Rep^^tus est in torm^ser^i.
of peace, desire to cover evil practices, allege this, 6 Follow peace with
all men. And that which is abused not of one sector company, but of all, is
this; Hypocrite, first pull out the 3 Al^um Pa^acletum m^ttam vobis.
beam out of thine own eye: August. de moribus ^a^ich. reproving their loose
lives, they allege this, Hypocrita prius, etc. So daily if we deal with
mo^es, with motes I mean in 4 Tu es Petrus.
the eyes (for with motes in the Sun any man may deal) then this is used as
a neck verse, Hypocrita prius, etc. which when we have said, we think we are
presently quit, and to have 5 Regnum Dei est m^ra vos.
entered another action of hypocrisy, and revenged them home upon any
reprehension; I say, we fly to this as a sanctuary, we use it as a spell to
charm the reprehender, that he 6 Sect m^n^ pa em um omnibus.
cannot speak one word more. But this is not Christ his meaning, his being in
the Flesh was not to maintain sin, he came not to make men escape the gentle
punishment of admonition: he came to ca^cell the handwriting that was against
us, not to make a new handwriting, but as it is said in the Psalm, wickedness
has a wide mouth, and David makes it a marvel to see the mouth of wickedness
stopped, for rather then it will say nothing, it will speak against itself.
1. Cor. 7. Paul reasons the time is short, therefore we must use the world as
though we used it not. 1. Cor. 15. 32. The wicked say, Tomorrow we shall d^e*
therefore let us eat and drink. They gather a contrary conclusion out of the
same promises: 2. Cor. 7. Paul reasons, Seeing we have such promises, let us
cle^se our selves: the wicked say Romans 6. Let us sin, that grace may abound.
We may reason thus rightly out of the former words of Christ; He disallowed
disorderly casting out. Ergo, he allows orderly casting out: he commands
the beam to be cast out first. Ergo, the mote also. We reason on the contrary;
No promiscuall casting out, Ergo, no casting out: his own first, Ergo, not
ours at all. Their conclusion is this, if they durst say so much: Praecipe quid
faciam or^ vt faciam; sed ^e omnino corripito, quicquid facio. I love not to
hear of my faults, meddle not with mine eyes. So it is true which is in Prou.
26. A parable in a fools mouth, is as a thorn, etc. He thrusts the blunt
end forward, and by abusing of places they gore themselves.

16 As we cannot see without the apple of the eye, so we cannot know the thing
of God The holy Ghost must teach v^
without the teaching of God. For though some things are learned by sense, as
we need not be taught from heaven to discern between white and black, cold
and heat, and such like: and some things are attained by the light of nature,
or help of Art, as the knowledge of civil and humane things; yet there are
many things to be learned, which we cannot attain unto by natural reason
only, without spiritual revelation. For to be persuaded that all things were
made of nothing, that a Maid should have a Son, that the Flesh corrupted
should rise to incorruption, that CHRIST a Savior on the Cross, should be a
Judge in the clouds, that we should be freed from death by his death, and
exempted from condemnation, by condemnation, that man should sin, and CHRIST
should suffer; where is the wise man, where is the Scribe, where is the
Philosopher that can show a ^^^son? But be it that man could be taught by
nature to understand things appertaining to GOD, yet: is needful that that God
should teach him, because else he should learn it with incer ^intie, and
little assurance: for besides that Job confesses, how though he went even into
the shop of the Lord, where he works, yet he should not see him. These
reasons I have to prove that I speak: first, the most and greatest part are
full of simplicity, and many cannot take the pains to search them; of many
that would take pains, many want the means; of many that have the means,
few come to any through knowledge of them; and they that come to knowledge,
labor under great uncertainty: whereof it comes to pass, that many either
prove fools, or become Heretics, because meddling with such things in the
pride of their wits, they have not prayed to be taught of God.

CHAP. LI. Of murmuring.
IT is a common thing with men to grudge and murmr against Gods Magistrates
true servants, and therefore Ministers and Magistrates and such like, must
learn with patience to bear it, and to prepare themselves for it. For if the
Israelites murmured against Moses, being so ^are a man, how much more will men
now grudge against such as have not obtained the like measure of graces?* This
is a sore temptation, and Moses himself did once offend, because of the
murmuring of the people: yet was Numb. 12. 1. 2.
he said to be the meekest man upon the earth. But else always Moses ouercomes
evil with good: for he was so acquainted with that people, that he had (as it
were) hardened his heart against them.

2 This is the nature of murmuring, it will cause a man to be no man at all,
which we may see in the Israelites, who wished to be in Egypt, whereas yet
they knew that for their sins, the Lord carried them thither, and as it were
in justice cut them off for sin: so it is as much as if they had said; would
the Lord had cut us off, rather than left us in this case: for they were
contented to die if they might not have their bellies full.

3 To be assured of Gods providence, and that we may not be overcome of
murmuring Remedies against a murmuring.
in worldly things, we are to look to the benefit of Christ in the forgiveness
of our sins, the sanctification of Gods spirit, and the hope of everlasting
life: for if we be assured of these* we shall be likewise assured, that the
Lord will no suffer us to perish in this world. 1
And if we doubt of earthly things, we do doubt of these spiritual graces
much more, 2
and the want of the persuasion of the one, does bring the other. For if the
Israelites had 3
been persuaded, that the Lord had delivered them, and would bring them into
the land of promise, they would not have doubted that he would preserve them in
the wilderness: which we may see in the example of Abraham, Genesis chapt. 24
who because the Lord had promised him a seed, sent forth his servant to get a
wife for his son: for he knew that the Lord who had made the promise, who
would provide the means also to bring it to pass: so if we be persuaded that
our sins are forgiven us, we shall not doubt, that any other thing shall hurt
us; for seeing sin the cause of all miseries is taken from us, we may be sure
that no misery shall hurt us* and if the Lord has given us his son, he will
give Confer all this Chapter with his Sermon of murmuring in the third part
for there is but little added here which is not there, and yet I would not omit
this.
all things with him, and the love wherewith he loves us in his son will not
suffer us to want the things that are for our good: for if a father will
provide for his son, the Lord will provide for us, who is a heavenly father,
and cannot be changed though earthly fathers he.

4 To this faith in the free forgiveness of our sins and the imputation of
the righteousness of Christ, we must add the faith in the sanctification of
the spirit: for if we believe that the Lord has made us of sinful men, just
men; of varie^s, vessels of righteousness, and temples of his spirit: if he can
make the Leopard and the K^^ to lie together. Esaias 11. if he can make the
covetous person liberal and the whoremonger a chaste person: if we believe
that the Lord will and is able to change us from any sin be it never so great,
and strong by nature, or by evil custom: we may then be sure that the Lord
in this life will not suffer us to fail in any thing needful for us, neither
are we to doubt thereof, seem it never so impossible: for it is a greater
work to change a sinner, than to work wonders in nature.

5 Fourthly, if we believe that the Lord will prepare a kingdom for us in the
heavens, we cannot but believe that in this life he will perserue us. For if we
believe, that our bodies shall be turned unto dust, and yet raised up again,
we shall be sure he will not but provide for us in this world: for it is a
greater thing to raise up the body from death, and out of the dust than to
preserve i^ being alive. And to this faith of our redemption, we must believe
in the providence of God, first, in creation, so that if we believe that the
Lord made all things of nothing; we shall believe that he will give us
sufficient: for we see that the light was before the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and the grass before the rain and dew, that we should not put too much trust
in them, and to teach us, that without these means we may have these
blessings: for the Lord has provided these means, not for his weakness, but
for ours Do we believe that God made all men, and shall we fear men? therefore
we believe not these things, or else we would not so much fear the want of
earthly things: for if a sparrow fall not on the ground without his providence
shall we think he will not provide for us? we must then believe the
particular providence of God in the government of all things, which will be an
help to keep us from distrust and murmuring: do we believe that the Lord
made us? then shall we not think that he will prefer us? for it is more
wonderful, Psalm. 1. and 139. Eccles. 11.

6 We are therefore to believe the providence of God, first generally over all
creatures, then particularly over every one of them: yea even over the
sparrowes. Again, if the Lord has care of beasts (as indeed he has)
because they were made for man, he will much more have care of man, for whom
they were made. He has a care for the wicked to do the^ good; for he fills
their bellies with his hidden treasure, then will he much more rejoice over the
godly to do them good: if he loved us when we were his enemies, will he not
provide for us being reconciled to him by the death of his own and only
son? If he did us good when we sought him not, will he not much more when
we do seek him in praying unto him, as he has commanded? If he has done us
good, when for our sins he might have punished us, will he not when with his
spirit he has sanctified us? Oh then let us not be unfaithful, and so become
murmurers against the Lord: but let us be faithful, and to look unto the Lord
to do unto us according to our faith.

7 Furthermore, this providence of God must be confirmed by the example of
Gods children in all ages, as in the time of the fathers before the flood, who
did eat nothing but herbs; ve^ some of the^ lived nine hundred years, to
teach us that men live not by these means: ^f by these means he nourished
them, he will by greater, as by flesh and fish, nourish us. The Israelites were
fed with Manna (which was never seen before nor since) for the space of
forty years. If they gathered any more thereof than the Lord commanded, it
stanke: yet being kept before the Arc 400. years it did not so, and when they
came to the promised land it ceased: whereby we may learn, that it is not the
means, but the blessing of God upon the means that gives nourishment. Did
not Moses and Elias live forty days without meat, and the children of Israel
go forty years in the same garments not waxing old? and othersome having
meat in abundance been hunger-starned? and shall it not teach us that these
things are ordained for our weakness, and that the Lord without these means can
nourish us? If David proved by experience, that he never saw a righteous man,
of righteous parents, begging his bread; if we be now righteous, as they were
then, the Lord will provide for us now as well as he did then for them, and we
shall have the like experience.

8 To this providence we must come with a patient mind to let the Lord give
what he will, and therefore we must have contented mi^^es, and know that
godliness is great riches, Contentation
and not to look for great matters, Ier. 45. as it was said to Baruch, and
therefore are we taught to pray for daily bread: so that we may have the same
mind that was in our father Jacob, Genesis 28. who was content with meat and
cloth, which generally is commanded to all, 1. Tim. 6. if the Lord give more
than this, take it as an overplus. A patient mind prescribes not to God, the
means nor the time, nor indenteth with God, but is content with the grace of
God in forgiveness of sin, and the sanctification of the spirit, though it
want other things: our Savior Christ teaches us, not too desirously to seek
after earthly Patience.
things, but rather after the kingdom of God: and we ought to receive the
love of God with all contentment though it come alone, and for outward things
to enjoy them, or not to have them as it pleases him: for the children of God
do for outward things possess their souls in patience, and commit the rest
unto the Lord, not binding his favor unto them.

9 The cause of all rebellion and murmuring is, that we know not the great
power of the Lord, or else we at that time do forget it: when by faith we
should make to our selves most comfortable use of it, as we may see in the
Israelites, who had beheld the great power of God with his goodness toward
them, but not in faith, and therefore when the tentation was sore upon them
they clean forgot it. The Lord therefore being zealous of his own glory,
shows himself to be most loving and beneficial toward us, which ought to
lead us to acknowledge his great goodness, but if we do not, then his
justice will surely teach us.

10 The Lord oftentimes with holds or takes away that thing, the having
whereof might be hurtful unto us: which if we would rightly consider of, it
would be an especial Wherefore we want many things which we desire.
help against murmuring in the want of Gods blessings. For if we would
consider this, that the Lord does therefore keep it from us, because he sees
it would be hurtful for us, and that when we shall be fit for it, he will
then give it unto us, we should better be contented with that we have, and
more patiently bear the want of that we would have: as for example, if a man
wanting health, riches, estimation, and such like, and be grieved for it, so
that he is almost ready to murmr for the want of them: if he then can
consider that the Lord knows they be not good for him, but if he had them
they would turn to his hurt: this would bring marvelous great quietness to his
heart, and would stop his murmuring nature, and would rather stir him up to
acknowledge the goodness of God toward him.

11 When the Lord proves his people, he thereby labors to bring them to
prayer: yet on the contrary, they fl^e from him, and murmr against him: the
reason is, for that How we fly from God in trouble.
they think it a small comfort to pray unto him in their trouble, but rather
think it very harsh to acknowledge their sins, and so to obtain the
forgiveness of them, which being obtained, nothing can be more comfortable:
they must have that they want, or else nothing will please them. As the
Israelites did murmr against the Lord when they wanted Nothing can please us
when we have not our desires.
water, nothing else would please them: so is it with many when they cannot
obtain some corporal or external blessing, which they do much long for. But
who art thou oh thou vile man, that thus dealest with the Lord, and never have
had thy heart washed by the blood of Jesus Christ? for if thou had, thou
would never murmr so much for wanting that thou would have, but rather
make him at all times the chiefest comfort, and in all thy necessities,
patiently and meekely call upon him in fervent and faithful prayer.

12 Men do not only fail in prayer unto the Lord: but also they murmr many
times against such as he has set over them to be their guides: for the latter
sin arises of the former. The Israelites quarrelled with Moses: yet what had
Moses done against them? they thought no doubt that he of malice, and contrary
to the will of the Lord, had brought them into the wilderness, for they
thought God had a nearer way and a better to bring them into the promised land:
and because they could not consider the work of the Lord, therefore they must
needs quarrel against some body, and wreake their grief upon him, laying
the fault upon Moses. Thus did Rachel, whom when the Lord punished, for that
she was Proud (because her husband loved her best) and made her barren, when he
gave children to Leah, she not considering that the Lord punished her pride
with barrennes, began to quarrel with her husband; asking him why he gave no
children to her? To whom he answered: Am I in stead of God unto thee, to give
thee children? And this is the manner of the people in all ages, that when they
cannot see the Lord punishing them for their sins, they straightway lay the
fault upon some or other, by whom they think it comes. As now if the Lord
do send tumults and storms into the commonwealth, so that the people be
brought to some trouble; do we not straight ways lay the fault upon the
Magistrates, and say, is not this the doing of the Magistrates? They consider
not that the Lord does by this means punish them for their sin: for it is
certain that the Lord loves a multitude better than one or few, and therefore
he will not punish a whole realm or nation, if the sins of a multitude did
not provoke him thereunto. But it oftentimes comes to pass, that for the
sins of the people, he does harden the hearts of the Magistrates, that they
cannot love their subjects so well, nor that they can be so profitable,
Magistrates
and do them so much good, as otherwise they might, as is reported by
Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20. This if the people could or would consider, they
would not be so ready to lay the faults*on their Magistrates, when trouble or
trial comes upon them: in like case do they also deal with their
Ministers. If trouble come, do they not straightwaies say, see what our
Preachers have done? and is not this the fruit of their preaching? so they
will always have one or other to lay the fault upon. But what was Moses
comfort in this case, and that which stayed him from murmuring against them?
Even that (no doubt) which other of Gods Ministers have had in the like case.
Jeremiah in the seue^teenth chapter against the raging of the people, made this
his sure defense that he had not thrust in himself into that office to be
their Pastor, but the Lord appointed and called him thereunto. Secondly, that
of affection he had spoken nothing but only that which the Lord commanded; did
he declare unto them; and from hence may all the true Ministers of God have
comfort: for if the Lord send them, he will no doubt defend them, so long as
they do this message faithfully, and therefore the people must take heed how
they either receive or reject any that speak to them in the name of the Lord.
For as they may not receive any that brings not the word of truth, nor be
feared by them; for as much as the causeless curse shall pass without hurt:
so likewise, and as surely shall the word of God spoken truly by his Minister
certainly have his effect, and shall not return in vain: And this is common
to all kinds of calling, that men may be confirmed therein. Contrariwise, when
we being in affliction can pray unto the Lord for his help, and acknowledge
his providence in that which is upon us, it manifests our faith, it
preserves us from murmuring, and keeps us from quarrelling with men: for if
we consider that it is the Lords work, we shall never set our selves against
him for it: but if we pass over his providence, then shall we avenge our
selves upon men. But many men will be content to judge and condemn this sin
in the Israelites, and never look into themselves to see the same: The sins
of this age grea ter than of elder ages.
but this sin is as rife now as ever it was, and this no doubt is a cause why
many cannot profit by the examples of the old Testament, because they imagine
grossly of the sins of that people, and think that there is no such gross
sins now, whereas indeed if the case were duly considered, the same sin is
grosser now than it was then: for as much as the mercies of God are more
plentifully upon us, and with greater continuance than upon them.

13 The children of Israel did so much as in them lay to provoke Moses diverse
times to murmr against the Lord: yet we may read how he yielded not, neither
was at any time overcome except once, Numb. 20. Psalm. 106, for which the Lord
said, he should not enter into the land of promise, and Moses found the truth
thereof: for when he much desired the same, the Lord would not be entreated,
but he must die in the Mount: where all men must learn that they praise not
the children of God too much, though they be strong and The stro^gest may fall.
have received great gifts: for by Moses example they may here see that by such
violence of temptation they may fall. And again, all Gods children must take
heed that they yield not to temptations, when they are offered: for though the
occasion be of another, yet the cause is in our selves, and we shall be
chastised for the same if we do yield. And again, we must take heed that we
do give no occasion to the Magistrate, or the Minister to murmr, least the
Lord punishing them, we also be deprived of the benefit which we should receive
by them.

CHAP. LII. Of Patience under the Cross.
THere is a difference between Gods children and others: for Gods children
Patience.
have the patience that others do want, though not at the first, yet in
continuance, though with some infirmity: first, because they are persuaded of
forgiveness of sins: and secondly, are sure of their vocation by good works,
which are the fruits of sanctification: thirdly, the knowledge of Gods
providence, which disposes all things for our good: fourthly, because they
look for another life, and when they fail of any of these, then they begin to
quail: and the wicked, because they utterly want these therefore they are
altogether confounded.

2 Patience is not so much in ^^e outward stilnes of the body and show of the
faee, as Psalm. 62. 1* 3. My soul kee peth silence unto God.
in the inward quietness of the heart, and meeknes of the spirit. Therefore
David, Psalm. 4* bids us examine our selves upon our beds, and be still: and
Esai, 30* the Lord says, your help shall be in silence and peace: and
therefore David and Job being in trouble, said they would lay their hands on
their mouths: for when a man does thus possess his soul in patience, he is
most fit for the mercies of God, and then shall he receive the greatest profit
by them. Simile.
For as in bodily diseases to be quiet, is a great ease and help: so it in
other troubles whatsoever, and therefore must we especially labor for it.

3 Many will say, that GOD is mighty, but they bel^eue it not, as appears
in that they are over fearful, when they be in danger: whereas Gods
children have some presert feeling thereof, and afterward are more
strengthened. So that if we cannot trust in God in the want of all helps, we
do not believe this power, if we depend not on him, pray not unto him, strive
not to obey him, we believe not this. For this cause did the holy men write of
the power of God, which they have felt, that after they may be strengthened:
and so must we consider of Gods power, that we in patience may look for help
from God in trouble, and in prosperity, see his hand that blesses the same
unto us, and so use the same unto his glory, and give him all the praise.

4 To a good action, it is requisite that our intent be according to the word,
that then our action being good, we use right means: if our means be good,
then must we have faith: if we have faith, then must we have sound hearts: if
our hearts be sound, we must devour through peace all hindrance: and waiting
for the good time of the Lord, we must possess our souls in patience.

5 There are diverse plain Israelites that will suffer a veil to be put before
their faces, and they will use them as the Pharisees did John Baptist, to
object him against Christ; John and his Disciples fast: and why do others so,
but to have a cloak for their wickedness? These are abused for want of
wisdom, and would mislike their practices in their heart, if they could sound
the depth of them: Praestat esse caudam Leonis, quam caput vulpis: Better to be
the tail of a Lion, than the head of a Fox. Well, it is good to be just and
wise, but yet not for our selves: but yet such as will not keep their wisdom
to themselves, but tell it out, or write it, come to wrack. Because he will not
follow the counsel of Amazias, See not, he has the reward of the Prophets,
and all the Prophets except four perished. The cause was, they were more wise
than was for the Princes advantage. In respect even of God his permissio^, it
is just that the just should perish: we may say, is this his reward? but we
must know that when for corruption of time, God his children cannot live
without hazard of their hazard, he takes the^ away: neither in so doing does
he break his promise, that gives them for a long life, eternal life; for a
bag of silver, a bag of gold: for in so doing he promises the less, and
performs the more. We would indeed be the Lords servants, if we saw his
service would always prevail; but because sometimes we see their seats
without honor that serve God, we will be none of his servants, or we learn by
reason to judge no action by the person: yet we say, if he prevailed not, he
took no good course, or if we cannot but say, he is wise, we say he is too
wise. The Prophet (Prou. 30.) says, he will write his vision to Ithiel, and if
Veal be with him, to him too, or else not: the meaning is, Ithiel is God with
us: he would write it to please God: Veal is to prevail: if that be with the
other, he will have His halfepeni^ and let^ise toe.
both, else keep to the other, and let Veal alone. When a man goes to the
market cum ob^lo, if he like lettesse, he may take them, and give his ebolum,
if he like his halfepeny better, he may keep it; but if one would have both
ebolum and lactucas: so if we have upright dealing, A^ upright life and good
consci^nce better than the favor of men.
and will esteem the favor of men in authority better, we may change it for
that: but if we esteem our upright dealing better, let us keep it, we must
not require them both. Example in Christ, he was crossed in all his doings: he
went with a full mind to convert his countrymen, and they would have thrown
him down an hill: he would have preached to the Gargazites, and they prayed
him to depart: he spoke greatly to discredit the Pharisees, and they prevailed
with the people against him: he bent all his preaching against Traditions, but
in the Apostles times they increased ten for one, they preferred Barra^^^
before him, and to fill up the measure, the just man perishes in his
righteousness: but that reason is there of this? that it may appear Gods
servants are no mercenaries, they be not godly with such and such conditions,
they say not, let justice rather be lost, than I die as the Heathen. A second
reason is in respect of the thing it self. Augustine marueileth why they call
not life a disease: for men speaking of a disease will say, he is in an
Apoplexe, surely he will die of it, when indeed he may escape: but of life he
may surely say, he has the sickness of life, therefore he shall die, we die of
the corruption of humors, and as there are two bodies public and private: so
two humors, and two corruptions of them, and is it not all one for one to die
by the corruption of the public humors, laws and customs, as of our own?
Nay better, we being whole in body and soul. In taking upon us to be
Christians, we bind our selves to die: since the fall of Adam no man passes
to Paradise but by the burning Seraphins; no man to the land of Canaan, but by
the burden of him, and the waters of Marah; no man to Jerusalem, but by the
valley of weeping; no man to the happy city, but by the waters of Babel: the
tenure whereby we hold heaven, is the cross, that was the indenture betwixt
Christ and his Father, that he should not enter into heaven, but that he must
first suffer, 2. Tim. 2. all that will live godly must suffer* And Ambrose
turns the proposition: he that suffers no persecution does not live godly:
and there is a reason* it is so that sometime the just man perishes in his
justice, and this is well that he dies in his justice: for diverse (as Gedeon)
have bin first spoiled of their justice, and then perished. That is the case of
many now adays, perish they may, but in their righteousness they cannot. It is
said of Enoch, he was translated, that his mind might not be tainted with the
sins of those times. If a man see in an orchard apples of all kinds, and the
husbandman Simile.
gather one kind and not the rest, a foolish man will marvel at it: but the
husbandman knows what he does. If we would afford God this equity, to know
when to gather his fruit best, we should not think much that the just are
gathered. Some say, it is better that the just man should perish, rather then
God his righteousness should be condemned: for we go about by doing it to
condemn heaven, which they withstand, hindering it so long as they live. We
send our sons to fight for the prince of heads, we lament The Lacedemonian
said of his shield to his soldier.
but curse not the king: we are Gods soldiers, the milita^t Church to fight,
that his justice be not condemned, we standing by; we have armor given us:
Ephesians. 6. Faith is our shield. God has good right to say so to us, giving us
Faith. This reason is from the excellency of God his Justice. Let us say with
the just man, better the world perish, then that Justice be lost. If every
hair of our head were a life, we ought to give them all for this. Again,
better Aut hanc, aut super banc Ruat mundus potius quam no^ fiat iustiri^.
we die, then many perisn.: by our example many may be won; example is a
chief motive. Affliction is compared to a Wine Press, for out of it comes
wine wherewith the hearts of diverse are so comforted, that they dare suffer the
like. A child or fool could say of a good cluster of grapes, it were pity it
should be put into the press: but he that Aut tu, aut multi morientur.
knows how it would else come to naught within a few days, will cast it into
the press: if it had not been so, we had wanted the wine we now have. Seeing
also they were men of The Cross how needful.
such imperfections as we are, we may be encouraged to do the like. God
says, he will have us shine as lights, whose property it is to serve others,
and to consume itself. At last De hoc liquore, sae^la futura bibent.
Veal shall be joined to Ithiel, then shall every one that suffered wrong, have
a writ of error, and they that handled good men ill, shall say, we fools
counted his life madness, and shall Alijs ministro meipsum consumo.
have such grief, as no man of never so great stomach would wish his enemy
more: and the just shall have blessedness for evermore. Who would not change
this vanity for it? who would be so mad as for ^ife to lose the cause of life?
And look how many hereafter Iudicia erunt post iudicium, Propter vitam perdere
viuendi caus^m.
shall be converted by their example, so many more degrees of glory shall they
receive in the kingdom of Heaven: and this is the cause why some of the
Saints would even line here again, that they might suffer again: So little
do they repent that they have suffered. It it said, The wicked shall a^t live
half their days. Malum natura breue, February is the worst month, because it
is the shortest. But how is it then, that they hold out their wickedness? That
is a great indignity. A drunkard will continue so long as his lungs will last:
an Drunkards.
adultery whiles his loins last: a glutton whilst his skin: a contentious
man as long A^^t^erie.
as his purse lasts well: if a man perish for righteousness, they are burnt
sacrifices; if naturally, Insoelices boni qui non habent tantam perseuerantiam
in bono quantam mali in malo.
they are but a peace offering, partly Gods, and partly natures: so then if a
man continue even for his wickedness, as Herodias was rewarded for that for
which she should have been punished, he is wholly the devils.

6 Malice drinks the greatest part of her own poison God his children drink
of the top of the cup, but the wicked of the lees to work in their bowels
eternal grief of conscience. Nemo impune malus.
Wickedness and punishment are both of one age, they are not burnt in the hand
but in the heart. The sinner is condemned, though he be not judged publicly,
yet every Impiety.
man judges him in his chamber. And if he continue, God brings him upon the
stage, and shows some notorious sign upon him, and some singular judgment
for sin. If they should continue as long as Methusaleth, yet the year of
their punishment would swallow up the years of their continuance in
wickedness: Follow not such as do evil. Augustine says well, good men have
not always good children, least virtue seem hereditarie: neither have evil
men evil children, least sin should overcome all the world. Likewise all
just men perish not, some do not, least we should think, there were no
providence of God: and all the wicked escape not in this life, least we should
think there were no life to come.

CHAP. LIII. Of Predestination, Perseverance, and Presumption.
WHom the Lord has appointed for his glory, to them he has also appointed
means to attain thereto.

2 We must not joy so much for that which we have done, as we ought to be
careful what hereafter we must do: for many are called, but few are chosen,
and many begin gloriously, which end ignominiously.

Perseverance is called (Ephesians. 6. 18.) Proskarteresis, 1. Cor. 16. 13. We are
taught to watch, and 1. These. 5. 6. not to sleep: we must not be like the
foolish Virgins, Mark. 13. 3* and the drowsy Apostles for want of it are
reproved, Matthew. 16. 38. What could ye not watch with me one hour? The law
says, Every good thing is worse than evil without it: because if men go not
with a through stitch, they have afflicted their souls in vain, Watchfulnes.
Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Exodus 18. 24. Godliness is a journey, there must be no fainting
in it: and to leave any good thing undone even for a moment is contrary to
perseverance: indeed to begin, every thing is pleasant, therefore for
varieties sake many begin, but for the cross dealing of the world they soon
leave off, and all the proof is in the end.

3 We must be followers of God, if not in euerlastingnes, yet in long
lastinges. What Deus aeternus, aeterna. quid leuitati and aeternitati. Praemium
aeternum aeternam requirit seruitutem. Iud. 7. ^2. Christus perseuerauit pro
te, tu ergo pro illo.
difference between eternity, and a day or two? If our reward be not
lease-wise for one and twenty years, but infinite, surely our service must
not be by lease, it must not be after the manner of Bethulia, a compositio^
for five days, but all the days of our lives. Christ sweat even blood. Oh he
would not give thee over in hell fire, and will thou give him over in a fire of
reeds?

4 When we see good men get new distinctions, as though they had not been
well taught before, it is a dangerous thing, Non perseuerrae (I say) noxium
tibi. Ezech. 33. 13. Have ye suffered so many things in vain, says Paul, Gal
3. 4. 2. Pet. 2. 20. Remember what it is to have one devil go out of one, and
to have seven to come in for it. It is a principle in the Civil law: Commonly
in all things we have fair beginnings, Ministers in their first day of
ordination, A principle in the Civil law.
on those days wherein we receive the Sacrament, when we are fasting, in
affliction, in sickness, or such like goodly promises and fat, but slender
performance and lean. Nay, some do not only not persevere, but they fall to
worse: they will say one day, as a wretch Nihil praesumitur fuisse actum, done
aliquid superest ad agendu^. Baldeminists said, Monacho feruenti, abbati
calido, Episcopo tepido, Archiepiscopo remisso.
spoke: Gloria patri, and another day, and filio, and the third, and Sp. S. but
for that, sicut crat in principio, they fall to their old bias again. This is
like to Nebuchadnezzars image, the head is of gold, the breast of baser
metal, and so nearer the end, the worst still. The Papists call them that
shrink, worse then cloth that shrinketh but when it is wet.

5 We must not be like Snailes, which push out a long pair of horns, which
being touched never so little, in they go again: we must not be like to
Jonathan, that is, follow the chase orderly until they come where honnie is;
we must not be as Asa, 2. Chron. 15. careful to do good until the Gout
take us; verse 16. and then be so way ward that no man may speak a word to
us; we must not be such as can abide affliction for a while, but when skin
for skin comes, stand as though we were appalled: but we must with Simile.
Non perseuerare cultus est mutilus.
Marie Magdalen sit at the Sepulcher, Ioh. 20. 11. We must with the Spouse,
Cant. 3. 4. take hold, and not leave off; we must follow the suite as the
widow, Luc. 18. we must not give over no more then the Cananite, Matthew. 15.
22. we must keep our hold as Jacob did in his wrestling: we are in a course,
we must out-runne. So run (says the Apostle) moderately at the first,
constantly in the midst, cheerfully in the end. So run not to have a
vain shoute for your first start, but to attain the crown. Stir up your
selves, look not back: the Lord will have all, not so much as the tail of
the sacrifice was wanting, Leuit. 22. We must do not for a time only, but
even our whole time. Somewhat Agrippa was persuaded of, but Paul would have it
altogether done. Some would gladly save a small portion with Saphyra: but that
were to become Bethulians, termers for a time, and all hypocrites are loath to
become simply and wholly, but they came with their so much, and so long: but
let us keep an equal Tenor still. Isaiah is as zealous in his 66. chapter, as
he is in his first.

6 We must labor to persevere in persecution, Math. 10. 22. and beware by the
falling quatenus and tantisper.
away of many, Math. 24. 13. yea we must resist even unto death, Heb. 12. 4. So
says the Angel unto the Church of Smirna. Apoc. 2. 10. We must keep Gods
name in our forheads, when Antipas is slain before us: we must ride to heaven
in a fiery chariot, and learn that every man's work shall be tried by fire. 1.
Cor. 3. Upon this theme the Apostles spent many of their sermons, Act. 11.
23. Act. 13. 43. Act. 12. 22. Heb. 3. 12. 2. Pet. 1. 20. 1. Ioh. 2. 24.
Erricomenoi. Math. 7, Vbi incipis no^le fieri melior, ibi desinis esse bonus.
The Apostles warns us, 1. Cor. 15. 58. to be settled, not tottering: and
Coloss, 1. 23. to be irremoueable: and Coloss. 2. 7. that we be rooted deep,
strongly built, and stick closely upon CHRIST, for he is the rock: so when
tempests come, we shall not be once moved. There be many impediments of this
perseuering: some inward, as desire of novelties, and sticking too much to
reason, which will go no further than she sees likelihood, and the conscience
of our unworthiness, whereby we despair: some outward things hinder us, as
worldly cares: oppose here Gods providence: the multitude of back-sliders
oppose the Non quid ^geris sed quid supersit curand^, si d^xis^^ sulficit,
defec^^li.
variety of true believers: the prosperity of the wicked oppose, Psalm. 37.
Yet a little while and they are gone, and never seen again. We must ever
labor to grow from the green tree of faith, to the maine tree of faith, that
is, to the full assurance of faith.

7 There are two kinds of presuming, the one of Gods mercies, the other of our
own Two ways of presuming.
merits: the one is in carnal Protestants, the other in bold and proud
Papists. For the first, we know that Gods qualities be not separable: Moses
says, the Lord is ready to show mercy, so he says he will punish the
transgressor. David sung a song of two parts, not of mercy alone, or of
judgment alone, but of mercy and judgment together. But I marvel how these
wretches dare add sin to sin, when no one sin shall go unpunished, and
how they dare presume of Gods mercy, under many sins, when God has showed
his justice to the dearest of his children for committing some one sin. The
Angels that conceived but an opinion of pride, as some write, though they were
almost as Gods, were for it cast down to hell. Man, with whom the Lord was
conversant, with whom he talked and walked, to whom he gave the Lordship and
sovereignty over all earthly creatures, and with whom he was familiar, for
eating of the forbidden fruit was cast out of Eden. Moses and Aaron (the
mirrors and miracles of the world) falling into Gods displeasure, were denied
to enter into the promised Canaan. David, who was honored with the title of
being a man after Gods own heart, falling into sin, fell out of God his
favor. But that which is above all, and ought to move any man, Christ himself
(the glory and image of his father) could not escape the most bitter cup which
he drunk of, though he begged it three times at the hands of his Father,
because he became sin for us. And yet sinful men, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
bold sinners and presumptuous sinners, persuade themselves, that they shall
escape the hand of God. But to leave them, and come to the other, I marvel
what they can challenge by works, seeing whatsoever they do, they are still
debtors, and therefore no deseruers. Let them therefore learn of their learned
Doctors to know that they have no merits but Christ's mercies: and let them say
with the ancient Fathers: This is our merit, that we have no merit.

CHAP. LIII. Of Prosperity, and Adversity, and of Grief, and of the
temptations incident to it.
GOd by the multitude of his benefits warns us, and prepares us for some
troubles and temptations to come: for surely he puts not on the armor, but
he will also Prosperity.
provide for us the battle.

2 Now it is no great thing to favor the Gospel, because it is in favor: but
to embrace it in trouble, is of true love, which we may try, if being in
prosperity we can feel The trial of our love to the Gospel.
the misery of others: for if we can rejoice in the prosperity of the Church,
though we be in misery, if we can be moved and grieved with the misery of the
Church, though we be in prosperity; this shows that our hearts are upright,
and that true zeal remains in them.

3 In prosperity, if we use our goods to our own ease, and wax careless,
that is unbelief: but if we give God glory, and wax more careful, this is
an argument of true faith. Security.
Let us then strive against infidelity both in prosperity and adversity, and
try our faith by these means: for if God work in us humility, in the
abundance of his mercy, it is a sign of our faith: if in wants we be
disquieted, it argues infidelity: but if we stay our selves upon God, it is
faith.

4 They that continue safe in prosperity, by Gods grace shall persevere in
adversity: but Note.
I dare not warrant them safe in prosperity, who have been safe in adversity.

5 The more prosperity increases to Gods children, the more they fear. Who^
to fear most.


6 In prosperity it is good to use the song of Solomon, and in adversity the
lamentations of Jeremiah.

7 God suffers evil men to prosper in this world for two causes: first, that
every good 1
man having in him some sins, might for his few evil things have here a
temporal punishment: Why sometime the evil prosper more than do the godly.
and every evil man having some good things, might be rewarded with temporal
benefits. Secondly, God often chastises his, and suffers the wicked, that it
might be seen that good men serve not God for the things of this world, as
Satan reckoned by 2
his account with Job, as also for that the Lord makes not his books clear
in this life, but reserueth the full and final account unto the last day of
judgment, wherein eueriething Note.
shall be fully recompensed, whether it be good or evil.

8 We must not marvel at wicked men's success, it is no new thing. Job saw
it, and The wicked sometime prosper.
David especially, Psalm. 73. Zachar. 3. the followers of Iehosua the High
Priest are monstrous persons. Paul does expound it will, calling them a gazing
stock. And though God say, hurt not mine anointed, yet are they harmed: Elias
for speaking against Ahab, and John Baptist for telling Herod his sin If Paul
speak against the Idol of Diana, he is a seditious fellow. It was some thing
no doubt, that made Moses so loath to go to Pharaoh, when God sent him. To
consider the troubles of the godly, it were enough to make Jeremiah write new
books of Lamentations, to make David sit him down by the rivers of Babel: for
the The afflictions of the godly in this life.
tower of Babel is higher than the hill of Sion. Poor little Isaac must go to
slaughter, while Ismael sits at home: good Jacob must be set to keep sheep,
whiles my Lord Esau rides on hunting. If you look for Joseph, you shall find
him in prison, Daniel in the Lions den: and so it is true of all for the most
part, yet I know it shall be well with them that serve God, Of grief, and the
temptations incident to it.


9 If we waste our strength and spend our prayers, and are not answered, we
suffer then some grief in withstanding a secret solicitation to mistrust.
Grief would feign have ease, whereof it is, that it labors always to lay
it self open, and to move pity, it fears nothing more then to be hidden.
And for this cause nature has given more helps to bewray Prayers
this affection then any other, as heaviness of the countenance, hanging of the
forehead, moving of the eyes, sighs and groans. It teaches eloquence, and
makes us to change our speeches, and so we learn to amplify the causes of
our woe. Hereof it comes, why falling upon the object of grief, we are loath
to depart from speaking of it, we double our speeches on that Theme. We know
the matter of Ezeckias grief forced his tongue to touch it twice: The tongue,
the tongue shall praise thee, etc. When Christ spoke words of doctrine and
exhortation to Jerusalem, once to name it was enough: but when he spoke in an
Argument of grief, then he must needs say, Jerusalem, Jerusalem. Do we not
see how David in his heaviness dwelt upon the name of Absolon? Habacuc, chap. 2.
he strikes twice on one string, and speaks not only to show his mind, but
to satisfy his grief.

10 This grief in it self is indifferent, in us good or bad, according to the
cause of it. If God would not have us grieved at all, why did he not frame our
hearts of brass? or why were not we hewed out of marble? Indeed to be
sorrowful, where we should not, or to laugh where we should weep, this
beseemes not wise men, much less Christian men to do. Simply to be grieved
is not reproueable, but to be grieved out of Time, measure, or An evil grief.
place, is fault worthy. When the light of the world began to be darkened by
Eclipse, when the life of the world began to go to the shadow of death, women
somewhat well affected, followed him bewailing him: But Christ told them, these
tears wasted on him, might be better spent on themselves. For (says he) the
time will come when mothers shall think them most happy that are no mothers,
and in this case Egeritur lachrymis dolor.
Tears shall be the only vent to ease your hearts, keep them therefore
against those days. So that grief in some sort is sweet and allowable in the
sight of God. Now that we may discern the better between Grief of passion,
and of compassion.
sorrows, let us note there is a grief of passion, and a grief of
compassion; the first we sustain in our selves, either upon some evil
present, or upon some good thing absent: the other works in us upon the estate
of others, when we shall see the Sword of the profane sheathed in the bowels
of our own brethren, who can make a doubt, that a good man might say with the
Apostle, Romans 9. I speak the truth, my conscience bearing me witness in the
holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow. And if for
others, shall we not Grief of indignation.
much more be grieved for things in our own persons? Yes, for be it that a man
were free from the grief of indignation, wherewith David so labored; be it
that a man were free Grief of emulation.
from the grief of emulation, wherewith he also was tried; be it that a man
were free from the grief of contrition, wherewith even David was exercised; be
it, I say, that a man were Grief of contrition.
free from all these: yet from the grief of a longing expectation in their
prayers, how free or vnfree rather Gods children are, their sighs and sobs do
show. We cry for aid, we Grief of a longing expectation in prayers.
seek for help, and yet it is deferred, this is a great grief, and this is
an holy grief. But mark how in our best affections, Satan takes occasion by
these things (most good) to draw us to things most evil.

11 In suffering grief we shall be provoked to mistrust God, and therefore not
in vain was it spoken by our Savior Christ, to arm them against the grief
of his departure, Pray that ye* fall not into temptation. Surely whatsoever our
estate be here, Satan will not leave us without some solicitation to sins.
Art thou in prosperity? say not in thy heart, there is is no God: The Phoenix of
the world by wealth became a wanton. Is the world in an vproare? Psalm 13. 1.
the Devil if he can, will keep thee without all fear. And of this an
ancient Father complains, saying; It is a doleful thing to see, how
honorable men of gray hairs, were wholly in time of public calamities given
over to security, and that when destruction was Security in public
calamities. Psalm. 9.
imminent, when as much as all their lives were worth, did hang on one single
thread. Nay he goes further; Men's iniquities grew up with the punishment of
iniquity, as if their sin should feed still the punishment of sin, so many
of them did dye dallying, because they dallied with destruction. But if we
cannot come to this stupidirie, not to be moved at all, our case must be
thought the happier, yet are we not freed from as great a temptation as the
former, for even this leads us along to another trial, and that is a
temptation to distrust, if our sighs and groans have not success in things
prayed for.

12 There is no kind of grief void of some special provocation to evil.
The grief, By every g^^^fe Satan will take occasion to l^ad us to evil.
which is least dangerous, is the grief of compassion, for we cannot be too
much touched with the miseries of our brethren; and yet this grief makes us
spare oftentimes where we should strike: but the grief of our own sufferings
is far more full of grief. How many the grief of indignation has cast away,
the histories show by whole millions. The grief of emulation, 1
mark how it grieves the godly. David saw the wicked having their children 2
dancing before their faces, and this chastised him every morning, and see the
downfall, whereunto it brought him, to say, I have in vain washed my hands in
innocence. Grief of 3
contrition is counted a godly grief even by Paul's own testimony, but into
what extremities this godly grief does bring many, the number of afflicted
consciences can show and 4
speak to the world. Nay the holiest grief, the grief of devotion and
longing for heavenly things, is not free from temptation, as we may see in
Habacucke, who seeing the delay of his prayers concludes, Thou will not hear.
This suggestion though it be once and again expelled, yet the mind will
grudge again: though we have once controlled and given a check to such a
sin, yet must we not think to be quiet, but still Satan is at the elbow
with the same argument. With our conquest of our corruption we must not hold
our selves contented: and though we give one repulse, we may receive a double
foil for it. But in this case a godly conscience dealing in a godly cause with
his God may think: if I were an Idolater, the Lord might say, Go to thy Gods
in whom thou h^^st trusted, see if they will help thee, for thou have refused
me, and cast me behind thy back. If I were a murderer, the Lord might say,
thy hands are full of blood, and thy Sacrifice is an abomination unto me. If I
were a blasphemer, the Lord might say, what have thou to do to call upon me,
and to take my name in thy mouth, thou have polluted my name, how should I take
pleasure in thy prayers? But when we see, we simply protesting, as did
Ezekiah; Remember Lord how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight, and yet cannot
be heard, what a provocation to temptation is this? For we would think, if
God will hear any, he would hear the godly; if ever Note.
he will hear, that he would hear after long praying; if any thing, when we
complain of violence and misery. But to cry, and a good man to cry, and to
cry long, and to cry in extremity, and yet no hearing, this is grievous.
From this grief grows another temptation If I have prayed so long and cannot
be heard, what booteth it me to pray? I will spare the labor, rather than
labor without hope and help.

13 To be left when we please our selves and take our pleasure in sin, were
a thing more easy; but when we shall beg on our bare knees, when the sorrow
of sin shall make our cheeks full of tears, when we shall wrinkle our
faces with weeping, and our throats shall grow hoarse with crying, and then be
as forelorne and forsaken, is not this a sore assault; what then in such a
temptation may we do? We must overcome grief with patience Note.
and care out and burn out with this temptation by faith, and purge distrust
in Gods promises To overcome great by faith and patience. A sweet c^nsolation
for afflicted minds.
by perseverance in prayer. Grief naturally is heavy, and lies as lead at the
heart, and consequently presses us downward, so that, if faith and prayer can
keep the heart, the hands, the voice, the eyes upward, it is apparent, that
patience surmounteth grief, and faith has outrunne temptation. If despair
did possess the heart, the very naming of God would be grievous, yea though
it were uttered by another. When then we cannot only hear God named, but name
him and call upon his name by prayer, it shows we are yet children of hope
hanging at the breast. As for the word, wherewith Gods Children and even some
of the Prophets have seemed foolishly to charge God, we wust know, that they
be void of passion not of persuasion, which thing is the more diligently to
be marked to abate the rigou^ of our censures, which we often give out upon
afflicted consciences. If a man Note.
shall lie down in his bed, commending himself into the hands of God by
prayer: shall any man doubt, but his estate is of the Lord, and his safety from
God himself? yet it falls out, that the same man is stricken with such fears
in his dream, that he gives out desperate speeches as a man forsaken of God;
will ye deem that man rather by that sudden motion befalling him in his
dream, than by that continual course, which he kept being awake? If you your
selves would not be judged in that case, judge not others in the like Matt. 7.
1. 2 3.
case, least it be measured to you, as you have measured to others.

CHAP. LV. Of Prosperity.
Joseph's example in drinking wine, is not an example of excess, wherein we
commonly offend at this day, for that is condemned and judgments are prepared
for it. And Excess condemned. Act. 4. 17. Austeritie.
want and such like too much austeritie is not commended, for why then should
there be such diverse tastes in meats? And wine was given not only to quench
the thirst, but also to make the hearts of men glad: for which purpose all the
other creatures serve also and therefore the children of Israel were commanded
to eat and to be merry before the Lord. The same may be gathered out of the
second of John, where Christ, albeit they had well drunk at the marriage, yet
changed the water into wine, which he would Sobriety.
not have done, if so austere order should have been observed. Although then
we may not pamper up our bodies, yet may we have a due care of the same, and
so distinguishing our liberty learn to abound and likewise to want: for if we
can be content with the want of things, it is a sign we should well use them,
if we had them, as in poverty, nakedness, loss of friends. Again, if we
use abundance of things well, it is like we should also well Coloss. 2.
bear the want of them, as a rich man to come to poverty. Let us therefore
learn diligently to search our hearts how we bear things present which we
often let pass: and contrariwise in poverty, imagine what we would do if we
were rich, and seek not to bear poverty well. Also being in quietness, we
imagine what we would do in affliction, not seeking to deal well in the
present estate.

2 Joseph having forgiven his brethren, as appears in thar he wept for them,
gave them money, and courteously talked with them, and gave them entertainment;
yet dealt he roundly with them in trying out their repentance, because he had
attained to great wisdom, which herein he used, and also had a loving and
pure affection; yet his example we are not to follow in all respects, for he
sustained the person of a Magistrate, and every one must keep himself within
the bounds of his calling. Joseph did bear the person of Joseph imprisoning
his brethren.
Christ in all this, where we learn, that although the Lord do justly afflict
us, yet we may be sure our sins are already forgiven us, as Joseph dealt
with his brethren.

3 Peace sometime is taken for a prosperous and quiet state in this life, as
go ye in Peace and prosperity.
peace: Sometime for quietness of conscience, but here it is taken for them
both, and rises wholly of the feeling of Gods mercies: we ought then to walk
in the course of godliness, without fear; and to assure our selves of the
preservation of this our state: all our happiness then is in Christ's mercies,
and it should be our chief care continually to come to the feeling of them.
But because peace cannot be without the feeling of Gods mercies, and his
mercies, without the feeling of our miseries, therefore none shall have ever
peace of conscience, or quietness and joy of those things which he possesses,
except he has first been touched with the feeling of his miseries. The
worldly rich men then have not this peace, for they know they are but usurpers,
because they be not lively members of Christ, who was of his Father made heir
of al things. Again, the godly though they be in great want, yet have all
things because they have the peace and quietness of their conscience, they do
then preposterously, which first lay up for them and their children the riches
of this world, and do not seek the kingdom of heaven. The word salvation
ought to make a difference between us and the Heathen, which say, health and
peace is all with them, but let us be content with that which the Apostle used,
and neither follow the Heathen, nor invent courtly terms of our selves.

4 God is debtor to none, and therefore he shows mercy upon whom he will,
against the Popish Predestination.
Papists which say that the lord predestinateth every one according to the fore
knowledge of his works. If the Lord show lesser mercies to us than to others,
we have no cause to complain, because he is no debtor: so we must not envy
then that have great gifts, for if we have any, it is more than due, or than
we have deserved: and this will teach us to be contented with that we have
had. Let us then look on that we have, and give God Contentatio^.
thanks for it, and know that if we should have more, he would give more: yea
if we consider, that they that have much, must make the greater account, and
that we are unfit to do so, we will thank God that we have no more than we
have. Jacob wills his sons, that they should not measure the grace of God
by outward signs: for albeit it be a punishment to loose them, yet we shall
never rest soundly in God, unless we can learn to A note upon Genesis chap. 48.
verse. 21. 22. I die but God shall be with you.
leave them. Secondly, whereas Jacob said that they should look for the
performance of Gods promise quickly, but in the Lords time: hereby we learn to
look safely for whatsoever is promised in the word, as that we be heirs of
the world, though we be afflicted in it. Again, he gives that which he never
possessed, for he had but only a burying place there, and yet this portion
fell to them, Io^ 14. 4. We learn then to strive to be strong in the faith,
as the Fathers were.

5 In this did the says of Jacob and Joseph notably appear, that they neither
forgot the Prosperity.
promsed land; nor thought worse of it for all the prosperity which they had
in Egypt, nor the pains which they suffered in Canaan. Where note that both
prosperity and adversity draw us near to God, if we have once received the
Spirit of God; but without that in their own nature, they are forcible to
draw us away from God: as may be seen in the Israelites, who for all their
trobles in Egypt, could not be brought to the To glorify God in our present
estate Hebr 13. 7, Faith.
Lord: let us learn then to glorify God in our own present estate, and to
use that well: and then shall we be prepared to ^eare well whatsoever
comes. Jacob at his death gives his Sons that which he himself had never
the possession of, which declared his faith grounded on the word: for he^
faith, God said thus* Thus must we believe when we have the word though it
seem ridiculous, but we must not believe without the word.

CHAP. LVI. Of Prophecy and Preaching.
THe office of a Prophet is not only to foretell things, although many did so;
(the Prophesying.
gross understanding whereof has put down our prophecies) but also to teach
to pray, and plainly to interpret with a fit application to the people, by the
revelation of the Spirit, 1. Corinthians 24 Genes. 18. and 19 Number 11. Deu^ 18.
1. Sam. 12. This revelation comes sometimes by means, sometimes
extraordinarily, but always spirituallay: for this difference is between
prophesying and teaching, that a man may teach that he has learned in the
Schools, but the other has a further revelation of the Spirit: to apply the
word to times and persons fitly, that every one may have his portion.
Revelation is ordinary or extraordinary; ordinary when he spiritually
speaks of the Revelation.
word, as the word of God, with power dividing it aright (as the Apostle Pau^
says) If any be spiritual, let him understand what I say. Extraordinary,
when by some revelation of 1. Cor. 14 37.
Gods Spirit, he can note and specify the time, or manner, or place of Gods
threatenings* here again I say as the Apostle says: If any be spiritual let
him consider what I say, and the Lord give them understanding: yet this is not
to bring in the revelations of the Family of love, or any other Heretics,
which dream of such things as are not in, and according to the word.

2 To receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, is effectually to profit by
their doctrine: for all things are written for our learning: so are all gifts
which God bestows upon others.

3 As they that receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets The duty o a Prophet.
reward: so he that is received in the name of a Prophet, must perform the
duty of a Prophet.

4 It is one thing to speak daily by meditation, and to beat upon the
consciences as a Pastor.
Pastor, and another thing to set down a thing with judgment and deep
study, as a Doctor must do.

5 There are three kinds of false Prophets. The first teaches false doctrine.
The second Three kinds of false Prophets.
teaches true doctrine, but applies it falsely. The third teaches and apply
well, but live ill.

6 It is good to preach according to the state of a man's own conscience,
unless wisdom require a consideration to be had of the time, person, and
place.

7 Pastors were not able to devour their great pains to the people, unless
they should consider what pains Christ devoured for them: and that their
pains may be the more profitable, as the Pastor or Preacher should pray for
the people: so in like sort the people should pray for the Preacher.

8 We care not though the Lord accuse or condemn never so much, so he does it
in another The people are to pray for the Preachers, as well as the Preachers
for the people.
court and touch us not. So long as Jeremy prophesied against Edom, against
Moab, against Ammon, or against mount S^ir, so long presently after the
threatenings, the people would go to the Church, and they were willing enough
to hear the burdens of the Lord so long as it concerned not Judah and
Jerusalem: but when he came to the burden of Judah and Jerusalem, then they
say the Lord has not sent thee, thou art taught to speak evil, etc. Wherefore
we must bring our selves to this, to be as glad to hear, and with as great
patience, the action of the Lord commenced against us, as against any other.
And we may Ieremiahs preaching.
note it as a fault and mark of false Prophets, to prophecy against other
countries, and to be full of general terms, but to come to particulars, that
they were loath to speak, and others were loath to hear. Being at Samaria, they
speak against Jerusalem: and being at Jerusalem, they speak against Samaria:
being at Bethel, they prophecy against Gilgall: and when they are at Gilgall,
they speak against Bethel: at Dan against Sheba, at Sheba against Dan. This is
a sin of false Prophets, the true Prophets do not so.

9 The honor of a Prophet is not from the breast of his Mother, it is not so
material, Prophesying.
who was his father, as who was his teacher. In whom chiefly is to be
considered, what the Prophet speaks, and how. The Prophets did sometimes
threate^, sometimes promise, sometimes comfort, sometimes reprove, but this
they did rather as teachers than Prophets, as whose proper function specially
was in speaking of future things, we do not so much embrace good things* as
wonder at strange things. The Prophets spoke that by inspiration, which they
knew by revelation, God disposing both their words and writings, so that all
that they spoke and wrote, they did but as instruments from God; so great a
difference is there betwixt our speeches and theirs. Though we conceive
exquisitely, how long are we before we can speak? And when we have meditated
well, do not our tongues falter in our mouths? Though our tongues utter most
the purity of knowledge, when we utter the wisdom of God; yet when herein
we add much endeavor, how sore we grieve our hearers, sometimes by obscurity,
sometimes by unsavory, and sometimes by unseemly speeches? In things of art
or reason, be they Prophets, be they Apostles, be they Evangelists, or be they
Pastors, they may be deceived. Was not Moses counseled by his father in law
Iethro? Was not Peter convicted of error by Paul? Was not some of the Prophets
convicted The certainty of holy Scripture.
by Jeremiah and Ezechiel? But how then are the books of the Prophets so
generally allowed? Answer is, that the Prophets were exempted from all
possibility of error in those things which they received by divine
revelation, indeed they must be void of error, because God teaching them
immediately every word and writing is void of error. Note.
But how shall we know, that these their books were of such divine
revelation, and delivered from God himself? We must know, that the certain
knowledge hereof to the prophets Prophecies tried.
was one, and to the hearers was another. The Prophets by vision most certainly
knew, that the things they delivered were from God. The knowledge and
certainty of these things were confirmed to the hearers by miracle, and
oracle: by miracle the persons of the Prophets were authorized (for without
doing of miracles, they were accounted of as the sons of the Prophets, not as
Prophets), by oracle their books were tried by offering them to the view of
other of the Prophets, and of the Priests, who asking counsel of God for the
w^r^ant of them, were answered by oracle from God.

10 Another scruple is yet to be answered, whether the Prophets did speak
these things being in themselves, or as rapt out of themselves. True it is, the
Heathen Prophets did speak things to others only, the Prophets of God did
otherwise, as they that were themselves ravished and affected with the things
given out to others. The promises of God by A note between the true and false
Prophets.
them delivered, were as honey in their own mouths, so sweetly were they
moved with them: the threatenings denounced abroad, left a sharp sting in
their own bowels, and made themselves to tremble; the word of obedience taught
to others, bound them as straightly, as if others had been the teachers of that
word, and they to be taught by it. Seeing then this is the certainty and
dignity of the writings of the Prophets, is it not strange that the Prophets,
at whose doors and thresholds, stood Princes and Governors in times past to
ask counsel, should now of every mean person be either wholly contemned, or
re^chlesly received, when they are read or interpreted? Though the greater
thing is to do, yet the first thing is to learn. For as hearing without doing
adds to our confusion, so doing without knowledge, is neither acceptable to
God, nor profitable for us. Let us not therefore hear only or hear vanity,
let us not hear the Preachers as we hear Minstrels, least that when we should
be old men in knowledge, and children in malice, we become old men in malice,
and remain as children in understanding.

11 It is a greater thing in a Pastor to deal wisely and comfortably, with an
afflicted conscience, and soundly and discreetly to meet with an Heretic,
than to preach publicly Pastors office in coforting the afflicted.
and learnedly.

12 He said to some dwelling in a place where the word was preached: Oh
consider it is the easiest thing to hear, it is the painfullest thing to
preach the Gospel. The sitting of one hour, receives a fruit unto
immortality: for howsoever men think the Ministers of God to speak even
whatsoever comes into their mouths; it is not so, they speak that which
many years they have studied for, earnestly they have prayed for, which by
experience they have bought, and by a painful life dearly paid for. If a
Prince should give out by portion a mint of money for the fetching, who would
spare to go? The Lord offers the mint of his mercy, to be divided to them
that will but hear, and believe it, and no man almost regards it.

13 We must not so press the Law, that we suppress the Gospel in men's
consciences. Law and Gospel.


14 All applications of doctrine must be referred to one of these heads.

1 To teach and establish true opinions. Applications of Doctrine.
2 Or to consute false opinions. 3 Or to correct evil manners. 4 Or to frame
good manners. 5 Or to comfort withal.
The first four are set down in this text: the whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God and is profitable. First to teach. Secondly, to convince.
Thirdly, to correct. Fourthly, to instract inrighousnes, etc. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
The fifth and last in this text: Whatsoever things are written before time, are
written for our learning, that we through Patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have Simile.
hope, Romans 15. verse. 4. These thigns are profitable, says the Apostle to
Timothy. And these things are written for our learning, says the same Apostle
to the Church of the Romans, therefore by these things we must only profit
and only learn by these: for as application is a concluding of one thing out
of another; so these are the five heads from which all application must flow,
and he that thus speaks, attaineth to the purpose of S. Paul, as elsewhere ^e
notes. He that prophecieth speaks unto men, to edifying, to exhortation and
to comfort, 1. Cor. 14* 3. That is to say, applies the use of his doctrine to
edification, exhortation, and comfort.

15 The means to increase our faith, is the word preached, prayer, the
Sacraments, and the discipline of the Church. The word crucifieth thee a new in
thine heart. Prayer gives thee a feeling of thy faith. The Sacraments confirm
both thy faith, and feeling; and discipline continues us in obedience both of
the word and prayer, and the Sacraments; and consequently, is a means to
continue in us al those comforts, which by the other means are to be found in
Christ.

16 The word of God is as a Glass, it blusheth not to tell our faults; yet
great infirmities have been in them, that should carry this glass. Moses
foreseeing his cold entertainment The word of God must be charged upon men's
consciences, and how many ways men fail in this.
in the faith, says. Exodus; 4. Mitte quem missurus. As Jonah when he should
have carried the Glass of Gods word, and of the peoples sins, sailed from
Niniuie flat East, to Tharsis, flat West. Nathan 2. Sam. 12. Though David was a
man easy to be spoken to, made off notwithstanding a good while, until the
king had made the premises himself, he would make no conclusion. To come to
our times, some there be, that do not only sow pillowes, but draw Curtains,
and spread Couerlets over men's sins. Others there are, that for gain will
run apace, and yet with Balaam will neither bless nor curse. Some there are,
that do conceive and are ready to bring forth, yet they cannot be delivered. 1
Others there are, who very softly and easily do their duty, as Elie did to
his children, 2
1. Sam. 2. Others there be that speak with some courage, but keep a loofe
and in a generality. 3
Lastly, some there are, who can and will particularize duties: but when they
spare 4
some, either rich or noble, these can be very hot and vehement against those
that be absent. 5
6


CHAP. LVII. Of Gods providence.
EVery one that leads a godly life, and trusts in God his Providence, shall
find that in extreme dangers he will put such things into their minds, that
they shall be cheered and comforted, when others shall be disquieted and
dejected. This we may see in the parents of Moses, because they believed, and
led a godly life, Heb. 11. This is the blessing, but the wicked shall want this
good issue: for the Lord will punish their wickedness in such a case; as
appears in the time of the glorious Martyrs, who lived well before, and in
their deaths were crowned, but Apostataes had their former hypocrisies
punished, and in such danger they shall not know what to do: but the godly
trusting in Gods providence, if they have a way to escape, shall have their
life for a prey, but if they want this way, yet they will offer themselves a
sacrifice to the Lord.

2 When Moses and the rest of the children of Israel had received some good
handsell of the goodness of God in his providence over them, they gathered
thereupon that the Lord would never fail them, nor forsake them, till he had
brought them to his habitation; Thankefully to record Gods benefits received.
which should teach us to do the like, for strengthening our faith in his
goodness, by keeping continually as it were a beadroll of his benefits already
received of him, least by letting the old slip out of our minds, which should
make us thankful, we never receive the new, whereof we are so careful.

3 As the root of all sin is in our soul, so the beginning of all diseases
is in our bodies. And as there is no sin which we should not fall into if the
Lord leave us; so is there no disease which should not come upon us, unless he
preserve us. For when his providence Diseases.
watches not over us, we are ready to fall into all misery. It is not in our
selves to keep our good name from evil reports, our minds from disquietnes,
our estate from poverty, etc. This if it were believed and felt, it would both
make us thankful and continue in prayer, not only in the want of such things we
desire, but also in the abundance of those we enjoy: For man lives not by
bread only, neither is it care can make us rich, nor our own devises bring
quietness to our minds: but it is the Lord, who in his providence works all
in all, which must always be acknowledged of us, to the end we may make use of
all things in any estate, to the glory of his name, and the good of our
brethren. Trial of our faith concerning providence.


4 We may try our faith in Gods providence by this, as we use the means to
come to earthly things, so for this we must use the word and prayer, Psalm. 119.
part. 22. If then we esteem not of the word, and find no comfort in prayer,
Psalm. 32. we can never esteem of his providence: we can never say in truth,
God gives us all things.

5 The Lord oftentimes in his wise providence helps the wicked, and such as
are unworthy, and in stead of punishments which they do deserve, he sends
blessings when they crievnto him for them. From which we may gather, that if he
hear the wicked, much more will he grant the desire of such as fear him. If
he remit the ungodly, much more God hears the wicked otherwhile.
them that in truth of heart serve him, for he deals not with us as our
deserts are, as every man may feel: but he does good both to the godly and the
wicked, and that to diverse ends; to the godly, to hyre them from their sins;
to the wicked, that after he may confound them without excuse. Therefore if
when the Lord forbeareth, we be touched in heart to repent, this is the work
of Gods spirit, the comfort thereof will abide for ever: but if when he
forbeareth, we think Note.
our sins are less, and so harden our hearts, then are we to fear that
utter confusion is at hand.

6 The Lord never forsakes his, but in all dangers he will provide though all
means fail, only let us believe his providence, and so will he give us our
hearts desire, if it stand with his glory, or else if we desire that which
stands not with his glory, yet let us believe that he is our FATHER in
CHRIST, and he will recompense the outward wants with a God will never fail
his.
spiritual blessing.

7 We may read in Exodus 17. 7. that the Israelites through distrust, doubted
whether God was among them, because they saw not such visible signs of Gods
presence and favor as they would. With the like doubt our Savior Christ was
tempted by the devil, Luc. 4 who labored to make him doubt, whether he were
the Son of God, because he wanted some things which were needful for this
life: whereby we may learn to know our own corruption, how ready we are to
judge, as the Israelits did, because we s^e not such ordinary helps as we and
other of Gods children have at sometimes had: but we are to correct this in
ourselves, and on the contrary to think that God is amongst us, and with us,
although we see some tokens of his anger. Thus do we reason in religion. Is
this true religion, seeing Corrupt reasons of blind men concerning religion.
there be so many diversities of judgments, such little godliness, it is like it
is not, but rather we are to look for some other: so we reason in the
commonwealth. Is this government good, which brings so great hurly burlies,
and so great troubles: so in marriage, when contentions and temptations do
arise, then they think they were not joined together by God: so in every kind
of trouble, we judge of the presence and providence of God by our outward sense
and feeling. This is the policy of the devil, to cause men either to sink
down Remedies.
in despair, or else to be impatient, and at the least to murmur. But to
prevent this, these are some remedies following. The first, that we look to
the word, and when we see that religion 1
has always had troubles, and so shall have still, then shall we
straightwaies see that our judgment is fleshly. Secondly, when we see that
many of Gods children in the world, as Job 2
and others had trouble in their marriage, and yet that it was of God, then
shall we learn that our judgment is not according to the spirit. Then let us
consider that the devil does herein exercise policy to overthrow our marriage,
and we shall be wary to avoid them. And if many have been in this state, and
yet the Lord has not left them, why should we yield to the temptation of
Satan, who would persuade us that our case is worse? Thirdly, we must 3
look to the former mercies of God, which we have felt. If we have once felt
them, then though we have not always the like feeling, yet we must not think
that he has forsaken us, so that experience of former mercies must be our
strength herein, if we have been in as great danger as now we are, and even
then he helped us, why should we doubt? Fourthly, 4
we must consider that many of Gods children are and have been so, and
therefore we must take heed that in our rashness we do not condemn them. We
must not therefore judge thus, unless we will be hurtful to our selves, and
injurious to our brethren.

8 Moses was commanded to take the same staff with which he stroke the red
sea, and therewith to strike the stony rock, to give the Israelites water to
drink, to teach the^ that the Lord was as well able to bring water where it is
not, as to stay the course thereof where How to depend on Gods providence.
it is. This ought they to have considered, and then would they not in other
things have doubted. If we will avoid the like distrust, we must remember the
former works of God, and then labor to be guarded in the hope of everlasting
life, the resurrection of the body, and the forgiveness of sins, that so we may
be sure he will be good to us still. And, as the chief He that believes that
Christ is his redeemer believes also that God is his provident ^ather.
help of al these, let us labor to be thoroughly persuaded of our
justification through Jesus Christ and the rising again to everlasting life,
which if we be surely grounded in, then shall we not doubt of Gods providence;
but on the contrary, if we labor not against fidelity in these articles of
our faith, we shall never resist unbelief in Gods providence.

9 When the daughter of Pharaoh went of purpose to wash her self, it might
seem to be fortunate, and a thing that happened by chance: but if we look into
the event, we might see the hand of God in it: and his most wise and mighty
providence therein, for the preservation of Moses, who^ he was cast out by
great co^straint of his own mother. From whence See of murmuring in the third
part.
we may learn the tender love and most provident care which the Lord has over
his Church, to defend it from danger, and to preserve it from peril; yea, and
rather than it should perish or miscarie, he will so provide that the very
enemies thereof shall succor and nourish the same, as Moses was, who was
brought up in Pharaohs house: in which example Gods providence in the
preservation of Moses.
we must needs see the wondrous work of God, as appears, in that Pharaoh his
daughter never doubted, nor questioned with his sister, and gave him a name
that might continue to posterity, gave him to his own mother to be nouised,
that he might, as it were, suck religion out of her breasts, and be wained in
the same, rewards her for her pains: wherein we see how the Lord does crown
the work of his children, and their faith: for Moses mother God is ever the
same in his providence to his faithful children.
had not only the thing which she desired, but also a reward; wherein
appears the great and exceeding mercy of the Lord. God is the same now as
then he was, he will never fail those that trust in his mercy through Christ,
and obtain forgiveness of their sins, study and strive continually to serve
him, even in their hearts, and patiently, and constantly wait upon his
fatherly providence. But he will always watch over them for good and not for
evil, and in what distresses soever they are, he will make a way out, and give
comfortable deliverance in his due time.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Prayer and Meditation.
IT is the nature of all men, never to come to God wholly, till they be
destitute of all help, but then they will cry to God as the Israelites did.
The Israelites cried often, because of some misery, and not because of sin,
and therefore we are not heard: but when they saw their sin, and came unto God,
then they were heard: so God will come quickly Luke 18. If we will have God
hear us, let us first see our wants* Secondly, feel them.
though he tarry long: quickly, that is when we are fit, and do pray with
feeling: long, because of our unfitness, and our want of feeling, and continue
not in waiting. Let us observe this in all crosses, as if any sickness he long
upon us, it is because we have not profited by it in feeling our sins in
humility of heart, in prayer to God: therefore he is long, but when we have
thus profited, then will be come, either to take away the cross, or to
recompense the same with inward comfort: and this may every one of Gods
children claim at Gods hands, when they have well profited by the cross.

2 Prayer is so acceptable and honorable a thing in the sight of God, that
oftentimes it is taken for the whole worship of God contained in the word, as
Genes. 4. 26. and 12. 8. Prayer.
1. Cor. 1. 2. 2. Tim. 2 19. And in our English tongue we use this phrase of
going to prayers, yea, our Savior Christ calls the Church a house of prayer,
and yet Christ knew, and we see, that it is a place of hearing the word,
administering the Sacraments, and using of Discipline. By the way let us see how
it comes to pass, that few care to hear the word, fewer to receive the
Sacraments, and fewest of al to come under Discipline; and yet al or the most,
show themselves friends to prayer, yea the heretics in other matters sundred
from us in this Prayer and the word go^ together.
point, agree with us. It is God his goodness so to ratify the use of prayer.
Neither are we to think that prayer, and the word are divorced, but go hand
in hand as in a league, Romans 10. 15. He speaks of prayer, Psalm. 14. of the
word, Eccl. 4. 17. hearing prepares us for praying, Psalm. 95. 6. The Prophet
stirs up the Church to prayer, Psalm. 7. To the hearing of the word. As it is
a duty in the people to use both: so the Minister uses both, 1. Sam. 12. 18.
Samuel prays, verse. 24. and preaches to the people, Act. 6. 4. The Apostles
finding themselves troubled with the ordinary ministry of tables, ordained
new officers, that they might give themselves to continual prayer, and to the
ministration of the word, 1. Tim. 2. The Apostle gives precepts both of the
word and prayer, both to pastors and people.

3 And necessary it is, that the word should rectify us before we approach to
prayer, because coming unprepared, and in the guiltines of our sin, we
cannot be heard, Matthew. 7. 21. and. 15. 8. 9. Psalm. 145. 18. Psalm. 34. 15. 16.
and 66. 18. Iam. 1. 6. and 5. 15. 2. Tim. 2. 19. And surely this point is
needfully to be urged in our time, wherein men are cold entertainers of
Ignorant and superstitious people do much commend prayer, but never call for
preaching. Secondly, some respect preaching, but not prayer. Thirdly, some do
wisely respect both. Fourthly, some regard neither.
the word, and if they go unto Church to pray a little, they think themselves
very religious. Experience will prove, that ignorant and superstitious persons
will much commend prayer, but never call for preaching: On the contrary, come
to them that have knowledge, and be truly religious, and ye shall observe
that they will more willingly hear and continue in hearing, than they will
pray and continue in praying. And I do appeal to the consciences of Gods
children, who know that prayer is rather a travel of the heart, than a labor of
the lips, whether to give God the glory, and to shame themselves, they must
needs confess that they had rather hear the word two hours, than continue
in serious prayer one half hour. But let us learn that there be some
exercises do more strengthen judgment, than stir affection, and yet in part
do rouse up affections too, as hearing, reading, and conferring; some other
more nearly work upon the affection, and yet withal inlighten the judgment
also, as praying, singing, and meditating. It is easy to renew or increase
knowledge by hearing. It is hard to set a work not only the eye, the ear,
and the hand, but to travail with our minds also, our affections and hearts,
setting all in humble frame of holy subjection in the presence of God.

4 And no marvel though our nature be so hard to pray, as thinking it a thing
painful, seeing among many exercises it is most profitable. The word makes
known to us the riches of Gods love, and strengthens faith: prayer feels
the power of it, and confirms with feelings. The word tells us that God
has a care of his people, prayer proves that Prayer and exercise most
profitable.
God has a care of his people. The word says, God is merciful: prayer finds
by practice that God is merciful. The word speaks of the majesty, power, and
goodness of God: prayer obtains the exprience of the majesty, power, and
goodness of God. If a man comes to knowledge, faith, and comforts by hearing,
it is rather an infusion from God into man, than an action proceeding from a
man to God: but if we taste of the power of these things by prayer, as there is
an infusion from God as the author, so there is an action from man as the agent
and instrument. This gift of prayer is also a nurse of repentance, because our
prayers look with bloody cheeks, as ready to blush, when with guilty
consciences we come before the Lord. If we should have a suite to a prince, we
would be loath he should have a just complaint of our rebellion to lay against
us, for fear of repulse or of a worse thing, we would not willingly have our
accuser stand before him, when we are suitors unto him: much Simile.
more are we to fear our hypocrisy, if we presume in wilful disobedience, to
pray unto the prince of the spirits, and searcher of all men's hearts. And if we
can be bold to pray in the hypocrisy of our hearts to such a God; we must
needs either be abashed without comfort, or astonished without feeling, we shall
find our prayers either accused, or accursed, or both.

5 Although there was but a weak faith in Moses, when he prayed, yea though it
seemed Moses infirmity in prayer.
rather to be an expostulation than a prayer, Exodus 5. 22. 23. yet the Lord
respected his faith, and pardoned his infirmity, Exodus 6. 1. 2. 3. etc. So
great is the Lord in mercy, and ready to hear those that call upon him though
in weakness, which may not only serve to move us to pray, but also assure us
that the Lord will hear us.

6 If any would know a true faith then, try it by one special fruit thereof:
if our faith Trial of our faith by prayer.
moves us to prayer, it is true: and so much faith, so much prayer, which will
take away doubting, and confirm us more in Gods goodness. Where are confuted
those which say, if Gods providence rule over all, what needs prayer? For
then had Moses, and the children of Israel prayed in vain: and David says,
Psalm. 34. The Lords care is open to our prayers. But if the promises of God,
whereon our faith is grounded, make us to refrain prayer from the Lord; it is
manifest we are too secure, and carnally minded: we are to fear that our faith
is false.

7 In that the Lord heard Moses in prayer, we may aslu^e our selves that he
will also hear us; for from a particular example may be gathered a general
doctrine, as is evident by the like gathering of Iam. 5. of the prayer of
Eliah: so that we shall either have that we Iam. 1. ^.
covet, or else some spiritual recompense; only this let us care for, that we
be righteous, faithful, and continue in prayer, and then shall we have comfort
in our selves. For reading Prayer bri^gs feeling and experience.
gets knowledge, but prayer is that, that gets feeling and experience.

8 Notwithstanding the Lord had promised by the mouth of Moses, that he would
give deliverance to the Israelites, yet he cease not (although he was
surely persuaded that the Lord would perform his promise, to pray for the
same, and that in most hearty and seruent affection: even so did Eliah, when he
prayed for rain, which he knew would The promises of God ought to stir us up
unto prayer.
certainly be, which teaches us first, that Gods promises do not make such
as fear him to be careless, but careful to use the means. Secondly, that
faith will always show it self in prayer, and the stronger faith is, the more
vehement shall be our prayer. It is said, that Moses cried and yet he did not
speak a word, so the holy woman Hannah, 1. Sam. 1. 5. prayed in the very
bitterness of her spirit, yet uttered not a word, which teaches us that the
hearty Prayer not uttered by voice. Simile.
prayer only pearceth the clouds and is heard of God, and the voice is no
further heard, than the vehemency of the spirit does cause it. For as the
bullet out of the Gunne, or an arrow out of a bow, so out of the abundance of
our heart must our prayers proceed. Therefore the voice may be used in private
prayers, to stir up the affections, and to keep the mind from wandering,
and in public prayers, because God will be glorified in soul and body, and
that others may be edified; but both publicly and privately, it is the heart
only that is accepted.

9 The refuge of Moses was by prayer to fly unto the Lord, and this is the
manner and dealing of all the dear children of God, not to keep close their
grief within themselves, To manifest our grief by prayer unto God.
but by prayer to make it known unto their God, that in him they may find
help. If we then, when grief oppresses us, can pray unto the Lord and make
known our requests unto him, we may have hope, that in his good time he will
deliver us: but if our grief do so trouble us, that it causes us to fret so,
that we can seek no help for it, or else do in our own strength fight
against it, there is small hope of our deliverance.

10 Moses praved sometime very imperfectly, and yet then the Lord heard him,
which teaches us that the Lord does greatly like of prayer, yea though it be
after a stuttering manner, as Hannah prayed in the Temple; or if it he but a
chattering, as Ezechias prayed in Note.
his sickness: yet if it be in the bitterness of the soul, and in the
vprightnes of the heart, the The Lord likes of a stammering prayer, if we
speak in heaviness of soul and vprightnes of heart.
Lord does like of it very well. It is not the fine words, nor the well framed
sentences that he delights in; he is then well pleased with our prayers, when
in the vprightnes of our hearts we offer them up unto him, and when the Spirit
by working unspeakable groans in our hearts, does make our requests known unto
God. Only let us look for the perfection of our prayers in Christ, let us
still rebuke our selves, and stir up our hearts to gather confidence, that we
may come more cheerfully unto prayers, as David did, saying: Why art thou so
heavy O my soul? And then may we be sure that such prayers are very well
pleasing in his sight. And here there appears a special difference between
the unbelieving Israelites and the faith of Moses, they looked on the dry
earth and unto Moses, where they could have small hope of redress, but they
forgot the Lord: therefore they murmured when they should have prayed.
Contrariwise: Moses forgot them, and so escaped murmuring; he looked unto the
Lord, and so fell to prayer. This is a certain note of true faith, when at the
first time that trouble does oppress us, we can yet power out our complaints
into the Lords bosom, and by prayer look for help from above. And although
we can find no fruit of our prayers, yea though we think that our prayers be
turned into sin, yet if we can continue in prayer and be diligent therein, if
we can even then also hear the word, when we can receive no comfort thereby,
yea though it ever rebuke us and seem to make our condemnation known unto us,
if we can abide our selves to be touched, and continue our care to hear the
word still, if we can do these things, it is a notable token of true faith and
the great work of Gods good spirit does show it self herein; yea and that
more lively Feeling.
than when a man has comfortable feeling.

11 It is a special favor of the Lord, when he gives such Ministers or
Magistrates as will pray for the people; for so they may see, that he will not
punish them as he ought, but Magistrates and Ministers praying for the people.
yet forbeareth them. We see in Psalm 106. That by the prayer of Moses and
Phineas, the Lords wrath was stayed, and Samuel prayed for the people.
Therefore Ministers and Magistrates ought to labor even by praying, and doing
good for the people, that even for their sakes the Lord may spare them, though
they have deserved to be punished. Contrariwise, it is a sign* of Gods wrath*
when he withdraws the hearts of Ministers and Magistrates from the people,
and that they cannot do them good.

12 The lifting up of the hands, is taken sometimes for prayer it self, the
sign for the Lifting up of hands.
thing it self: so the speech is used, Psalm. 141. 2. Let the lifting up of my
hands be as an Evening sacrifice. And in Tim. 2. 6. I will that men lift up
pure hands in every place: Where we see, that the truth of the things is joined
nearly with the sign. For if a man have not an heart, his lifting up of hands
is nothing; but if the heart be thoroughly moved, then also will the eye be
lifted up: yet we do lift up our eyes, that our hearts thereby may be the
better lifted up: and our eye does not wander, nor our care does harken after
other things, but our hearts have first wandered.

13 When Moses prevailed with the Lord by prayer, then did he also prevail
against his enemies. S. James says, The prayer of a righteous man prevails
much, if it be fervent: So that The fervent prayers of a righteous man.
if he be not a righteous man that prays, or if the righteous man's prayers
are not fervent, it will not prevail. As S. James therefore gathers a
general of a particular, so may we gather, that if we be fervent in prayer,
then we shall prevail: but if we be not fervent, we can have no hope. And that
is the cause that in our matters we bring not our purpose to pass, because we
are cold in prayer, or trust too much to our own wisdom, or such like.
Therefore in what matter soever we have in hand, if we do first seek to God by
prayer in feruencie as did the men of God herein, then shall we prevail as
well as ever they did.

14 Those things which we hear and read, are other men's, until by applying
them to our selves by Meditation they be made ours.

15 As reading, hearing, and conferring of the word, do more increase knowledge
then feeling: So praying, singing, and meditating, do more increase feeling
then knowledge. What exercises increase knowledge most, and what feeling.
Genes. 46.


16 It is not certain how long after his sacrifice and prayer Jacob received
comfort, and therefore we see that the comfort of the Spirit does not always
depend upon the means, neither is bound thereunto, but sometime comes long
after the using of them. As Christ says of the Husbandmen, that they sow, and
look long after for the fruits of the earth: which may teach us comfort, for
that our prayers are never in vain, but always granted though sometime long
after: and here are those corrected which look for comfort immediately upon
their requests, not knowing that sin is the cause why we receive not when we
ask, and for that we use not the means aright: this also tries our
obedience, if we will with patience continue using the same means, though
presently we feel not the fruit of them, and learn with Mark and the
Apostles, to lay up things in our hearts: to try what will come of them
afterward. Jacobs vision is not a bare and mute thing, but is joined with Genesis
31 3.
the word, and teaches that all comfort must come out of the word: and
therefore what comfort by Sacraments, visions, apparitions, and such like, does
not lead us to the word? Isaac.
nor work in us greater obedience to the same, nor gives us some victory over
sin, that is vain and proceeds of error. It is Faith in the Promises, that
works in us obedience: False co^forts.
and therefore in every commandment there is a promise, either understood or
expressed: for the law is spiritual, and requires a spiritual obedience,
which we cannot perform because we be carnal, and by nature disobedient,
except the Lord do minister grace unto us.

17 Violence (as it were) must be used in the heart, when we pray: because it
is the heavy Verbal prayers how dangerous.
judgment of God, that verbal prayers bring us to great blockishnes.

18 It is good to read before prayer, to the better preparing of our hearts
thereunto.

19 Where prayer wants, the action of sin is as ready as the temptation.
Temptations. Barren in grace for want of payer.


20 Generally, we must desire Gods mercies greedily: but particularly we must
ask them conditionally, and with affection as well to leave the thing asked as
to have it.

21 Many are barren in grace, because they are barren in prayer. We cannot be
dry in the grace of God so long as we resort to Christ by prayer, who has
the seven Vialls of gold full of seuen-fold mercies.

22 In singing of Psalms without some special occasion, he would say in
company, specially Singing of Psalms.
of such as were of some general instruction: although privately for himself,
according to his grief, joy, or affection, he would sing proper Psalms; yet
he thought they that did most rejoice, might sing the Psalms of greater
grief, to put them in mind what was, or may be in them; as also, to season
their joys with the remembrance of the sorrow of some of the Saints. Again,
those that are most thrown down, might reap fruit in using the Psalms of
greatest comfort, that they may see what has been, and what is belonging to
them, after that they have sown in tears, and mourned with that holy
repentance which is not to be repented of.

23 There be two extremities of singers. Some hearing the action to be good,
use it of custom. Some hearing that we must use it, with prepared hearts,
stay so long for fitting themselves thereunto, that they leave it often undone.
Others use it so often, and yet so unfruitfully, that their customable singing
breeds wearisomnesse* wearisomnesse causes tediousnes, and tediousnes causes
to leave all. Then we are indeed prepared to sing when the word dwells so
plentifully in us, and we be so filled with the Spirit, that the assurance of
our sins pardoned; the persuasion of God his favor; the hatred of sin, the
love of the life to come, and such like provoke us thereunto.

CHAP. LIX. Of Repentance.
Our conversion to the Lord, must be with our whole heart, without exception,
How we must convert to the Lord, and the notes of a true conversion.
inward without hypocrisy, speedy without delay, continual without
Apostasy, in faith without despair. First it must be of the whole heart:
many repent, but they will except one sin. David says, Cleanse me Lord from
all my sins, but we will have the Lord dispense with some sin. 1. Corinthians.
5. A little leaven will sour much, a little Serpent will sting much. Origin
writes very well, that Christ did cast out, not six, but seven devils out of
Magdalen, for all must be cast out, a clean riddance must be made, 1
as seven devils out of her, so all sins out of us. Secondly, it must be
inward, many have All sins.
cleansed their hands, but not their hearts, such sins as stare a man in the
face, are too 2
palpable, we must be doing against little sins. For sin is a Serpent,
whose tail We must not repent only of st^ring and gross sins.
many have cut off, but few have touched the head: nay many have a whole and
untouched Serpent, who neither touch tail nor head, who proclaim with a
Trumpet their re probation. We must not cleanse the outside of the platter
only, but we must say in our conscience; This action (oh Lord) have I
presented to thee with simplicity. Thirdly, we 3
must do it speedily. For though the Lord says: At what time soever a sinner
does repent, etc. Speedy repentance.
so he says, Blessed is the man that has borne the yoke from his youth, for
to give the prime days to the devil, and our dog days to the Lord, what is
but to power out the wine to Simile.
the world, and to give the dregs to God? But if we serve God when we may
serve the devil, Non dico saluabi^u^, non dico damnabitur.
the Lord will have us, when Satan would leave us, Augustine being asked of
ones estate by letters, who had deferred his repentance to the end, said: I
will not avouch he shall be saved, nor that he shall be condemned: but says
he to him that wrote to him: Repent Age tu poenitentiam dum sanus ^^.
you while you be well. It must be continual, least having begun in the
spirit, we end in the flesh: Blessed are they that persevere, for so long as we
live we are in danger of falling. There be many that are not called: of them
that are called many are not chosen. Gods Repentance must be continued.
graces are no longer with us than God himself is with us. Wherefore seeing he
is departed from many of our brethren, which first departed from him, let us
beware we be not as dogs that return to our vomit. Lastly, we must do it in
faith: Christ teaches us to say, Lord Micropistoi.
increase our faith, for we are of little faith. Now faith is esteemed
according to the quality, Simile.
not according to the quantity: the leprous hand though it cannot hold well, if
it receives Repent in faith.
any thing, does some duty. The child that cannot go is not forsaken, but has
his guide, we Simile.
must learn then to hold fast, and to go by them as hand in hand, whom the
Lord shall Katalambanein.
assign over us to guard us.

2 It is the prosperity of all true repenting sinners, to fall with humility,
to rise with dignity, Properties of true penite^^s.
and as the more grievously they have offended, so the more humbly they will
crave to be accepted; the higher the dignity is from which they are fallen,
the lower is the place whereunto they would be received. And he knows best
what a godly thing it is to rise, No^ nou^ substantia creatur, sed l^^befactata
repatatur.
that ^ightly knows what a foul thing it is to fall. For if a man be down,
if Satan ^^ath assaulted him, if sin has wounded him, if his own flesh
has betrayed him, so that he lies stricken with Satan, with sin, and with
himself, against himself: then show me After our repentance, our strife with
Satan, does continue to the end of our days.
whether it be not a godly thing that the same man in number, though not in
nature, the same in person, though not in property: for a new substance is
not created, but the sa^e being fallen is restored, falling a natural man
should rise a spiritual man, not to be that ^^e was, and to be that which he
was not: neither must any man so far flatter himself, that h^e should think
himself at any time to rise so far, as that he may cast off sin as an
upper garment, to lay it aside until he list to use it. For the seed of the
woman having bruised the Serpents head, the sword of the spirit having
hamstringed Satan: the great Captain CHRIST JESUS, having spoiled the strong
man of his furniture, it cannot be but many broils and bickerings will be
behind, and some blows will be in the controversy, so long What sin we repent
not truly of, we fall to it again.
as we be in this life.

3 When the Israelites were in Egypt, and saw things fall acrosse, they
murmured against Moses: but being brought thence by him, and seeing things
prosper, they willingly went with him, and left off their murmuring; but when
any new occasion was offered, for the trial of their Faith and patience, they
fell thereinto again, because they did not truly repent Note.
them of it. And this we may see in all kind of sinners, which for a time may
leave their sin, Sorrow for sin. How to overcome our particular sin.
and yet not repenting from their heart, when a new occasion is offered, do
fall more foully then ever they did before, as adulterers, angry persons,
thieves: the lothsomnes of which sins, leaving a sting in their conscience,
may cause them to leave them for a time, yet because they labor not with their
hearts and affections, but only rest in judgment, they have no sound sorrow for
it, and therefore fall afresh. This must teach us therefore, if we will truly
The people which murmured in the wilderness, gave a mani est ^igne thereby,
that they repented not of their murmuring in Aegipt.
leave any sin, both to condemn it in judgment, and to hate it in affection,
that so we truly being penitent, that is, careful to leave our sins,
desirous to do the contrary good, we may have power and strength from above to
overcome them.

4 We may read in the 16* of Exodus, how the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, which is a manifest sign,
that they never repented them of their murmuring in Egypt, at the red Sea, and
waters of strife. And although the Lord delayed the punishment, yet could they
not be brought hereby to repentance, because they neither felt what their
murmuring deserved, nor what the mercy of God is worth* We must then learn,
not only to leave sin, and purpose not to commit it again, but we must with
grief of heart repent of it, feel Gods mercies in forgetting it, and a hearty
hatred of it. Otherwise when a new occasion is offered, we shall fall thereinto
again, as a swearer To leave a sin we must first have grief of heart for it:
2* a feeling of Gods mercies in forgeting it 3. a hearty hatred of it. We must
see our hearts desiled with the sin we leave, else it is impossible to repent.
will after an Oath be angry for it, yet because he sees not the grieuousnes
of the sin, has not acquaintance with the reverend use of the Name of GOD,
falls to swear again: So it is with them that profane the Sabbath of the
Lord, and of them that speak evil of the magistrates and minsters, they say
they will do so no more, and yet because they repent not, therefore they fall
again: So is this seen in angry persons, which are rather grieved for shame
or loss, or such like causes, and not for the love of GOD: so it is in
thieues, which come to the gallows again, although once received their
pardon. This also may be seen in Tale-bearers, when their dealing is known,
they marvel at themselves; yet not repenting, they fall to their sin again.
The Apostle Saint James in his fourth chapter teaches us, not only to cleanse
the hands, but to purge the heart also: for we must see our hearts defiled with
the sin we leave, or else it is impossible to repent, for the heart being
still defiled, will yield to a new occasion. The means to leave these sins is
there set down, to howl and weep, etc. Iam. 4. for the burnt child fears
the fire: but because God does not thoroughly punish men, and because men's
hearts do not feel the grieuousnes of sin, and Gods judgments due to them
for the same, therefore they sin afresh: but if they did feel Gods wrath,
and the grieuousnes of their sins, then no doubt they would shake at the
appearance of evil. Therefore that we may come to this, and hate those sins
that especially do prevail against us, we must use sharp medicines, as in an
old festered sore, they use corrosiue Simile.
salues: for there are some kind of sins like to some kind of devils, which
cannot be cast out without prayer and fasting. And when we cannot be healed
with ordinary means, the disease still continuing, then must we use
extraordinary, which if we do, the Lord will lift us up, and in the end give
us power to trample sin underneath our feet. For We must have most grief
for our chiefest and greatest sins.
if we had more grief for our chiefest and greatest sins, God would give us
a heart to hate them, and to fear the least occasions that might draw us unto
them: so should we be for ever preserved from them, they should never
prevail against us.

5 Sin does much grieve the Lord, although in great mercy he does long and
oftentimes forbear the punishment thereof: which should much move us and cause
us when we see our often fallings, greatly to be grieved thereat, and highly to
be displeased with our selves for the same, least we fall into presumption.
And when our own consciences, and the devil do accuse us for such sins as
we have committed against the Lord, as then we are to bewail and lament our
goings astray, and displeasing of our God: so are we to trust in his promises,
and to embrace his mercies, least we be ouewhelmed with grief, and so fall
into despair, for the devil ever and continually labors to bring us either
to the one or the other, presumption or desperation. Therefore when we have
sinned, and yet do rebuke our selves, being much displeased with our selves,
because of Sin, we are Note a good lesson.
to comfort our selves, the Lord will show his mercy upon us: for if he
showed us his mercy when we were not grieved, how much more when we
unfeignedly lament? If he has waited upon us, to do us good before we
repented, how much more shall his goodness appear toward us unfeignedly
repenting?

6 What is the cause that men can be so well content to lie in their sins
without repentance, The causes of im^netency.
and think all is well, if they can for a while forbear and abstain from
them? This no doubt is the cause, because they set not themselves before the
judgment fear of God, 1
and of Christ, and therein fear to consider how grievous a thing sin is in
the sight of God: 2
how greatly it displeases him, and what fearful condemnation abides them,
that securely 3
and carelessly continue in their sins. For if men could consider this, that
their sins provoke 4
the wrath of the Lord against them, and do procure everlasting condemnation to
be powered out upon them, they would no doubt feel sin most grievous unto
them, yea, a burden that presses them down to hell, then would their spirits
be vexed within them, and their hearts bruised with the due consideration of
their sins* yet all this would not bring them out of their sins. For the
law condemns and works wrath, and the judgments of the Lord do cast down,
wound and kill, that so we might be fit to receive the Lord Jesus, who came to
raise up, to heal and give life to such as are fallen sick, and dead. And
still is he present to help those which are in like manner distressed: for
till such time he will not work upon them, to cure and deliver them from their
sins: he was sent only to the sick, etc. and those no doubt he will heal.

Hereof it comes to pass that many do continue in their sins, and are not
delivered Note.
from the power of them: because they are not wounded with a fear of Gods
judgment, and so driven to seek their help in Christ, but in their own
power: for thinking sin to be but a small matter, they go about to suppress
it by their own strength, and by their own power to subdue and overcome it.
Wherefore the Lord, that he may let them see that without the help of Christ,
their strength is nothing and their labor spent in vain: does suffer them
again, and again to be buffeted with their sins: yea and if they will not
then fly out of themselves unto Christ, they shall receive the foil and be
overcome therewith: to the end they might be brought and framed at the length
(if they belong unto God) to be fit matter for the Lord to work upon. And then
no doubt, if we can come thus humbled in our selves under the mighty hand of
God; and by unfeigned prayer, crave forgiveness at the Lords hands, for Jesus
Christ's sake, and desire continually the assistance of his holy spirit, we
shall increase in faith, and feel the clear forgiveness of our sins, and in
him we shall find strength against sin, and shall feel his power working in
our weakness, or Repentance after forgiveness.
as sorrow must go before, so repentance must come fast after forgiveness.

7 Some when they have sinned reason thus, the Lord does not punish me for my
si(...)s, therefore he has forgiven them; but this kind of reasoning is false
and dangerous, because it abuses the great mercy of God to hardness of
heart: and that the Lord will punish, though he forbear for a time, it is
plain, Exodus 34. 7. Which if we would consider, then would the goodness and
the long suffering of the Lord lead us to repentance, Romans 2. ^4.

8 The Lord will spare his judgments in them, in whom he s^eth a true love of
true Religion: for they that love Religion will desire to hear, and hearing
the word, they wil^^ot fall to any sin, or if they fall into sins, they
will not lie in them long.

9 When our sin has less liking in us, there is hope that it will decay in us:
especially if we sorrow for it, when we cannot fully forsake it, and labor to
forsake it because it is sin.

10 Those things never hurt us which grieve us: but those things hurt us which
grieu(...)us not. A sure experiment it is, whether that sin wherewith we are
tempted oftentimes ^hal How to know whether one special sin shall get
dominion over us.
get the dominion over us or not; If the oftener it tempts us, the more we are
grieved a^ it, and the more ground we get to the contrary virtue, it shall not
reign. But if the first coming of sin wrought a grief in us, and by the
after and oftener coming our grief* be less and less, it is much to be
feared, that in time it will prevail, and utterly overcome us.

11 Unless our sins be palpable, and plainly laid before our eyes: it is
hard to bring us to any shame and sorrow for them.

12 We ought to grow in repentance, as God grows in punishments: Gods
children Privileges of the Elect.
have this privilege: First, they shall be called by the word. Secondly, if
that will not se^ue, they shall be called by Gods works: either of mercy or
justice in others. Thirdly if they 1
profit not, they shall taste of them in themselves. First by small measure,
seldom and a(...)ttle 2
time; if they be not thus bettered, they shall have them in greater measure,
oftener and ^onger. 3
Fourthly, if they neither profit not at all, first or last, or be ever
uncontrolled and suffered 4
to thrive in their sin, they are either much hardened or else bastards.

13 Let us make much of repentance, for it is not in our power, but in the Lord
wh^^ gives, Repentance Gods gift.
when, to whom, and in what measure it pleases him.

14 We can mark what men are spared, and so flatter our selves; but we mark
not how they repent, least we should disquiet our selves.

15 Afflictions yield joy in time to come, when by them we are the more wea^ie
of Afflictions open the ears of many.
sin, and more careful of repentance.

16 It is good to be afflicted, that thereby we may be brought to know our
sins: like wise to know afflictions before they come, that they do not
ouerwhelme us: And the^ is the ministry Job. 33. 16.
of the Law necessary in the Church: for afflictions are but appendices of the
threatenings, for they that despise Gods threatenings, care not for affliction,
and they never come, but when we profit not by threatenings. Again, the
threatenings do certainly move and teach; but afflictions do the^ uncertainly,
(this general doctrine may be seen in the whole course of the Scripture) also
that the promises are never ministered before we ^^e thoroughly humbled. As in
Adam, Noe, Abraham, Joseph, Moses in many, and in the children of Israel, David
and others; so that repentance and faith are joined together, and repentance
proceeds of godly sorrow: if we be bold to comfort our selves before we be
thus beaten down, our comfort is counterf^it, and we do but deceive our selves,
and this ordinary working of God is joined with great equity: for if we be
not thus humbled, our consciences The mercies of God to whom they are dear and
precious.
touched with the guilt of sin will still look for punishment. Again, the
mercies of God are never so precious and dear, as when they light on a
troubled conscience. And therefore Esaias says. That the fee^e of them that
bring glad glad tidings, are pleasant to those that had been long in captivity
Esaias 52. 7. As Joseph knowing the policy of Satan, who ^n sorrow seeks to
bring us to desperation, comforted his brethren: So Paul would not have the
incestuous person Be not sad.
to be overwhelmed with grief, and when he had made the Corinthians sorry,
he does comfort them again. So N^hemiah, after that the people had wept,
said, this is not a day of mourning: So Esaias uses fearful threatenings, yet
after is most plentiful in comforts. As presumption must carefully be avoided,
that men may be brought thoroughly to feel Esaias 23.
their sins; so must desperation also, least that Satan draw us away for
want of feeling the mercies of God: and this is to cut the word aright, which
all men must pray, that it may be found in the Ministers. It is not meant, that
Joseph would not have his brethie^ sorrowful Verse 5. Whom ye sold.
at all: for why then used he the means thereunto before? but he auoideth the
extremities whereunto we are ready to fall, and would not have them so over
sorrowful. He does not vpbraid them, for he had freely forgiven them, and was
clear from revenge, but he names their sin, that they still may have some
feeling of it, and so must we do.

17 A certain woman being converted to Christianity, by a civil Justice,
seeing him afterward slide from the faith, and the said Justice going about to
corrupt her; after he had converted her: She said, Sir, I heard you speak as
the Lord, and in hearing you I heard you not so much your self, but I learned
of Christ by you: I heard not, I say, you as man, but I heard by you the Lord
our God which is invisible.

18 It is no more marvel for a profane person, to be as senseless in good
things at the Note
beginning of his conversion, then for one bound and brought up in a prison to
be ignorant of the things of the world.

CHAP. LX. Of Riches and their abuse.
RIches and sin have some affinity, in regard whereof Christ says, in a
compassion of their misery whom we so wonder at, Oh how hard a The misery of
rich men.
thing is it for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven? Adding (which
the world condemns for a hard speech,) That it is as easy for a Cable to go
through the eye of a needles etc, Christ calls riches thorns, forewarning us
that we handle them well, least we be pricked with them. They are evil
commonly in either getting, or in keeping, or in using, quicunque dives aut
iniquus, aut iniqui haeres.
or in loving them. It is an old proverb among the heathen, the rich man is
either unjust himself, or his father. Mark the evil Steward in the Gospel,
the gorgeous Rich man, the Glutton that promised to himself abundance for many
years, who possessed it not many hours. When Christ catechized the Rich man,
he went away sadly. He calls riches the Mammon of iniquity, Matthew. 6. The
glory of a man's house, Psalm. 37. The blessing on the left hand, Proverb. 3.
And the fatness of the earth, is as well the blessing of Esa^ as of Jacob.
Demas loved the world, Paul loved not the world. Esaias poor, and Sabnah rich. I
put the question to the veriest reprobate, and let him answer me, whether Esaias
be not now wise, Riches stink in a short time.
and Sabnah be not a fool. Alas what will it profit a man to hoord up any
thing in such a chest, as in four days will stink? What if a man can rejoice
in his wicked riches seventy years, when he shall be grieved for them seven
hundred thousand years, when they shall say to the mountaiues fall on us, and
to the hills cover us?

2 Riches dim our eyes as a cloud, that we cannot see far with them, and
one may How riches are abused, and how many ways they may decay with us and
deceive us.
well say: Poverty has slain a thousand, but riches has slain ten
thousand. They are very uncertain, they promise that which they cannot
perform: neither can they afford a contented mind. A man will say, Oh, if I
could get so many Furs, I should be very warm, and yet his heat comes
from his body, so many will say, if I had many farms, I should be well
contented, when as a contented mind comes from the Lord. Take ^iuet and
rub a Beggars cloak with it, it will make the cloak sweet; rub Velvet
with it, and it will slain it. Likewise take riches, and give them to a poor
man, and Simile.
they will refresh him, give them to one already rich, and they will surcharge
him. They are not the water of life always flowing, but they are as the
brooks of Arabia which are Simile.
most dry, when one should most need them for water. And they be as Spiders
webbes, Simile.
which when they wax 'great, are swept away with a beesome, and then either
thou perish^st from them, as did the rich man, or they perish from thee, as we
may see in Io^, Art thou rich in money, thou art in danger of thieves? Art
thou plentiful in household stuff, thou art in danger of fire? Have thou much
gold, the rust does venim it and thee? Is thine apparel gorgeous, thou have
the Moth thine enemy? Have thou much cattle, thou fear rottennes, in
merchandise Pirates fear thee, in husbandry blasting hinders thee? Thus the
Lord of Hosts has set an host of enemies against all worldly things
whatsoever. When the ice is frozen, one may walk on it for a time, but when
the Sun comes, it melts, and such things perish sooner than they grow, In
momento ardet, quod diu crescebat lignum. The Temple was destroyed in forty
and six hours, that was so long in building.

3 The less account we make of earthly things, and the more account of
heavenly things, the liker we are to have them: for wordly things must be so
craved, as we first give How to have both earthly and heavenly riches.
them to God, and then wish to have them if it please him, as David did when he
was driven out of his kingdom, and Abraham when he was ready to sacrifice his
son: the one had his kingdom restored, the other had his Son given him
again. But when we desire earthly things greedily, and care little for
heavenly, the Lord withdraws them from his children, to teach them to seek
after spiritual riches; and if we desire heavenly things, the Lord will give
them with earthly too: as when Solomon asked wisdom, it was given him with
riches too; and so had Jacob his desire with earthly blessings also: therefore
let us seek heavenly especially, let us seek them in and for Christ, which
may give us the forgiveness Seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof.
of our sins, which if we can make sure, all other things shall be joyful
unto us: for then shall we be made members of his body, and that prayer which
once he made, Ioh. 17. shall ever be profitable to us, that is, That the Father
would love us with the same love, wherewith he had loved him. And as God the
Father in love has given us his Son: so will he with him give us all things,
so far forth as he knows them good and fit for us. Matthew. 6.


4 The nature of fleshly minded men, is, unwisely to discern of Gods dealings:
for they John 17.
The worldling prefers one corporal blessing before many spiritual graces.
had rather for go many spiritual blessings, than one corporal, as the
Israelites, who for the want of bread, despised their deliverance out of Egypt,
which was a sign of their spiritual deliverance. And thus do men now adays;
for if they be in prosperity, they are more grieved to forgo some part of
their riches, than to forsake many of their sins. Again, if they want riches,
it greeueth them more than the want of spiritual things. But we are to learn,
that riches are no signs of Gods favor: and if we see not his love but in
them, we are too earthly minded, and would bind God to be like unto us.
Without riches many men ear not for God, which although they say not, yet
because they neglect the word, prayer and sacraments, and despise his Ministers
(as the Israelites did Moses and Aaron) they show that the thoughts of their
hearts are so: but let us take heed that this be not in our hearts, and by all
means avoid it, least the God of this world, whom wicked men serve, do give
us here our hearts desire, that in the world to come, he may have us for his
portion.

5 We may not ask these earthly things as signs of Gods favor, therefore if
we have his favor, let us not esteem the want of them as tokens of his
displeasure. Again, the Lord holds Note.
us without these things, because we would abuse them, and set more by them,
than by spiritual Wherefore God denies us many earthly blessings.
things: yea, the Lord for a time holds us without these, that we might
esteem of spiritual graces the more, that so in time we may have them both
together. Again, if we have wealth and riches, the Lord tries us if we will
be more thankful, and more dutiful to him, more reverent in hearing his word,
and more loving to our neighbor, which will ensue, if we do truly profit by
them: but if we be unthankful, sluggish in hearing the Word, in Prayer, and
Sacraments: proud and contemptuous to our brethren; then does the Lord show
unto us the corruptions of our hearts, which unless we speedily cut off, we
may justly fear, that he will either cut us off from them, or them from us, if
we belong unto him.

Whatsoever you get by lawful means, give evermore the tenth to the godly
poor.

No through reformation can be hoped, in Family, Church, or Commonwealth,
(except the Lord work it by some notable affliction) where long case and
prosperity have bredde either superstition or profaneness.

6 Many are outwardly well and rich in this world, which are inwardly ill and
poor in Poor in godliness.
godliness; and many hate outward evil things, which for want of spiritual
knowledge, see not the corruptions of their hearts.

7 Nothing is ours, but as we feel our title in Christ, and as it is
sanctified by the word, and by prayer.

8 It is a common Proverb: He that loves the law, loves the King: and I say,
He that qui diligit legem, diligit Regem, qui diligit Verbum, diligit Deum.
loves the word, loves God. Well, thou shall know, at this time, or at that
time, in thine own conscience, by the word preached, that Christ does offer to
come thee: it stands thee in hand to entertain this Prince, not without some
solemn preparation. How thou must make provision for his coming, thou art
taught, Matthew. chap. 3. First beware the great mountain of thy reason rise not
against the Word, least speak Christ what Christ can speak, we will do as we
list. When this is pulled down, yet there are many crooked ways of hypocrisy
to be made straight, and many by-pathes in stepping to the world from the sight
of our infirmities, hindering our perseverance, are also to be made even.

9 We must not think that sin will go from us of it self, or that
salvation will be wrought with a trice, but we must deal forcibly with nature,
because when sin and the word cannot dwell together, Satan will take such
order, as he will by all means hinder us from the word: which if he cannot
do, then he stirs up a fight in us, like the struggling of the two children
in Rebeccaes womb, so as sometime we are ready to say with Rebecca, Strife in
the regenerate.
had I known of this, I would never have done so; I would never have heard the
word. Rebecca had two nations in her womb, Paul had two Princes in him, and we
have two Monarchs Romans 7*
dwelling within us. We can be content to hear, until the word rifle us. But
as a purging potion, as long as it is a drinking, is but as another drink
until it work, and then we could be content to cast it up again; or as a
drawing plaster seems favorable enough until it works, and after we
could willingly put it off again: so we can quietly Simile.
hear the word, until it works upon us, and then we could forsake it. But if
ye be such, as because ye will not for your health suffer a little pain, but
will cast up your purgation, and scratch off your plaster, go to, ye shall be
seered, and a crust shall be upon you, and ye shall not feel it, but in death
the crust shall be taken off. This fight must be in us, as it was in David,
Psalm. 42. and in Paul, Romans 7. whose heirs if we will be, we must follow their
steps. But here is the help, many will keep off the word, that it shall not
have a full blow, and so they shield and ward that stroke, that should martyr
and crucify sin in them. Let us thrust the word upon him, by hearing and
meditation: but alas, many give so few blows, or so weak strokes in using
these exercises so seldom, that they prevail little. But thou will Christ
must not only overcome for us, but also in us.
say, Christ has overcome for thee. True it is, but had he suffered a thousand
times, he never overcame for thee, unless in some measure he overcome in thee.
Now we must overcome, even as Christ (Matthew. 4.) did overcome. Do this, do
that, says the devil. No, says Christ, it is not agreeable to the word. But
how did Christ overcome the world? even by being overcome of the world. First
of the crosses of the world, a strange thing to observe by being overcome, and
so shall we do. How then must we overcome the flesh? By crucifying it, Galath.
5. We cry against the Jews for killing of Christ, we may cry as justly
against the nails of the Our sins crucified Christ.
Cross, and say, that they crucified him: it was the corruption of my heart
that crucified him, the works of mine hands did nail him, my sins were the
spear that pierced him. What did my faults crucify him? Well, I will be even
with them, I will have a Scriptum est Zach. 12. 10.
for them, I will surely nail them, and in the revenge of the death of the
Son of God Christ Jesus, I will never make much of them, I will certainly
persecute them. Alas, how can we make of our desires, seeing they crucified
Christ? We must kill them and bury them, that so caused Christ to be killed
and buried. Nay, if we see one that would kill our sins, we would kill him,
and on those sins, which on Christ did set a crown of thorns, we are not
ashamed to set a gorgeous garland. But if we can overcome God, may we not
easily overcome the Devil, the world and the flesh? What is there a way to
overcome God? I surely, even as a poor woman overcame him: this is your
victory even your faith, as thus. God has set down this rule: Whosoever
calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: the woman marking this calls
on Christ: Christ would not hear her, a hard point, he had promised to save
her, and now he will not hear ^er. Well, she comes again to him: what then?
He says nothing to her. This was strange, yet she prays Christ ^ow overcome
to our comfort.
again. Now he speaks, but with small comfort. I am not sent (says he) but
to the lost sheep of Israel. The silly woman replies by the word, then he
yields and consesseth himself to be overcome, saying: O woman go thy way,
thy faith has saved thee. See, she held still the word of the Scripture more
than the word of Christ. Well then, faith is the victory, and by it God is
overcome, and much more sin, the world, the flesh, and the devil.

11 This is the plea of the Lord against us, that we dwell in a land, where we
are usurpers The Lord will condemn us for the unworthy possession of his
creatures
and have no right. No man is of so reprobate a sense, but he will grant, that
whatsoever we have, we have it at the Lords hand. But are these free gifts, and
without all condition? No, Come to the land of Canaan. Was it given to the
Israelites upon no covenant or without any agreement? It is not so. For it is
plain, Psalm. 105. The Lord gave them the possessions of the Heathen. What
barely? No, but upon this condition, that they should keep his statutes. There
is no man has a foot of ground, or never so small a possession to dwell in,
but he has it on this condition: Whosoever inhabits this or any other land, he
keeps all by violence, because he keeps it without performance of the
condition: but if we keep the Lords statutes, we keep the condition, and
consequently have a good right, and the Lord has nothing against us: otherwise
(I say) we are violent usurpers, because the Lord his grant is upon limitation,
and for such a one, if the Lord either remove him from the land, or take the
land from him, he cannot say, but that the Lord his action is just against him.
Now albeit if we seek elder times, this people of England has as much been
dispossessed, as any country. But it is all one, whether this displacing be
general, or particular in losing some part of our possessions. If we enquire
of the reason, why it comes to pass that tenures and lands be often alienated*
so as they be here among us: our verdit is, that howsoever sinful the father
was, the son is an unthrift, I ask then, why another keeps his inheritance.
Thus they say, he is wiser; then this man was a fool. True, the question is,
how he comes to be so: answer is made, the fault is in education. But there is
no end in Sin the cause of the loss of many blessings.
these things. Men will not see the cause to be sin, but they fly to couerings
and curtains. Let us come then to the Lord his awarding, and that is, because
there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge: but killing* stealing, and
whoring, Hos. 4 1. 2. Whether then we know of whole towns, or of particular
families, that have lost their inheritance: we must know the Lord his
indictment to be executed there against some sin. Therefore when we bless
our selves for our riches, and say, the Lord be blessed for my wealth, this is
a goodly inheritance: My lines are fallen in a fair place: we must also say,
though this also be a good saying, All this I have of the Lord, and hold
whatsoever I have of him: do I keep that part of the covenant, which is of my
part, as he has performed his part of his condition with me? If I do, then I
am no usurper: for he has given me a condition, and I have kept it; he
commended knowledge to me, and I know in knowledge: so that I am able to make
an account of it, etc. but otherwise though I never come for any other sins
to judgment, yet our action for dwelling in our possessions is sufficient to
stand against us. For if we keep not the covenant, the Lord has, or will
enter an action, and to thee or thy posterity he will surely perform the
execution of it.

CHAP. LXI. Of Sacraments.
GOd might have wrought miracles without the rod which he willed Moses to use:
for he used it not for himself, but for Moses and the people of Israel to
help their infirmities: So must we receive the Sacraments as helps,
Contra^aereticos. And Our Sacraments.
as the rod in it self was a common rod, but being appointed of God for more
excellent use, was so to be accounted of them: So water, bread and wine
although in themselves common, yet put apart for the use of the Sacraments, are
to be esteemed and received as the ordinance of the Lord, for the
strengthening of our Faith, wherein also the Lord will try our obedience,
whether we will worship him in these things which have so small a show.

2 The neglect of Gods Sacraments does provoke him against us, as it did
against Moses, Neglect of Sacraments.
for the neglect of the Circumcision of his Son. The Lord met Moses with
some* such affliction, as that he was ready to die according to the
threatening, Genesis 17. Where we may see the neglecting of Gods ordinance
punished, but not the want: for Moses did omit it, either to please his wife,
or his father, or both: wherein he honored them more then the Lord. The like
is said of the Passover, Number. 9. Deuteronomy. 27. Our Baptism and the Lords Supper
do answer these Sacraments, therefore the neglect of them requires the like
punishment. We have no less grace offered to us in our Sacraments, then they
had in theirs: if they then were worthily cut off, much more are we if we
refuse either of our Sacraments, unless it be for necessities sake. And
although the Lord does not presently meet us as he did Moses, yet is he the
same God, as in mercy to those that use them in Faith, so in judgment
Co^te^pt of our Sacraments is death.
to take vengeance upon the contemners of them. But some will say they would
come, but the Ministers will not suffer them. If the Ministers do hinder them
without cause, they shall bear their condemnation: but if for want of Faith
and repentance he do stay them* and be diligent and willing to teach and warn
them, and they still continue careless, their blood shall be upon their own
heads: they can claim no part in the company of Gods To receive the unworthy
at the Lords Supper.
children, for he should communicate with them in their sin, if he should
receive them being unworthy, either for want of knowledge, or because of
sins which they lie in.

3 The institution of the Passover, Exodus 12. has in it some things, which
are peculiar to the first celebration, other some things, which belong to the
continual observation, as in the ^^. verse and before, that they must not go
out of the doors, etc. These belonged* to the first celebration of it, and
afterward were not to be used, because they had respect only to the present
Time: therefore our Savior Christ offended not when they did eat the
Passover sitting, and went forth after the institution of the Lords Supper:
some things were personal and had respect to the present time, which were not
after to be used, as that it was to be eaten with unleavened bread; for then
there was none other: then that it was at Night in a parlor, which was that it
might be showed that the other Passover was abrogated, and this came in it
stead: other things that had no such particular respect are wholly and only
still to be observed.

4 We must be prepared to receive the Lords Supper with sincerity and holiness,
which The truth of the ceremony of unleavened bread.
is the truth of the ceremony of unleavened bread: for unleavened bread had
first respect to true doctrine, as our Savior Christ himself expounds it;
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. And this teaches us not only to beware
of all false doctrine, as the doctrine of the Papists, or such like, which in
it self is evil, but also to beware that we be not defiled 1
with the corruption of the true doctrine, which in it self is most pure: for
the doctrine of the Pharisees was much of it true, yet somewhat mingled and
otherwise defaced: and this corruption of true doctrine is called leaue^,
because if it be suffered it will corrupt the whole. Secondly, this has respect
to maliciousnes: for so Paul expounded it, The leaven of maliciousnes, 2
where also not only the gross sins are said to be of the nature of leaven,
but even 1. Cor. 5.
the very roots of sin and maliciousnes. Contrary to this are we commanded
to come in a pure and sound religion and doctrine, also in sincerity and
truth of heart, having respect unto, and having a desire to fulfill all the
commandments of God. Thirdly, whereas 3
it is called the bread of tribulation, Deuteronomy. 16. 3. it shows with what
affection we must eat this Passover: namely, that as the poor man has much
pain and labor before he can get bread, so that his heart faints with want,
or when all taste is gone, by reason of his sickness; and when he has gotten
bread, or finds nourishment thereby, he even weepeth for joy: so should we
even a long time bewail our sins, and repent us of the evil which we have
done, and even saint for the desire of JESUS CHRIST, that so we coming to the
Papists and heretics never felt the power of Christ's grace.
table of the Lord being refreshed, may effectually receive grace, and be
heartily thankful.

5 This is one great cause why the Family of love and others, do with so
deadly hatred despise our Sacraments, because they never felt the power of
them, nor sought to have by them the assurance of the merits of Christ,
conveyed unto them, and sealed in their hearts* Would we not then be like unto
this kind of people, in d^spising the Word* Sacraments, n^r any assu^^^^e of
sal^^tion ^y the Sacrament, and therefore despise them.
and other holy graces? let us not then rest in the bare use of them, let us
not come to them of fashion, let us not content our selves with having the
outward things* but let us labor to feel in our hearts the power of the
spirit, let us pray that by them the spirit may work in our hearts, and in
them always let us look for the teaching of the spirit, so shall it come to
pass, that we shall always reverently and worthily think of the means, and
never be weary of them, but always carefully use them: and yet not separate
them from the spirit, but looking for the working of the spirit in them; we
shall find the graces of the holy Ghost most plentifully powered on us, and as
it were by Conduits, conueighed into our hearts.

6 The Lamb was not the Passover but a sign of it; so is bread and wine in
the Supper Sacramental phrases where fore used.
called the Lords body and blood, because it is a sign thereof. This is an
usual speech, when the Scriptures speak of Sacraments, to teach us that
although there be not carnal presence, as the Papists imagine, yet there is a
true spiritual and effectual presence of the things signified: and therefore
we may certainly look for the performance of the same, if by faith we can
receive it.

7 He said this was his manner in dealing with them that came to the Communion,
if C^^^uni^ants but indifferently prepared for the Sacraments.
they were but indifferently instructed thereunto, he by exhortation charged
them to beware what they did, he would not wish them to come, but if they came,
he would not utterly deny them if they lay in no sin.

8 Barzillai having done a great benefit to David the King, could not tell how
sufficiently to gratify him with recompense. In the end he charge Solomon
his son that the son of Barzillai should sit at his table: which thing,
both in David's opinion, and in Barzillais estimation was the greatest benefit,
wherein they could both stay either for his liberality in bestowing, or for
the others contentation in receiving. Now if this for so great a benefit seemed
so great a reward; how rich and how glorious is the bountiful dealing of God
with us, which without any desert or deed offered on our parts, has in his
love appointed it to sit at his son Christ Jesus his table, where not
Solomon, but a far greater than Solomon is present?

CHAP. LXII. Of sin, and how to abstain from the least, and of iniquity and
the punishments thereof.
THere be some which call good evil, and evil good, they shrink up evil
into a narrow We must abstain from the least sin, and from all show of sin.
Two kinds of evils.
scantling: and would feign bring it to this, if they could, that none do
evil but they that are in gailes. But we must take ^eede of this, and
therefore let us know what it is to do evil. Evil is either naturally
evil, or evil by circumstance. In all our actions to avoid evil, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 22. we must learn this lesson, follow nothing but prove it first, and
keep that which is good, but abstain from all appearance of evil. Be sure
that it is good ye do, but if it have but a show of evil, avoid it: if it
be an evil favored thing to see to, fly it. 1. Cor. 6. All things (says
Paul) are not profitable, though they be not plainly forbidden.

2 To hear the threatenings and to tremble at them; to hear the promises and
to believe Means to keep us from sins, etc.
them; to reverence the Sacraments and to receive them; to pray unto God in all
our wants, and to be thankful for all his mercies, are ways to keep us from
sin, and to recover us from sin when we are fallen thereinto. Therefore the
neglect of these does pull down judgments upon men: for though Paul rebuked
the Corinthians of many sins, ^* Cor. 11. 30. 31.
yet for this cause (says he) some are asleep, some are sickly, etc. For if
these had been used as they ought, sin should never have grown so far as
it did.

3 Let them that fear the Lord account it his great mercy, that he will not
let them prosper and thrive in their sins: least they should be carried away
thereby to perdition, and those who belong not to the Lord (though they think
all well) so long as they feel their profit: yet let the^ know that the Lord
does show no greater sign of his wrath, than when he suffers the^ to prosper
in their wickedness. For as a father that hates his child most, To prosper in
sin, a sign of wrath.
when he gives himself to be ruled by his own pleasure: so it is with the
Lord. Therefore let them that take pleasure in following their own lusts, and
satisfy their own desires in sin and wickedness, though for the present they
obtain that they delight in, take heed least the clouds of darkness suddenly
ouershadow them; and so the Lord send them to be tormented in hell before they
be aware. Whereas contrariwise he chasteneth his children in this world, that
eternally they might not be condemned.

4 We shall never througly leave sin, until we know and acknowledge sin to
be sin, and be truly sorrowful for the same.

5 The nature of the wicked is, that there grows their love, where they be
not gainsaid See Admonition.
and reproved for sin, and where they be admonished, there grows their
hatred.

6 If once we give consent to sin, we are made ready to fall into more and
many sins, and making no conscience of one sin, we shall not make conscience
of many and great sins: and so being once in wrapped in sin, it is an hard
thing to get out of the claws of the devil. Lord give us grace to see and to
resist the first sin, even the first motions unto sin, Iam. 1. 13. 14.
conferred with Heb. 3. 12. 13.

7 It is the greatest judgment of God that can be, to thrive in sin.

8 We must take heed that by the occasion of others that sin, we give not our
selves to do the like: but rather by the fall of others into sin, we must
learn to rise up unto the Lord.

9 The occasion of sin may be by another, but the cause of it is in our own
corrupt nature, which is always ready to sin.

10 Sin gets most strength, when good men fall into it.

11 It is a great mercy of God to go bungar like, and foolishly about a sin.

12 It is good to resist that which nature most likes.

13 That God that drew light out of darkness, will draw goodness often times out
of our corruption. Our corruption corrected by the mercy of God, makes us
esteem better of Note.
good men, being removed or taken away from us, than we did when they were
near and remaining with us.

14 One sin goes not alone: but one sin will open the doors of the soul
to let in another.

15 We never will labor to leave sin, so long as we be quiet in mind, but
still flatter Six notes of the greatness and enormitie of sin.
our selves and bedawbe our consciences with rotten plasters, until we be
either stricken with fear, or cast down with judgments. The greatness and
enormitie of sin is seen by six points: First, on Gods behalf how huge and
detestable it is may be seen, who by sin is so greatly dishonored: for how
much the higher his Majesty is, so much the greater 1
enormitie it is to sin against him. Secondly, sin is noted by the quality
of a sinner. 2
Sins are made so much the higher and greater, the more that a man is bound
unto equity: for the more and greater benefits he has received of God, so
much the more is he bound to do his will. Thirdly, it is waighed and noted in
the quality of the matter, whereabout 3
the sin is committed: for a sin against man's person or name is greater,
than against his substance or goods: but those sins are most grievous which
are directly done against God, which do impeach and touch his Majesty, so
nearly piercing him, as it were to the quick, as distrust, despair,
blasphemy, idolatry, etc. Fourthly, sins measured by 4
means of the end which the sinner bends to: for the worse that the intent
or purpose of the sinner is, the more grievous is his sin. Fifthly,
circumstances are to be respected of time, 5
and place. Sixthly, of the very deformity of sin it self according to it
self, the which is always 6
so much the greater and more loathsome, as the virtue is more excellent and
worthy which is contrary to it: whereupon as the love of God is the highest
virtue, so on the contrary part the hatred of God is the greatest vice. S.
Gregory says, A vile and stinking carrion is more tolerable to man's sent,
than a sinful soul unto God. So then if we fear, and be unwilling to appear
vile, filthy, and detestable before the holy and most worthy Majesty of God,
and if we abhor that the countenance of our Creator should be turned from us,
let us then avoid sin with all carefulnes and pure affection, within and
without: for no deformity can so disfigure us in man's eye, as the reasonable
soul by sin is Simile.
deformed, and made vile and hateful in the eyes of God, and before his sight:
for by sin the soul of man is made like the devil himself.

16 Evil doers shun the light, what they cannot avoid, they endeavor to
conceal, they do things they shame to hear of, they walk disorderly, and
think to shroud themselves Of iniquity, and the punishment thereof.
in the clouds: That, which the fear of God cannot cause the^ wholly to avoid,
that the shame of men enforces them to convey from the eyes of the world. So
sin is ashamed of it self, and shows that God had naturally implanted in all
a sentence, and condemnation against sin, which though we commit, yet
committing it we condemn it, and because we condemn it in our selves, we
conceal it from others. Yet many have so deprived themselves of this natural
remorse, they open the face of sin to the view of all men, let a man shut his
eyes never so close. How earnest was Athanasius with the Emperor, sharply to
correct the Pastors in his time going from their flock? If for the reverence of
their person, Negligence in the Ministry.
says that good man, thou will not constrain them to dwell with their
flocks, suffer me to avoid them out of thy government, and if God ask me a
reason, why I do so, I will show it him. And yet these sins being written in
the open foreheads of many in this land: how many do pull down their hearts
one whit the more for it? Thus to walk in sin without shame at all, is it
marvel, if the godly bewail to see it? If there were but one unjust man,
iniquity for this one man's sin were lamentable, much more when whole
families, when whole streets, nay when whole towns and cities are such, the
case is to be lamented. And be it that generally the common sort of men be so
ill inclined, yet so long as the Ministers be unpolluted with blood, there is
hope, the rest may be recovered: but if they be as a thief that lays wait
for his pray, And living not only of, but from the altar, work evil in the
eyes of the people, what then can be hoped for? Yet hope of better is not only
cut off, if those that be in authority correct both the one and the other, and
censure both people and Pastors. But if a state be so ruinous, that they do the
greatest wrongs, which sit in the highest rooms, when iniquity and authority
kiss each other, when the workers of Swearing.
iniquity will not be controlled, and cannot be corrected; then it is a time
of mourning and lamentation. If the Prophets in their days did bewail such
things, what should we do, Oppression and adultery.
whom God has cast into such days, wherein we see the books had and read
wherein iniquity is prescribed? As for swearing, and profaneness, these are
the sins of poor men, they that will bear a top in the world, must now think
oppression and adultery be things indifferent, so far are the precepts of
iniquity spread even in our highest places. This thou feast, O Lord, and can
thou suffer it, that what thou condemnest for a crime we should account it
virtue? When such things are among us, and suffered and practiced in stead of
harmonious songs, the music of Jerusalem should be to lament. Otherwise it
will bring those times, when it will be our greatest mishap that ever we have
been happy, so much our present sorrows shall be augmented by our by*past
joys. Then it will be time to burn our Crown to ashes: when for these
abominations we that seemed as Gods, shall be trampled under foot as dung;
when the Nobles, that are as the purest gold, become to be as earthen vessels;
when our Ministers, that were honorable, shall become contemptible; when the
Babylonians shall drink in our holy and honorable vessels of Gods worship.
Poor.
Oh that this could teach us wisdom, to make the bowels of the poor the
coffers of our treasures. Yet herein is not all; our sins deserve a greater
scourge. Our children, for Plagues threatened.
whom we would not promise an heavenly inheritance, shall wallow in their own
blood before our faces; when that comes to pass, though thy child be dear,
yet remember that he should not have been so dear to thee, as he that shed his
blood both for him and thee. And yet beyond all this our ground shall be burnt
to the ground: our vines shall dry, our trees shall be eaten up with fire, our
pastures scorched as an heath, our sumptuous buildings shall be ruinous houses,
our fields shall be like unto the paued allies, and our cities shall be as a
plowed field, the enemy shall find a Paradise, and shall leave us a
wilderness. But you will say, what is all this to us as yet? I answer, if the
least of the Saints (which be precious stones in the Lords Sanctuary) be
better than all buildings in the world, who can think of our spiritual
vastation, and not to have his countenance sad with the remembrance thereof?
Has not the Lord even in our days and in our eyes, pulled off the bark from
every pleasant tree; how has he made it bare? is there one branch, which the
enemy has not made white? How do the herds pine away? how do the flocks
perish? That which the Famine of Gods word.
Paliner-worme has left, the Canker-worme has eaten; that which the
Canker-worme has left, the Caterpiller has eaten, they have spoiled the
Church from hand to hand. Wherefore it behooves those places, that have so cast
the Lord out, to labor the harvest may be recovered, and that the branches be
new planted, that the holds cast down may be reedified, and that the vines
decayed may be repaired. For want whereof every private man's field being as a
garden, and every man's garden being as a Paradise, the Lords garden Idleness in
the Ministry.
(whether for want of manuring, or for the sleeping of the dressers, I know
not) lies like the field of the sluggish man, and his vineyard like the
vineyard of one that is idle. And where every house is curiously sieled, every
city aptly compacted, the house of the Lord (whether for that the spiritual
workmen are confounded among themselves, or the overseers of the work be
willingly corrupted) lies void and waste in many places, so that they that see
it, are constrained to say, O Lord, why do thou behold us thus, and
suffer to see such vastation? Neither yet shall the voice of the enemy
crying in the day of revenge; race it, race it down to the ground, strike us
with such a terror, as when violence Calamities for the contempt of the Gospel
and Gods worship neglected.
shall come upon us, our wives, our children, without all respect of age and
estate. It is not possible, that we in our great security, should conceive a
shadow of that inexplicable grief, which shall follow that persecuting plague
hastening toward us, when the carkases of our friends shall make a way, and be
as a path in our streets, when our women shall villainously be abused in the
Lords Sion, the children put to the edge of the sword, the Princes hanged up by
the hands, no sparing shall be of sex or of age, and besides so outrageous a
rage, when our foes shall come to tread as holy ground, where the glory of God
his house Popish persecution how great.
should strike them stone dead, when their sword should be abashed and lose it
glittering, when it should see the Majesty of the Lord in his Ministers and
Preachers. This is a matter of grief and indignation: for the harmless blood
powered out by the king of Babel on the ground, being compared to the blood of
the Saints shed by the Pope, it would be but as a spoonful in respect of the
Sea. When this moodie Tigre comes, he will pretend that he roots out heresy;
but then why does he suck the blood of infants, who are not capable of heresy?
Well, if this be his intent to root out heresy, is the sword a fit instrument
to do it? Paul and Peter, and the rest of that blessed college, and Christ
himself put many notable heretics to silence, by the force of reason, and not
by dint of sword. Was it Christ his meaning, that the successor of Peter should
draw out his sword, when Peter himself was bidden to put it up? And yet this
royal Priest and Bishop, generally will drown the Church in her own blood.
And do we not see how the guides, Pastors, and overseers of the Church, are
driven out of sundry places, where this Bishop has set his foot, whose hearts
could have been better contented at once, to have sealed their doctrine with
their blood, than to be separated from them, to whose souls they had devoted
themselves? An heavy farewell, no doubt they took of their congregations, when
as we read of some, who filled their high ways with their beasts, and laid
their children at the feet of the Pastors, when they Persecution.
departed from them, crying unto them, What shall be our estate, now ye are
gone to martyrdom? Who shall wash our children in the cristall waters of
Baptism? Who shall ease our afflicted consciences when the adversary shall
accuse us? Who shall lead us the way of life, and bring our souls to rest?
Recompense them (O Lord) as they have deserved, that are the cause of this, (O
Lord) give them sad hearts. So heavy a cross will it be to see an irremediable
desolatio^ of holy things: we know not yet the bitterness of this cup, yet we
have them among us which have tasted it, whom let us entertain with Joseph
with tears of mercy, and let us in their suites say to the Lord, they have
beholden misery (O Lord) cause them to behold the light of thy loving
countenance, for their relief and comfort. So be it.

17 It is the great judgment of God upon the corrupt judgment of the world,
that To be moved only with palpable and prodigious sins, a sign of security.
unless sin be prodigious and monstrous, such as go round about the world,
we are not moved with it. When we admonish other sins of jesting, and such
like, forsooth we must smile when we do so, and we must laugh upon them, least
we move choler, and give offense. Well for all sin in equal measure, and for
the least of all sins, Christ Jesus the Son of God was feign to shed his
precious blood. Howsoever sin seems little to us in committing, it was very
great to Christ in suffering for it. They be small sins to us which are usual
to all, but if they were not usual, they would seem prodigious.

18 All the senses especially the eyes, as they are most singular instruments
to receive Occasions of sin.
good things by, if they by Gods spirit be directed: so if they be not well
ordered, do bring greatest evils, and therefore David prays that his eyes
might be guided aright, and Job Government of the eyes.
makes a covenant with his eyes, under which the other parts are included, as
also when David makes a covenant with his mouth. Joseph his mistress first
offended in looking without a cause: for the wantonness of vain looks bewray
the corruption of the heart, we must then strive to have a lawful cause of all
our doings, that so we may be assured of Gods providence to watch over us,
least if any harm happen unto us, we be the just occasion thereof. Secondly,
she offended in not keeping a measure: for whosoever sees his own corruptions
truly, will be afraid of the very appearance of evil, as Job, although he was
never adulterer, yet privy to his corruption he made a covenant with his eyes.
Joseph's mistress spoke to him day by day and he refuses, she abides still in
her evil purpose, but he still refuses her, and here is the difference
between Gods children and the wicked, the one continues still in wickedness
and would have all others such, the other persevere in godliness, and would
bring all men to the same, she was convinced of her fault, and yet sorrowed not
but continued. Where note, the oftener sin the less grief, a note of the
children A note of the di^els child and Gods. Verse 12.
of the devil. But contrarily, the oftener sin the more grief, a note of the
child of God. Joseph was young about thirty four years, and yet chaste,
contrary to those that say, fornication is but a trick of youth. Joseph was
entised and yet yielded not, a sign of a pure heart, for although temptations
be offered of those, yet it proceeds of our corruption that we yield to them.
As Bathshaba yielded to David because she was corrupted: Joseph yielded not to
his mistress, because his heart was pure. If we will be clean in all, let us
first know our hearts, and see where we are weakest, and get a special defense
against that, otherwise we Hearts.
shall take too much liberty, and indeed the chastest in heart, will be
chastest in look, because they know their own corruption and strive against
it, for whosoever hates sin truly, will hate the garment defiled with sin: and
will beware of those things which in themselves are lawful, because he is
ready to abuse them.

19 If God has made any as the eye to see, as the mouth to reprove, as the
hand to redress The greater place we are in, the greater our sins. The
Magistrates and Ministers sin most dangerously.
sin either in families, in Church or in Commonwealth, they must specially
look to themselves, they sin not. For of al others it is a great disgrace to
see them, as the principal members of the body hurt. Again, the hurt of such
a member is the endangering of all the other members. Now great reasons there
are, why such men sin most dangerously. First, the higher we ascend, the
greater strength we receive of God to resist sin; a thing then it were most
deformed, that the more strength we have to keep off sin than others, the
less we should do it. Again, the greater and better credit we have, the
more we must think our selves bound to thankfulness, then where thankfulness
should abound most, unthankfulness being found most, it is the greater blemish.
Thirdly, where we are 1
nearer to such dignity, we should have the chiefest gifts to keep our motes
and beams, 2
both great and small sins; now if the eye, that should foresee and prevent
such things 3
should receive motes and beams in it self, it is a thing most absurd, when
they, I say, that should rid the house, the Church or Commonwealth of
blemishes, be most full of 4
blemishes, it is a great deformity. Lastly, the least offense that such a one
commits, every one is grieved with, and then rather than such a thing should
be, it were better not to be a Governor, or that he were fair burned. For
as without the eye no other member Simile.
can do this office, neither the hand, nor the foot can do their function
without sight; so without the direction of such governors, no part can do his
duty. The safety of the eye is the safety of the other members, the good
estate of the people is in the good estate of the Prince, every member has his
interest in the ey^, and therefore the fault of the eye sticks in every
member. So that in the peril of the eye how many members soever are dependant
of it, so many are in danger, and so many slippes that men of authority fall
into, so many occasions of offense are offered to their charges.

20 In a public reformation we must specially meet with the greatest sin, and
begin Great sins must first out
first to cast out beams, and then motes. This is the order of God himself:
for although he first talked with Adam, and so proceeded to Eve, and then to
the Serpent, (for Adams sin is as the mote) yet when he comes to judgment
and to sentence of casting ou^, he first begins with the Serpent, whose sin
was a beam sin, and so proceeds against the other two, which in respect of
that were but as mote sins. This was David's order, first Psalm. 101. Degrees of
sin. 1. 2. 3. 4.
he will cast out Apostataes, and Atheists: secondly, scorners of Religion and
all perverse spirits: thirdly, the slanderer and taleteller: and lastly even
him that looks but proudly, which thing we little account of. This was the
order of Christ: for bodily diseases, it is said, Matthew 4 he healed all
sicknesses, and then it is said he healed cripples: for spiritual he first
cured them that were possessed, the^ the lu^atike, then the leprous, etc.
Lastly, this was the order of the Primitive Church, whether they dealt in
excommunication, in suspension, Excommunication. 1. 2. 3. 4.
or in admonition. For excommunication, first they began with scorners, then
with blasphemers, thirdly with heretics, fourthly with perjured persons, and
fittly, with the obstinate enemies of Discipline. For suspension, they dealt
first against common scorners: secondly, The order of the ancient discipline.
Suspensis. 1. 2. 3. 4.
against neglecters of the liturgy: thirdly, against quarrels: fourthly,
against incontinent persons, and fifthly against slanderers. For admonition,
first they met with the idle persons: secondly with common pratlers: thirdly,
with vnrederent behauiours of themselves against superiors: fourthly, against
them that exceed above their ability in their apparel: fifthly, with them
that neglected the state oeconomicall by needless running into Admonition. 1.
2. 3. 4. 5.
debt, and so into debt, and so into wilful poverty. Thus we see the order of
God himself, of David, of Christ the Son of God, of the Church in it
excellent beauty.

21 The estate of sinners may well be compared to them that be sick: for as
when one Simile.
keeps his bed, and goes to Physic, it argues some notable malady, and
disorder, whereby he is hindered from some necessary function: so our soul by
the distemper of sin, is not only hindered from her duty, but is clean put
out of all good course and temper. David complains of this, My sin has
taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look Psalm. 40. 12.
up, they be gone over my head, they have worn away my beauty, there is no
rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Very aptly are they compared to sick men
that are sinners, to the end they might more warily look to themselves, search
the bottom of their thoughts, feel their grief where it lies, find out the
cause thereof, seek be^imes for remedy, least not taking it in time, it
rankle and fester inwardly, it eat and infect more and more, it come to a
running sore, as David complains, and so prove very near incurable. The
Pharisees are well called sick men, to move those Peacock-tailed iusticiaries,
to pity the miserable plight and pickle they were in, and not so slightly to
ouer-looke themselves as they were wont to do. Who is so unnatural, that is
not moved with pity toward the sick? who is so without all bowels, that is
not touched with compassion of a sick man? If his heartstrings be not so hard
as a horn, if he have not a flint stone in place of his heart, if his reins be
not steel, and his heart and bowels hewed and framed out of an hard Oak, he
must needs have some remorse, his bowels must needs yearne, and his heart
within him cannot choose but mourn over the groans of a man that draws his
last breath. And as the Lord spoke, it is a memorandum for them to strike their
frozen hearts: so for our selves we have to take this Item also, for in them he
touches us, our share is in it, he shadows therein the whole estate of
mankind subject to every disease, always drouping and complaining, always
laid up on one side or other, teaching us to give over, and to divorce our
selves from all security. The Scripture in this point is plentiful, Who can
say his heart Note.
is clean? There is none that does good, no not one, all are sick either of
the covetous dropsy, or ambitious All sick.
fever of the itch of concupiscence. He that has not the fit on him, may start
up and look to his neighbor. All our health is a perilous disease, our
righteousness is as a rag stained with the flowers of a woman. If none be
void, if many sins lie hid in us (for who can tell how often he offends,
who can say, he is not crased?) if our cleanness be filthy, if our light be
darkness, if our health be sickness, how filthy is our filthiness? how
dark is our darkness? howsoever is our sickness? And how truly is our body
called abody of death? If then we had any hope of our recovery, it would make
us look for our Physician Christ.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Physic and Diet, Sickness and Health.
IN that Christ does vouchsafe to be called our Physician, and to be so, it
does greatly commend unto us his kindness unspeakable, and mercy
unmeasurable, that he would come down from heaven from his throne of glory,
to become a Physician Properties of an expert Physician.
to heal our desperate diseases. More that he is no common leach, but such a
one as we may safely put our lives into his hand, it will appear easily if we
consider the properties of an expert Physician, in whom these three are chiefly
to be considered and required. First a sense of the infirmity, whereby in
looking well over us, we may know the disease the more 1
thoroughly. Such a one was Christ, Esaias 53. He had good cause to know our
infirmities, he needed not that any should counsel him, he knew what was in
man. Secondly, a very ready 2
and willing mind to heal them, and take pains with them that are diseased.
This also was in our Savior, Esaias 64. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, in
that he has anointed me, that I was willing to heal the broken hearted, and
preach forth the acceptable year of the Lord. Thirdly, a faculty and
facility in healing. This also was in full measure in him. He went about,
says Matthew, doing good, healing every disease and malady among the people,
which may far more fitly by way of a Metaphor, be translated unto the soul,
where after a more singular way he works great masteries, and does great
cures. This is the comfort of all comforts to the groaning soul, to have a
pitiful, a willing, and a skillful Physician to look upon them, and take them
in hand.

2 When sickness or any affliction is upon us, we must take heed that we
indent not with the Lord, but learn presently to live righteously, and to
profit by whatsoever is laid upon us, though we see not present release. For if
the cross only humble us, and we be not humbled in heart, what shall we be
when the cross is gone? Therefore let us see the Lord, and be humbled,
because it is his doing, and with our whole heart subscribe thereunto, and let
the Lord remove it in his time, so that we presently profit by it.

3 A certain man who had bin three years pained with a grievous disease, and
finding To be truly humbled in sickness to bear the Lords cross.
no remedy by Physic, wished many times to die, and yet when he had better
considered, he humbled himself and said with his heart, If this lie on me all
my life, yet will I serve the Lord, which done he found present ease, and was
not troubled therewith afterward. Also when men are fallen into the hands of
the Magistrate, or of the discipline of the Church, they will show great
repentance for the time. But when the time of their examination and course of
Justice is past, then also is their piety past, they are never the better;
which shows that they were not truly humbled, neither received any profit by
their present correction. But let us learn to profit by both, namely, by the
immediate, or mediate hand of God upon us, and know that if the Lord forgive
our sins they shall be forgotten of men, and if we shame our selves, and be
truly humbled under his hand for them, then the Lord will take away our shame,
and whatsoever affliction in his due time.

4 If we promise amendment in the time of our trouble, and yet follow it not
in the Hardness of heart.
time of prosperity: it is for hardness of heart. For Pharaoh his example is
for to fear, we must not put it off for time to come, but presently learn to
amend our lives, otherwise the Lord may deal with us as he did with him.

5 When sickness or any other trouble does afflict us, if we would know* whether
it proceed from the favor and love of God toward us, let us learn to see it
in the example of the thief on the cross, who fled unto God, profited by the
cross, and would that others also The thief on the cross.
should so do: for if we can in trouble fly to God, not to witches, and profit
by our cross, which in it nature is able to make us worse, whereunto also
Satan will set to his hand; if we desire to amend our life, and that others
also should amend by our example: by these fruits we may see that our sickness
is sanctified in Christ, and all other our troubles are also sanctified in him.
For God would not have received us so graciously in the sacrifice of his son
Christ, if he meant to destroy us, he has given us so many pledges of his love:
So we may reason with our souls, as Manoal^s wife did with her husband, ludg.
12. 23.

5 Seeing God created all things, nothing has virtue in it, but as God gives
it; and when it pleases him he takes it away. Our father Adam lived with
herbs, and yet should have lived for ever; but we have many other things for
our nourishment, and yet live not. Again, our fathers before the flood lived
longer than we do, yet had not so many ^^shes as we have. The children of
Israel lived forty years with Manna, and Moses and Elia* lived forty days
without meat: all these teach us, that man lives not by bread only, and that
the want of the creatures does not necessarily cast us into diseases, but that
it is our si^^^e which casts us into them. Meat does not nourish us, Physic
does not heal us, and the creatures do not strengthen us, but the Lord does
all in all, as it pleases him, to try his children, or to punish the wicked.

6 In corporal blessings, if we have not the spirit to teach us, that by the
word, and by prayer they are sanctified unto our use, if we cannot receive even
every morsel of meat at Gods hands, as tokens and pledges of his favor,
surely we shall either at the last be brought to loathe them, or to set our
hearts too much upon them: so that the Lord shall be constrained to take them
from us, to make them ^ot, melt, and stink, so that we shall not find them,
nor have any good, holy and profitable use of them. Contrariwise, if the spirit
do teach us, and assure our hearts, that all the creatures of God are
sanctified unto us by the word, and by prayer: then shall we give God due
glory in them, find profit by them, and have them so long continued unto us,
as shall be expedient for us. Some do look on the word of God only to get
knowledge, or to be as others are, at the last it will How to entertain^ the
Ministers of Christ.
be loathed of them. So the Minister of God if we like him only for favor o^
some gifts that he has, and not for that he is the minister of our salvation,
we tha^ quickly either make him an Idol, or else utterly despise him.
Therefore if we will always have them in due estimation, let us acknowledge
them to be such as labor for our salvation.

7 As oftentimes it falls, that some men receive natural sicknesses from
their natural parents; so do some likewise receive from their natural
parents natural sins.

8 When some had admonished him for making mention of old sins when he was at
the death of any: he said first, I esteem not men as they are in the time of
their sickness, but ordinarily I measure them, as they were in their lives.
Again, they are not guilty of olds sins in death, which repented truly of
their old sins in health, and life. Besides, if they be not guilty, my prayer
or speech hurts them not, but profits others: if they be guilty, the
trouble of them shall turn to their good, in that they shall find the
judgment of this world, and escape the final judgment that is to come.

9 He thought that there should not be one Minister for the sick and the whole
in the Plague.
time of the plague, but that one should minister to the whole, whilst their
own Pastor tended the sick.

10 So greatly he rejoiced in troubles, that he would not wish to be utterly
freed from often infirmities, because the Lord had very much by them provoked
him often to examine himself.

11 A certain godly and especial friend of his making known his purpose in
taking If a cross be removed before we profit by it. God will send an other.
physic to help him in a less infirmity, he said, Sir your physic may
ease you of some pain, but I hope it shall not purge you of the favor of God:
for although you be eased in this, yet for that God loves you, he will meet
with you in some other thing.

12 Asa was reproved, because he sought not the Lord when he was sick of the
gowte, which was a punishment of his unlawful covenant, 2. Chron. 19 though it
came of his age and travail. The children of God must so think of the means,
that they see God disposing nature, and destituting them of grace, if they
fail in the right use of the means. Many now adays in sickness go to the
Physicians with Asa, never considering their sins, the just cause thereof. It is
good to seek to the Physicians, so that God be first sought to by repentance
of that sin, which we think to be the cause of the same. But when the
Physician cannot help them, and when they know no cause of their sickness,
but are strangely stricken, and suddenly, then they are found, and say they are
taken, as Moses Exodus 4. iuddenly Exdo. 4. 24.
stricken says, that the Lord has met him: so the strangeness of the thing
did sooner bring him to God. Therefore as the children of God are by this
means sooner brought to God, as Moses and Job; so the wicked in the like cases
do fly further from God, and think it lawful to go to witches, when their
Physicians cannot help. Let us then both in ordinary and extraordinary means
of blessings and punishments always confess, that the hand of the Lord has
wrought it, and seek to be cured of him by whom we have been wounded. And let
us so look to the means, as that we first reconcile our selves to God for
our sins, and pacify him, in that he may bless, and not curse the means
of Physic.

13 The Lord sends plagues one greater than another, yet always threatens
before the plagues do come; so that if we would profit by the threatenings we
should prevent the plague that it should not come. And this use ought we to
make of the threatening, that so we may escape the judgments by profiting by
the word, and by them.

14 Some will say, that they do not find in themselves those fruits of true
repentance, Fruits of repentance.
by their sickness and troubles, which are set down to be in the children of
God. Such must take heed that they do not deny that which God has wrought in
them. Job could never be brought to do so. But if thy afflictions continue,
and thou find not that profit that should be in thee, reason thus with thy
self: I am the child of God, and am afflicted, and yet profit not as I ought:
therefore God does continue the same upon me, that I may reap due profit by
it. Therefore I willingly yield to the cross, and take it up* but if thou
feel not this, yet if in thy heart thou do love Gods word, and his
children, and all goodness, and hate sin, and all wickedness, thou must
needs be his child, and therefore So so^^e as we b^e humbled w^ have the
fruit of our afflictions.
be comforted: for because thou art not humbled, therefore thou reapest not the
fruit of affliction, and therefore they lie still upon thee, that at what time
soever thou art humbled, the Lord may take away the cross, and give thee the
fruit of thine afflictions. For when thou art humbled, he will cease to
afflict.

16 A godly Physician in the time of persecution having three patients
resorting unto him, to be cured of one great evil, said: this strange disease
and sickness be tokeneth some strange sins and corruptions to be in you, and
therefore if you will by me be freed from the sickness, reconcile your selves
to God that he may free you from your sins. They all at once excused
themselves, wherein they bewraying their great ignorance: the Physician
unripped their lives, and at the first inquired of them, if they did not
frequent the Mass. They could not plainly deny it, but covertly excused it,
saying, that therein they did but as others: which when the man of God
perceived: have you so highly displeased God, and know not of any sin to be
in you? go your ways, and first learn how grievous your sin is, before
God: for the Lord having laid his rod upon you, I dare not take it off,
unless ye show fruits of repentance. And thus he dismissed them, until they
knowing and acknowledging their sin, with grief returned, and afterward were
healed.

CHAP. LXIIII. Of Satan's practices, and of Schism and security.
THe Devil sets an high estimation of a man, for that (as we may read in
the Gospel) he thinks himself whilst he is in a man, to be in a palace;
but when he is out of a man, he thinks himself in a desert. Hereof it is,
that being cast out, he keeps such roaring, foaming, and trembling, as is
wonderful. Paradise, one would think, might have delighted him being so
beautiful: yet he esteemed it but as a wilderness in respect of Adam.

2 The Devil has a palace of pleasure and a court of liberty for those that
he his: but if we will be the Lords, we must be hedged in and stinted, we
must not go awrie. The Devil will let you do, speak and think what you
will, the more liberty ye use the better Deuteronomy. 6. 3. 4. Satan's service.
he likes your service: but God has a st^^ct house, he will have the heart,
the mind, the soul, the body, and the whole heart: this is hard service:
well, it is easy to enter service with the devil, if one say, I will serve
you freely, if another say, I will be a retainer to you, but I will wear Gods
liuerie, all shall be received, none refused. If you be well, the Devil is
well: if you be quiet, he is quiet, but this is a miserable service.

3 The Devil is very painful in his assaults. He works with Christ, and
doubles his David's adultorie.
temptations on him, and pursues him all his life long. When he gate David
once to con sent to adultery, then he trebles his blows, he causes him to
make Vriah drunken, he uses deceit, he causes him to murder Vriah, yea, he
murdered many with him, he will not be contented with the borders, but he will
assay to take the principal city. Take Peter for an example: first he comes
long behind: secondly, he was haled in by the shoulders, the^ he began to
palter, after he denied Christ, not long after he swears, and last of all he
curses.

4 It is a part of the Devil his sophistry, as in good things, to sever the
means from the end, so in evil things, to separate the end from the means;
David joins both together, Psalm. 119. I am thine, oh Lord save me: The
Devil persuades us, that God will save us, but How Satan shreds Scripture.
makes us never look to that, I am thine. In evil he bears us in hand we
may use the means, and never come to the end, and so clips off half, as when
he can suffer this, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man: he would leave out
this, but thou shall come to judgment. But these has God joined together, and
neither the subtlety of youth, nor any wit of man, nor all the devils in
hell can separate them, the pleasures of the flesh* and the judgments of GOD.
As to our first parents, Ea^e ye shall not die; To whom some Solomon might
have said, if it seem pleasant to you, Eat it, but death shall come: So in
these two that Ezekiel has joined; the ease of the Pastor, and the blood
required at his hands. He might have said, go too, build you Tabernacles,
where you may take most profit, and give ear to nothing, yet God shall bring
you to judgment, God with a chain of Adamant has knit the pleasure of the
world with judgment, he that has one must have both.

5 It is often the policy of Satan, to make us travail in some good things
to come, when more fitly we might be occupied in good things present.

6 We must be proud against Satan in CHRIST, and humble to all men in Christ.

7 Satan will tempt us, though he cannot overcome us.

8 As GOD and his Angels are about us, so is the Devil and his Angels: and as
the good Angels have not been seen, but extraordinarily: so are the evil
Angels, and he that depriueth himself of this meditation weakeneth his Faith.
For it is to our comfort, that See the first part.
though we be in danger, and no man by us, yet GOD and his Angels are with us
to keep v^* And this meditation ought also to humble us, that though in evil
doing no man can see and hurt us, yet the Devil, and evil spirits still houer
over us. Again, we must know, that as the Angels have appeared to good men for
special defense: so the soul spirits may appear to some men for special
sins: which evil spirits are not the souls of an^e departed, as in the
blind papacy it was imagined, but the evil spirits in the Air, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6. 12. which are there truly called the Princes of the
darkness of this world, because they do as Lords, command, and sway in the
blind souls of men, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. John. 1. 4. 5.

9 Experience teaches, that many meddle with the matters of the Church, which
are senseless and barraine in the doctrine of Newe-birth. But alas, what if a
man knew all things, and knew not himself to be a new man in CHRIST? all is
nothing. We must stir up our own sluggishnes, by the forwardnes we see in
others, so shall we rightly profit by Gods graces in them.

10 If we play with our own affections, sin in the end from sport will
spur us to confusion: for though we be given to flatter and presume of our
selves, that being twist or Security.
thrice spared we dare sin again: yet we must know that the Lord will
recompense his long carrying with wrath in the end.

11 As a man being out lawed, may take his pleasure for a while, but whatsoever
and wheresoever he may be taken, he must yield to the punishment which by
verdict he is appointed: so the wicked on whom sentence of damnation is
already passed, may for a while shake off their pain with vain pleasure, but
afterward they shall be arrested, and carried violently to the place of
woeful execution. But for the godly unto whose conscience, Note.
the assurance of their inheritance of heaven, by the evidence of the Gospel
and ^eale of the Spirit is ratified, all the devils in hell shall not prevail
against them, but in death they shall be warned to make their open appearance
in the day of the resurrection, yet as honest and before the Judge, and not as
fellonious offenders.

12 It is a fearful thing to be over quiet with our selves when we have
sinned: for the Grief.
way to draw sin with Cart-ropes, is, not to be grieved with sin; and the
casting or shaking of temporal grief, is the way to eternal grief. When we
have sometime quaked at sin, which we have seen in others, and afterward
(although we like it not yet) if we dislike it not with as great indignation,
as we were wont to do, but by little and little we Fear of sin.
can well away with it: It is greatly to be feared, that by degrees we shall
fall into the same sin or sins our selves.

13 Many that are not mere evil men by security, have fallen into the hands
of Gods Security.
judgment.

14 It is the righteous judgment of God, that there often is most deadly
enmity, Enmity.
where has been worldly and carnal amity. If there be any hatred risen
between our Reconciliatio
selves and such men, who have been our friends, let us examine our selves if
we ^ought first to please God above all, and then to please them by good
means.

15 Gods judgments are most sudden, and when men are in greatest delight.
Even Sudden judge ments.
in the Sunshine Sodom was destroyed, and in the banquet time Iob^ children
were slain: therefore we are to learn to be most wary and watchful, and
then most to suspect our selves when the world thinks least of evil, and is
most secure.

CHAP. LXV. Of Parents, Education of children, Governors of youth, and Care of
posterity.
WHen children have infirmities, their parents are to see and consider whether
they See the first part of Education.
have not received such sins from them. If they have, they are rather to pray
for their children, than too much to correct them, least they persecute their
own sins in the persons of their children.

2 When Moses was to go at the commandment of the Lord into Egypt, he first
returned with his wife to his Father in law Iothro, to have his leave of him,
thereby showing his duty and obedience unto him, that so he might give no
occasion of offense, and might avoid all appearance of evil: so must all the
children of God, be careful in the like case, and not to excuse themselves by
good meanings.

3 The Lord is careful that his works should be recorded, and that not for
his own cause; for he knows them well, not for the age present, for that many
remember it, but for posterity to whom he would have it to come, that in them,
thereby he might be glorified. Therefore the Lord made choice of Joshua, to
whom he would have Moses to rehearse Exodus 17. 14.
the victories which he had given the Israelites over Amaleck and his people,
that he might not be proud thereof nor glory in his own strength, but that
he might give the glory wholly and only to the Lord that gave it. Secondly,
that thereby he might be prepared to help the people, and to govern them
after Moses departure. And this must teach us to pray, that the Lord would ever
prepare such as may be profitable to posterity. And therefore in the 78
Psalm, God commands that the works of the Lord, should be taught to
posterity, and so says Paul to Timothy, deliver this to men, which may be
fit to deliver Provide for posterity.
it to others, etc. From whence we may learn, that when the Lord will have a
blessing continued to any people, he will also prepare instruments to convey his
blessings to posterity. But when the Lord will not continue his mercy, then
will he deprive them of the means. Seeing then in our time men are careful
only for themselves, and few care for them that shall come after, and that so
few regard to Catechize their families: these things, I say, are signs, that
the Lord will not continue those mercies to our posterity which we Families
must be Catechized.
do now enjoy.

4 Youth especially is to take heed of pleasure: for though fire be good, yet
in fl^xe or tinder it is not good; so though pleasure be good, yet pleasure in
youth is not good. We Young age is a dangerous age.
need not plough for weeds, they will grow fast enough in the fallow. But
some will take their pleasure in their youth especially, and they purpose to
become good, and to live gravely hereafter in their age. This is to make a
covenant with the devil, as the devil said Late repentance dangerous.
to Christ, I will come out: but the time is not yet come: so we will leave
pleasure when the time comes, and in the mean time he keeps us in a purpose.
Young men make their sins of a double die, Crimzen sins, they become a
disease of the bones, and custom is We must use pleasure but with restraints.
turned into a necessity; whereupon diverse say, I would feign but I cannot
leave them, of these if one recover, forty rotte away.

5 If Satan can make our youth an unprofitable age, in all the ages following
little good is to be looked for. For if ye once nip the blossom, where is the
hope of the Autumn? Where may we look for fruit? Well, if we will needs use
our pleasure, then must we set down some measure. The devils rules never have
exceptions, but Gods Saints must learn restraint; we must never make our
hearts the stewards of our affections, that our thoughts wander not in them,
and least in desiring things too much, we exceed when we have them. There must
be the least lusting of these outward things, because there is least use of
them. If a man cannot want them, he will abuse them when he has them. It is
Sin by degrees grows to impudency.
true that Ierom says: The beginning is honest, but the greatness is
deformed. And that also sin is very reasonable in the beginning and very
shamefaced. Thamar went first to play the whore with a veil before her face,
but now with an open face: first honest recreation, and then a pleasure of
vanity, recreation before labor, to play before we study, we use pleasure,
but to no good end.

6 There is a general rule, wantonness is the beginning of sin. We see in
Esau, to Wantonness ends in wickedness.
what great profaneness his wanton pleasure in hunting grew. So in the
Scriptures there can be found none other beginning of Salomons fall, but this,
that 1. Kin. 3. when he had spent seven years in building the house of God, he
spent thirteen after in building an house for himself. This was scarce a good
proportion, to bestow thirteen years on his own house, and seven years on God
his house, and the Apes and Peacocks that he brought into the land, set the
people in such vanity, that they vanished away in their wanton thoughts.
Idleness and trifling be the callings of Gentlemen now adays, as also
needelesse expenses. 1. Tim. 5.

7 If ever we would have the Church of God to continue among us: we must bring
it into our households, and nourish it in our families.

8 A certain woman saying without pity at the birth of a poor child, here
is the mouth, but where is the meat: had this saying replied on her at what
time she brought forth a child which died, here is meat, but where is the
mouth?

9 We are not to justify our selves before God only by faith, but we must
also Against verbal professors, which turn Gods graces to wantonness. Iud.
justify our selves by good works before men: so that we must not only
labor for our selves, but endeavor to stir up others also, and look one on
another, as the Cherubins did, and tell things one to another, as John told
his brother. We must be careful for one another, and that not only for the
time present, but for the time to come. This we are bound to do, and our
common dealings ought to bind us thereunto. We provide for our children, should
we not provide for the Church which is spiritually tied unto us? Surely, if we
consider the plenty and peace, which we enjoy, we shall see that it is not for
our deserts* for we abound in sin, and none iniquity is wanting in us, but
it is the blood of the Martyrs, who have purchased this so dearly. For these
days did they sow with tears, and we have reaped them with joy. Now, if we
will not have our posterity to reap the tears of our lives, then let us be
careful to sow the good seed of godliness, else they shall feel the smart.
The meaning is this, that they which have househouldes and have been called
themselves, should labor to leave behind them a go(...)eed for the continuance
of the Church, as we see in Zache, unto whose whole house ^^^ Lord Jesus
brought salvation. It is a fearful thing to hasten to be worldly, and to
linger to an evil thing is an holy lingering, and to make have to godliness is
a godly hastines. Elisha must not salute any, whom he meets; the Apostles
must not tarry to talk with any Haste to do good.
in their journey, and why? The Lord requires great have in his business. It is
profitable to make have to heaven, but it is no wisdom to make have to hell,
yet to do well we find a Lion in the streets, but to do evil, there is no
hoe with us. Well, the kingdom of God suffers violence, we must make have to
it, and beware we linger not as the foolish Virgins, to store our selves with
Oil and to furnish our selves with the graces of God.

10 Job says, wisdom is not found in that land which lives in pleasures. If
you find a land of good fellows, you may seek somewhere else, for wisdom
is not there. If God has appointed, Genesis 3. that none should eat a crumme of
bread without the sweat of his brows, how much more the bread of everlasting
life? If they be not able to direct themselves, the next way is to seek
counsel of others. But, as Horace says, This age will bear no admonition.
Rehoboam thought his own counsel best, more resolute at twenty years, than
at fifty, yet reason is but as a gristle in us. Set them in a good way, and
yet be unconstant in it, desirous to try conclusions easily drawn from evil,
and yet they will easily slip the collar, and turn to evil again.

11 There is no sacrifice so acceptable to the Lord, as for youth to strive
with this double, Youth must renounce pleasures.
triple and seven fold cord, to abandon all pleasures, before we have tasted
of the honey with Jonathan. It is acceptable I say before a taste, not after a
loathing: God loatheth such service, when the stream of affection is weak.
Look how many baits and snares Satan has for sin, so many remedies has
God to crown us. But young men will have their reasons, I will do it, but for
a while: A foolish reason, seeing the whole age of man is but short. God will
not allow a minute, therefore not our youth. Again, in our time we must not
look for longum, but opportunum, this is the time of salvation. It is in man
as in other things, in breaking of Horses, luring of Hawks. Vegetius in his
fourth book De remilitari had rather have a Soldier that never learned to
fight, than one il brought up in warfare. Timaeus requires a double tuition
for a Scholar, that had been ill brought up. The diseases of the spring are
more curable than those of Autumn: So the sins of a young man are curable,
if they take not many surfets one upon another. In youth it is easiest to
resist the pleasures, which we never tasted of. If a young man then say, I will
tarry until I be old, before I resist sin, it is as much as if he should
say, I am strong now, I will stay till I be weak. This is the indignity of
our reason, Esaias 2. There be sins called purple, cri^zen, sins of a deep
die. If it be right purple, it was died both in the wool, and in the thread.
So if Satan do die us before we are made cloth, in our youth, whiles we be
wool if we be so died, it is like to stick by us. But if we will needs be
died purple, we must be so died as purple is taken in the Apocalypse: purple
righteous in the blood of the Lamb. When a man has long had a trusty
servant, he is loath to forgo him, he will rather give him double wages, so is
it with the devil, and thus for their continuance. Augustine said of a young
man that had lived riotously in his youth, and afterward suddenly converted: I
grant true repentance is never too late, but late repentance is seldom true.
Therefore to make sure work, let us carry the yoke in our youth. Often God
does punish the want of his fear in our youth, with the want of wisdom in
our age, he punishes the flesh with the world. Oh says Job, all these things
that I suffer, are for the sins of my youth, his conscience accused him of
nothing else.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Gods worship, and of Religion true and false.
Although the word of God is always in season to be ministered: yet men's hearts
(because of their corruption) are not always in season to receive it.

2 The Devil does oftentimes bring men to superstition in a good Satan's
policy.
thing, that afterward he might procure them to leave it off utterly.

3 Superstition does break off love in all estates. Superstition. To be
present at the Mass how dangerous.


4 ^is a great and secret offense through the corruption of nature, to persuade
our selves that we may go to see idolatry, though in heart we consent not unto
it. But doubtless as by the judgment of God we often fall into that sin, which
before we did not know, so the offense is great. First, in respect of our
corruption which naturally is given to superstition, Secondly, in respect of
our brethren, if they be strong, to grieve them; if they be weak to offend
them. Thirdly, in respect of Gods glory, the zeal whereof should make us with
heroical spirits, to cry out against such sin.

5 In the first Commandment the substance of Gods worship is set down, in the
second God requires the use of the body in worshipping him as well as the
soul.
the means, in the third the end; and in the fourth, is the time prescribed,
wherein these things especially are to be practiced.

6 God requires the body to worship him as well as the soul, and therefore let
him that has an ear to hear, heir: he that has a tongue to speak, let him
speak; he that has hands to lift up, let him lift them up: and he that
has knees to bow, let him bow them. There are strange speeches to this end in
the scripture that not only they that have tongues should praise the Lord, but
every thing that has breath; yea, he requires to be praised of every bone in
the body. The right and title whereby God chalengeth this service of our
members, is because we are his, and when we were not his, he redeemed us with
a price. First, the clay whereof we are made was his, by creation of right he
may claim us: he finds How justly God may challenge of us to serve him in
body and soul.
us here at his own charge, cost, and expenses, and so by the testimony of the
book of his providence we are his. The LORD by bleeding from his heart by the
spear, from his hands and feet by the nails, from his head by the Thorns
purchased us to his service, and therefore his title to the body is good:
wherefore against the Anabaptists and Familists we say, that as God is the God
of the spirit, so he is the God of all flesh; and though he will be worshipped
in spirit, yet not in spirit only, but in truth also, which truth (being his
word) requires the service of the body. So many then as refusing the
congregation, making the corners of their chambers only witnesses of their
religion, detract from the Lord his worship. But they excuse themselves with
fearing the suspicion of hypocrites, an easy slander, a thing that none can
purge himself of, a case therefore to be referred to the Lord himself. But
these men of all other do evil in speaking against hypocrisy: for if they be
no more inward than they are outward, if their Chamber-holines, be no more than
their Chappellgodlines, then are they of all men most miserable. Read Psalm.
122. and 84. and 68. and we shall see the Prophet David highly to magnify that
which they smally account of.

7 Many carnal men think they can trust in God and in riches too: they will
carry We must not be of a dark and close Religion, or of a double profession.
two bowstrings into the field, that if one fail another may serve. But we
must serve God either ever or never, either in all or in none, either every
where, or no where. These me^ will not say with Christ, one thing is necessary,
but they will serve God and the world. Thus some pray to God, and perform their
vows to the devil, some are only retainers to Christ and bear his liuerie,
but are indeed the servants of sin and their own corruption, some bear the
mark of God in their foreheads and in profession; but they bear the mark of
the beast in their hands and conversation: we dare and must credit the Lord
with our souls, why should we not credit him with our bodies also? God
knows that we are but frail, and he having made us, will surely preserve us.

8 The place where God is worshipped, is called in the Scriptures, The presence
and face of the Lord. It is oftentimes said in the Psalms, that we must come
before the face of the Lord, and they that eat of the sacrifices are said to
eat with the Lord. Therefore when we come to hear the Word, to or pray, to
receive the Sacraments, we come even before the Lord, where he shows his
presence more clearly, although wheresoever we be we are in his presence: for
as the power of the Prince is over all the land, yet his chief presence ^^^^
Gods presence.
the Court; so is the presence of the Lord chiefly in the house of prayer,
though he be every where: which if men would rightly consider of, then would
they also take heed with what feet they enter into the house of the Lord, and
would not ^e so bold as to come thither Simile.
without preparation, nor to pass away without any meditation of that which
they have Eccles. 4. 17.
done or heard. The want of this persuasion causes all carelesnes, both before
and after, and when we are present. If this kind of dealing will not be
liked nor allowed of any worldly Prince; that men should be admitted to the
Chamber-of-presence, and yet care not what they speak, nor how they b^lieue
themselves: surely the Lord will not always bear with such as abuse the
house of prayer, and ^^reuerently behave themselves in his holy presence:
though for a time he suffer them, yet certainly in the end he will be sure to
punish it most grievously. Therefore we had need to be watchful over our
selves both souls and bodies, least by abusing our selves before the face of
the Lord, we provoke him Mal. 1.
unto anger, and cause his displeasure to fall upon us.

9 In the beginning of our gracious Sovereign her reign, it was usually said,
that the dearths that then were, was for the New learning. Afterward the Lord
sent peace and wealth, as we do now see: whereby he gives us to understand,
that it is he that brought them from popery, so that now hereafter none can
complain. Wherefore they do sin Popish objections against the Gospel.
very grievously that shall say the Gospel has brought dearth, diseases, and
war* For we can all testify, that the Gospel has brought peace, plenty,
and health, which if we will not believe, then the Lord will root us out,
though for his Name and glories sake, and for his Son Christ's sake, he will
raise up a seed after us, that shall confess this to his glory, as we see in
the example of the Israelites, which had a Iosuah and a Caleb. But as he
punished the Egyptians because they were ignorant, and the Israelites because
they abused knowledge; as he punished the Israelites because they would not
worship him, and punished the Egyptians because they would not suffer them to
worship him: so he has punished the Papists because they were false
worshippers, and the Protestants for that they abuse Note this proportion.
the true worship: and as he punished the Papists, because they would not
suffer the Lord to be worshipped; so will he punish the Protestants, if they
will not worship him in spirit and truth, for there is like proportion.

10 Some will say, what can we gain by hearing the Word, can we live by
prayer? Our Mal. 3. 14. 15. 16.
household must be provided for: if we could come by our living so easily as
some do, or if we were as well to live as such a man is, we would serve God
then as well as any of them, they may serve God freely, and without any cares
to hinder them, we must take p^ines for our living, necessity calls upon us
to follow our labor. But do thou not know^o man, that the Lord leaving thee
in this need, does now prove thee, whether thou serve him for thine own ease,
or for his glory sake? If thou do not now discern of thy temptation, and
apply thy self to the serving of God, in hearing, praying, reading, and
thinking of his Word, but do in a greedy care seek after earthly things, be
sure that if thou be his son* he will at one time or other correct thee, and
by one way or other waine thy mind from these outward things: but if thou
belong not to his covenant of Grace, he may perhaps give thee thy desire, and
leave thee also without correction, which is a sign of a Bastard, but at the
last he will cut thee off from the things that thy chief delight is in, and
finally, thou shall perish everlastingly in hell.

11 When men will not harken unto the Truth, then will he give them up to
believe How God punishes such as receive not his truth in love.
lies, and when they will not regard his faithful ministers, that labor with
them to bring them to holiness, then will he leave them to such deceitful
workers as shall please them in profaneness. And as it fared with Pharaoh and
his people* that would not believe Moset, but hearkened to the sorcerers of
Egypt, so shall it fare with all those that will not believe Gods faithful
servants, the true Preachers and ministers of the Gospel, but will be 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
led and headlongly carried away with popish seminaries, and such wicked guides
as sow false doctrine, and lead them into all errors and heresies. The
Sorcerers could not take away the plagues of the Frogs, etc. but indeed they
caused more to come, whereby the King and his people were the more troubled: so
is it in all false religion, they will bring men ^^to many troubles, but they
cannot help them out of one, they will help to perfect sin in men, but they
cannot rid men out of one sin. It is proper to the word of God only, and to
the true doctrine delivered out of the same, that ministers comfort to Gods
people in their troubles, and stays them in their distresses, as David says,
Except thy law had been my delight, I had perished in my troubles, Psalm 119.
92. Wherefore if in death, and in troubles we will be quickened and comforted,
let us delight in the statutes of the Lord, and wholly depend upon the doctrine
of his word.

12 Moses was not so well when he was in Madian, as if he had been in Canaan,
yet better Iethro no Idolater.
than when he was in Egypt: for though Iethro had not the worship of God pure
in every respect yet was not he an Idolater. For then Moses would not have
dwelt with him, nor yet have sacrificed with him, if he had offered to a
strange God. Whence we learn two things; the first, that if we have the chief
and principal points of religion with us although there may be some wants and
defects, yet that we make much of Gods great blessing therein, and labor
carefully and diligently to use them, showing our selves thankful to God for
them: so will the Lord in his due time bestow more blessings upon us, and
minister that which is wanting unto us* Secondly, that the Lord will always
have some to keep his truth, to the glory of his own name, and the
condemnation of the wicked. Iethroes religion Trial of Religion.
may be tried by these notes. 1. That he rejoiced more for the deliverance of
Gods people, than for the promotion of his son. 2. Because he was careful to
confirm his faith, by the experience of them which had received greater
graces. 3. Because his joy did break out into an open profession of sacrifice.
4. His divine speech and good counsel which he gave to Moses, does testify
that he was a pure worshipper of God: at the least he held the chiefest, and
was not a nouice in religion. By Iethro his example we may learn to try our
religion, if it be pure, then it works in us a care to use all the means.
2. We take joy in them. 3. We express the fruits of it in our life. 4. We
rejoice more at the prosperity of Gods people, than at our own preferments or
commodity.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Regeneration, and Sanctification.
IT is a greater miracle that a man should become a new creature, than a man
should be cured of never so strange a disease. Hereunto agree the Prophets, as
Esaias 11. where it is showed, that men as savage as wild beasts shall change
their nature, and become tame, so that the Prophet Regeneration how wonderful.
counts this a miracle: yea, if we our selves saw the wild beasts tamed, we
would count it a miracle. The Fathers think that the regenerating of a man is
more miraculous, than to turn water into wine: for the wine is of the grape,
the grape is of the tree, the tree is nourished by the water, so that wine
after a sort does come of water: so that the one is more common: the other is
to bring out one contrary out of another, and a thing of that which have no
cause going before, and he that marueileth not at the conversion of men, he
has not tasted of the gift of regeneration, and new birth.

2 Men must first be made, by feeling of their sins, to seek after Christ;
then by an holy faith to find Christ; and then by newnes of life to dwell with
Christ.

3 We have nothing to do with God the Father, the Son, or the holy Ghost,
unless we be regenerated.

4 As we have taken a vain delight in the vain course of this life; so we
must sigh We must delight spiritually in spiritual things.
and pray, to be delighted spiritually in* spiritual things. If the blood of
Christ has washed us from the guiltiness of our sins, then the holy Ghost
has purged us from the filthiness of our sins.

5 The reason why the graces of God are sweetest in our new birth, is, because
we do after the same, fall somewhat to the flesh again, otherwise it would
not be so. And regeneration (Ioh 3.) is the work of the spirit only, although
in respect of us it seems contrary between us and the world: for the world
thinks the pleasures present always sweetest: so Of feeling.
do not the children of God, even of their spiritual delights, nay they are
contrary in another thing to themselves, for they think their present
corruptions and temptations ever greatest, as in sick men, the last sickness
is the sorest, but they think the present feelings of the spirit ever least,
though it may be, they be as great as ever they were before: but who knows
the cause of these things, seeing it proceeds wholly from the spirit of God,
who as the wind blows here and there, and in what measure it pleases him.

6 Seeing we are the temples wherein the Lord will vouchsafe to dwell, it is
good reason we should cleanse our selves. In respect whereof, first the Prophet
Esaias. 52. 11. and then the Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. 17. building the exhortation of
cleansing, presuppose this, that where God will dwell there is a place
cleansed, and indeed a temple.

7 There is no man of judgment, that though in other places he thinks many
things lawful, or at the least indifferent in their own nature to be done,
yet he will not do them in the temple. So consequently, if we be Gods temple
(as every Christian ought to be We are Gods Temple.
wheresoever he goes) we must be cleansed. Again, for that the Lord has made
us priests, and we must carry the vessels of the Lord, therefore we must be
clean, Revel. 1. for priests were to cleanse others, and therefore good reason
it was they should be clean* and we, if we will be cleansers of others,
necessarily we must be clean our selves. Yet there is a third argument, Iere.
31. 1. which is most effectual, and that is, because our heavenly father is
holy. And if this move us not, we are rather as servants holy, for fear of the
whip, or we are mercenaries, we will cleanse our selves for hope of reward. God
our father is clean, therefore we his children must be also clean. God is of
pure eyes, and no defiled thing must enter into the new Jerusalem: wherefore we
must cleanse our selves, because we be the Lords Temple, because we be
priests, because our father is clean and holy. A thing is filthy in the How we
must purge our selves, and how many ways we may be defiled.
Law, either by touching another thing that is unclean, or which has unclean
issue in it self, so that there are these kinds of pollutions: the first, if
we touch an unclean thing: a thing unclean of it self, as a leaper: and
thus, if we touch sin, or the devil, or any limme of the devil, which be
things unclean, we shall be also unclean. The cause is, pitch will defile a
man. There is a second kind, which is this: we know that water, for as much as
it is a baser substance than the wine, though in it self it be no mere
unclean thing, corrupts 1
the wine being mixed with it: In like sort, the creatures the things of this
world, though 2
they be not wholly unclean of themselves, yet because they be things of baser
condition than our souls are, if our hearts be set on them, they pollute us.
There is a third kind, and 3
that is not by touching any unclean thing, but by committing impure by it
own nature: Note. Tit. 1. 15.
and this is the touch of our own reason, of our own wit, of our own
imaginations proceeding of our selves, which will defile us: though we touch
neither the devil, nor the world. And indeed this is such a kind of
defiling, as comes by a man's own sweat, or by our own blood, being polluted
in it self, as the babe which God passed by, Ezech. 16. 4. 5. From these
kinds of filthiness we must be cleansed. And yet there is another manner of
cleansing, and that is put down for us, Leuit. 13. 48. where it is spoken of a
warfe or woofe which had been defiled with the plague of leprosy, that shall
be washed. And yet although the Priest see it be clean, it shall not be
clean, until it be washed the second time, verse* 55. We must proceed from
cleansing with soap to cleanse with Fullers earth, and with Nitr^. Now, how
this cleansing must be, the Lord Jesus shows, Ioh. 15 3. 4. Now are ye
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you: but the spirit works by
the word. In Baptism we are cleansed, it is not the water that cleanses us,
but the spirit which is as a fire: how be it this fire has oil to minister
matter to it, which is the word. This word is that, which quickens and
inflameth us: and this is not only holy in it self, but it makes us holy
also, We must be thoroughly washed and sanctified.
if we believe it.

8 If we were to be cleansed but from some kind of filthiness, it were an
easy matter, we would easily conclude it. For there is no man, but cleanses
off some filthiness, no man has all the spots that are mentioned, but to be
scoured from all: this makes the purification full. It is said, Herod heard
John, and he heard him gladly, and he did many good things. So he was
cleansed in many things, but not in all, when it came to the sweet sin, Thou
shall not have thy Brothers wife: which should have made up all, then he broke
off. When Felix, Acts 24. had heard Paul's matter, he gave him liberty, but
with all he hoped he should have gotten some money, so that his heart was not
wholly cleansed. Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5. gave a great part of all their
possessions to the Apostles: but all came not, they kept back a piece. Naaman
(2. King. 5.) would worship and sacrifice to none, but to the true God: but yet
he would have the house of his master Rimmon excepted, to offer to the God
Moloch. So may we say of our times. The Bethulians would have a term to serve
God in: they were tearmers, but it was but for a time. This (all) then is that
which Our sanctification must not be of one part.
makes all perfect. And then it is wittily said of a Father, of this word
Catholic: As it signifies an University of all, as that God has a Catholic
Church, that is, in all Ages, and in all places, and of all estates of men, a
Church; so me thinks, that they are good Catholics that are sanctified
throughout, that will wholly cleanse themselves. So then we must thoroughly be
cleansed; that is, both in the flesh, and in the spirit: As 2. Cor. 7. 1. both
in heart and in hand, James, 4 In the Hebrew tongue it is worth the
observation, how two The godly are 1. Straight.
words commonly to this effect run together: the one is, that we must be
straight, as were all the Saints, Job, Paul, and Daniel, who were always
straight: So must they be that deal with God; they must have no crookednes in
them: the word (as I think) is alluding to the outward timber in a building.
The other word signifies Sound. It must not be 2. Sound. Simile.
hollow, though it be straight. So that these two must go together, straight,
and sound: we must neither be crooked, nor hollow. So referring these to the
Saints of God, whom we named, if you look to their outward parts, they were
straight, if you look into their internals, they were sound. This then serves
well for two sorts of men, which are both hypocrites. There be some men that
will be are the world in hand, that the best side is inward, Two sorts of men
hypocrites.
and the worst outward, as the Nicodemites, who, howsoever they do outwardly,
inwardly they worship God devoutly. Others there are clean skinned, men as
clean as Alabaster outwardly, but inwardly they be dissemblers, and they are
contrary to the other, 1
and bear the world in hand, that the best side is outward. These have the
cleanness 2
of the flesh, though not of the spirit: as the other think, they have the
cleanness of the spirit, though not of the flesh, and these be mere dangerous
dissemblers. If a man bow to Baal, one may see a spot of his knee, and yet he
will have a clean spirit, he is an hypocrite. Well, we must not be half
Christians, we must be good Catholics, clean throughout, clean both in the
flesh, and in the spirit*

9 The flesh is sure a very corrupt thing, and we should soon see it but for
the soul, which is as Salt to keep it from putrefying for a while, which if
it be gone, the flesh corrupts straight, which we should see, if we would but
take the view of a dead man out of the grave* It is but a rotten thing, and
therefore all that is bestowed on it, is laid upon that, which in the end will
make all as rottenness it self. They therefore do evil, that lay out all
their substance on their flesh, for it will rot: in regard whereof, the Apostle
bids us not to take any great thought for it, or to provide much for the lusts
thereof, Romans 13. All that comes of the flesh, and all that ends in the flesh
is filthy, and therefore we must not make our flesh a Queen, or as a Paradise
on the earth. We must sanctify both body and soul to the Lord. Paga^s and
Papists have better outward things then carnal Protestants. Spirit.


10 Our Savior CHRIST says, our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, therefore not to exceed the Pharisees, not to
exceed Heretics, nay not to exceed the Heathen men, but to want even the out
ward good things which they have, shows that all our Religion is in vain.
And yet to cleanse hand, foot, eye, tongue, and all without, is called but the
cleansing of the outside of the platters. But we must not rest here. We must
go yet further, and be pure in heart: for Blessed are the pure is heart: such
shall receive the blessing. We had great need to cleanse our spirits: for as
they retained the image of GOD before sin came, so now being corrupted, they
are most corrupt. For every thing degenerating into a contrary Nature to
that, which it was, is made most contrary. The honey a very sweet thing, yet
when it is often purified, many have a most bitter matter of it. So GOD his
nature is gentle, and he is long ere he be provoked to wrath: but when he is
angry, who is able to abide his wrath? down go mountains and hills, and all
before him: so the perfectest part of man being evil, is of all things most
abominable to the Lord. This deceiues all men, to think some good thing is
left in them. But if the tongue which speaks out of the abundance of the
heart, have but the overplus and superfluity of the heart, be a world of
wickedness, (as S. James says) how much wickedness think ye is in the heart?
Nay; the sin of the spirit is so evil, that the Lord hates the small smoking
stemes of it, even the very euaporations which ascend out of it. There be some
motes in it, which in the dark cannot be seen, as in time of superstition,
because of their palpable ignorance, they cannot be discerned: but when the
Sun beams come, those little motes are espied. Until the Sunne-beame had
shined to Paul, he could not see these motes, but afterward he saw, that Thou
shall not lust, was a great thing, and then seeing his motes, he fell out of
conceit with himself. Our fine spirits now-adayes will admit Religion, but
they will mingle it with that filthiness, that comes out of themselves, I mean
their own witty conceits. Thus we see, that a man that will grow up to the
clear hope of a better life, he must be cleansed from all filthiness of the
spirit, even from his finest sins: for otherwise they will work him woe
enough.

11 Touching sanctification, we must have our direction out of the old
Testament, and What is required to be sanctified.
we must consider, whether our thoughts, words, and works, be cleansed from
their outward corruptions, and though we be not guilty to men, notwithstanding,
I say, our thoughts are not sure. And all things are impure unto the Lord,
unless they be sequestered and made impropriate to God; so that, if we have set
our very thoughts apart to God, then there is a holiness begun, and then we are
meet not only for meat, but for a sanctified use. To understand this the
better, we must know that the Jews (who refer us by proportion of
sanctification to the signs which the Law has set down) say, that sundry
beasts serving for meat only, were not unclean, but if they come to an holy
use, they were unclean. So we, though we be not unclean in these outward
things, yet that is not enough, we must be clean also to serve the Temple,
and holy, as the Temple that is holy. Now the difference of the beasts used in
the Temple, and other common beasts, is in this, the beasts used to a common
use were used in many things, but those of the Temple, were used but to one. So
if we be to serve for an holy use, we must not be for when and for what we
list, but taken up in thought, word, and deed, to scrue the Lord: we are not
to bestow our thoughts on all things, but to refer them to the Lord
mediately, or immediately.

12 Certain it is, that to the cleansing of our selves, as it was in the Law,
that the go^^ Our sanctification must be continual, and is not perfected until
our resurrection.
and silver being cleansed for the service of God, had such a defiling by the
service of Idols, that no water could wash them clean enough, but being never
so well purged, yet they must of necessity pass through the fire: so we say
of our corrupt nature, though we cleanse it, and cleanse it very often and very
much, being so much corrupted both of it self and with the touch of outward
things; yet it must needs go through fire, and pass by death, which must
thoroughly purge it, without which it cannot wholly be purified. For before an
universal cleansing, there must be a dissolution of nature. There may be other
services Death is the complement of our mortification.
to use in us, as there was of those beasts that were for meat: but when we
must come to that one and immediate service of God, there cannot be any, until
our nature he dissolved, and are passed through the furnace of death, and so we
shall be freed from all filthiness. In the mean season the crackes and breaches
of our nature, and the corruption crept Death.
into the bones, sinews, and veins hidden in the secret parts, between the
marrow and the joints, (whither, the Apostle says, the word of God does
pearce, Heb. 4. 12*) I mean the sins of natural corruption shall not be
laid to our charge, and for other pollutions in our souls we are to strive
against them, and to grow up in the fear of God, which To fulfill the days
of our sanctification The sanctification of a Nazarite.
(2 Cor. 7. 1.) is to fulfill, as the Virgin Mary fulfilled the days of her
purification, the days of our sanctification. The word is taken from the text
of the book of Numbers, where the days of consecrating a Nazarite must be
fulfilled. He should be many days in cleansing himself, which if they were
not fulfilled, his sanctification should not be perfect. So that if the
Nazarite coutinued thus until the end, then he should be free: but if even the
very night before his time was ended he touched any unclean thing, then all
that he did before was void, and he was to begin all his days again, for he
was impure. For so long as any part of the sanctification is to be done, all is
imperfect. This is more clearly set down Numb. 19 11. 12. where mention is
made of purifying the third day, and the seventh day, and if the man touching
the dead did not fulfill every day, then though he came near the end, and
fulfilled not the end, he should be impure still: if he purified not himself
the third day, he should not be clean the seventh day. So we must not deliver
an holiness to God for a time, or in some causes, or for some persons: but we
must thoroughly fulfill the days of our holiness, not presenting (I say) a
maimed holiness: as in the Law it was not permitted for a man to offer a lame or
maimed beast, though it wanted but a tail, which was a small thing, yet for
that defect the Lord refused it. There are a great many of professors, which
would needs be men sanctified, but they are loathe to be cleansed, and to
fulfill the days of their holiness. They will go a while, a day, or two
days, they will not come to the third, and then they are unclean the seventh
day, and so all their labor is in vain. Others, when they cannot away with
this strictnes to continue, say on this manner: Seeing we are still imperfect,
let us be imperfectly imperfect, let us be unclean still, let us prepare
rivers of sin: for Christ shed streams of blood, the more we sin, the
greater glory will come to Christ. And thus they stand at a stay, their
holiness is a standing holiness, it fills not, it stands at a stay, they are no
perfect Nazarites, they still lie in their pollutions: their motions are from
the house to the Church, and from the Church home again, and at the A true
description of our ignorant and idle Protestants.
years end they are as holy as in the beginning of the year: they go and go
to the Church, and make many voyages, as an horse in the Mill makes many
circuites, who labors still from morning until night, and then he is but where
he was at the first: so they are in a motion from morning until night, and at
night they are even where they were when they begun in the morning. There is
another sort not standing still, but they make many beginnings: Simile.
and when they come to the third day they begin again, and again, and
again, still they go back, and then they must begin again, and so they come
to holiness by fits. These many beginnings are not good. There is but one
motion commanded, but it must be continued, we must fulfill our many days,
when we have once begun, we must not defile our selves to become new Nazarites.
Neither must we stand at a stay, but go forward; but if happily we do fall,
we must take a view of our selves, that if we fall not the second time* we
will fulfill our days indeed. The equity hereof stands in this, the Lord
respects the fruit, and not the blossom. He calls himself Alpha, the
beginning, for he* is so; but in respect of the end he is also Omega. So must
it stand with them, that are his Temple, they must not be only Alpha, but also
Omega, they must fulfill their holiness. In regard whereof, we see Ezech. 9.
that the mourners are marked, it is with the letter Tau, which is the last
letter in the Hebrew Alphabet, and it betokens an end, to show they had not
quaumes and starts of well doing, but they were men fulfilling their days. We
know the Trees in Gods Orchyard, are Palms and Cedars. The nature of the Palm
tree is to grow being The Palm tree.
young, and to bear fruit continually: the Cedar though it be long indeed ere
it grow, yet when they bring forth they bear fruit long, and when they are
very old. So they that are Romans 5. 10.
planted in the Lords house, the older they grow, the more fruit they bear,
being of the nature of the Cedar, growing from faith to faith, not making many
beginnings. And if the Lord be not content to abound, but to ouer-abound in
mercy, then must we also even abound more and more, in mercy, grace, and
sanctification.

13 It is not possible without affliction to enter in Christ's kingdom, except
ye sup of that Affliction.
cup, and be baptized with that baptism, that he was baptized with: Why? But
here is now no persecution. Surely if we have not Esaues sword, we shall be
sure to have Ismaels tongue, and that is worse than a two edged sword, This
time will afford no sharper, but when the beast shall be loosed again, and
when the Dogge-dayes come in again, we must learn joy fully to receive the
other, and to account a chain of gold less honorable, than a fetter of
iron, which shall be clapped upon us for Christ and his Gospel sake.

14 The belly was the first sword the devil drew against man. Paul says to
Timothy, Temperance and abstinence
drink no more water: in sickness or infirmities we have leave to drink
wine, otherwise we must take heed of wine wherein there is excess. Noah
thought that after the great water, Practiced of God* children.
wine would have done him no hurt, but it made him a laughing stock to his own
son. The children of Israel did eat and drink, and then rose up to play, for
they had not so much lust before meat: and what play played they at that time?
that which made Moses break the Tables for* anger. Lot did most shamefully
abuse his body, where though he cannot be accused for wilfulnes, yet he may be
condemned of negligence. And what children came of that stock? surely the
washpot, and the maker clean of shoes, the enemies Lots posterity
of God his children, which might not be received after fourteen generations.
When Eliah was to be provided of God, to have him his Cater, what meat fed he
of? A cake bakte on 1 King. 19. 6.
the coals, and a pot of water: might not God have sent him roast meat and
baked meat? But he knew it was not best for him. So Daniel being in the lions
den, God might also easily have caught one of Nabuchadnezzers guard, carrying a
service up to the Kings board, to bring meat to Daniel: he seized upon
Habacucke carrying the Reapers their meat, which I think was but a homely
service. Elisha when he made a set feast for the young Prophets, they had
nothing to dinner but a few worts, and there were Coliquintidaes among them
too. Daniel durst not venture on the Kings fare, but put up a supplication,
that they might have nothing but gruell.

15 It is too unnatural to yoke the spirit under the flesh in most miserable
thraldom, to set the crown on her head to make her a Lady, and to compel
the spirit to take laws, injunctions and commandment at her hands; to set her
at the helm, and to make her word to stand, and if she say, I will, that thou
abuse thy body with surfettings, drunkenness, adultery, it must be done
whatsoever it cost. Why this is to set a blind horse, or an vntuly Simile.
mad horse foremost in the teeme: this is to saw off our own leg of flesh,
and to get us on a wooden leg; this is to take the Crown, the Scepter, and
the kingdom from the Olive tree, and Fig tree, and to give it to the
scratching and unprofitable Bramble, which will serve us to no use but to
scratch us by the hands. True it is, it goes well with this body of sin,
that it should be so, and it goes to her heart it should be otherwise. But
alas consider, though to a man ruled by the flesh, adultery ^ee at the first
as sweet as the honey The flesh must not rule.
comb, and as smooth as the oil, yet the end is very wormehood: nay, nay, it
is a pearcing sword. Though wine in the glass has a goodly look, yet at last
it ^^ingeth like a Serpent, and biteth like a Cockatrice. Though to be unruly
in wringing and oppressing, grudge not the conscience awhit; though stolen
water be sweet, and bread privily eaten has a good taste; yet in the end
their mouth shall be full of gravel, and S^ch^ms whoredom will end with a
sword, and Achans Baby lonish garment will cost him his heart blood. Far
otherwise is the condition of the soul than is of the body: for where as we
have need of a table and sundry meats to cherish our body, and of many
sundry drinks to refresh it, of clothes to wrap it in, of medicines to salve
it, and of many other things to support and bear it up to the soul: to the
soul there is but one thing necessary, even faith in Christ, this is to it
the bread that came down from heaven, the rivers of water Faith.
flowing to everlasting life: this is Esaues coat that smells so well in
Isaacs nostrels, this is the sovereign plaster, this is all in all* Oh how
much better is that, that needs but one thing? By this faith we obtain the
reward promised us. True it is we must fight; and ouercomming we shall have
the reward. Howbeit, God does not only set before us the reward, Note.
and intaileth it to us, but he gives us also to overcome, he assisteth us,
he encourages, he smites for us, he does all for us, he gives us the
means: only this he requires, that if we feel our selves ouermatched, we
will but cry to him, if our heart fail us to say to him, thou art our
buckler. Let us therefore press down the flesh, and exalt the spirit.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Sabbath.
IN Exodus 16. 4. we may read how the Lord would try the children of Israel,
whether they would keep the Sabbath or no: he applies the same speech in
particular for the keeping of that day, which generally is set down for keeping
the whole law, to the end that as diligent as they would be to keep all the
law, so diligent should they be to keep his Sabbath: and The religious
observation of the Sabbath.
that they might do this the better, both in keeping it themselves and
committing it to posterity, the mercy of God is commended herein, that he
would give them double Manna for the Sabbath day. The like mercy he gave to
this people when they were in danger of war, that the enemies that day
should not invade them. Now although the Lord deal not in the same manner with
us, yet the same promise is made to us, to take away that too much carefulnes
of provision, which we might excuse our selves by. Then we should trust to this
promise, and equity thereof, as Paul alleges it, 1. Cor 8* that albeit the
Lord uses not the same means to defend us, and preserve us, yet we may be
sure that he will ever defend us and minister to our necessity.

2 The keeping of this commandment, is the keeping of all the rest, as the
breach of this is the breach of all the rest: for so he says, Exodus 16. 28.
That the Israelites had broken his commandments, when this one was only
broken.

3 The want of the true doctrine of the Sabbath has bred two extremities.
First in Papistrie, Two extremities for want of the religious observation of
the Sabbath.
it brought so many holy days. Secondly in the Gospel, many controversies
about the ceremonies.

4 Of the ancient Fathers, some thought that this day was ceremonial, and
therefore was appointed of the Church, as other days might also be appointed,
and have been as we see: Other some said it was mere ceremonial, and now is
ceased, so that now there remains a continual Sabbath: others seeking
liberty, have been contented to use it, as their occasion served.

5 In Exodus 16. Moses speaks of the Sabbaths, as a thing that was in use
before, and 1
came not in with his ministry; and therefore no reason it should be abolished
with the same.

6 Whatsoever was requisite to Adam in his innocence, and to keep him from
sin, is 2
now requisite in regeneration to help us out of sin: if Adam being perfect
had yet need of means, then much more we, whose regeneration is imperfect.

7 If Adam being clean from sin, had yet need of means to keep him there
from: 3
much more we, from whom the dominion of sin is but only taken away, and yet
the remnants of sin be within us. This kind of reasoning is good, for we use
it against heretics, to prove the necessity of the Word and Sacraments. Adam
had need of the Word and Sacraments, having the word in his heart and in the
outward Commandment, therefore have we need of these as he had, though we
could come to the perfection of Adam (which as yet we cannot) contrary to the
Anabaptist. They will say, we are risen again; then let them not eat, let
them not marry, let them show themselves void of all humane infirmity, which
must needs be, if we be risen again, for then should we be like Angels.

8 The Commandment of the Sabbath is of such nature, that it was given for our
infirmity, as is manifest, for to him all days are alike, therefore he blessed
it to man. Genesis 2. 1. The sanctification of the Sabbath.
In that he is said to sanctify it, he did it not for himself, but for man,
as he is said to sanctify or bless the Creatures for man's use. A man must
labor six days, and lead a life active, and the seventh day he must lead a
life contemplative, in having a spiritual use of Simile.
the Creatures. Why would the Lord have the garden dressed? even for that it
might be more glorious: for there was the Summer and Winter, budding and
falling of the leaf, which the Lord wrought by means: Even as needful was it
that the soul of Adam should be dressed that he might grow: for although he
was made in the Image of God, yet so that he should grow up therein. And this
Commandment is for our imitation, it is plain by this reason, because that
the same words that are here to persuade him to the obedience of this
Commandment, is used, Exodus 20. to persuade all others to obey the same:
therefore as Adam for his infirmity stood in need of this help, till he
were translated to the heavens, to lead a continual Sabbath, so is to us.

9 The end of Marriage in the beginning, was to preserve man in obedience:
since his Marriage.
fall there came another end to raise him from his fall, and to help him in
his obedience: so the end of the Sabbath was one before the fall, and another
since.

10 The moral law was not given first by Moses, but renewed, because the Lord
had tried them long by tradition, and they profited not, as is plain in every
Commandment, and therefore this law for the Sabbath was not then first given,
but renewed as the others were, wherefore it is no more ceremonial than the
rest.

11 In this that the Lord makes express mention of the six days, and
afterward of the seventh, it appears, that the order of continuing the six
days, is here noted to be usual, and the Sabbath to come after: therefore it
was not then first delivered by Moses, it was before, though much abused.

12 Yea, the ceremonial law was in substance before Moses, because we read of
Altars, and holy days for the sacrifices to be offered in, though they were
corrupted: for the lord left not his people to worship as they list, because
Obedience was ever better than Sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15.
The Lord making Laws, respects not what any one man needs, but what most
stand Will worship ever condemned.
in need of: therefore seeing there is mention of Priests, Sacrifices,
Altars, Holy Days, and that the Gentiles which had these, borrowed them of the
Jews, it is manifest that the Lord never left his people to their own
government in his worship.

13 The Lord gave the ten Commandments and spoke them himself, Exo. 20 Deu.
5. Yea Moses added many things: hence we may gather that whatsoeues the Lord
spoke himself, it belongs to all, that which Moses added was for the Jews,
and so is ceremonial.

14 The Lord sanctifies this day, when he commands it to holy uses: the
people sanctify it when they so use it.

15 The Jews were punished, not for breaking the ceremony, but for contempt
of Number. 15.
Gods Commandment, and for doing it with an high hand: as appears there,
where he The breach of the Sabbath punished.
that gathered sticks is adjudged to die. For first there is a description of
the sin, and then follows that in practice which was in word or in precept.
This is also seen in the law of the Fast, wherein no man must work, for who
so wrought, he should die, not for that he wrought, but for that he contemned
the means to be humbled: so the like reason generally is for working on the
Sabbath and the fasting days, that they were not punished for the ceremony,
but for contempt of the ordinance of God so necessary. The equirie is, in that
the Lord gives six days to work, and but one to serve him, if the first
being a permission does endure for ever, then does the other also remain for
ever. And that this permission to work on the six days, cannot be restrained
for any religious use, it appears, as in that Adam had the use of the
creatures, and the Apostle does leave all things free, and therefore these
days came not for any religious uses.

16 But some may except, the Lord made holy days and fasting days, therefore
we may do so now. Answer, first, exceptions do not take away a general rule.
Secondly, the Lord makes Laws for men and not for himself: therefore they
may not follow him, unless they have the like reason, as in the day of
humbling for any singular benefit, as in the Coronation of the Prince; yet
these days are not taken up of men, but the Lord blows the Trumpet, and in
neglecting them it is sin, for God must have this prerogative only, to make
Laws. Seeing the equity of the Commandment is to us as well as to them,
therefore the Sabbath belongs to us as well as to them. The Lord created all
things and gave them to all, and all may have use of them: therefore this is a
sure proof that the reason is common to us with them, and so this Commandment.

17 The exposition of this Commandment shows the same: for the worship of
God is never commanded, but this also is commanded, and the corruption thereof
never corrected, but this also above all the rest: as may appear in all places
of the Scriptures, where mention is made of the Sabbath, especially, Numb. 15.
And is all this because of the pretermitting of a Ceremony? Would he not be
ever worshipped in spirit? Never to delight in the Ceremony? Therefore this
was because the means of Gods worship were contemned.

18 That it should be changed once it was meet, but never to be changed again:
for as The Lords day.
then the day of rest for the creation was most fit; so now the day of our
redemption is most fit, seeing now the world is as if it were made new, and
therefore cannot be changed.

19 Then they could not kindle fire, which we do, therefore it was
ceremonial. First, Kindling of fire on the Sabbath.
some think that commandment was but for time of the wilderness. Secondly, the
Jews in every commandment had something ceremonial, which we have not now
being in CHRIST. As in the second commandment, we are to read, and teach the
word of God, it belongs to us as well as to them, but to have frontlets we
are not bound. So of singing, we are bound to have singing as well as the
Jews, but yet not with Organes and such like. So of burying the dead, we are
as staightly charged to do it as the Jews, yet not with ointments, and such
cost as they were at. So in every commandment they had some thing
pedagogicall which is taken away; but the commandment it self, is more
straightly required of us then of them, because it is more clearly set forth to
us then to them.

20 Not only they that spend the Lords day on their pleasures, are to be
reproved as breakers of the Lords service: but they also which work upon the
same. Amongst them, those that are the children of God, whose hearts God has
touched by his spirit, shall see that the Lord will not let them prosper in the
same sin; but what they take in hand shall go slowly forward, their
bargains shall bring but small gain, they shall have but little use of that
which they buy on that day. Nay, sometimes they shall see that when they have
broken the Lords Sabbath, some judgment or other does light upon them and
their labors, so that they will confess that their Sabbath days labors stand
them in small stead.

21 Many will observe straightly their Easter day, but we must have every
week an Easter day, to consider of the benefit of Christ's Resurrection; not
that we must only that day think thereupon: For as our Father Adam every day
when he dressed the Garden, should think upon the Creation, yet on the
Sabbath day he should wholly give himself to observe the same: So must we
every day consider of Christ's Resurrection, yet on that day we must do it
wholly, that we may recompense the want of the former days.

22 He that keeps the Sabbath in truth and in conscience, will continually
walk uprightly Note.
in his calling all the week after; and on the contrary, he that is a
careless prophaner of the Sabbath, if his life be examined, he shall be found
to be a loose liver, if he lie not in some notorious sin. Therefore if any
man desire to walk in the commandments of God, let him labor in conscience
to be a sanctifier of the holy Sabbath.

23 Many will be superstitious obseruers of their popish-holy-daies, and
straight keepers of their Easter Day, and then shall all business be done
quickly, that all may go to Church: but the Lords day is of small account with
them. Yet must we make every Sabbath day, an Easter Day, (that is) a day
wherein we are to record the Resurrection of Christ, and all other mercies
which God through him, has showed on us, and on those days must we labor
diligently to feel the fruit of them all.

24 Playing should not be on the Lords day, because man's finite nature being
subject to distractions, is no less hindered by pleasure, then burdened with
worldly cogitations: yea, and so many are the exercises of religion and love,
both private and public, appertaining to that day, that a man is not able to
perform all the number of them in one day, The breach of the Sabbath punished,
and how to order our affections in the view of such judgments.
much less then has he time to follow his delights.

25 Upon a great rain falling in a Fair time, not long after the Sabbath,
which by the Fair was broken, he had this working in his heart, how one
should order his affections in such a case. First, in respect of God, whether
one should not rejoice, seeing men would not be taught by so long preaching, to
keep the Sabbath, that the Lord, eue^ by his afflictions should teach men his
holy ordinance. Secondly, in regard of men, whether he should not pity them,
for that their goods were subject to such dangers. True it is, that men are to
be pitied: but when the question is of Piety toward GOD, and pity toward
men, it were better to rejoice that the Lord will through some hindrance of
worldly things, tender the obeying of his own ordinance, than piety should
decay, and so many souls perish.

26 Against them that say the Sabbath is ceremonial, we must first mark, that
the Prophets are continual vrgers of the moral law, as for the ceremonies,
when they came to 1
them, they pass them over, saying, that God has no pleasure in them, as Esaias
2. and 66. and among the rest, nothing is more namely, and precisely urged than
the Sabbath, therefore it is no ceremony. Again, grant it to be ceremonial,
and ye shall make God a confounder 2
of the Law and Gospel, a mingler of the ceremonial law with the moral; and
admitting one ceremony in the Decalogue, why may there not be two or three or
more? Concerning this mixture, many heresies hereby have crept into the Church:
and it cannot be avoided, if we make the fourth Commandment ceremonial. We
know that when Saul was among the Prophets, 1. Sam. 19. it was a common saying,
Is Saul among the Prophets? as if it were no good order, but the Prophets
should be among themselves, and Saul with 3
his companions. A third reason may be, that Christ in the Gospel delivers a
sum of the whole law, Love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self. But
this sum of the law is merely moral, therefore the law, whereof this is a
sum, is merely moral, except we will accuse Christ for giving us a moral
sum of a ceremonial thing. Besides, the Commandments 4
were but a renewing of the law of nature, for it was written in the breast of
Adam by the finger of God. Now there became a declining from this law of
nature, by the negligence of them that should have taught it to their children.
Therefore would the Lord have it written once for all. But in the law of nature
there is no ceremony, for it is the image of God, and whatsoever is in God, it
is altogether holy and for ever, and ceremonies are holy but for a time:
therefore in the image of God, in the Decalogue, there is no ceremony, and
consequenly the Sabbath is not ceremonial. A fifth reason is this: they that
affirm the Sabbath to be a Ceremony, must either say that the Ceremony is in
the 5
word Sanctify, or in the word Sabhath: for this is the Commandment,
Sanctify the Sabbath: as for Remember, it is but a prouiso, and no part of the
Commandment, but the force of the Commandment stands in the word Sanctify,
and it is a Verb transitiue, and therefore cannot be without an Accusative
case, as Day or Sabbath, and in sanctifying is no ceremony: Diem, or Sabbathum.
Therefore the Commandment is no Ceremony. Moreover it must needs follow,
that that which is concluded by a reason, is commanded by ^ precept; but in
this it is concluded by reason: your labor and rest must be scanned by Gods
labor and rest, 6
and the Lord labored six days, and tested the seventh day, therefore you
must work al your works in six, and rest the seventh. As much reason is
this, that as Christ reasons 7
how the Divorce being a thing brought in upon occasion, did not therefore bind
the conscience of the Jews because from the beginning it was not so, which was
as much, as if he should say or insinuate by the contrary, whatsoever was from
the beginning it binds the conscience. So we say of the Sabbath, that it
being from the beginning, not only printed in the breast of Adam, but also
sounded in his ears, must therefore bind the conscience.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Thanksgiving and right use of the creatures.
NOne can ever praise the Lord, till he be ravished with his greatness, and
goodness, and the want of this feeling causes us to be cold in thanksgiving,
even as our prayers be cold when we have but small feeling of sin.

2 And that we do in truth of heart acknowledge God to be the preserver of us
from Of unthankfulness.
all evils, and giver of all mercies, we may try by our thankfulness and prayer.

3 The sin that was in the Israelites is in us, for the want of one good thing,
does make us rather to mourn, than the having of many good things does make us
thankful.

4 We must be thankful presently and speedily, when we will long keep the
remembrance of any mercy.

5 Because our faith yields but drops of thankfulness, the Lord is constrained
to yield but drops of his mercies.

6 Being with one afflicted in body and mind, unto whom the Lord had showed
great tokens of salvation, and fruitful to sanctify the present afflictions:
he said, I fear not the time of the visitation of them, that thereby do grow
in the gifts and graces of God: but Use of the creatures.
rather I fear least the time of their deliverance should be tainted with
unthankfulness, and so woefully they should loose the fruit of that good which
so dearly they purchased of the Lord.

7 We have no continuing city now, but we look for another, not that we may
not call these things ours, which are sanctified unto us by the word and
prayer, and in a good conscience using them: but that we should not set our
hearts upon them, further than they are sanctified unto us, we should not desire
to use them.

1 These outward benefits are promised with a condition, that so far we shall
have them as is for his glory and our good, with which condition we are
commanded to ask them: if then we want any thing, we must know it is not good
for us, but hurtful: we are to magnify his mercies, which holds those
things from us which are not for our good: and yet gives us that by the want
thereof, which by the thing enjoyed we could not come unto. For the thing does
not hurt us, but our corruptions which abuse it, therefore he keeps promise
when he takes it away, for he has made the promise for our good.

9 It has been the order of the Church, to begin and end their assemblies with
praises. And no marvel, for of all sacrifices this seems to be most
principal. First it was an exercise in Paradise, and it shall be an exercise
in heaven. Again, this exercise shall continue, when all other shall cease.
For in heaven we shall not need the word, nor prayer, nor Sacraments, nor
discipline, but the praising of God shall not cease, being a peculiar exercise
of the Angels and Saints of God in heaven. Besides, to this exercise of
praising God are all other exercises directed. For why do we hear the word,
but that feeling increase of knowledge, we may praise God? Why do we pray, but
that having experience of God his mercy, we may more amply give thanks to
God? Why do we receive the Sacraments, but that being ravished with comforts
by them, we might give greater glory to God? And moreover, if we may
conjecture the goodness of a thing by our unwillingness to do it, this exercise
may be thought to be the best, because it is the hardest. Large volumes of
protestations fly from us, but in our need, which would make one believe we
would be thankful, but scarce a word of performing any thing is found in us,
after our prayers be heard: wherein also we are not unlike to the dissembling
Shipmen, who in extreme dangers leave their Oars and fall to prayer, but
coming to the land, they fill Cans, and drown all the Simile.
remembrance of their gracious delivery with deep drinking. In sickness and
health we are full of praying, but the tempest past we are too quiet and
careless. It is marvelous in our Liturgy, that among an hundred prayers,
scarce one thanksgiving is found, and yet in evil matters, either by a natural
Logic, or cunning Rhetoric, we have learned to begin a new suite, with a
thankful commemoration of receiving the old.

CHAP. LXX. Of Temptation.
GOd tempts us not as the devil, or the wicked do to evil, but to try in
what measure How God tempts us.
we have profited by his mercies, and yet by the same means that the devil
does, but to a far other end, as to let us see our unworthiness, and weakness
of our faith. If we did thoroughly believe this, that as many benefits or
afflictions we have, so many baits are for the devil, and so many means for
God to crown his own mercies, we should be very careful to finish our
salvation with fear and trembling.

2 If we do truly acknowledge God to be he that preserves us in mercy from
evil, Phil. 2. 14. 15.
and we have the testimony of a good conscience: then if the Lord try us
with want of things, with disquietnesse of mind, etc. we shall sustain our
selves, because we know it is not for sin, but for the trial of our faith,
because we have walked in our ways, and tarried in our calling, he has some
end in it which we know not, and therefore we may look for his help and
comfort in his good time, and that he will give us wisdom to bear it, or
else recompense our wants in spiritual graces.

3 The Israelites had a great temptation, yet many think they were not
tempted, to be brought into a wilderness without meat: if he should try us
so now, we would be as ready to murmur (though we think the contrary now)
as they were, seeing we repine if we want but a little.

4 It is certain that the Lord does as well try men by benefits, as by want,
and a dangerous Deuteronomy. 29 21.
temptation is it: for as the Israelites were at the bitter waters tried by
want; so also were God tries men as well by benefits, as by wants.
they tried by enjoying the goodness of God in the Manna: Seeing the^ that both
ways men are tried, every man has to try what his temptation is, and against
what he has to fight, as if he be in prosperity, he has to fight against
pride, security and contempt, or small regarding of Gods creatures, with which
we must continually strive, or else he shall have no trial of his faith, nor
comfort in that he has received. Again, if a man be in adversity, then has
he to fight against distrust, murmuring, repining, vnpatiencie, and such
other, which will overcome us, if by faith we do not resist them, and so shall
we spoil our selves of the goodness of the Lord.

5 Herein has also every man to discern his temptation: a man is sick, and
yet not altogether cast down; a man is poor, and yet not oppressed therewith,
even here does the Lord try him whether he love him or no, whether he worship
him in truth or not. Herein does the Lord tempt every one of us still, when he
commands us to pray but only for daily bread, we ought therefore herein to
take a trial of our selves, but the over ^^ hartnesse of our nature is such,
that we can never look to our own estate present, wisely to think of that,
but if we be in poverty, oh then we would serve God indeed if we were rich: if
we be in sickness, we would serve God if we had our health, Again, being in
health, we think we would serve God if we were somewhat tamed with sickness: if
we be rich, we think we should well serve God if we were in poverty; in the
mean time not studying to glorify God in sickness, riches, and health, by
thankefulnes for them, and the right usage of them, to that end, for which he
has given us them, neither yet regarding in our sickness and poverty, with
faith and patience to wait on the Lord, being contented to serve and The
trial of our service and zeal of God.
worship him with whatsoever he shall lay upon us: for by the want of these
things the Lord does prove us, whether we worship and serve him for these
outward things, or for the loving zeal that we have of his name and glory: so
that if we cannot willingly come to read and hear Gods word, to pray, and
receive the Sacraments, though we be pinched The Devils objection Job.
with want of things, but we bestow more study, care, and time upon them, then
of this worship of God, it is a manifest sign, that for these things we serve
the Lord, or else we would 1. Does Job fear God for nothing.
not.

6 By the example of the Israelities, we are taught to take heed that our
hearts be rightly and wholly with God, that not only in the plentiful
abundance of things, we can be content to serve him, but also even in want, and
in greatest afflictions, knowing that by this means the Lord does take trial
of us, even as silver is tried in the fire, that the dross may be burnt and
taken away. Secondly, that the metal be more pure and fine; even so we by
such trials should not only have our great corruptions purged, but we should
also be made more fit for the use and service of the Lord. For of our selves
whether we be tempted on the right hand, or on the left, we are not able to
stand, as we see in the Israelites. So long as the Lord continues true
Religion with this government, every man thinks he shall ever stand: but when
there shall come a change, there will be a trial: so when God shows us
tokens of his love, we may think we trust in him, but when he denies Trial
of faith
these tokens unto us; there is the trial. When the children of Israel were
either in a moderate estate, or in some new deliverance, they lived very godly,
and are commended, but if abundance of things did once make them wanton, they
fell to Idolatry, and when they were in misery they murmured: where we see
that it is easy to come to general obedience, but in particular to embrace it
in every place and time, this is harder. Again, that is only true faith,
which in trouble and want holds out constantly, and fails not for any
temptation.

7 The Lord does try his people many ways, yet but with one thing at once: as
some times with want of bread, or with want of meat, or with want of water, he
does not power all his punishments at once, to let them see the corruption of
their hearts, because they are ready to distrust for every thing: and again, to
let them see, that for many things they cannot be thankful. This is the
ordinary dealing of the Lord with us, he does us good many ways, he tries us
sometime one way, sometime another way: and does not lay all his punishments on
men at once, unless their sins be come to the full, and they deserve it: or
else if he be minded to take some singular trial of men, as he dealt with Job,
and thus he deals with us, to bear with our weakness, and to try us, whether
the having of many blessings would move us rather to follow the Lord, than the
want of some one thing would cause us to forsake him. This may be seen in
particular trials, as when he gives a man many things, and We are as ready to
mur mur as the Israelites.
lets him want his health. If we consider this, we shall see that we are as
ready to murmur as ever they were: for if the Lord give a man two years
health, yet one years sickness does more make him to murmur, than many years of
health does make him thankful. For the want of this will make men deny God, and
the Gospel, and to be ready to go to witches for their health, and will not
look for help at the Lords hands. The infidelity of the Isralites was
greatly herein bewrayed, for did God make the waters of Egypt blood? dried up
the red sea? made bitter waters sweet? would not that God also make waters to
come out of the rocks in the wilderness? their murmuring is here therefore
very manifest, and our murmuring is now as great as theirs was. For though men
think that this people did evil to murmur, and think that now there are
greater occasions the^ they had: let us consider their temptation, and we shall
see it will excuse them, and greatly accuse us. For what temptation was it to
have many children and cattle, and not to know where to have water for them?
We upon less occasions will murmur, for though we confess that we are in
better case the^ our fathers were, yet because some have less than others
have, therefore they are ready to murmur, though they have otherwise sufficient:
Much more therefore would men murmur if they had nothing, and then would they
bid God and his word and all farewell. And has not God dealt with us as
mercifully as with them? Yea surely, if we have hearts to consider Gods
providence, for who cannot see that the Lord has delivered him often from
dangers? Whom has not the Lord dealt his mercy most liberally to? Therefore
are we as much without excuse as ever they were.

8 Moses finding the Israelites to murmur for water, calls the murmuring, a
tempting of God, because it did not proceed of infirmity, seeing they had
tasted of, and felt the wonderful mercies of God for them, far greater than
this was to give them drink: for by the former miracles they knew that God was
able and also willing to help them, and therefore seeing they still murmured,
Moses calls this a tempting of God, whereas before when they murmured diverse
times, yet he did bear with them, as such as did offend of infirmity. Where
we see that God dealing with us as with them, has borne with the time of our
ignorance, and we may al confess, that the Lord does not deal with us
according to the works of our own hands: but if we will be ignorant still,
and despise instruction, or after we have had experience of his goodness, if
then we will presume to tempt God, it is fearful, when we know the great
goodness of the Lord, and have experience of the same in our selves, Psalm. 93.
2. When we know it is a sin which we commit, and yet we will tempt God
whether he will punish or no, as Peter rebuked Ananias, Act. 5. and Paul
rebuked those who in vain excuses would eat in Idols temples, saying, do you
provoke the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. And this was the temptation with which the devil
tempted What it is to tempt God.
our Savior, saying, cast thy self down. But Christ answered and said, if I
should so do without Gods commandment, I should deny his providence which
only watches over men in their ways. And thus he puts away the devil;
this then is to tempt God, and this Moses means when he rebuked the people,
saying, why tempt ye the Lord? that is to say, You know your sin well
enough, the dealing of the Lord with you is manifest, and mine also; now add
not rebellion unto sin, but if you sin, then do you tempt the Lord: The Lord
in Psalm. 95. passes over other sins, and makes th^^ or^^ of temptation.
(...) be swear, etc. Now let us consider when we fall into some sin which we
know no^, the Lord is merciful, but if we then, when we know it is a sin by
the law of God, and when we have felt every way the hand of God upon us, and
the spirit of God checking us To sin against knowledge is a tempting of God.
for it, and that the Lord has used means to bring us out of it, if then (I
say) we sin, this is a plain tempting of God. And this we must apply to our
several transgressions, as if a man have bin an adulterer or an angry person,
or c^uetous before his knowledge, the lord will bear with it, but after the
Lord has dealt with us in these several sins as before is set down, then if
men do sin, this is the tempting of the Lord, and this is the beginning God
bears long with the offenses of our ignorance.
of the wrath of God. And such men stand in a very fickle estate, and are in
great danger to fall into the hands of the Lord. This is then a comfortable
doctrine, to hear that the Lord will hear with the offenses of our ignorance,
and will not lay them to our charge, if then we will go cheerfully forward,
when he gives us knowledge and other means to draw us unto him: but if we
refuse instruction, and will not be drawn from our sins, this To refuse
knowledge is a tempting of God.
is a tempting of God, and this shall be laid to our charge: as we see that
the Lord says to David, that he was in all things upright before him: but in
the case of Vriah* because his other sins which he committed, both often and
grievously, were but of humane infirmity, and this was contrary to knowledge,
and again he sought means to hide his sin, and was not easily brought from
it, yet did he obtain pardon, because this was but once, and David's sins.
he was much humbled for it: But Saul often doing the same, at last asked
counsel of a familiar spirit by a Witch, which he before had punished,
wherein he did clean contrary to his knowledge, even for this it was said,
that the Lord did cut him off. Wherefore we have to pray with David. Psalm. 19.
Lord who does understand the errors of his life? then purge us from our secret
sins, and keep us that no presumptuous sins do bear rule over us. so
shall we be free, etc. For if a man sin against man there may be an arbiter,
but if a man sin against the 1. Sam. 2.
Lord, who shall deal for him? As Eli says to his Sons q d. If you had done
this being ignorant, it had been a small matter, but now you that have been
taught of me the contrary, have now made the sacrifice of the Lord to stincke,
and so have tempted the Lord.

9 As it is a great comfort that no temptation does invade us, but that which
has taken 1. Cor. 10.
hold of the nature of man, so this ought to make us with profit to humble
ourselves, that there is no temptation upon any man, but the same may take
hold on us in time also.

10 We are never the further from temptation for misliking it, but the nearer,
unless as in judgment we mislike it, so in affection we humble our selves in
fear and prayer before the Lord, as knowing the same in time may invade us.

11 We must not keep our hearts too close in dangerous temptation, nor deny
mercy to others, least God deny mercy to us.

12 If we be tempted, let us examine it by prayer, whether it be contrary to
the word, for sin by the law is revealed and rebuked; if it be sin, then it
brings the curse, for the Law accurseth the sinner; if it bring a curse,
then must we tremble* if we tremble not, let us suspect that our nature likes
the temptation, and let us apply prayer: if we tremble in To tremble in
temptation
truth, we will never do the thing whereunto we are tempted.

13 When Satan cannot get us to omit gross sins, he will assail us with
spiritual temptations.

14 Those temptations are most dangerous which have most holy ends.

15 If we conceal our temptations long, it is the policy of Satan to make
us keep his counsel.

16 The Lord through grace does quench in us those temptations, which would
quench in us his spirit.

17 Temptations being resisted to bring a proof of that grace that is in us;
temptation being received argues corruption in us. Adam should not have been
worse for his temptation, no more than Christ, but that the one yielded, the
other did not.

18 They that tremble in the temptation, shall triumph after the temptation: our
faith is as a pots mouth which being large received much, and being narrow
receives but little Simile.


19 The godly see their temptations often, much, and with profit; the ungodly see
them seldom, scant, and without profit.

20 Being both feeble in body and sick in mind, when he felt the Lords
strength in his sickness, nourishing him: as also that he did clear his
judgment, and more and more give him a misliking of evil, and a liking of
good: he knew his temptation should go away in the end.

CHAP. LXXI. Of truth and errors, sincerity and contempt of the word.
THere is no profit in teaching or hearing without application. Ephesians. 6.
Application of doctrine how necessary.
Paul speaking of the truth, calls it a girdle of truth, it must not be a
loose truth, out of which a man may easily be shaken, it must be a tied truth,
not a ranging truth, if it be loose about us, it will fall away with the least
flaw of wind Romans 15. The Apostle speaks of this putting on of Christ, we
must not make a broad cloth of him, to make him apparel to warm us at the
hour of death, or in some time of trouble, but we must presently make him a
garment, that it may sit as close to us as our coats. James says in his first
chapter, that the word must be ingrafted in us, it must not hang by us: but as
there is no true grafting without the renting of the old stock, that the new
graft may he fastened and closed up in the rent: so there is no true receiving
of the word, until our corrupt wisdom be rent asunder and the word of God
closed up in stead of it: So that as there is truth required, so a girdle of
truth: As Christ is our comfort, so he must be put on: As the word is received,
so it must be ingrafted in us. In more sensible things we are familiarly
acquainted with this matter. What profit is there in a plaster, be it never so
skilfully made, unless it be applied? Well, nothing indeed is good without
applying. The Simile.
Sun is comfortable, but what does it if we be shut up and it never come to
us? What nourishment is in meat, what use in apparel, if we use and apply
them not? So Christ and the word not applied are nothing to us, though most
profitable in themselves.

2 Truth is a thing specially esteemed of the Lord, and it is a service so
acceptable unto Truth how great special arguments.
him, that he will not be without it, and therefore a rent or pension due unto
the Lord. But why does the Lord so require truth at our hands? the Prophet
says, The Lord has magnified his truth and his name above all things, and he
has put on himself, as his name, to be called 1
the God of truth. And Christ the second person in Trinity witnesses his
death to this, in 1. Father.
calling himself, not the God of truth, but truth itself, and he bare
witness before Pilate, 2. Son.
that he especially came into the world to bear witness to the truth, so
greatly he loved it. For the holy Ghost we read Ioh. 14* He is said to be the
spirit of truth. So we see how great 3. Holy Ghost
a thing this truth is with God, for he makes himself glorious in this title,
and makes it the Crown of his head, his Son, his Spirit, his Ministers are
glorified by it. In a second respect 2
truth is dear, for that Adam being charged to beware of the forbidden fruit,
had his first assault of Satan against the Lords truth, and backsliding from
it, he lost all his posfession in Paradise. Because of this dealing of the
Devil in Paradise, ever since the Lord has been very jealous of his truth,
and wills men should whatsoever they do remember to pay him truth. The third
respect, why the Lord will have truth, is, because it is a thing most
concerning us, and comfort us in the agony of a distressed conscience. For
in this 3
case mercy cannot so comfort us, for God has justice as well as mercy, and
he is just as well as he is merciful; and for Christ he cannot comfort us,
for he is not given to all, and it may be not to thee, and therefore in these
two only there is no comfort. But to challenge the Lord his truth is best, and
his faithfulness in giving Christ, whom he has promised, is our chiefest hold,
and nothing can put us beside it. This is the surest tenor of our salvation,
because by this we hold whatsoever we hold, and howsoever we are defective in
other things, yet in respect of truth we must make much of it. Thus in these
respects, that truth is the diadem of the Lord, in respect that Satan does so
assault it; and it is the tenor of our salvation, it is sure that it is a
pension to be paid. But to come nearer, whether this truth be in us or no, we
see the earth it self is not only true, but liberal to us. And as it has
truth and mercy, so knowledge is in it too; for it knows al times and
seasons, When to receive, when to return, it shows it self a cunning
Scholar, and it keeps such a comely course in Men may be compared to la^dor
earth. Note.
all seasons, as if it had perfect knowledge, and this is another reason, why
we must labor for truth. We may well be compared to a land: For though there
be a soul in us of the substance of heaven, and coming into our bodies made
of earth, should make them like to heaven, and so heaven should lift us up to
heaven from the earth, yet our bodies, which by the soul should be more
heavenly, have so weighed down heaven as it were to the earth, and pressed
down the soul to things below, That we have set earth as it were above heaven
in all our attempts and imaginations* and so our souls are become a very
ground and land, for all our intent being earthly, we are justly called earth.

3 There are found out three truths. First, The truth of life, which every man
must labor There are three kinds of truth.
for. The second is, The truth of Justice, which is in Commonwealths. The
third is, Truth in doctrine and religion, which is in the Church. For that
truth of life, which ought to be among men, that we may better understand it,
we will show it in measures and weights. In a measure there is a Standard, and
in weight there is a Seal, and if our measure be equal with the standard, and
if our weights be just with the seal, so as they be neither lighter nor
heavier than the standard weight: our measures and weights are true. Now to
apply these things: the maine and standard truth is set down, Ioh. 17. Thy
word is the truth: Then here is the point, the word is truth. If our thoughts
be agreeable to this standard, and then our Note.
tongues be agreeable to our hearts, well agreeing to the standard, if our
doings agree with our tongues; then comes sincerity of heart, simplicity of
speech, and constancy of life. Now here is the question then, whether the
conclusion we make in our brain, be equal The true standard of truth.
with the standard, or else our hearts are false, and they being false our
tongues are out of rule, and our outward life can never be true. For surely if
the word have not taught us our truth, we have no truth in the world, and then
we truly measure all things according to Note.
the truth, when we esteem all things as the word does esteem them: look
what conclusions the word has set down of the world, and of other things,
that must be our conclusion and principle in every thing. Phil. 3. Paul, who
doubtless knew the truth, and delivered nothing but measured by the standard
of the truth, has this conclusion, that to win Christ, he would lose all:
there was nothing so glorious in the world, but he counted it riffe raffe for
the attaining of Christ. This is then the first thing to do al things by the
analogy of the word, and then we shall have but one heart, not a heart and an
heart. Otherwise we shall be as deceivable as the vineyard that Esaias speaks
of, whereof grapes were looked for, but it brought forth wild grapes. And
because men have worldly conclusions, and the world not the word is their
standard, so that they are resolved of their principles speaking thus secretly
in their hearts, We will keep this gain and profit, they have lost the
truth. Truth in simplicity of speech.
So must it be in the simplicity of our speech, for unless our words be
according to our hearts, we delude our selves. For if in the Church we shall
have an Amen, a great praising of heaven, and a large cursing of sin, and yet
no regard of this simplicity, all is but an illusion. When men shall publicly
sing out of the Psalms, that nothing is more precious than the word of God,
and yet we set by nothing less: this is plain mockery to bear the world in
hand that we love the word, and yet our thoughts are more large and deep, and
attentive to the world. So that we have false hearts and dissembling words:
and truly though we dare not show this to the world, and though in our hearts
we care not for a Sermon once in seven years, yet if we were asked how we
stood affected to the word, what great credit and commendations would fly out
of our mouths? But now let us come to the truth of our actions in
steadfastness of life, that a man may bind on our word: the overthrowing of our
lives, do so much drown the voice of our mouths, that whatsoever we protest
in word, we spoil in our works. The blood of Habel was an action, and it
cried up to heaven: our Amen in our mouths is drowned by the blood of our
actions Truth in action.
crying so loud before the Lord. For our actions bewray men, for there is such
wringing, going, ouergoing, and incroching, that there is no Truth in our
lives, in respect of the concordance of the tongue. And whatsoever their bonds
are, we must have Truth of the Commonwealth.
other forfeiture upon forfeitures, to proclaim their falsehood to the world.
Now come to the Truth of the Commonwealth, we see, as the Prophet says,
Judgment is turned in to Worme-wood, (that is) a man had as good eat a
hand-full of Worme-wood, as have our cause pleaded in the Court. Let Noblemen
be never so wise to open the Truth, yet the Devil has made many wiser in
breaking of the Truth, then any can be wise in setting it down. It is known
too well, that many grieuances have been, for that men have grown more
cunning in overthrowing of Justice, then many have been able to establish
Justice. But every man would be content to bear this burden, because it
concerns another Court. But what say you to the Truth of Religion that is
among us? why, our Doctrine is sound enough, that needs not to be spoken of.
No? Yes surely, very needful it is to speak of Truth in the Church.
it. Truth indeed runs about the Church-walles for ears, and goes about
the Pillars, but it finds no nearers, and as the wise man says, he that has
a Treasure in store and not in use, is, as though he had it not: so we may say
of our Age, men have a little knowledge, but for want of using it, they are as
though they had no knowledge, and seeing we hide our knowledge if we have it,
and we cannot speak the truth, at our going in and our going out, as men are
charged by Moses, we cannot be said to have the truth. So in a second degree
Paul would have us use the world, as though we used it not, surely had he made
his wish of the Truth, as he did of the world, he had surely had it. All our
knowledge is a knowledge of the brain, it is not a knowledge of the heart, for
it never makes us set less on Simile.
the score of sin: ye shall see this plain, we know that fire will burn,
and because we know it indeed, by no pain almost can we be brought to put
our finger in the fire; and doubtless, if we were persuaded that sin would
burn us as a fire, we would not so easily put our hands unto it. And I would
know, if a man had a rule or gold-weight, whereby he might measure his timber,
and weigh his metals, and yet he never uses either his rule, or his weights,
what good it would do him. Talk of religion, and begin to speak of the word,
and you shall have many, that will hold you talk a whole dinner time, or
half a day, and look into their lives and common course of their
conversation, and they will falsify whatsoever they have said; so they have a
thing, but without all use of it. There is yet another Verbal profession.
thing mentioned, Ephesians* 6. and that is a gyrdle of Truth, it must be tied to
us, but our truth is not gyrt to us, it sits not close to us, it will
easily be shaken off from us, if the Cross come, and persecution shake us a
little, we can easily shift it off.

4 A man would not willingly dwell by an evil* nature, and hatred will drive
any man a Why Truth is not found among us.
way. Truth is hated among us, and no marvel, though it delight not to be
among us. If a man should take upon him to pluck up an olde-hedge, and to
admonish one of sin, straight way one Snake or other will be ready to hiss
at him, and to sting him for his labor. They that should look to us, are
hated, and if a man be so bold as to tell a man of his fault, he shall have a
rebuke for his pains, with this scoff or the like: this is one of the wise
generation which can telll the truth: so cold an occupation is it to tell the
truth. So that we are not only culpable for not having Truth, but because we
have driven Truth out of the Land. It would grieve me to name men's sins
herein, but yet your selves know, that a man will sell credit, Faith, and all
that he has, to set Truth out of the way, and shall we think then, that
Truth has any heart to dwell among us, seeing we sell it for twopence, or a
groate; nay, for a pair of old-shooes? But let us know, seeing that CHRIST
has pronounced himself to be the TRVTH, he has made these men that sell the
Truth, guilty of the sin of Judas: they sell Christ not for so much, but for
half so much: nay, for a quarter so much as Judas sold him. For CHRIST is
TRVTH, and CHRIST is sold.

5 Contempt and hatred overthrows all estates, if either the Law be
contemned, or the Contempt of the Word dangerous.
Lawgiver hated. And as in Kingdoms, so it fares for this point in the
Church, if the law of God be not esteemed, then the jealousy of the Lord of
Hosts will surely either take away his Law, or punish the abusers of it. The
cause of contempt commonly, as they say, is Familiaritas parit contemptum,
veritas parit odium.
familiarity. Familiarity breeds contempt. Indeed the wise men of the world
noted, that there were three excellent mothers, which brought forth three very
evil daughters. The mothers are these: first Familiarity, which is the high
pitch of friendship, brings up contempt, Three good mothers bring forth three
evil daughters.
so the more we enjoy the thing loved, the viler it grows in our eyes.
Secondly, truth breeds hatred. The third is peace, and that is the mother of
idleness and security* So that whatsoever is free in v^e once, that grows
vile, as Manna (though it were a very precious thing) did in the eyes of the
Israelites. Yet we must know, that albeit sometime these issue from these
mothers, yet they be not their natural daughters. The natural child of
familiarity is not contempt, but it comes of our corrupt nature, which is
clean opposite to the nature of God. For as the nature of God is so perfectly
good, that he does turn even very evil things to very good things, as the
malice of the Jews in putting his Son to death, to be a mean of our
salvation; so our nature is so absolutely evil, that it turns very good
things into evil. Wherefore retaining this foolish axiom of vanity, that Note.
nothing is precious but rare and strange things, it comes not of the nature
of the thing, Charity is true.
which is still good, but of our nature, which no more esteems it. In the
first of Samuel it is said, the word was precious in those days, which was,
because it was rare, for they accounted highly of Samuel, because they had no
Prophet long before, but we must not do so, neither in other things do we so.
Do we in natural things contemn the sun, the water, and the fire, because
they be usual? we do not. Then surely, naturally we contemn not a thing for
familiarity: but the cause of contempt is the ignorance of the use of the
thing; and therefore no doubt, as we do not contemn the sun, the water, the
fire, because we know and are persuaded of the true use of them: so therefore
we do in long use contemn the word and prayer, and sacraments, because we
know not the necessity and the use of them. Whenever then we begin to be
cloyed, let us know the nature of a sin does begin to grow in us, not that in
the long use of the word we are so full of knowledge, but for that we know not
the use of it, and therefore like swine we leave the pearl, and go to the
shells. Greatly therefore are we to pray against this. Concerning hatred, when
the pearls are contemned, the Ieweller is wrathful, and when the word is
despised, the Lord is surely displeased, for which cause good men feeling their
spirits to grow hot at the sight of such contempt, and the contemners seeing
themselves to be drawn out into the midst of the congregation as it were, then
they begin to war with the Lord and his Ministers, and they seek either in
their living to muzzle them, or else to pursue them with the sword of Ismael,
that is, with their tongues to smite them, and so to try them even as with
coals of Juniper. David complains, that he was compassed about with dogs,
which thing was most accomplished in Christ, who was made of many pieces,
sometime thought to be a Demoniacke, sometime a drunkard, sometime a friend of
Publicans and sinners* and as they speak of the Master, so will they speak of
the Disciples, whatsoever comes into their choler. Yet though there be three
parts of the land naught, for the fourth sake we must sow, that though three
parts of the congregation be not good, yet for the fourth part we must preach,
as Christ, who went about into all places, for an hundred and twenty souls,
who no doubt had four times as many hearers: and so we must follow the renting
part for their sake, that hear with reverence and fruit.

6 The Galathians esteemed of Paul as of an Angel, yea he bears them witness
that they The people of Mediolanum or Millaine.
would have plucked out their eyes, and have given them to him: and the
Millaines were so affected to Ambrose, that they protested that they would
rather loose their lives, than their Bishop. David being called from a
shepherd to be a king, had friends more than a good many, thick and
threefold. But when the oil is powered forth, sharp wine must go in.
Amittere animas quam Episcopum.
But yet Paul is imprisoned, Ambrose has fair promises, and David meets
with one Shemei or other, that will give him hard good morrowes, and pelt him
with stones: so long as the quails last, and the fleshpots, and Manna comes
down as thick as dust and feathered fowls, as the sand of the sea, who but
Moses then: but if they have not flesh at their call, if The world follows,
and favors the Gospel when it brings prosperity with it.*
they fall once a shrugging and whyning, if Moses get him not out of the way,
he may be spurd and perchance go to the pot. Christ if he can so provide that
the water may be turned into wine, and that there be taken up twelve baskets
full, and so they may sit down on the green grass, and eat by 4000. and
5000. it is a trim world, why Christ shall be a king, and Rabbi and Rabboni, and
good master and Hosanna in the highest, and all that may be, and more than may
be. But if Christ cast out a word, and say that a Prophet is not esteemed in
his own country, his country men are ready to lay hands on him. It is good
being for S. Paul at ^ conium, if he and Barnabas can promise so, that they can
make men whole with a word, such fellows shall not lack. Jupiters priest shall
be sent for, and sacrifice shall be made; they shall be taken for no men, but
for Jupiter and for Mercury, if they can do us any good. But if Paul go and
gather sticks, and so a viper ca^tcheth him by the fingers, then out upon him
murderer, ah wretch, Gods judgment seized on him: yet for all this, let him
shake it off quickly, and he shall go for a God.

7 If thou will diligently hear, there are two kinds of understanding, one in
judgment, another in heart, the one is but little, the other brings
practice. Deuteronomy. 29. for we are said to err in heart, though not in judgment.
Psalm. 95. so in judgment though not in ^art, if we understand in heart, the^
it will be a small matter to bring practice. For when we allow in judgment,
and love in heart, then are we carried willingly to that thing: so that if we
know a thing which we cannot be brought to do, it is because we understand not
in heart.

8 The chiefest thing, that God is pleased with, is to be truly religious, to
love truth with singlenes of heart, and a prepared mind to be obedient unto it,
without the which, though a man should lead an Angels life in outward show,
yet by how much it were the more praise of the world, by so much it is more
abominable in the sight of God.

9 If we play with our own affections, sin in the end from sport will spur
us to confusion. For though we are given to flatter, and presume of our selves,
that being twice or thrice spared, we dare sin again, yet we must know that
the Lord will recompense his long tarrying with wrath.

10 If any man make no conscience to walk uprightly, I will not free him from
poverty, from sickness, from heresy: for as well can and will the Lord
punish the mind as the body.

11 Pharaoh scorning Gods people and his messengers, the Lord turned it to a
blessing, Against scorners.
and it may teach us not to mock the children of God, and again to hear
patiently the practices of scorners, as David did Shemei: and so shall it be
turned into a blessing unto us. Pharaoh could mock and contemn God in his
prosperity, but he could not withstand the plagues when they came, but was
most fearful: and this is the course of all the wicked, to contemn God in
prosperity, and to be most fearful in any trouble.

1 The promises of God must be to us, as a double string to our bow, as Jacob
ceased Add these four sections to the chapter of Temptation.
not to wrestle, though his thigh was bruised until he had the blessing; so we
must not faint in temptation, though we be humbled until we have victory. We
must not despair of the victory in temptation, because of our striving,
albeit we have some infirmities, but rather we must rejoice in our will, and in
God his grace, whereby we have desire to go to God.

2 We need not go far from our selves for monstrous temptations.

3 It is ill halting before a cripple, when one has been exercised with many
temptations he can discern others.

4 Satan by temptations makes a man forget mirth, and casts a mist before
his eyes that he cannot discern, and corrupts his taste that he cannot judge
of meats. A certain man laboring grievously of a great sickness in body:
yet the passions of his mind were such, that he was senseless of the pain of
his body. Again, the Lord afterward changing his mourning into rejoicing, gave
him such abounding comforts of his spirit, that as before through extreme
anguish of his spirit; so now through most wonderful passions of heavenly
joys, and assurance of his sins pardoned, he felt no outward pain of his
body, though dangerously it was afflicted.

CHAP. LXXII. Of Witchcraft, vows, and unbelief.
Witches and wizards can do nothing, as appears in that wizard Balaam, Number.
23. who says, that God must first be displeased, or ever he could prevail
against Israel by his witchcraft; therefore must we not seek for help of
them, they have not power to hurt nor to help us. Ford God is almighty, and he
must help thee, therefore turn to him by faith and repentance, and do not
fly to them. Means may stay Gods children for a time, that they look not to
God, nor to their sin: yet if the punishment be long upon them, then they lift
up their eyes unto God, Psalm. 30.

2 As when a man brought into the iayle, conueying him out by bribing the
iaylour, Simile.
purchases to himself greater punishment, if after he be taken, yet suing to
the prince for pardon, gets it and scapeth clearly: so if a man be healed
by a witch or wizard, which The cure of Witches*
is unlawful, he deserves a greater evil, if the Lord visit him: wherefore
let such speedily repent: but if we be healed by the Lord, and the means he
has ordained, then we freely escape and may be thankful.

3 The wise men of Egypt could not do as Moses and Aaron in the small
creatures, where we shall note, that witches cannot hurt, further than the Lord
will, as the devils paces are also limited, and they cannot hurt, when, nor
where they will, but as the Lord is displeased, as Balaam confessed. And Ahab
was not deceived, before the Lord gave the spirit leave, that so the hypocrisy
of men, which receive not the truth in love, may be detected, yea the Lord may
afflict his children for a time hereby, for to let them see their unbelief,
and to stay their faith.

4 Many not knowing their own infirmities, rashly vow, and promise liberally,
as Vowe^.
whores and thieves, and therefore anon after return to their vomit. But the
children of God, knowing their own weakness, are afraid to make large
promises, and yet stand more strongly afterward against sin.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the word of God: and of the confirmation thereof by wonders.
THe Lord being about to give his law unto the Israelites by the ministry of
Moses his servant, does aforehand warn Moses thereof, and this he tells him,
that he will be seen of him in a dark clowd. Of this the Lords strange and
wonderful appearing, there are two ends or causes; the first was, that he
might get more credit to his law, and also to Moses the Minister of the law.
The second was to show Moses his weakness and infirmity, whereby he might be
humbled. And for the first, we see that when the Lord would bring to pass any
mighty works, he did withal show such mighty signs, as made his works with
reverence to be received, and those whom in his business he had appointed
Ministers, to be well accepted. In the day of Elias, when the law had lost
credit in the hearts of men, and was little or nothing at all regarded, then
did the Lord wonderfully, work by his servant Elias, and did great things by
his hands, that credit might once again be won unto his law. And when he
brought his son into the world, by whom he would publish the Gospel, even
the saving health of all men, such works were showed, as had not been from the
beginnings, and such wonders were wrought, as made all men amazed, at such time
as these more than ordinary mercies were brought and offered unto the world,
whereunto these extraordinary works were coupled and adjoined, and therefore
such works cannot ordinarily be looked for, because they were never ordinary.
For if such works, and signs, and wonders should now be looked for, and if we
should attend unto them, and believe them, Wonders.
the Lord would then have warranted them to us by his word, and then he would
have foretold us, that such things should after come to pass. And has he done
this? No, no, he has taught us another lesson, and clean contrarily has he
admonished us, when he bids us beware of false Prophets, which come to us in
sheep clothing, and would purchase credit to themselves by lying signs and
wonders. Seeing therefore that there shall be many such false Prophets,
especially in the latter days, which shall be sent abroad even into all
places, effectually to delude those that have not received the truth in love.
And again seeing the Lord is not bound to means, but he will work, when,
and where, and how it pleases him, that we may wisely judge of them, and
discern the spirit of error from the spirit of Truth and life: it shall be
profitable for us to set down some true notes of those wonders which are set
out to us in the Word: if by co^paring them together, it may appear Notes of
divine wonders
when, and how far they must be received, and contrarily, when we may and
ought to refuse them. The first note or difference is in the works themselves;
the other is in the persons by whose ministry they are wrought: and for the
works themselves, which God has extraordinarily wrought, there has evermore
such Majesty appeared in them, that the finger of God might be so plainly
seen, that all men, yea, even wicked sorcerers have been brought and forced to
acknowledge the same: and though the Devil can turn himself into an Angel
of Light, and his ministers make a show as though they were indeed the
ministers of righteousness; yet let them work what they will, and say what they
can, neither their works nor words shall bear such an apparent show of
Majesty, as the works of God have ever done. Every man therefore may plainly
see God in his works, and none shall be deceived by the oaths, but those that
love to believe lies, and are willing to deceive themselves, whom God does
justly give over to be deceived, and to fall Who be deceived with the lying
wonders of Antichrist.
from Faith, because they loved not to abide and stand steadfast therein. For as
an Ape, of all other living things most like a man in shape, and yet most
unlike of all others in quality and condition, can deceive none: but every one
will easily know an Ape from a man, unless they be fools or children, or such
as will be willingly ignorant: so between the works of God, and the lying
wonders of the Devil, there are so clear notes of difference that all may
easily discern them, but those that shut their eyes that they may not see, and
harden their hearts that they cannot understand. The children of God do receive
such wisdom Simile.
from above, and such knowledge does the Lord in mercy bestow upon them, that
they are able to discern the spirits, to try their works, whether they be of
God or no, and to sever true doctrine from the false. And albeit the Lord
sometimes correcting them for their sins, do suffer them for a while to be
deceived, and that they might hate falsehood the more, does let them a little
be deluded therewith: yet because the Truth of God it cannot fail, not an
hair of their heads perish, it is impossible that they should for ever fall
away; it is impossible that they should finally be deceived, and become open
enemies of the Truth, or obstinate maintainers of a lie. Secondly, the Lord
did never raise up such extraordinary worke-men, or show such extraordinary
works, but it was either to confirm the doctrine that had been taught, to get
further credit unto it, or else to make it more clear, and to give a greater
light unto the same: As we see in Moses, who came to bring the Law unto this
people; not a new Law, nor contrary to that which was before, but he renewed
it, confirming, and making it more clear, and that which they had before,
delivered from hand to hand, that he gave in Tables, and that which they before
had practiced, he gives forth unto them now in Precepts. For by the whole
story of Genesis it is soon perceived, that not only the moral Law
contained in the two Tables, The law Moral was before Moses, and observed in
the in the Church before it was written.
but eue^ the Ceremonial and the Judicial law were known unto Abraham, and
others, that lived before the law; it was never lawful for them to have any
more gods but one only and true God, and so consequently that his pure worship,
which was according to his will. The Sabbath was observed and kept not only in
Paradise, but even of the Israelites, when they were in Egypt, before they
came to the wilderness: which they could not have done, had they not received it
by traditions. The duties also in the second Table were as common, and as well
known as any others were. And when we read in Genesis of Priests, and Altars,
and sacrifices, differences between clean and unclean beasts, etc. it does
easily appear that the substance of the Ceremonial law was long before Moses
his time: the death of adulterers, and the punishment of murderers, do
plainly declare that they had the political Law before the days of Moses;
and that he was not the first giver thereof unto the people: he taught therefore
no new or strange doctrine, nor yet contrary to that which was before. He was
only the means to confirm it, and to make it more easily to be understood, for
he delivered it in plainer manner than it was delivered unto the Fathers. The
Prophets did expound it more plainly then he* and as every Prophet was more
nere the time of Christ, so did he bring greater light to that which went
before. John Baptist had clear revelations than any of the Prophets. For our
Savior does prefer him before them, not in respect of his person, but in
respect of his office and calling: but the Lord Jesus even our God and Savior,
and our only Prophet of al others, has brought most clear light, which he
has revealed and made known unto the world, both by himself, and the
Apostles: whose Epistles and writings are by many degrees more plain and
manifest than the writings of the Prophets which were before them. And do we
not see, that since the time that The light of the Gospel has dispeld the
mist of Popery.
the Lord began to renew the light of the Gospel, and to deliver us (as it
were) from the darkness, wherewith we were well near oppressed? Do we not see,
I say, that greater light does more and more appear, and that many things are
now more manifest than they have been in former times and ages? Moreover, the
law had testimony from the covenant made with Ahraham, Isaac and Jacob. The
Prophets did prove their doctrine by the law, and the covenants, and our
Savior has his witness out of the law and the Prophets: and his Apostles did
draw their proof from all. The law is in the Gospel, and the Gospel in the
law: and therefore whosoever shall not make their doctrine agreeable to the law
and the Gospel, they may, nor ought not to be received: but in the boldness of
Gods good spirit, we may say with S. Paul, Let them be accursed. For the Lord
is not contrary, nor unlike to himself. As the spirit spoke in old time in the
Patriarchs and Prophets, so spoke he in the Apostles of our Savior Christ, and
so will he speak in his true servants and ministers to the end of the world:
there is with him no variablenes nor shadow of change, but he abides ever the
same, most like unto himself: and so does his word, which is of the same
nature. Whosoever then shall b^ing unto us any doctrine not warranted by Gods
word, or contrary to that which before has been delivered: yea, if he bring
it in harder and more dark speeches, than the word of God is, or if he
deliver it more strangely or obscurely, and yet will bear us in hand, and make
us believe that he has cleerer revelations, we may then justly suspect him of
untruth, and utterly refuse him, further than by certain grounds and reasons
out of Gods word, he does confirm his Doctrine. And as we may rightly hold all
the doctrines of men accursed, when they speak or write any thing contrary to
the wholesome word of truth, or else do add anything thereto. So likewise if
any shall take away from the word of God one jot or tittle: we may in the fear
of God, and in the zeal of his truth pronounce against him that sentence,
wherewith God in great wisdom has closed up his holy Scriptures: The Lord
will take his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and out
of those things which are written in this book.

2 John says, the Spirit blows where it lists, so also as much as it
lists, sometime The Lord often uses vehement speeches to spur our dull
hearts.
breathing softly like the cool air, and sometime like the whirle-winde: for
man is full of wandering thoughts, and imaginations, especially when he hears
the word: but nothing is more dangerous than the young man's heart, which is in
all places of the world at once, if you speak not what he thinks, he does
not attend, if he be not astonished: and for this cause does the holy Ghost
often offer galling concessions, and pinching permissions, as Eccl. 10. God
seems in such speeches at the first to favor sin. But as we lift up a
thing In Rhethorike.
high, to drive it the harder, so God uses such speeches to throw them to
eternal destruction, to break them to fitters. Yea we would think the Lord to
be a proctor of evil, if he Permssio cum Catastrophe.
should not sometimes be very vehement. The bitterest kind of denial is to bid
us go, yet so ^^ine would God work on our heart, that he uses such
vehemency. In Logic.


3 It is as far from God his nature to deride any man, as it is for him to
repent: but our Per obliquum ductum.
sins are so great, that if it were possible, ye should make him a scoffer.
But as when salvation Why God uses vehemency of speech, and how we must read
it.
is wrought in the highest measure, it is wrought in greatest compassion; so
the highest point of revenge is derision. We know the nature of God is full of
pity, and (unless it be to very evil persons) his speeches are full of
compassion. Speak my people, says he, Micah. 6. And Esaias. 5. What have I not
done that I could do to thee? And, Oh that my people would have heard, Psalm.
81. And when they would not hear, he speaks to the dumb creatures: Hear
heaven and earth, Esaias 1. And Christ says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. These
are good and royal speeches, which are very sweet, and sweetness it self. But
when he speaks to the desperate and wicked, he changes his speech into
sharpenes, as Mat. 6. If light be darkness, how great is that darkness* If
sweetness become bitterness, how great is that bitterness? Every thing, when it
degenerateth into his contrary, becomes most contrary, as of the sweetest
wine is made the sowrest vinegar, and that, which is coldest, when it is
boiled, is most fervent, the sea calmest, when it is moved, is most raging.
Augustine says, that his Risus Dei prae omni ira Dei. quod cum risu loquitur,
t^ leges cum luctu.
laughter is more to be feared than his anger. That which he speaks with
laughter, let us read with weeping. For God never uses such speeches of
derisio^, but there follows immediately destruction. Prou, 1. 26 27. Psalm. 2.
He will laugh them to scorn, and then will break them in pieces. And because
this is the last warning before judgment, when we find the Lord speaking so
unto us, it is as much, as if he should say: Now hear the word, or never. Well
these speeches are used to wilful sinners, as Micaiah speaks to the King,
that would go to battle, whatsoever came of it, Go to and prosper, Prou 2.
Because you have not heard any word, nor profited by my sermons, nor by my
inward checks, nor come when I showed out my benefit, but refused my
correction, then comes this: I will laugh at your destruction. Ephraim will
needs follow Idols, well let him says God, Iosu 4 Psalm. 2. We will not be
yoked: and will ye not? go to, the Lord in heaven will yoke you. And again,
such as drink iniquity, till they have no use of God his gifts in them, woe
be to them.

4 We must redeem time even from our ordinary callings, to read the holy
Scriptures.

5 It is best to note the general virtue of the word, and not to use
exceptions, but upon particular and constraining necessity.

6 It is the grace of God, when the word of God is of such credit with us, that
it humbles A special grace to be humbled by the word. Wonders.
us more than all manner of corrections.

7 The usual dealing of the Lord is, that he first sends his word, then his
wonders: which if they prevail not, then does he fall to afflicting us, and
the ending of one cross shall be the beginning of another, till he has
brought us to him, if we be his; or till we be hardened, if we belong not to
him.

8 The word of God is the savor of life to some, and the savor of death to
others, So the sin hardneth the clay, but soft neth the wax Sacraments.
Admonition.
it brings some to repentance, and others it hardens.

9 We must esteem highly of the Sacraments, and admonitions of our brethren,
because in contempt of these we despise Gods ordinance, and they can never have
their fruit in us. For whosoever have felt the fruits of the spirit, can tell
that nothing is so comfortable to us, as that great joy, which they felt in the
right use of these holy ordinances of God. And hereof comes that continual
joy which the children of God take and find in reading, hearing, and speaking
of his word, prayer and Sacraments. Therefore let us learn to esteem the word
of God, which has been offered so long, and let not our corruption as in other
things, so in this less esteem it, because it has been long with us, which
through corruption we shall do, if God by his great grace do not sustain us.

10 Our father Adam had nothing to lead him by, but the great book of the
creatures, which when by sin it was blotted, the Lord supplied this want by
the word though not The Fathers of the first age had the word.
written (which is clear) (for that without faith it is impossible to please
God) but Abel by faith pleased God, and that faith presupposed the word,
therefore they had the word: for which cause some were called the sons of
God, because they were ruled by the word of God. And this word is said by the
Apostles and Prophets, that it endereth for ever: therefore our Fathers had
this word, though not always written.

11 We must learn principally those things, which the spirit of God most
purposes to teach us, and be more sparing in those things, which to know,
Gods spirit is the more sparing to teach us.

12 Although the word of God is always in season to be ministered, yet men's
hearts are not always in season to receive it.

13 To one that said she had a thing told her in the spirit that should
undoubtedly come to pass: he answered, how it might be of God: who after some
great and grievous conflict, comfort her. But evermore such workings are
according to the word, if they be of God. And seeing such inward motions, for
the most part are either offered or wrought by our own corruption, or sent of
the devil, as an illusion: we must try these motions by the word, whether they
be for spiritual or temporal things: if they be of God and according to his
word believe them for the words sake, and not only because of the revelations:
if they agree not to the word how pleasant soever they seem to flesh and
blood, listen not then to them too much, and less believe them.

14 The word of God is reverenced with many titles, it is the revealed will of
God; the Titles given to the word.
library of the holy Ghost; the cubit of the Sanctuary; the Lantern of
Israel, Psa. 119. ^09. the spiritual Manna; Christ his Aphorisms; the
wisdom of the cross; the Lord his legacy; the touchstone of error; the key
of the sheepfold; the mystery of godliness; the oldest way of life and truth,
Prou. 28 the fulness of knowledge; the Schoolmasters of mankind; Duo ecclesiae
vbera.
the beacon of the soul; the seed of new birth; the mouth of the Lord
Jehovah; the twoedged sword; the acts and statutes of the highest Parliament;
the mint of the Church; the Cum Deus aliquid dieit, etfi^d non ampl^us quam
seme^ dicat ea fide ac deuotione accipien dum est, ac ^i saepissime dixerit.
Chryso^t* aduers. vituper. Monasticae vitae.
lode-starre of the faithful pilgrim; the signe^ of God his right hand; ^he
Lambs book; the watch-b^l; the glass of our life, 1. Pet. 2. 2 the scepter of
his kingdom, the arch of the truth; the breath of the holy Ghost; God his
Oracle; the Epistle of God to the world; the inestim^ble pearl; the tenor of
our freehold; the covenant of promise; the Court-roule of his fi^es and
amercements; the well of the water of life; the Lord his treasury; the
lightning and thu^der of the most High. When God speaks any thing, although
it be no more than once spoken, we ought to receive it with that faith and
devotion, as if it had often bin spoken. We must think of the Lord his
writings at the least, to be as sure* as the proclamations of the Medes and
Persians, which alter not, Dan. 6. 12. Every jot and title in the library of
the holy Ghost, is fined, has passed seven times through the fire, ere it come
to our hands, so it shall not need the furnace of our vain reason, for it
further trial, Psalm. 12. This word was given first by God in his own person:
secondly, by the ministry of Angels: thirdly, by his servants the Prophets:
fourthly, by his own Son, Coloss. 2. 3. it was written, 2. Pet. 1. 21. it
was inspired, 2. Timoth-3. ^6 it is perfect, Prou. 30. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. it is
plain, Ioh. 7. 17. Whereunto we must give our diligence, bewaring that the
rule of our obedience be not our own good intent, will or devotion: nor the
rebellious affections of our corrupt Will worship.
nature: nor that wisdom, inventions, doctrines of the carnal man, nor the
examples, customs, fashions, manners of the world, but only the pure and
perfect word of God, which is compared to a sword for the cleaving and dividing
of the hard heart. If a sword will not serve, it is compared to fire for
melting, and dissoluing of such, as will not give place to the edge: but if we
be so stony, as fire will not do us good, it is an hammer to batter, bruise,
and ^ush us in pieces.

CHAP. LXXIIII. Of good Works, and our obedience to his word.
IT is written, Exodus 10 5. 6. Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them,
and so did they. And the Apostle Paul says, that of our selves we can do
nothing. Yet through the Lord Jesus we are able to do all things. Upon such
like places the Papists gather that the commandments may be kept. I answer,
that those words concerning Moses and Aaron are to Numb. 20.
be referred to that particular action of bringing the people out of Egypt:
for both before, and after we see many infirmities in them, yea with what
temporal punishments are they punished, that they cannot enter into the
promised land. That also that was said of Noah, is to be referred to the
making of the Arc, Genesis 6. 22. So when David prays to be heard according to
his righteousness, it is in respect of that cause which he had in hand, for the
which his enemies did persecute him. Again, the children of God from time to
time have fallen into great sins; as Noah, Abraham, Lot, and David, whose
examples we ought to lay up in our hearts, to keep us from despair, when we
feel infirmities in us.

2 Nothing is so available to obedience as the due consideration of Gods
ordinance.

3 The obedience of God is as a chain to tie up all the creatures of God from
our hurt, Obedience.
and as a thing to muzzle their mouths that they cannot bite us. Again,
disobedience breaks the chain, and opens the mouths of all things to our
destruction.

4 In good works we must not only be wrought upon as patients, but work as
agents. Good works
There be three special signs of good works: first, a good work must have
it foundation Three signs of good works
in the word, for a good work is grounded on a good word, and every plant,
that is not planted in God his Eden, shall be plucked up. In vain we worship
the Lord, with our 1. Word.
own traditions, whatsoever thou do, do it, because God commands thee.
Now because wicked men may do good things, as sacrifice, hear the word, pray,
build houses, use hospitality, etc. we must next see whether these be apples
of the tree of faith or no, which only purifieth the heart, Act. 15. and even
makes the actions pure. Kain kneeleth at the altar, 2. Faith.
Habel kneeleth at the altar, both sacrifice, both obey the commandments, in
both the same work according to the same word: but the one offers in faith,
the other not. Chore offered his sacrifice, Aaron offers his sacrifice, the
same work, but not the same faith. Esau leesing the blessing wept, Peter
leesing Christ wept: here are tears alike, but not in truth alike. Judas said
peccaui. David said peccaui: here is repentance, the work like, the faith
unlike. Yea again, as we must look to have a writ from the Lord, and with a
good writ have 3. The end, Gods glory.
a good heart; so we must beware we look not at these things with a squint
eye. The Pharisie prays in the market places, he would have a good work in
hand, but his heart was not right, it was mixed with a little leaven of
vainglory. Here then falls all the great works of Papists, who will
pluck part of their salvation from God, and make the Lord to become debtor to
them, whereas even the very works of Christ without the promise could never have
merited salvation. We must say rather, my well doing O Lord, extends not unto
thee, all that I do, is nothing, I am still an unprofitable servant. Now all
men must do good works, for the law being written for all, shall be exacted
of all. Under the steward we are all contained, we must all appear, we must
give an account, every tree, that brings not forth fruit, as well the vaste
oak of Bashan, as the low shrub shall be all cast into the fire. It still
runs in an universality, yea the very reprobate must do well, and though he
cannot attain heaven, yet his condemnation is not so deep, his worm is not
so sore, his stripes are not so many. But is none more bound to do well, than
others? Yes the faithful. If a brother offend, admonish him. Though the
ignorant shall have stripes, yet they that know the truth, shall have more
stripes. If I had not come says Christ, ye should not have had such sins,
but now have ye not wherewithal to cover them, yea of the children of God one
is more bound to good works than another. Upon every soul comes
tribulation, upon the Jew, etc. Who, for that they had the Prophets, the
tabernacle, On whom to confer our well doings.
the covenant, and we for having good Ministers and Magistrates are especially
bound to good works. If we would know on whom we should show these works, I
answer universally on all, even as our heavenly Father does on all; yet this
has also a bound and restraint, Gal. 6. 10. Let us do good unto all men, but
especially to those that are of the household of faith. Among them also they
are especially to be helped, which most stand in need of our help, as we may
see in the man in the Gospel that lay wounded. Lastly, to show Protestants
most bound to good works.
why we must provoke and be provoked to good works, to pass Jews and
Gentiles we will come to Protestants, who are most bound to good works. We are
slandered to deny good works, because we would supplant and depose them out
of the chair of Christ, and deny them to have the prerogative of salvation.
But we defend good works. First, we affirm 1
good works out of Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of God as dear children,
because as God has called us to be his children, so herein we ought to
resemble his image by doing good both to just and unjust. Secondly, where it is
said, Tit. 2. 12. that Christ gave himself for us to 2
this end, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a
peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works, we also say, that we are
debtors to do good. And surely this commends all the pains of Christ, if we
be zealous of good works: so not to be given to good works does in some sort
crucify him again. But it is enough that we have once grieved him on earth,
and therefore let us not grieve him in heaven also. Thirdly, being the temples 3
of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6. 19. it were a despite against the Lord, if we
make the house Motives to good works.
of God the stye of Satan, and sincke of sin. Fourthly, the Angels rejoice
to see a sinner repent, as also there is great sorrow, when a Professor falls
away, the heavens seem to 4
be clothed with black thereat, and the Angels wear mourning attire. But to
come down from heaven to earth. Fifthly, whereas the rankest heretics have had
often great feelings 5
(whereby this is no good way to salvation, to think our selves sure in a
carnal security) Peter teaches us another way: Make your election sure by
good works. 2. Pet. 1. 10. as by a sign consequent, not as by a cause
antecedent. Sixthly, we must by good works avoid the offending of our brethren,
least that as Lot was vexed among the Sodomites, we grieve the 6
hearts of the Saints. Seventhly, as we are not to grieve strong Lot, so we
must not offend the weak ones, for whose sakes we must abridge somewhat from
our liberty in things 7
lawful: and much more cut off our licentiousness in things that be
unlawful. Eighthly, we must do good even for the wicked. Wherefore the Apostle,
I. Pet. 3. 2. admonishes wives 8
so to live, that even they which obey not the word, may without the word be
won by the conversation of the wives. If women are thus charged, then much
more men. Ninthly, because the Devil not barred out by good works, does make
us his palace, or rather his paunch, or 9
his stable; and at the fall of a righteous man, the damned do (as it were)
make great bonefires in hell, let us bring forth the fruits of righteousness,
which may make the Devil to some in fretting, and work more madness and
melancholy in the damned. Tenthly: for 10
the confusion of the wicked in the last day, it shall be good by well-doing to
redeem some comfortable confidence of our being in CHRIST, against that day,
when the sides of the wicked shall lie panting in pain. Now to make up the
number of a douzen, we may be 11
moved to do good works, by considering the end of the godly, and the end of
the wicked, Mat. 25. These reasons many and weighty, shall redeem us from this
reproach, wherewith 12
our enemies do charge us.

6 To do good is worth the doing, albeit in vain, and as Sencca says: He is
a perfect man Perdere beneficium and dare, non dare and perdere.
that can loose a benefit and give it, not to give and loose it. But whose is
the hurt? CHRIST preached in vain to the Jews, and Noah to the old world, and
Lot to the Sodomites, but were Noah, Lot, and Christ hurt for it? And yet many
writers think no good work is in vain to We must do good, though it seem to
be in vain.
him that it is done too. But certainly to him that does it, it is not in
vain: there is a great reward for them in the life to come. And in that
respect GOD will have his children do many good works in vain. As to Moses
he said, Go preach to Pharaoh, he shall not hear thee, yet go. Again, that
which is well done, is better done then not done: for then it perishes with
them, otherwise it should perish with thy self.

7 There is none has a privilege whereby he is exempted from doing of good
works. Good works.
The Law is given to all, John 10. Every one had his Talent, Luc. 19. Every one
shall bear his burden, Gal. 6 Every one shall stand before the Tribunal of
GOD: every man's blood shall be upon his own head, Ezech. 5* Every Tree that
brings not forth fruit, shall be cut down, Matthew. 3. Tribulation and
anguish shall be upon every soul, Romans 2. Thus we still see it runs of all
and every one. The reason is, God accepts no persons, neither in gifts of
Nature, nor in gifts of Grace, nor in judgments, even the little Hills, the
small Trees, not one pin made of an unfruitful tree. But are the wicked tied
to do good works? Yea, even they, Matthew. 11. it is said, it shall be easier
for some, then for others, which is interpreted, Matthew. 8. that there is utter
darkness: whereas Basil says, the greatest sins go thither, and Luc. 7. He
that knows his Mastere will, etc. Even the wicked must do good to make their
judgment easier, their stripes fewe^, and their place better. Must Scotos to
exotero^. Amartimata exotera. Extreme sins go into extreme darkness. We
must do good to all men.
any, more then others do good works? yes, the Christian must especially be
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. warn them that believe, Tit. 3. 14. and in the
end of the same chapter, Let our men learn to show forth good works: what
manner men ought we to be? 2. Pet. 3. If any that is counted a brother. I.
Cor. 5. Now then among Christians who are most bound? Tribulation, etc. on the
Jew first, etc. The reason is, for they had the Oracles of GOD, Romans 3. 1. 2.
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, that fellow sins
indeed: so then this person, on whom the pouring of the ointment has been
first, ought to be most thankful in good works. We must do good even to all.
Be merciful as ^ am, Luc 6. and we know he suffers his sun to shine
ouerall. The reason is, God his image is in all. But especially to the
faithful. Job. 22. I cannot profit thee, etc. Psalm. 16. My well doing
extends not to thee, but to thy Saints. It is Christ his own desire, Luc.
22. When thou art 1
converted, confirm thy brethren. We can do him no good, but in his Saints.
And yet ^o go 2
further, to him most of all that is wounded, as to the Samaritane, Luke, 13.
If he need our 3
help, though he be a Samaritane. God could have made there should have been
no need To do good duties to the soul.
of them, but for that he would try the liberality of the rich, and the
patience of the poor. Then much more to the soul, which is the subject of
immortality, must we show welldoing in pity and compassion. 4


CHAP. LXXV. Of Zeal.
THe zeal of Moses, and Phineas, and CHRIST, we should strive to have, that
we may be grieved with the corruption and sins of the time, but to redress
them belongs not to us, except we be Magistrates.

2 Zeal leaves in men a great impression, being tempted with Faith and love.

3 We must desire to be zealous and earnest in matters weighty concerning the
Lord, or his people, but in small matters, our own affairs, and worldly
friends, we must take heed it be not natural earnestnes, or carnal, or not
sauouring of the Spirit.

4 One saying in his hearing, that it might be observed from time to time, that
men have Confer this chapter with the sermon of zeal in the third part. True
zeal and the properties thereof. Confer this with the 3. sermon of zeal,
the third part. The recompense of true zeal.
been more bountiful in furthering a corrupt religion, then in relieuing the
professors of the Gospel: he answered his judgment was the contrary, for though
many in popery give much, yet it is of their abundance, but we read in no
place that ever men sold their whole possessions to give to the preachers, as
it was done in the primitive Church.

5 The nature of true zeal is set down, Heb. 10. where the Apostle heavily
threatens them, that willingly give over themselves to sin; there is named
in the proper tongue the zeal of fire. For as fire is not without heat, so
zeal is hot, and cannot long be holden in. It is set down by the contrary,
Reu. 3. when after the Church of Laodicea for her lukewarmnes, is threatened to
be spued out of the Lord his mouth, it is added, be zealous and amend: where we
see zeal to be opposed to lukewarmnes, which is too temperate an heat for the
profession of the Gospel. Again, I. Cor. 14. 1. that which in our common
translation we read, Follow after love, and covet spiritual gifts, etc. the
natural text has, Be zealous after the more excellent gifts. And Romans 12. Be
fervent in spirit. i. let God his spirit kindle in you a fire which may flame
out of you. Now there are diverse kinds of zeal, as the zeal of the world, of
the flesh, of false religion, according to the world. And every man is eaten,
spent, and consumed with some kind of zeal, which must shame us if we have not
the true zeal, for that this zeal leaves in us some advantage and
recompense, which the world, and carnal men Note.
have not. For when they have spent and set on tilt all the strength of their
bodies, and powers of their minds, they have no gain but torment of
conscience, whereas the godly being spent in a good cause, have that repaired in
the inner man, which is consumed in the outward. Now Properties of true zeal.
to know what that true zeal is, as near as by properties we may describe it,
we must first understand, that it is grounded on knowledge. For if our zeal
be not according to knowledge, 1
much like to the zeal of them spoken of, Romans 11. we may come to persecute
the Truth, and think we do very welll. Our zeal must begin where the word
begins: and end where the word ends, that in all things it be proportionable to
the word. Our Savior Christ 2
rebukes the Pharisees, for straining out a gnat, and swallowing up a Camel:
for tithing cummin*seed and mint, and for pretermitting the weightier matters
of the Law, wherein they bewrayed a rotten zeal, in that they were careful in
the less, and careless in the greater points. So now a days many rather
desiring to be counted zealous then to be zealous; for a ceremony Zealous in a
ceremony, in principal points as cold as ice.
will be as hot as may be, and yet in more principal points of religion they are
as cold as can be: in greater causes let this be our canon, to use greater
zeal: in less matters let this be our pedagogie, to use less zeal, so that
we remember to count nothing small in the word, and that we can increase and
decrease in affection, as the thing loved does increase or decrease in goodness.
If I say, we can zealously pursue the most principal things, and for the peace
of the Church can tolerate less things (for if any man in matters of less
importance Two rules.
list to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Church of God,)
we shall observe this 1. rule still remembering this caution, that we count
nothing small commanded or forbidden in the 2
Word. The second rule is, that we have an eye as well to things inward as
outward: our Savior CHRIST reprehendeth the Pharisees, for that they made
clean the out side of the platter, and left the inner-side foul, whose lives
though outwardly they were without reproof, yet inwardly they were full of
pride, disdain, self-loue, and such like. Well, our zeal must begin within,
and in time appear without: we must no less fear to do evil, being by our
selves alone, then if we were eyed of the whole world, least that we become as
painted sepulchers, and as such dishes, as are clean without and foul within.
A branch of this Rule is to have a narrow and jealous eye of our own
corruptions, lurking in the bottomless pit of nature, and gaged only by the
word and spirit. When we love to be hypocrites, Hypocrisy uncased.
in dissembling this natural corruption, and yet are busy in pretending some
outward sanctimonie, the justice of GOD in time will uncase us, and then the
sin which we would hide, shall appear in the face outwardly, and the good
which in Truth we never loved, shall be seen never to have been in us. Herein
then we may go to school with the covetous man, who had rather be rich, than
be counted rich, that we may rather be godly indeed, than be counted to be
godly, least that seeing we be not such indeed as we would be, we become
notoriously to be such as we would not be.

3 The third rule is, that we keep a tenor of zeal in both estates, as well
in adversity A third Rule
as in prosperity. Many in peace are professors, who in time of troubles are
persecutors, who loving the peace of the Gospel, not the Gospel it self, do
more bewray that they were never truly zealous. Others, whilst they be under
the Cross are very demure and devout, who if once they come aloft, forget the
simplicity of the Gospel, and fall to the security of the world. Hereof comes
that fearful complaint, that men hot in preaching and professing, while they
are under, are choked in their zeal when they come to preferment. Such men are
glad not of the gospel, but of the prosperity of the gospel; such men will be
sad, not for the want of the Gospel, but for the adversity which follows
the persecutors of the Gospel. Our trial herein may be thus, if our private
estate be prosperous, A true trial of our zeal.
we lament with David, the estate of the Church, being ruinous: or if our
private estate being perilous, we can rejoice with Paul in the estate of the
Church being prosperous, our zeal is according to truth. David near the
Crown for his happiness, fasted for the estate of the Church, lying in
abominable filthiness. Paul a prisoner in bonds, thought himself at liberty,
so long as the Gospel was free.

4 The fourth Rule is, that in pure zeal we be patient in our own causes,
and devour many private injuries, that the Lord his cause may the better be
provided for, and have the A fourth Rule.
better success. Many can be as hot as fire in taking up their own cause, who
are as cold as ye in defending the Lord his cause. This Rule observed, would
sow up the lips of the adversary, who though for a time he think us to be
cholerike, and madmen, madly reue^ging our private affections, yet one day
should confess, that we sought not our own commodity, but God his most
precious glory. And to stretch this examination of our hearts one degree
further, let us beware of that corruption, which springing from self-loue will
give us leave to rejoice at good things, so long as they be in our selves, but
repineth at the sight of them in others, which will permit us to be grieved at
evil things in our selves, and yet make us to rejoice to see the same in
others. True zeal loves good wheresoever, and in whomsoever Good notes of
true zeal.
it is: true zeal hates sin, wheresoever, and in whomsoever; true zeal
loves friends, as they be God his friends: true zeal hates adversaries, so
far as they are God his adversaries: true zeal loves a good thing in our most
professed enemy: true love hates a sin in our most assured friend: if we
are persuaded that our enemies be God his children, howsoever we disagree in
some particular, yet we can swallow up many private injuries offered, and we
more rejoice in them, as they be God his children, then we can be grieved How
to be grieved for the sins of others.
at them as they have iniuried us. Indeed true zeal is most grieved for the
sins of the godly, because so much is their sin grieuouser the^ the sin of
another, by how much they came nearer to the image of GOD, then another;
howbeit this must always be with a Christian sympathy; which works in us a
grief for their sin, as well as an anger for their sin, and which changes
our grief into prayer for them. Though then we be never so far asunder, we
must love them that love God, though we be joined never so near, we must hate
them that hate God; in the mean time in devouring on the one hand to do all
duties of love and obedience unto them, in admonishing them, praying for them,
and mourning for them, as they be joined in any band unto us; and remembering on
the other hand, when nothing will do them good, but the matter is at this
point, that we must either cleave to God and forsake them, or forsake God and
cleave to them; that nature and civility in the second table are to give place
to religion, and piety in the first table.

5 The fifth rule is, that we must not be stricter to our selves, than to any
other, and be A fifth rule.
more liberal in some things to others, than to our selves. This will first
cause us to cast the first stone at our selves, this will teach us to pull
first the beam out of our own eyes, and then the mote out of another eye,
this will make such an experience of sin in our selves, that we shall neither
flatter too foolishly men in their sins, nor rebuke too rigorously men for
their sin. Some we shall see justly misliking a ceremony, refuse it in
themselves, yet for that it is a thing indifferent, they can tolerate it in
others: others there be, who being unwilling to use it themselves, judge
straightly all others as heinous offenders that use it. Moses refused to take
so much as a shooe-latchet himself from the Egyptians, and yet to others that
would take, he would not deny the law of arms; so straight he was to
himself, so liberal he was to others. Paul seeing that in some places he
could not so conveniently live of other men's charges, as at Corinth and
Thessalonica, although at Colossos he Provision for the Ministry.
received somewhat, where they were able to bestow on him, yet he would not
that all men should be tied to this example to do the like: for he labors
much in all his Epistles almost about this, to show how Ministers ought
sufficiently to be provided for, so strict he was to himself, such
liberality he left to others, Romans 14. 2. Cor. 8. 10. where he entreats of
things indifferent. It were good then, that Christians might say thus with
themselves. I can do thus by Christian liberty, but if it be an hinderance to
the glory of God, or an offense to my brother, I will not do it; if others do
it, so their heart be good in this, and their The cause of many (...):
contem^^^ in the Church.
conscience is used in other good things, I will not herein wage war with
them, but to join with them in greater and better matters, I will pardon the
less. If this wisdom had been used long ago, what vanity had there been
in the Church of God? for want of this, what trouble has risen therein?

6 The sixth and last rule is, if we have a zeal against the sin, because it
was against the A sixth rule*
law of God, and therewithal have a compassion to the person, because one like
our selves An^er a^^ sorrow (...) be ten(...) toge(...) Co^s (...)men's ag(...)
sin.
has offended, this mixture of affections causes anger to feed on the sin,
not on the person. When our Savior Christ going about on the Sabbath day to
heal the man with the withered hand, was reprehended of the Pharisees, it is
said he looked about him angerly, and after it is added, that he sorrowed for
the blindness of their hearts: see how anger and sorrow meet; anger, that men
should have such little knowledge of God, or love to their brother: sorrow;
that being such excellent creatures, they should slip so foully. Look upon
the Prophets, which, if in the heaviness of spirit, they did not utter their
word, which in the zeal of God his glory they did denounce: so that when they
most threatened, they were most grieved, that the plague spoken should fall upon
them. Now that is an outreaching zeal, where our anger rather seedeth on the
person, than on the sin. Samuel in the zeal of Gods glory, spares not
flatly to tell Saul of his sin, and yet Note.
in love to his person, he was always bent to lament Saules cause, and to pray
for him. Do thou love Gods glory? Then will thou surely admonish thy
brother of his sin, because zeal cannot suffer God to be dishonored. Do
thou love thy brother? then will thou admonish him with compassion, because
love lamenteth the weakness of thy brother, who has done that which thou
might have done.

FINIS.
GODLY OBSERVATIONS, CONCERNING DIVERSE ARGVMENTS AND COMmon places in Religion.
CHAP. I.
COnscience is a sensible feeling of Gods judgments grounded upon the word,
nourished by the consideration of the latter day, stirring up our hearts to the
approouing of our doings both before God and men. It is an effect of faith,
faith therefore as the cause must go before; where no faith is, there is no
knowledge; where there is no knowledge, there is no conscience. Many men say,
this is my conscience; they might better say, this is mine opinion, this is my
fancy. Knowledge is less than faith, and opinion less than knowledge.
Again, it is placed in the heart, to the stirring up of us, and summoning of
us to approve those things which we know before God. We must not make our
conscience like a cheuerel purse, stretch it too far, or too narrow, that is,
be not too righteous, as the Anabaptists, and the Family of love. Saul in
sparing Agag would be too merciful, and afterward waxed cruel, by killing
the Prophets. Those that are true The old heretik^s.
Puritanes are such. We must not let our conscience looser than the Scriptures
be, for then we fall to be profane. Take heed of extremes, for virtue is a
mean between two extremes, taking something of one, and something of the
Virtus est medium vtrinque reductum.
other; knowledge of generals, and conscience of particulars. Papists, and
Iusticiaries, because they have no knowledge, but rest upon their doings, they
can have no conscience. 2


2 In our conscience we must begin with the weightiest matters, as that our
sins are remitted Psalm. 32. 1. Psalm. 103.
by Christ, that our infirmities are covered, etc: but, to begin at small
matters, and pass over great, is to swallow up a Camel, and to strain at a
gnat, to tithe Mint, Anise and Commine it is Pharisaicall. Keep the
foundation; if we err in inferiors, Gods spirit will in time reveal it,
and the fire will consume it.

3 Conscience approoueth our doings to God, that is, the thing that is done,
albeit there be infirmity in the action, that is, either the manner of doing,
or the affection of our doing is not good. A thing is named of the greater
part: Wine a little mixed with water Simile.
is wine, Aqua vitae is so called, because it is the principal: so it is
called a good conscience, though some infirmity be in it.

4 Conscience is good, or evil, natural, and good; an erroneous conscience is
where is no knowledge, but ignorance, or doubting, as to doubt in Gods
providence, Mat. 4. Command that these stones may be bread, etc.

CHAP. II. Of order, and how necessary it is in all things.
Between Mary's part, and Marthaes part, we must take Mary's part first, for
it is the best. And when we come to evil things, we must make a better
difference than Saul did, who spared the Amalekites whom he should not spare,
but dealt more cruelly with the Gibeonites: but we must provide that the
Amalekites be more grievously punished, than the Gibeonites. This doctrine
stands against two sorts of men: the first is of them that clean pervert
all, and can away with no order: the other is of them that make a mixture of
many things. It has been an old complaint of the world, that in the web of
the law the poor fly is taken, but the hornet escapes, Order.
the poor man is entangled, the mighty personage is delivered, for they keep
much ado about a little. But if we keep a blowing and a raking so all day
long in the motes, and never can stumble upon the beam, we pervert order: As
for them that are shufflers of all together, who can find no degree in things,
but they do first whatsoever comes first to hand; let them know, that as the
Lord will not have things done confusedly, no more will he have things done
preposterously.

2 Order must be had in all things, especially in heavenly things: for if in
all Arts there be an order, it were ill to think that in the science of
sciences there should be confusion. We shall see an order even in God
himself: in the Trinity, though all the persons be equal, yet there is an
established order of the second person, of the third person, though not for
essence, which is indivisible, yet for better order, of teaching of us to come
to the knowledge of God. And as God is an order in himself, so he requires
and commands an order to be used. 1. Cor. 14. 40. It is the decree of the
Apostle as a general rule, Let all things be done in order. Coloss. 2. 5. Paul
rejoices that they had order among them: but 1 Thessalonians. 4. he describing
notable wicked fellows, notes them by this, that they walked inordinately,
nothing was first or last with them, they did all with disorder. Lastly, Job.
10. Hell it self is noted to be a place, where there is no order, and
therefore inordinate walkers do well belong to that place. So that generally
we see by the Lord, by his works, by the godly, by the wicked, that order is
good: much more is order requisite in action. The Praeposteratio annihilat actum.
wise men saw that the deed done in such a preposterous and confused manner,
is as good as not done. Now if this be so in all actions, much more must it be
in the commandments of the Lord. 1. Sam. 2. there is mention made, how the
children of Heli whilst the meat was yet a seething, they fetched it forth
of the pot with flesh-hookes, and though they did afterward burn the fat for
sacrifice, which should be the special thing to be done in order, though (I
say) they did not omit to sacrifice; yet for that they served themselves first,
who should have been last, and so served the Lord at last, who should have
been first, it is noted as a special sin provoking the wrath of God. A
plainer case than this is in the new Testament, Matthew. 6. where an order is in
seeking: First seek the kingdom of God, then, etc. Here is first. and then a
plain order. He that was called in the Gospel to follow Christ, though he
denied not absolutely to follow, but would follow somewhat preposterously,
though he desired but first to take his leave of his friends, and then would be
a follower; he had a repulse, he had a check for it; not for not following,
but because he would make that first, that should be second, and the second
first, and so the order was changed. And this is for order in general: in
particular we must observe order in refusing the evil, and choosing the good:
the greatest evil is most to be eschewed, the best good most to be chose^. That
which is most good, must have the first reward; that which is the greatest
evil, must first be punished Frist we must forsake the evil, then choose the
good; first gather the tares (says Christ) then take up the good corn also:
so that we must not only do good, but do it in order.

CHAP. III. Of hearing the word of God.
WE must hear the word attentively and fruitfully, and not with the ears of
the world, which are deaf ears. As the Apostle said, it is al one to be a
child in discretion, and a child in years: so it is all one to be deaf by
nature, and to make our selves deaf. The Adder is called deaf, for that she
makes her self so, she is said not to have ears when she has ears, but
not to hear the charmer, least she should lose her poison: such hearers are
Deuteronomy. 29 19. such hearers had Steven, Act. 7. 57. such hearers are Ierem. 7.
10. Another kind of hearing there is, when one does hear a voice, but a
greater noise is in his head, excellentius sensibile, as Aristotle calls it,
so that he cannot hear the less. It is the voice of the Estrich, Bring,
bring; Emolumentum is excellens sensibile, it is the finest word that ever was
invented, it makes that nothing else can be heard for it. There is a third
kind of hearing, the most usual of all, and yet heinous enough: They have
ears to sleep. A very improper speech, that is they cannot hear for sleep,
as Eutychus had in the Acts at Paul's sermon, where Eutychus fell down, and had
almost broke his neck for it. See the judgment of God upon the first evil
hearer of the Gospel. Well, hear thou the word of God preached diligently:
Potest enim tibi id in animo conting^re, quoa Eutycho in corpore.

2 There be some of this sect that will yield unto men their bodies to do
with them what they will, but their souls they say are for the Lord. And why
not their bodies for him also? they have an inward and a dark kind of
godliness, that so think it enough to make the night, or a corner of their
chamber a witness of their religion; which kind of men are to give an account
for detracting from the Lord his worship. Others there are, and they will go
to the congregation, but it is when the chain of idleness and other business is
grown so long that they may go with some case. Some will come to the Church
more often: but when the judgments of God are denounced, they say they shall
not come near them, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. we are delivered though we have committed
all these abominations. We have al uncircumcised ears, and naturally we have a
praeputium before our ^ares, and they that are skillful in Anatomy know that
there is as it were a hammer at the ^are, which will open wide when we hear
vanity, but it is fast shut when the Lord speaks unto us. It is a common
disease in others to seek after variety, and so after vanity, and so nature
desires an infinitum. And these me^ either hunt after words, which may cause
them to err from the word of truth, or else they say they hear such cold and
uncomfortable sermons, as they cannot away with. If good gifts be joined with
the preaching of the word, and we hear the word with the gifts, it is a
question whether we hear for the words sake, or for the gifts sake: but if the
word come without such glorious gifts, a man may stir up himself
sufficiently thereby. And when it does come to pass, that such unsavory
liquors be drawn out of mustie vessels, we must be driven to this
consideration, that God for our dulnes has shut up the mouths of his
Preachers, and has denied the power and purity of preaching unto us, and that
our dead and deaf ears are the cause that the Lord tieth up the strings of
our Preachers tongues* Neither is this to smooth or sooth up any one in
negligent using of their gifts, for the Lord will have his gifts used; and a
candle put under a bushel is not of the Lord his setting, it is the devils
doing when our gifts are suppressed. Well, if we have ears and hear not the
word, then is no difference between a man's ears and an Asses, and it is
rather a property of Idols which have ears and hear not, have eyes and see
not. And as they that have mouths and speak not, are rather Idol shepherds,
than true Pastors: so they that have ears and hear not, are rather Idol
gazers, than true hearers of the word. Again, for this cause we must hear,
because we hear the most excellent object; the object of the ear is a sound
or voice, now the most excellent sound is the sound of the Gospel, the most
excellent voice is the voice of the Preacher. Another reason may be, that our
members are put to their best use, when they serve most for the glory of God*
as our feet are put to the best use, when they carry us to the congregation,
our hands when they are lift up in prayer, our ears when they be hearkening to
the word of God: and therefore they provide well for themselves, that early in
the morning before they do any thing else, do put out their members to the
best use in the worship of God. And surely if there were nothing but the bare
word of God delivered unto us, as it is a thing containing the will of God, it
were worthy the reading, hearing, and meditating: but when it opens to us the
treasures of salvation, when it teaches us wisdom, and equity, so as we may
be able to discern every affection, it is a thing much more worthy our
travel. We think that we may fly up to heaven by the wings of profound
knowledge: but, says the Scripture that learned preaching shall save us? No,
the foolishnes of preaching must save us, all our salvation must be fetched
from hence, and therefore it is worth the hearing, this is Ioels trumpet, and
of great force. We must learn therefore to use a preparation, without which
all our service stinketh before the Lord. When thou enterest into the house of
the Lord, look unto thy feet, Eccles. 4. 17. Stand in awe (says the Prophet)
commune with your own hearts* Psalm. 4. And Job. 1. 6. Job is said to sanctify
his sons. 2. Chro. 30. 18. 19. though many of the people had not cleansed
themselves, yet Ezechtas prayed for them, that prepared their whole hearts to
seek the Lord. But all we rush to the congregation as a fox out of his form.
And though we have knowledge enough, yet we had need to be straighted, because
we are as a broken bow, and in seeking of knowledge we must seek it
fruitfully: scire, vt scias, audire vt audias, is mere vanity. Every one
would be a patient in the word of God, but there be many pragmaticall things:
Beatiqui audiunt. What is that enough? Beati qui ambulant, qui custodiunt;*
eati qui perseuerant. If we will not hear, the time will come when we shall be
constrained to hear: if we will not hear when the Lord speaks, we shall
cry but not be heard: if we hear it as a bond to tie the Lord to hear us
again according to his promise.

3 Look how near we come unto the practice of David, so near are we to the
lively members of God; and look how far we are from that, so far are we
from the image of God. Men rather seek for profound knowledge, than for faith
that works by love, and covet more the ministerial doctrine, than after the
power of the Spirit. Therefore God, who is as able to send a lying spirit into
the mouths of 400. Prophets, as into any of the meanest Israelites, does
punish them commonly with strange doctrine, and give them up to strong
illusions. We ought to have such a burning affection in us, that we should not
be able to express it, as David had, who because he could not express it,
uses an exclamation, Psalm. 119. 97. O how love I thy law! but men's hearts are
dull, and their spirits heavy, they are far from this affection that was in
David.

4 Our love to Gods word is a trial of our love to God; he that trembles at
Gods word, and is obedient unto his voice, does better than he that offers
sacrifice, and he that loves Gods word, does love God, and else not.

Where the love of a man is, the practice will be there; Matthew 6. where the
treasure is, there will be the heart. As the covetous are bent upon their
riches, as the adulterer is bent upon his lust, and the gamester on his
pastime, is not weary in sitting up whole nights and days: so the godly on
Gods law, they study in it night and day, they study not by fits and starts,
as some do, but continually. David proves his love to Gods word, because he
placed his whole delight and felicity in it, as appears by the grief he had
in the want of it.

5 When many means are used men stand more excuselesse, that in so often
repeated and reiterated mercies and method of teaching, will nevertheless buy
out their condemnation, by a willing ignorance, and will not be taught. Again,
we are fitter one time than another to make our profit. Tell men of their
sins to day, and they may fleare at it; tell them to morrow of it, and the
tears may trickle down their cheeks: and Elihu says, God speaks once or
twice, and yet man hears not, till a third time come. And shall we think our
fathers needed this rather than we? Surely there cannot be a more sure token
that God his spirit is our teacher, than that we find a desire still to more
and often hearing: and who sees not that we are subject to spiritual
transmutations, and how easily fiery inflammations raised betwixt God and us
do die, if God be silent yea but a little? Therefore let us say with the
Church in the song of Solomon, chap. 8. verse. 13. Cause us still to hear it.
Some think to stand in some sort, though the Lord build the^ not, although as
the Psalmist says, Except the Lord build, all is in vain: so there is a
learning of things without the Lord, yet the profitable building and learning
is only of the Lord. We are therefore to be delivered of this common error,
which makes us, when we do not profit, to accuse our Teachers, and to carpe at
his matter, or to quarrel at his manner of delivery: wherein as we do not
free and excuse all Teachers as faultlesse, so it is a certain truth, that
teach he never so well, soundly, and orderly, yet that will not serve, we must
have a greater thing. Christ we know made many sermons, yet there were many so
far from profiting by him, that all that he gained in his life, and in his
death, were not above six score persons: and therefore no marvel though at
our preaching some profit not.

It may be some think, that if they should hear Christ speak personally to
them, they should profit, and be made by and by perfect good Christians: but it
is not so. Though David was taught by Nathan and Gad, two excellent men, yet
how often does he pray after they had taught him, that the Lord would teach him?
To this purpose therefore we must learn two things, the Minister teaches but
the ear, he that teaches the heart, his chair and his pulpit is in heaven:
so that at one time we must attend as it were on two Preachers. Now if we
think all to be one labor, persuading our selves that it is enough to listen
to men, we deceive our selves; and this deceit has wrought that either we
bring no hearts at all, but only our ears, and so though the Minister have
some part, yet God has nothing to work on; or else we bring such worldly
hearts, that there is no room left within to any further teaching than the
ear. Hitherto come then the short and the long. If we will be taught of God,
though Christ come to teach us in his own person, yet we must labor for a
double hearing, that is, both of the ear, and of the heart, both inward and
outward, else it shall fall out with us, as with sundry other things: there
are some fruits both of corn and plants, which come up, but not of any sound
seed, which comes to a blade or so, but it never yields a ripe substance:
so there is a momentanie springing up of some knowledge, from some corrupt
seed, as of eloquence, of pleasing words; but these men have nothing, but as
it were a wild egg engendered in them, and the fruit of it will never last
long, be the Preacher never so forcible in his speech. But when God teaches,
Amos the heardsman from his cattle, Peter taken from his nets and fishing
boat, do much profit us. Many of the Saints of God before us to this end have
showed how they have been taught. Augustine after he had nine years studied
Divinity, in which time no doubt he often read over the Bible, yet at the length
was much moved with a place in the 13. of the Romans, Put on the Lord Jesus:
and this was the place that after often reading, he was nothing but ordinarily
touched with; and yet after, Gods spirit laying it to his heart, is was the
means whereby he confesses himself to be converted.

CHAP. IIII. Who be swine, and who be dogs.
BY nature we are all swine, and dogs, for that we folllow our own
uncleanness, but especially, we that were Gentiles: for in that respect
Christ calls so the Cananitish woman, making the Jews whom he called
children in a privilege above us: but since the wall is pulled down. Beside
our natural condition we are all vessels of wrath, followers of our own gorge,
until that strong and strange change be come upon us, Esaias 11. when of dogs we
become lambs, of uncleanness we become clean. Howbeit, the Scripture does not
so understand us to be dogs; but such are meant by our Savior Christ to be
dogs and hogs, who having the continual means either break into the
contempt of the things themselves, or fall to an open despite and violence
against the Ministers that bring them. Whether it be then that we turn again
to our own righteousness, and to seek justification by the law, in which
respect Paul calls them dogs, and concision; or whether being raised in the
blood of Christ, we do not only slip, but plunge our selves into the gulf of
sin again; in this respect we may be called swine and dogs. For we see
this is the estate of the dog, that continuing and carrying in himself the
torment of his own body, and bearing the burden of pain in his bowels, he for
a while casts it out, and being discharged of it, he after charge himself
with it again; so they that carry a fire of grief in their own bosoms, even
a confidence of their own righteousness, if having for their comfort cast it
off, resume it, are well compared to dogs. Such are our papists, heretics, and
familists. The nature of the swine is, that being clean, she retireth to her
filthiness: so they on the other side who by the water and fire of the spirit
have been so cleansed, that there has appeared an open and a sensible change
among them, if after they fall greedily to their former vanity, they are as
swine. And so both the falling away from true religion, and the reuolting to
the former corruptions of life, the malicious refusing, or brutish persecuting
of the word, or Ministers thereof, come within the compass of these creatures.
And so long as such sins be used, so long must we cease giving precious
things, until place again be given for the footing of the Lord. The reasons
are, for that in that estate they will either tread under foot, that is,
contemn such good things, or they will turn again and wound a man, that is,
persecute, or else deal ill with hand, or tongue, issuing from such
persecutions. To such we must not cast pearls: for to them we shall do no
good, but to our selves we shall do harm.

CHAP. V. Of Unmercifulness.
THe Sier of such unmercifulness is the devil: which if it be so, good Lord
how many legions of devils be in some then? Por quae quis peccat, per eadem
punitur: If we offend by unmercifulness, God will punish us by
unmercifulness. Our courtesy is like Judas his courtesy, to kiss, and say,
Hold him: It is Ioabs courtesy to say, Art thou in health my brother? and to
stab in with a knife: it is the Devils courtesy to Esau to seem to bewail
Gods hard dealing with them, the easier to entrap her: it is the courtesy of
the Pharisees to Christ, to say, Master, we know thou art no man pleaser, and
to get an enditement of treason against him. The less indeed of this
courtesy, the better. Well, many times the beautifullest things have not the
necessariest use, nor the richest men do the most good, and in common use, the
gold does nothing so much service, as iron. We see that in the army many
bear a better and a bigger show, but when ought is to be done, all lies on
the poor Pioner; and there is none of us but well he woteth, that in the most
gorgeous house, that is, though all the other parts be more sightly to see to,
yet the principal part of all the foundation is nothing but a few oystershels,
and potsherds, and rubbish, and such like baggage. And when as the best of us
al is no better but esca vermiu^, worms meat, for nothing but the very
dunghill, though he be covered with purple cloth, yet notwithstanding the worst
of us all is proud enough, and thinks as well of himself as the best
deserves: yet as rises our good, so rifeth our blood, qui velit ingenio
cedere, rarus erit, he that will think of himself less than of another, he
is an odd fellow, show me him, give me such a fellow.

CHAP. VI. Of Works.
TO except, or to prophecy against the promises of God, is not good, because
it is 1
sufficient for us to do the thing warranted by God his mouth. If in offering
our service to Christ we lose twenty and win one, it is gain enough: and
it is better to do a thing in vain, than not at all. Moses went to Pharaoh,
though he knew before he should not profit him. If we do well, the good thing
persheth in another, and not in us, but if we do not the good we may, then the
good thing perishes in us. Again, we shall not receive a reward according to
our success, but according to our labor. The Lord does esteem a barren
duty, and no man does (as it were) cast away, and spend in Sterile officium.
vain so much as he does. How many sermons spends he in vain? how many
threatenings in vain? how many promises in vain? how many things commands
and forbids he in vain? men nothing esteeming them, and yet he cease not.
Therefore herein we must not fare better than the Lord, and yet as good
children of so good a father, we must still labor to do good, though we reap
small fruit.

2 May we follow a rabble to do good? this is a question: I answer, we must
not follow Non faciendu^ quia multifaciunt, sed quia bonum. Vt bonum facia^, an
been, satis mihi su^t pau^i, satis vnus, satis nullus.
a multitude to do good, for by following them to do good, we learn to follow
them to do evil. This is my meaning, we may not do it, because many do it;
but because it is good: for if the other be his reasons, surely he will ^ollow
in evil also by the same motive. It was well said of a learned father taken
out of a Philosopher, a goodly speech: To do good, or to do well, few shall
suffice, yea one, yea none. I have laid the best medicine I can to this sore,
yet it will itch still, it has many allures, and will continue still, for it
is one of those sweet evils, Job. 10. It may be effectual to some, yet if
none follow it; I have done my duty, Cantaui canticum dilecto meo, I have
sung a song to my beloved, and so an end.

Election is a great spur to good works. It is not as men say, if I am
elected I cannot Augustine. Si pote^tiores faciunt, non faciam quia faciunt,
sed gaudeo quia faciunt.
perish, I may live as I list: but if thou art elected, thou art also elected
to the means to faith, and the fruits of it, else thou art not elected.

CHAP. VII. Against Policy.
THE godly have ever been wiser than the politic of the world. Joseph was
wiser than the Egyptians, yea than his brethren, and yet they were wiser than
the rest. Daniel, Moses, Paul, wiser than their enemies. The Gallathians
mingled the Law, the Corinthians preached gloriously, yet Paul was wiser than
they all. The politic were overthrown at building of the Tower. Pharaoh in
Egypt his policy was, first in killing the males, 2. by his setting of
Coniurers against Moses: so men believed: and some men do write, that Moses was
but a Coniurer. 3. in letting them go, and following them: now says he they
are entangled in the rocks; but what was his end? he sunk down like a piece
of lead in the red sea. Balack sent for Baalam to curse the Israelites: his
most devilish policy that could be was this his counsel, Thou can not,
says he, bring them to open idolatry, send for them, bid them to banquets of
meats offered to Idols, make them drunk; so doing they fell; first, to
adultery, secondly, to idolatry: but this wretch Balaam perished with so many
thousands of them. Saul to hold in the people; 1. would sacrifice before Samuel
came. 2. gave Michol to David for so many foreskins of the Philistines; not
that he loved him, but that the Philistines hands might be upon him, and not
his own: 3. when that way prevailed not, he by force would destroy him: 4. he
goes to the Devil, for this is the end of all policy when it cannot
prevail, that they ask counsel of the Devil. The Devil after he had
deluded him long, now tells him the truth, and after he kills himself. Look the
policy of Abimelech; and Achitophell, who being crossed in his counsel, went
and hanged himself. This may terrify all Machiauellists, and crafty
politicians, and 2. encourage all to rest on Gods word, which makes us wiser
than all foes and wicked of the world.

CHAP. 8. Three special notes of a man truly righteous and religious.
THere be three things whereby we may know whether we be in the right way or
no, and they be precious and dear in the sight of them that have a care to
please God. The first is our gross temptations: for many trusting to good
talk, good education, good company, and thinking themselves well settled, are
content to rest in these means, and travel not to see their inward
corruptions, and privy temptations, which if they be but burdensome unto us,
and make us as it were sick to carry them, it is a good token. The second
thing is by marking our affections, if we love nothing so much as the favor of
God, fear nothing so much as the loss of it, having found it if we carefully
keep it, and having lost it, if we never be quiet till we recover it, being
content to want all things to have it, not staying in the possession of all
things if we want it; this is a good sign. Thirdly, we may comfort our selves
if we fear God as well in prosperity as in adversity, and love God as well
in adversity as in prosperity. For every man can fear him under the cross,
as Pharaoh, Saul, and Balaam, and every man can praise God in abundance, as who
praised him more than Jobs wife being in prosperity.

CHAP. 9. Of the Sabbath.
BY nature all days are like, as are all men, water, bread, wine, until God
sanctify them, that is, put them a part to a several use. As amongst men, the
Magistrate, the water in Baptism, bread and wine in the Supper: so among days
the Sabbath, Genesis 2. 3. (because of Gods appointment) are not to be accounted
common. Acts. 10. 15. What God has made clean, pollute thou H^ o theo^
ekatharise, su me koinou.
not: Pollute thou not, that is, employ thou not, as thou do other things,
to common uses, but let it serve to holy uses only. For nothing consecrate was
ever put to profane or ordinary uses. Exodus 30. 38. To sanctify is to make
holy: It is said, God has made holy the Sabbath. For himself it is
superfluous, to whom all things are holy; for us and for our selves therefore is
the sanctification thereof. For, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. the Apostle says, This is the
will of God even your sanctification: therefore he sanctified it for us, that
is, he Touto gar esti to thelema tou theou ho agiasmos humon.
blesses the word which we hear upon that day, after a more effectual
manner, and with a more special blessing to beget in us holiness, that we may
by it become holy, as he is holy. God then by his blessing has sanctified it,
we by our obedience must sanctify it, that is, be occupied in all those
exercises of religion, whereunto God has annexed a promise of working in us
true holiness. To do otherwise is to oppose our selves to the ordinance of
God: yet though we do profane it as much as in us lies, the day does remain
Means for the sanctification of the Sabbath.
holy, as Christ witnesses. A man may commit adultery with a woman, and yet
she remain chaste, Matthew. 28. Now I do say, we do sanctify the Sabbath day,
by using the means, by which sanctification is wrought in us, as by prayer,
Act. 16. 13. privately or publicly used, Psalm. 122. 1. and secretly among the
faithful to be used before all other means, Psalm* 95. 6. after all other
means, Numb. 6. 24 or by reading the word, or hearing it read, Nehem. 8. 8. in
the assembly, Act. 13. 13. or reading it privately our selves, Dan 9. 2. both
to the trial of that which we have heard, Act. 17. 11. and for our own
private meditation. If reading we do not understand, we must provide us a
guide, either by word, Act. 8. 19. or 2
writing, that is, by Analogy, or by hearing the word Preached, which is the
chief means of Guides. 1
all the rest, Luke 4. 16. Romans 10. 14. By singing of Psalms, Psalm. 92. 1.
generally containing the 2. 3.
praises of God, or more particular, as present occasion shall serve. By
meditation, Psalm. 92. 2. 3
upon the word preached, or read: upon the creatures, Psalm. 143. 5. upon Gods
judgments, 4
and mercy toward our selves, our fathers house, the places wherein we live,
and the 1
Church of God elsewhere: by conference, Malach. 3. 16. of that which has done
us good, 2
or the wants we feel in our selves: by using practice, that is, by doing
those things which 3
may testify unto our conscience, and before men that sanctification is
wrought in us, and 4
that the means have done us good, Matthew. 12. 12. 2. Cor. 16. 1. 2. and that
in things corporal, which some have set down in a Latin Visito, poto, cibo,
redimo, lego, rolligo, condo.
verse: or in things spiritual, uttered in another Latin Corrige, fuade, doce,
sola^e, remitte, fer, o^^.
verse. Without bodily rest we cannot thoroughly sanctify this day: For Adam in
Paradise, and in the estate of innocence could not do it, much less we as we
are. Therefore even before the fall he had a Sabbath, Genesis 2. 3. giving him
therein to intend the service of God wholly and only, for the other six days
he was to dress the garden, Genesis 2. 15. The equity of this commandment is
the rule of nature; whatsoever must be thoroughly The Sabbaths use.
done, must be wholly done. We are to rest from the labor of the six days,
that is, from whatsoever might have been done, or may be done after. For which
cause we are commanded to remember the Sabbath before it come. We must abstain
from bearing of burdens, Ierem. 17. 22. from buying and selling even victuals,
Nehem. 13. 15. from necessary labor, in necessary, and at necessary times,
that is, both in seed time, and harvest, Exodus 34. 2. yea even from whatsoever
may seem to have a show of holiness, in the very building of the Lords
sanctuary, Exodus 31. 13. generally, whosoever does any work on the Sabbath
defiles it, and commits a sin worthy of death.

The punishment which God threatens to that country where this precept is
neglected, is the plague of fire, Iere. 17. 27. And to keep the Sabbath,
buying, and selling therein, Punishment for the breach of the Sabbath.
is the Sabbath of the men of Ashdod, and Tyrus. Nehe. 13. If we must cease
from our vocation wherein God has placed us, and the works thereof, then must
we cease from feasting, games, faires, and such like of less necessity, of
greater impediment for the Sabbath: such is the Sabbath of the golden calfe,
Exodus 32. 6. And if we must abstain from Recreations.
those things which in themselves are not evil, then from surfeiting, idleness,
doing of our own wills, and which at no times are lawful: otherwise it is the
devils Sabbath, and not the Lords, Es. 58. 13. Neither must we think if we
precisely keep the bodily rest, and put on our best apparel, that we have
satisfied our duty: for as bodily labor, so bodily rest profits nothing, 1.
Tim. 4 8. Therefore we must take heed that our rest end in sanctification, or
else our Ox and our Ass^ keep as good a Sabbath as we.

No commandment is both affirmative and negative but this, to meet every way
with us: every precept else runs in this tenor, Thou shall not: this
requests us mildly, and says Remember, nay, it not only desires us, but it
persuades us, and gives us a reason, whereas the Lord might absolutely command
us, yea he affoords not only a reason, but many reasons, as four in number,
which is to none else, that every way we might be persuaded. Now he uses the
word of remembering for a special watchword of watchfulnes, which imports
thus much. Whatsoever ye do, do this, and do it with care, have a special
regard to this, in any case forget it not, that so we might think the breaking
of this day to be no trifle: and it is taken carefully from us when we give a
special charge, Deuteronomy. 5. Take heed to this day, remember it, ere it come, ye
may be overtaken. By the Sabbath is meant the holy rest, so the land has a
Sabbath: and this day is exempted by God from the rest to this end. Indeed by
nature all days were alike and common, till God severed one; which for his
sake, and the ends sake must be distinguished from the ordinary days: so all
men and creatures were common, until the Lord set them apart to special uses.

The Sabbath is wholly moral tows, and to our Fathers; partly moral, and
partly ceremonial to the Jews, unto whom every commandment had a
ceremony; first, by reason of their weakness; secondly, because they were under
the cloud. Now they are cut off. But before them was the moral use of this
precept, even from the beginning, Exodus 16. nay Genesis 2. and no tradition
quenched it. So our Sabbath continues, and takes hold on the conscience. True
it is, every day we are bound to sacrifice, and not to forget our duty, Psalm.
1. 2. we must pray continually, and David sacrificed thrice a day, Psalm. 55.
but this day must be wholly sanctified, no part of it must be given to other
things, to look to our selves in, So Adam had a vocation, and a rest in part,
and wholly: for nature distract, can do nothing well. As for the cremonie of
the day, it was in the seventh day, but that is altered into the day wherein
our Redemption was finished, and the world renewed: and therefore by the
Apostles themselves this day was instituted. 1. Cor. 16. Acts. 20. 7. For the
name it is plain, Apoc. 1. 10. The rest of it, in regard of the straight-yoke,
was from gathering sticks, Sabbaths rest
Numb. 13. 32. from kindling a fire, Exodus 35. 3. and the sanctifying of it,
was in killing of Lambs, and offering flowers.

The Sabbath is a sign, but not a ceremony, as the tree in Paradise, it does
admonish of Sabbath, a sign.
the true Rest, and is a pledge of the everlasting Rest. It is the agreement
between the Lord and us, Exodus 31. 17. Ezech. 20. 12. It is the Market Day of
the soul to gather Manna, which is the bread of life. Well, we must first
rest; from what? from our own work, works, words, and delights: for the Law
is spiritual, Esai. 58. 15. First, we must rest from the works and labors of
the six days, which are here opposed to rest; from bearing burdens, Iere.
17. from gathering Manna, Exodus 16. which was their food; from treading the
winepresses, and making bargains, Nehem. 13. from bringing sheaues, Ibidem,
both in Earing time, and Harvest, Exodus 34. 21. To work on the Sabbath is to
defile it, Exodus 3. The plague of fire, is God his judgment of it, Ierem. 17.
27. Gods severity by death, Exodus 35. As for the sanctifying of it, GOD has
made it holy, Gene. 2. 3. By his blessing he associateth us to make it holy,
as well as himself, and that is by our obedience. He has done what he can to
make it holy, let not us profane it, and he will not account it holy, unless
we so use it. We must therefore separate it from the common uses, as the Church,
the font, the cup, which are pu to holy uses, to the worship of GOD, and the
furthering of religion. First, we must separate into Gods work, as preaching,
Luc. 4. 16. Reading, Acts. 13. 13. Prayer, 16. 13 conference, Mala. 3.
Meditation. Psalm. 92. or any good work, Matthew. 12. 12. whatsoever shows in
us the power of Christ his Resurrection. Now to the reasons. It were a great
sin not to yield to his Commandment, a greater, not to yield to his
perswasionss. His first eason is, Six days shall thou labor, etc. This is
rather a permission than a commandment, as was that of eating of the Trees in
Paradise. If GOD had given us one for our selves, and kept six for himself,
it had been equity in him to command, and duty in us to obey: now he has
kept but one for himself, and that for profit too. To break the
commandment in respect of such liberality, were great sin, as we may see
in Nathans conference, in Aeuaes reasoning, and in Joseph's argument with his
Mistress, as also in Io^s speech to his wife. And do all that thou have to do:
That is; Finish all ere this day come: Reserve this wholly to GOD, use not this
to perform any part of thy business: For therefore have I parted the six
days, and given thee them, that this (one) may be wholly mine. Secondly, the
Lord says, it is his Sabbath; therefore not ours, neither to use it in our
Fayres, our Harvest, or our plays. So that the offense reboundeth up to
heaven, Romans 13. 2. In it thou shall do no manner of work. Here is the
negative part, work six days [Rest the seuenth] in them do all, in this do
none: a flat antithesis. GOD has dealt prodigally with us, let us not deal
sparingly with him. Thou and thy son. We see he begins with the superior;
ergo, he ought to be so far from hindering, that he must look to the
sanctifying of this day, and provide that his inferiors, and they in his
government rest as well as he, both from their own, and from their Masters
business. The practice whereof we may read. Nehem. 13. And the reason is good,
because in respect of God and his service, there is no respect of Master and
servant; so that though the superior rest himself, if he provide that all his
house do rest as well as himself, he violateth the Lords rest. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
Thy cattle, for bodily rest. This shows Gods mercy to be great, which
provides for man and beast, and this he does, that too much might not be
exacted of the creature, but that they might have a breathing time: And
secondly, that we seeing them rest, might the more effectually be moved to
rest our selves, as the King of Niniuie. Thy stranger; We must have Lots care
over the body of our strangers, they are of our jurisdiction whiles they are
under our roof, and we must sanctify our house, much more every man must be
sanctified. GOD, thus in setting down Nostri iuris.
every particular, takes away all occasion of quarrelling in the breach of this
law. For in six days. This is set down, that in the Lords method we might
consider of his works, as David, Psalm. 139. and Job, chapt. 10. We have the
example and practice of it in GOD himself, who being above all Laws observed
this, to make us more willing. Let us be like to him, for by having notable
examples, we are more effectually stirred up toe do any thing. It is the use of
the Scriptures after reasons to exemplify, as CHRIST, Ioh. 15. in teaching
humility, and Paul 1. Cor. 11. Therefore we are to follow God, if we be his
children, who has for our example vouchsafed this day this great dignity. He
blessed it, and the works of it, making them effectually to work in us
regeneration, and fitting us for eternal life. He hallowed it to the ease of
servants, and beasts, so bridling our worldlines to the Meditation of his
creatures, to the work of Faith and charity. Wherefore what God has
hallowed, let no man profane.

CHAP. X. Of Discipline, and Excommunication.
WHen men are neither profitable for the land, nor good for the dunghill they
must he cast out. This casting out has a necessary use in the body natural,
as where nature cannot do it of her self, there she does it Excommunication.
by art; in the body civil as by exile; in the body ecclesiastical, as by
excommunication; in the body oeconomicall, by suspension or expulsion. God cast
out Adam from paradise, the Angels from heaven, Abraham cast out the bondmaide
with her son, Moses separated the leprous persons from the clean; CHRIST
cast out buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

2 The rulers of the Church are called the Church, to whom Discipline
appertains, even as Mark. 3. not the whole company of the Jews, but the
rulers of the Synagogue are called the Church of the Jews. Therefore as we call
the Court of Parliament the Realm gathered together, although it be but an
Epitome to sit, and compromise of things: so these few being a Compendium of
the Church, have all things committed unto them. And God himself in the
Parable does not bewray this, but does in wisdom conceal it: saying, They
will without peradventure reverence my Son: So without controversy, one
would think they would hear the Church. But as the Jews made a way with him
that was the heir, so we say now adays with the Edomites, Psalm. 137. down
with the Church, that there be no fear of yoke, nor the print of the yoke
upon our neck. Well, how grievous a thing it is to despise the Church, we
will see by the dignity appointed to the Church in the word of God. Tit. 2. it
is called a peculiar people, and in an ancient tongue, The Lords Jewel, 2. Cor.
4. All the world was made for the Church, and for the Churches sake, CHRIST was
a Christ, Heb. 11. He that despises the Church, the world is not worthy to
give him breath, Hebr. 1. The Angels of God are servants to it. Cor. 6. the
Church shall judge the How dangerous to despise the censures of the Church.
whole world, and the Angels 2. Pet. 1. 3. 4. The Church is partaker even of
God his own nature* Ephesians. 4. The Church is the fulfilling of Christ, so that
Christ is as it were maimed without it, and what can be said more of it?

3 An excommunicated person was so odious among the Jews, that besides that
they did excommunicate him, and shut him out of their Synagogues, if they met
such a one, they thought it a special token of some fortune as they term it.
So that among the Jews excommunication was worse then five deaths: so much was
reverenced the censures of the Church. This did the Church, but when men began
to be idle they put off this duty. But what is this excommunication? A giving
up to Satan. There was a great partition wall between God and us, until Christ
came and made a breach, and entered into the place wherein God was shut up from
us. Christ himself became the door, but the keye of the door has he committed
to his faithful Minister. They that are without this wall, they are among the
Ziims, and Iims, among the Owls, and Dragons, they are as in hell, and in
exile from the congregation of Christ. Eliah made the heavens brass three
year, so as they gave no rain: but what a thing is it to make God as brass,
so that all the spoutes of his mercy be stopped, and all conduites of
compassion should be dammed up against us?

4 In the case of discipline we have to deal with the Lord of heaven and
earth: It is to good purpose to know with whom we have to deal, for it causes
us to bestirre our selves in dealing with worldly men: then how much more now
must it cause us so to do? This discipline did Christ himself put in
practice, who often takes the trouble of his members to himself, as appears
in his speech to Paul; Paul why persecutest thou me? and in the saying of Peter
to Ananias, Thou have lied against the holy Ghost. And surely at the last day,
the contempt of the Ministers shall be counted as deep a sin, as if we had
contemned God himself: which may appear in Dathan, Corah and Abiram. And
surely God thinks we should honor his Church above all: and yet men say,
Come let us kill the heir. Wherefore the Lord will come and note out these
husbandmen. Howsoever men please themselves in doing thus, yet God that sits
in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and vex them with his sore displeasure
in the end.

5 The discipline which Christ has instituted is committed to the Church.
Behold, and hear a miracle, heaven placed under the earth: where as in all
other things heaven is above earth, God made heaven and earth; Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven: so now with David we must say, What is man that
thou art so mindful of him? not only to give him the rule of earth, but even
of heaven, yea of Angels, yea of God himself: so that now God cannot loose
them whom the Church has bound: so that although he does many things without
us, yet when we have done this, he does not otherwise, etc. Else there are many
bound in heaven, which are not bound in earth, especially in these days when
the leaves are fallen from the tree, the beauty is gone, and the discipline is
taken away: yet the Angels have chains though we cannot see them: so that they
watch over the wicked to bind them, and to cast them into hell. Thus we see the
high dignity of the Church, and yet this is not given to every one, but to the
Church, who though they be base, and contemptible, yet the Lord committed unto
them the apple of his eye. In the Epistle to the Hebr. he says, That the earth
the air, and the heaven are not worthy to give them breath, he has made the
Angels to be their servants, to them he has given such authority. And no
marvel, for he has made them more excellent than the Angels, he has made
them the body of his Son, yea and the friends of his own self. To them he
committed his treasures. And what be his treasures? Surely when David comes
to value it, he says, that it is better than gold, yea than much gold, than
much find gold, than all precious stones. Yea and that Psalm. 19.
he might leave nothing out, he says, it is better than all things else. Yea
the Kings of the earth do, and ought to fetch the law at the hands of the
Levites, although they now being corrupted, seek counselors like unto
Achitophel. Thus we see how the Lord esteemed his Church, whom he makes thus
his treasurer. We know that Kings make great account of those men, whom they
make their Lord Chancellers.

The second note of the dignity of the Church is, in that the Lord has
committed his broad Seals unto them. What, has the Lord seals? Yea, and
therefore the Lord said to Ieconiah* though he were the signet of his hand, yet
he would put him off. And what seals be these? Surely it is the Sacrament of
Baptism, and of the Supper, and these are the seals which the Lord has given
to his Church.

The third note of this dignity of the Church is, that the execution of
judgment is given unto them: and this makes men esteemed when they are put in
such high places. Well then, the Lord has committed into the hands of the
Ministers the execution of life and of death, and therefore they are said to
judge the world; and if they be Judges of the world, they will not reuerse
their sentence: and therefore they shall surely be condemned whom the Church
binds. And though that they may not boast of their power to destroy but to
edificate (for all venomous beasts can they destroy, etc. and so can the halter)
yet they have great glory thereby: for the censure of the Church (as one
says) was, and is the day of judgment, before the great day of judgment
come. So that by this we see to what dignity the Lord has in all points
advanced his Church.

6 It is said that the Devils dispossessed thought not so highly of themselves,
but they Discretion necessary in discipline.
could be content, and desired to be cast into a heard of swine: so that this
is the estate of this vile fiend, that so he may be in some, neither dog nor
hog is misliked of him, he refuses not the very she, but he will have it. It
is far otherwise with our Savior Christ, he will not communicate, nor have
communicated his holiness and his sacrifice to such souls, as have not
cleansed themselves from the corruption of nature as swine, or from corruption
of custom as dogs: he himself denies his precious things to such vile
creatures, Matthew 7. 5. Therefore if Christ deny these things, who dares grant
them? For as in the beginning of his works, he separated the light from
darkness, and in the end shall separate the sheep from the goats; so will he
have us to make a separation between his Saints, and swine: and therefore he
has not only charged his Ministers, who are in office next to him, to take
order for the separation of the precious from the vile, but also every
particular man, according to the measure of his calling. But in our common
course we offend, as not giving where we should give, so by giving where we
should not give; as by not casting where we should cast, so by not casting to
them we should cast. Indeed in particular to judge of a man to be a swine, or
a dog, as Paul did Hymeneus, Philetus, and the Copper-smith, we cannot. If we
see evident signs of a scorner, of a fool, that is, of one utterly destitute
of the grace of God, of a reuiler of the word, of one covered with the leprosy
of sin, and pleasing himself in the wallow of his filth: when he is thus,
that is, while he is such a one, that whatsoever is bestowed on him is lost, we
must stay the casting of pearls, or giving of precious things to such, until
the Lord by the touch of his finger has turned him, until (I say) the Lord
has taken order for a way to be made for the applying of that which wisely is
to be administered. But if we neglect to give precious things, when and where we
should give them, and then after give when and where we should not, by
rebuking a man in his rage, we should rather drive into a further blaspheming,
than take away his former sin.

CHAP. XI. Of Means.
ALthough God have appointed ordinary causes, yet he has reserved in his
own sovereignty and jurisdiction the staff of them, and the virtue, infusion
and heat of them. For as the Physician prescribing a medicine made with wine,
it is not the bare wine that nourishes, but it is the thing steeped in the
wine that works: so although we have things ministered unto us by the best
means, unless the Lord put to his staff all is but in vain. For as we may
see some continually fed with cordial and nutritive meats, notwithstanding
labor of a consumption* so we shall see others fed with water-gruell, and
yet to be very well nourished. On this manner GOD can work with means, and
this he can work without the means, because the Lord would show that he
reserueth a power beyond means: although he established all things in a
natural course, yet he brought forth every thing without means: so the light
was created the first day, the Sun the forth day. Men seeing their corn not
to grow, cry for rain: but her bes and fruits grew before rain. True it is
that we look for things ordinarily now by means, but they began without
means: as God making man at first without seed, now will increase them with
seed, his blessing being with his ordinance, and not else. But behold a
further thing, God works not only by means, and without means, but
contrary to means also. Christ when he would restore sight to the blind
man, does it with that means which we think would put out a man's eyes, and
blind the sight of him that can see; whereby he shows that even contrary
things obey him. Eliah, 2. King. 4. to make salt waters sweet, puts salt in
them: such is the power of our God which brings light out of darkness, which
is the destruction of light.

The means to reap profit by the word of God, are 1. reading, 2. hearing, 3.
praying, 4. conference, 5. meditation, 6. practicing. By meditation we digest
things, and meditation makes us have use of that we read or hear. Knowledge
is gotten first by hearing, else one may go mumbling a long time, unless he
have one to direct him: and it is a proverb among men, that the doctrine of
the Master is the learning of the scholar. Secondly, because it is not good
to hang our knowledge on other men's sleeves, therefore we must read. Thirdly,
many read books, but they are but book-learned, as we say such a man is
book-learned: these have nothing else of their own, therefore is meditation
necessary, it makes learning our own. Fourthly, we may be deceived, we may
think we have knowledge when we have none, there it is good to make many
doubts, and hence comes conference: all these means are to be used, for God
sometime blesses one, and not another, we must use all least we should tempt
God: some hear, and not read; some read, and not meditate; some keep their
study, and never confer. Faith is a knowledge, it is called a demonstration,
it has always relation unto the word, as the scholars learning is the
Masters doctrine. Wicked men know the Scriptures as it is a knowledge, but
they cannot apply it, and have the true use, men of God speak as if they were
moved, therefore the interpretation of the scripture must be of the same spirit,
no man knows the mind of God but Gods spirit.

CHAP. XII. Daemonis appellationes, or the diverse names given to the Devil in
scripture.
THE Devil is called Daimon of his great knowledge, and great experience,
Diabolos of his slaundering, and false accusing: peir azan of sifting, boring,
and broching the faithful to see what is in them: skoloposarkos of making us
subject to the rebellion of the flesh, the Devil of doing evil, or a
diuellendo, or else as in the old english monuments, the devils fetched from
the Greek Diabolos, for his authority the Prince of this world, that is, of
the corrupt estate of the world; for his form and ugly shape, the Prince of
darkness; for his untruth, a lying spirit; for his filthiness, an unclean
spirit: for his hurting, a serpent: for his experience in hurting, an old
serpent: for his strength, a Lion: for his greedines, a ramping, or roaring
Lion: for his poison, a Dragon: for his alluring, a tempter: for his
constraining, an armed man, having store of darts: sometimes he ramps and
roares in one sharp, with horns and claws full of terror in a Lions skin,
which is especially in the evil day at the hour of death. Sometimes he
transformes himself into an Angels shape, in bright apparel, full of
compassion in the mantle of Samuel; in a religious habit, full of scripture,
every other word is scriptum est, setting an ambush of Devils to invade us;
holding the cross, and this is his craft: If he be able to change himself
into an Angel of light, much more is he into a shadow of the night, for he
sets his nets, and diggeth his pits in every thing to take us in our flesh
by ease, or pleasure, or pride of the eyes, suis mimis, by death, and the fear
of it. In our soul he has his forge, and bellows, evil motions, lusts,
suggestions to kindle the fire of concupiscence, in our affections bending our
fear, and our love, and such like to that which they should not be employed
unto, in our reason by casting doubts, and planting the root of bitterness in
us, which is infidelity: in the creatures by abusing of them, or by
unthankful receiving of them: in the world by having his nets in riches,
preferments, evil examples, customs, and evil company: in melancholy
humors, persuading despair to be true sorrow; in choleric bodies, persuading
wrath to be good zeal; in civil wisdom, by mingling policy with
Christianity; in our best motions, by mingling with repentance distrust in
Gods mercies, with faith security; in making us measure Gods love or hatred by
blessings, or afflictions, of this life; in preventing us of good by breeding
in our hearts a loathsomnes of the word, and wearines in the meaner; in
stripping Christ of his high Priests garments, and true office of mediatorship;
urging sometime these sayings, Except ye also repent, ye shall all likewise
perish: which kind of sentences are not so properly his, as belonging to his
office, which is a Mediator and true Savior.

2 Satan is invisible, changes himself into an Angel of light, that he
cannot be discerned by the eye, no nor by reason, he windeth himself into our
reason. Peter thought Christ should not dye, what reason was it that the son
of man should dye?

CHAP. XIII. Of the contempt of the Ministry.
1 IEhu being threatened, called the Prophet a madbraine, (for so they judged of
them 1. King. 9.
that digressed any whit from the set composition of words, and orderly
precepts of their art) which no doubt therefore has, and will come to pass,
because men can no longer either lend eye, or ear, than either they can see by
reason, or discern by art, Oratorious periods in preaching.
or whiles the speaker keeps himself within this ordinary course of style,
or carries himself even in an orderly and oratorious period, so long as witty
invention, comely compassing of matter, proportionable measure of words are
afforded: but if a man come to cut up the conscience, and in some vehemency of
spirit deals more roughly, and less orderly with their special sins, then
he is brainesicke, and runs, as they say, besides the text. Neither are
these complainers silly souls, but learned Parthians, and wise Arabians, men
elaborate in art, skillful in precepts, and proud Babylonians, who cannot
discern between a godly vehemency of spirit for the Lord of hosts sake, and
a railing austeritie of speech for malice, or vain glory sake. If then Paul
be misconstrued wrongfully, he must recompense such sins with meekenes
patiently, whereby often the Lord has brought to pass, that the proudest
heart of most obstinate gainesayers have been more broken, seeing the mild
sufferance of the Ministers of Christ, than if they had been pursued with most
hot reuengement; which then especially experience has proved true, when the
Lord with some cross and humilation sealing the truth of his faithful and
zealous servants, has caused many to think themselves to have resisted the
graces of God, and persecuted the gifts of God in them, whom they thought
before to be curious, precise, and seekers of singularity.

2 Grievous enough it is when our corn, our cattle, our goods and treasure
shall come to the tables of our enemies, but what though we be yet freed from
such Chaldaeans, yet is there a great famine in the land, which they little
think of that are the Church-robbers, whom we falsely call Patrons of the
Church. Little think they of it, who in stead of feeding Patrones of Churches
falsely so called.
to salvation, starve many thousands to destruction, in whom if there were any
love of God from their hearts, I dare say, and say it boldly, that for all the
promotions under heaven, they would not offer that injury to one soul, that
now they offer to many hundred souls. But Lord how do they think to give up
their reckning to thee, who in most strict account wilt take the answer of
every soul committed unto them one by one? Negligent Pastors.
Or with what ears do they often hear that vehement speech of our Savior
Christ feed, feed, feed? With what eyes do they so often read that
pearcing speech of the Apostles feed the flock, whereof you are overseers,
look unto the flock committed unto you? But if none of this will move them,
then the Lord open their ears to hear the grievous groans of many souls
lying under the grisly altars of destruction, and complaining against them: O
Lord the revenger of blood, behold these men whom thou have set over us to give
us the bread of life, but they have not given it us, our tongues, and the
tongues of our children have sticken to the roof of our mouths, for calling,
and crying, and they would not take pity on us: we have given them the tenths
which thou have appointed us, but they have not given us thy truth which thou
have commanded them: reward them o Lord as they have rewarded us, let the bread
between their teeth turn unto rottennes in their bowels, let them be clothed
with shame, and confusion of face as with a garment, let their wealth as the
dung from the Earth, be swept away by their executors, and upon their gold
and silver which they have falsely treasured up, let continually be written,
The price of blood, The price of blood; For it is the value of our blood: O
LORD, if thou did hear the blood of Abell (being but one man) forget not the
blood of many, when thou go into judgment.

CHAP. XIIII. Of shame, and shamefastnes. Romans 6. 12. 21. 22.
THere is is a shame that is twofold: First, natural, as in Paradise, (that
is) an affection Shame, how to discern it.
of Nature, and this was good: Secondly, after the fall was shame; but that was
evil: but that shame is of the beginning of that godly shame, as temporal
loss, and worldly sorrow, often brings a party to that godly sorrow: of which
is spoken, 2. Cor. 7. So this shame brings men often to that godly shame.

2 We say in a Proverb, he is not past grace, he blusheth: that is true
partly, for some good and conscience remains in such. A heathen Philosopher
seeing a young man come by him blushing, said unto him, Young man be not
dismayed, be of good comfort, there is hope in thee, this is the very color of
virtue; meaning that blushing is a good sign. It is an evil sign, when men
are past shame. As in this Age of ours, young men are bold, and Impudency of
our times.
not afraid of any. Job chapter 28. says, that young men ran from him for
shame; ours are impudent, of foreheads of steel, out-facing matters with
swearing, etc. I care not say they for them all, let them speak what they
will, it is the saying of the heathen Orator, to neglect what every man says
of him. This a point not only of one that is negligent, but of such a one as
is altogether dissolute.

3 There be many other fruits of sin, beside shame, Genesis 1. at the Creation
all was Objection.
good, GOD saw it so, therefore all the evil which we see, is of sin, as
confusion in the World, distemperature in the Body, maladics in the Soul; all
disorders of the House, Town, Commonwealth, come hence: why then does not the
Apostle say, sin brings these?

The reason is, for that these do not follow the sinner ever presently: the
Lord does not Answer.
ever cast the sinner into prison, exile, sickness, etc. yet this shame ever
follows him, if he run beyond the Seas, sail, ride, go into darkness, yet
the Lord is there, and thy shame pursues thee. Here note the goodness of GOD,
and his wisdom, after sin he only gives this 1
shame to us, that we should enter into our selves. This, first is a most
merciful way for us: Two notes of Gods anger, in exercising us after sin
with shame.
if he should either prison us, plague us with sickness, etc. when we sin, it
would consume us, we were never able to abide it; so that this monitor is best.
Secondly, it is a most wise way: all have this in them, shame, a conscience at
all times, and places: but not so of other punishments, we have them not.
Again, many a man in prison, exile, and other plagues have a stout heart and
stomach, but shame makes him hang down his head and repent, 2
none of the other do so.

4 There is a shame of the world, such as are ashamed of men, not of God: in
godly shame men are not ashamed of men, but of God, they cast down their heads,
go from chamber to chamber and mourn, etc. They are ashamed to come before
God, yet they come unto him, and pray unto him, as Luc. 25. the prodigal
son. Luc. 7. Magdalen, that came behind Christ. Ierem. 13. Ephraims
repentance is set down, he says, I smote on my thigh as one in grief, I was
ashamed. David, Psalm. 51. shames himself.

5 There is a secret hiding of sin, that argues shame in men, as in Adam,
Genesis 3. David, A secret hiding of sin.
2. Sam. 11. colors his sin. So we find many excuses and clokes, but the
fruit of an evil life is shame: and this must be voluntary in Gods children
ere they die. What fruit have thou had of a wicked life, when as of four and
twenty hours in a day, thou have not Sabbath.
bestowed two of them in the Lords service? Of two and fifty Sabbaths in the
year, thou have spent these worse then any day in the year? what will become
of it? ere thou dye, shame. Six days the Lord gives to work in, yet serve
him on those days, begin with prayer, and end with it. Worldly business
distracts men, therefore the Lords day is given to recover us from distraction,
and wholly on that day to serve the Lord.

CHAP. XV. Of Justification.
WHen we speak of growing up in the fear of God, the word so translated
seems to be a word of quarrel and controversy, between the maintainers of
man's justification by works and us, who either do, or would seem to empty
men of all opinion of inherent righteousness, that there might be nothing left
in us, but the glory wholly be given to God. For they would have it, that we
should perfect our holiness, Romans 3. 28.
and so they ground, that we by holiness might come to perfection. Now
concerning Popish perfection.
this their perfection, which like proctours they so patronage, if we ask any
of them, if he be that perfect man or no, there has not been any found that
would take it upon him, they cannot find us among their manifold orders; one
that is so perfect, nay they deny them this perfection: which thing if they
do in civil modesty, thinking they can do it, and will not acknowledge it,
they lie both to God and the world. All the quarrel is this, I do not dispute
says the defendant, whether I be perfect or not perfect, but I affirm that
some have attained this perfection: who be they? Here they bring especially
their two old fathers, Zachary and Simeon, who were men fearing God, holy, and
just, and therefore perfect: and thus they think men are not so much to be
abased as we think they are. Now to bear out this point, if we might stand in
it, I mean of growing up to perfection, the very opinion of the Catharoi (such
as were indeed the Puritanes in the Primitive Church) Puritans be the old
Catharoi, and the Paepists.
would not challenge this so arrogantly as they do. Many reasons may be made
against them, but we will use that one of the holy Ghost himself, even in that
place, where they stand upon their guarde, 2. Cor. 7. 1. where we be taught
that such men as they would have perfect, must have also promises: we know to
whom a promise does appertain, being of free grace, not to men of perfection,
for grace is not needful to such. I would know therefore what perfect man
needs promises, for a promise is of free grace. This seems to be enough to
overthrow this perfection of holiness, for even such men, says Paul, need
promises. We will come to their own example, take Zachary and mark his song,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, not because he has enabled us to
perfection, but because he has redeemed us being imperfect, for his mercy
promised, and his oath sworn, and that he would send us deliverance. So that
their very perfect man is glad to be redeemed, and to be delivered. Now come to
Simeon his song, Lord let thy servant depart in peace: Why? because thou have
made us perfect? Nay because mine eyes have seen thy salvation: so that this
man also needs salvation. If then these holy paterns of perfection needed the
promises of God, and salvation by Christ, we dare conclude against them, that
they were not perfect as Papists teach they were.

CHAP. XVI. Of Parables, and Similitudes.
Apt similitudes in scrip ture sorting and fitting all callings to instruct all
degrees concerning Gods kingdom.
IT pleases God in speaking to men of their salvation, to use the terms of
their vocation, to whom he speaks. And there is no sort of men, but God
speaks unto them on manner. Therefore to Kings he speaks, likening the
kingdom of heaven to a King, making a marriage: to Merchants, likening the
kingdom of heaven to a Pearl: and even to the baser sort, and them that are
in the kitchen, when he likeneth it to Leaven, and Mustard seed: and when he
speaks to Husbandmen, he frames his parable of the Sower; as Ierem. 4. when
the Lord might have said plainly, Prepare your hearts, ye men of Judah and
Jerusalem: but he rather speaks unto them in the terms of their calling,
that as they are diligent and painful in matters of this life, so they might
be painful in matters of their salvation, and that men might try themselves,
whether their care of eternal life be answerable to their care of things
concerning this life. And we must think that of what vocation he uses the
terms to men, unto that vocation he specially speaks. For example in many
places of the Scripture, he speaks of husbandry, that men by it might be
drawn to think of better things. For when we go into our field, and behold
our grounds, and find them that they are fruitful, and plentiful, and that
even the vallyes do so exceed with corn, that men sing for mirth, then every
man must think thus with himself: To stir up our own dry and barren
hearts, considering and viewing the fruitfulnes of the ground.
Surely my Harvest is very plentiful, and my corn which I have sown yields
her increase with very great measure; Now am I as plentiful and fruitful an
harvest unto God? Am not I rather a barren and dry ground, yielding no fruit?
Surely, if our Harvest be fruitful unto us, and we which are Gods Harvest are
not fruitful unto him, then our harvest shall condemn us. For the means of
Husbandry, as Plough, Cart, etc. we are careful to have them, we bestow cost
to repair them, and then must we thus think: See, I have all the instruments
of my Harvest in very good order, have I the means of my salvation as well? If
I have not, the very Harrowe, and horses harness will accuse me. Thirdly, if
we have a Tree, whereas we bestow cost to cut it, and to prune it, and because
it brings forth no fruit, we say, if thou will not serve me for my taste,
thou shall serve me for building: or if thou will not answer me for building,
thou shall serve me for the fire. Let us remember that seeing GOD has been at
great cost and charge to dress us, and we bring forth no Ioh. 15. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7.
fruit, God shall not need to condemn us, we our selves, and our own
judgment of our tree will condeme us: and cetainely, if we be not good for
fruit, we shall be put to the Matthew. 3.
fire. Now as there is fruitfulnes of the ground, so there is fruitfulnes of
the soul, and as there is fallownes of the land, so there is a fallownes of
the heart. But how shall we know To try the heart whether it be barren* Four
signs.
whether we be fallow or no? For this is a point worthy to be stood upon,
considering the direct exhortation of the Prophet Jeremy, chapt. 4. Among many
signs, I will content my self with four. First, we know that all fallow
grounds be common, and every thing has free passage through them, without any
stop or let: so if our ears be common, that we can 1
hear any talk, be it never so profane, without any chill cold, as it were
coming upon 1. If our ears and hearts lie common for passengers.
us, then doubtless our ears are fallow, and we had need to be broken up:
and so of other parts. Secondly, in Fallow-grounds there is great quietness; in
grounds broken up to be sown, there are many fowls busy, ready to pick up
the good grain being sown; but in the Fallow men need take no care nor
thought to drive them away. Now if we find all 2
hushed and quiet in our hearts, if we do not busy our selves with driving
away corrupt affections, 2. If we be not busy to drive away bad and corrupt
affections.
it is a token we lie fallow, and had need of breaking up. Thirdly, the
showers falling upon Tilled ground make it fertile, and fruitful: but all the
rain coming on Fallow ground is lost, in respect of any fruit, unless it be
for increase of weeds, and of thistles: Then if the blessing of GOD dropping as
fast as rain on us, raise up no fruit in us, unless it be that we are made
more proud and vain; we are yet fallow, and the Lord must break 3
us up. Fourthly, common passengers going by good corn bestow a prayer to
bless it, 3. No blessings better us.
which none do to the dry fallow, being fitter for children to play upon,
than for men to reap fruit on: so whosoever takes such a course of life,
that no man will vouchsafe to say of him, The Lord continue him; and yet some
worldly men will peradventure say of 4
him, He is a quiet man, and does no man harm: yet if the skillful plowman
passing by (I 4. The preaching of Gods word, discernes it to be fallow.
mean the Prophet, or Preacher of God, which can discern better of the soil)
say not so much as we wish you prosperity in the name of the Lord; no doubt
that man is fallow. But besides this, the devil the envious man and sower of
Tares, uses many policies that we may not be broken up. Against whose
wisdom, because I would have you wise, I will bewray his wisdom. One point
of his policy is this, he would keep us from the plow, and the plow from us,
and therefore when we should go to hear the word, he casts before Satha^s
policy
us other businesses, persuading us that we may leave the word, and meet the
plow some other 1
time; when it may be that journey might have turned us up, that time might
have bin the acceptable time of our calling. If pretense of business will not
keep us away, but we will needs be plowed, he tries another point, and
proves us by pastime, by plays, by drowsinesse, and brings a great
vnlustines upon us, that we have no stomach in the world to hear the Lord.
Well, if so be that he cannot fadge, but we will spite of his teeth come 3
unto the plough, then he will labor to make the plow pass over us, and so
it shall not break up, that is, he will so deceive us with vain and wandering
conceits, that we shall only hear, and hearing we shall be as though we did
not hear, and so Paul's doctrine is inuerted by Satan. Paul bids us use the
world, as though we used it not; the devil bids us use 1. Cor. 7.
the world, as though we used it not: which if we do, we shall deal
prouidently for the devil, but unwisely for the Lord, and for our own
salvation. If neither of these have that 4
success that he looks for, but we come under the hand of the Sower, and
somewhat falls Luke 8. Mark. 4. Matthew. 13.
on us, then he goes about to pluck out that which is sown from us, and so
will be sure to hinder the taking of root in us, and by this he prevails
mightily in many. And because not only fallow ground, but sandy and stony be
unfruitful, if he cannot have us 5
fallow, he will have us sandy, or stony. We know if seed be cast into
sandy ground, it is easy to be carried away with every wind, and if the
plow go on stones, it will not profit the stones, but the stones will hurt it.
Christ bids us not to give holy things to dogs, and Matthew. 7.
not to cast pearls before swine, least these tread them under their feet,
and the other return and al^ to rent us. Wherein we understand, that if the
word of God be spoken unto them; they blow it from them like swine, and they
receive no more good than sandy ground. And another sort there is worse than
this, who hearing the word, resist, and become enemies to the Preachers, as did
that wicked man Jeroboam, who being reproved of his Idolatry, 1. King* ^. 34
stretched out his hands to have stricken the Prophet, wherein they are like to
dogs, and these are the stony gounds. But to come to breaking of fallow
grounds* every man must be careful, first to use the plow, which is the word
of God, which he must come to hear; then he must hear it as he ought, that is
he must pray before he come.

CHAP. XVII. Of Gods providence.
GOD his providence is great toward man, Psalm. 8. when as men see the Lord
passing by the Sun, the Moon, and Stars which are very beautiful, and
fasting his love in a lump of clay, wherein he puts a soul, which
afterward he purposes to glorify: he passes by creatures ingendring Musk,
to us which engender lice, and stinch; yea the Lord has hid the gifts of
creatures from themselves, and made them to fear us, whereas if they knew the
things wherein they excel us, they would not be so obedient, and yet the very
life of all those thing are given us to our comfort. God has yet a more
particular care of us: for whereas all things naturally are delighted
Regeneration
with their like, the Lord being delighted even with his first work in us,
much more is delighted with the second work in us by regeneration; as when he
sees we hate our selves to love him, we hear not our selves, but hear him.
But most wonderful is it, that God cares for every particular, and singular
person yea for every hair of every person. He called and knew the Saints by
their names, as Abel, Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Paul, Christ did not only know
Nathaniel, but a little accident about him, that he was under the fig tree.
By this care the Lord knew to draw Lot out of Sodom, he singled out Caleb and
Iosuah, yea he knows us among twenty thousand.

CHAP. XVIII. Of seeking of God.
THere are none almost but at one time or at another they seek God, though the
common sort do it at the last cast in their extreme agonies, and when health
and friends fail, they go to him. But Malachy says, God is a King, and will
have his senioritie, and in this order of seeking, many good men are deceived:
for so they cousin not, nor deal falsely, they think they may scratch worldly
riches; but the Lord will not have us to take the silver of worldly things,
before the gold of godliness, neither must the servant first wait some hours
on himself, and then on his master, but contrary. As there is a seeking, so
in seeking there is an order. This is Gods prerogative to be sought first,
Matthew. 29. He is a fool that thinks that the gold of the Temple, that is
riches, is better than the piety in the Temple, which sanctifies the gold.
Salomons choice must be our direction. Abraham sought obedience before his own
country: Joseph and Moses sought God rather than Pharaoh. But we seek
preposterously, giving youth to pleasure, old age to God, we make our eldest
children Lawyers, the second or youngest Divines, where as our fathers made the
first borne to serve the Priesthood. In our contracts we first seek wealth,
and then religion, a cursed match. Well, because we can see no impiety, but a
contrariety, we may so seek God, that we shall not find God. Wherefore let
us seek God in his word, and that not in a piece of the word, but in all the
word, not making a conscience of some sin, and yet retaining some other
sin. God will not be halfed, and quartered in quantity, because he is
indivisible in substance. Many will use a restrained obedience, and the world
would have a placard still for some sin. Such a one was he that would have a
dispensation for kneeling in the house of R^mmon with his master. Ananias
would keep some part to himself. God will be sought totally in respect of his
word, as also he requires an universality in seeking of himself. We must
not seek God and the world together, we must not have two strings to our bow,
having one eye on the word, and an other on the world. We must not think if
we have God it is well, if we have him not it is no great harm, proposing
piety to our selves so long as we be in the Church, and promising immunitie
to our selves being out of the Church.

CHAP. XIX. Of sin.
VIolent good things and constrained deserve no praise, and therefore the Lord
suffered Adam to be able to sin, that not sinning when he might have
sinned, he might truly be rewarded; and not to have sinned when there was in
him none ability to sin, was worth no commendation. And therefore the
Papists do evil in charging God, that he might have given him such gifts, and
right use of his gifts as he should not have sinned, as also that he might
have hindered this evil. But the Lord was no more the cause of sinning, than
the soul is the cause of halting in a man. For as in a lame man the soul is
only the cause of moving, and the shrinking of some vein, or crookednes of
the leg is the cause of imperfect moving; likewise God is the cause of every
action in man, but our own corruption is the cause of the sin of the action:
and yet for all this the Lord draws out good even from the vilest actions.
Wherefore neither does the Lord evil himself, nor suffers evil to be done,
but as he drives out a more good than there is ill in the action it self.

2 Some men leave sin, as adultery, theft, or murder, for open shame, or for
punishment; but in other cases which offend God as much, as negligence in their
calling, profanation of the Sabbath, neglect of hearing the word, they make no
conscience at all. Therefore we must have a laboring against all sin. Others
leave sin, but it is for age, or failing in pleasure, or some such thing
which hinders them, of which diverse will tell To leave sin, and to repent of
sin differ.
of their sins with such mirth, and make much of them that fall into the
same, when as the mention of them should be odious. It is not all one to leave
sin, and to repent of sin. Others have a purpose to do good, and are
attentive in hearing of the word, but to win credit by it, but not to credit
it: whereupon it is that many do not profit by hearing, Opus operatum.
nay they do not desire to profit, nor are not sorry when they do not profit.
This is plain popery, they get the work done they care not how. Some others
have done good, but their doing of good does work in them such a pride that
they take some glory of it to themselves, they are made more careless, which
is abomination before God. Sin, shame, and death, came in together, live
together, and shall dye together: as in Adam he was naked and had no shame; so
in Christ, and in the godly at the last day no sin shall be in them, nor shame;
as in the Angels, now they are not.

CHAP. XX. Of profit and pleasure.
PAul dividing the times, 1. Tim. 4 and 2. Tim. 3. into the latter days, and
the last days, tells in the spirit of prophecy of them both, that in the
one there should be much superstition, which are gone; and in the other, into
which we are fallen, and they are fallen on us, that men shall be lovers of
pleasures more than of God, and account gain godliness: so the one esteem
our life as a pastime, the other think of it as of a market, to be getting at
all hands. Although Marthaes part be the worse, and Christ has said so,
because it shall be taken away from her, yet all choose her part, and yet this
otherwise has often a great scourge of God joined unto it. It is the error of
the world in these days to think all is well, so we get not our riches by
evil means: but I say, though we use no evil means at all to get them,
even in loving the bare things themselves too much we offend: For not only
things corrupt are impure, but also things mingled with such things as are
corrupt, are made vnpure: so things impure mingled with the soul corrupt it,
because the soul is only for the Lord.

CHAP. XXI. Of Christ's power.
THe Son of God takes care of that thing which we think no pitle needs to
be be taken of, that is, of the peace of conscience. When men hear of their
neighbors to come under this new Lord, they thank GOD they are not so, and
when they themselves are a little waked out of sleep, and feel their head not
well, but think the chamber goes round about, they quietly can lie down and
fall to sleep again. Well then, seeing Christ takes care of us, we must not
fear a strong enemy, because we have a more valiant Captain. The Devil
indeed is a Lion, but so is Christ a Lion, and that of the tribe of Judah;
there is a Lion for a Lion, courage for courage. The Devil is a Serpent, so
Christ calls himself a brazen Serpent; there is a Serpent for a Serpent, and
wisdom for wisdom; yea a Serpent of brass, to sting all the fiery
Serpents of the wilderness. But thou say, Christ is called a Lamb, and a
worm. Be not discouraged, that is in respect of his Father, who found him as
meek as a Lamb, who might have trodden on him as on a worm; but the Devil
never found him a Lamb* but a Lion. So that though before God he was as a
Lamb or a worm, yet before the Devil, a Lion for a Lion, a Serpent for a
Serpent. The weakness of Christ is stronger than all the power of hell, John.
18. when the Devil seemed to be in his ruff, when he had a proud show, he
sends a great crew to take a silly man; when he told them it was he whom
they sought, this little word cast them down; a word of a man, humbled and
ready to be judged, by the breath of his mouth, cast down legions. What shall
this Christ do now in glory! nay what shall he do when it comes with
thousands of Angels? This then is the estimation, the Devil is strong, but
Christ stronger; the Devil is wise, but Christ is wiser.

CHAP. XXII. Of Temptation.
OF all punishments this is the sorest, to be suffered to walk as we list. Ps
78. the people would needs have Quails: Almighty God says, Let them have
Quails: but he destroyed them even when the meat was in their ^^outhes, for
with their morsels they swallowed wrath. Oh, says the Lord, that the people
would walk in my way, and Israel obey me: but because ^hey would not, God gave
them over to their hearts lust. Romans 1. 24. Idol^trie the greatest sin that
can be, God punished with this: whereby we see how heavy a sin it is in God
his sight, how light soever we make of it, to be given over to our own hearts
lust. In the book of Numbers there is mention made of a place where the
children of Israel were plagued, called the graves of lust, whereof a learned
Father says: In these days there are many graves of lust, for his body that
lives in pleasure is a grave of lust. And this is that which I desire we may
see, that we might once have a feeling of thorns in pleasure, and that God
punish us not by suffering us still to go on. I read in the Scriptures of
delivering a man to Satan, and of delivering a man to himself: the first
there may follow salvation, as we see to the man in the Epistle to the
Corinthians: but if we fall into the second, it is dangerous. For it were
better to be delivered over to the devil, than to his own lust: for thither
it will bring him, and that so, as he shall not see it nor respect it.

FINIS.
More special directions to be observed, for the comfort of afflicted
Consciences.
1. Temptation.
ACcording to the measure of Temptations, GOD is accustomed to give graces
afterward. 2. Temptation.


Believe that GOD the FATHER does govern your Temptations; that the HOLY
GHOST shall, and does assist you; that JESUS CHRIST was tempted to overcome in
you; that the Saints on earth do pray for you, even those which never knew
you, but do pray for the tempted ones.

Use the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, Psalms, Conference, Fasting, Vowing. 3.
Exercises of religion.


Nothing must trouble you, but God his Word truly understood, nor comfort you,
but the same. 4. Comfort and disco^fort.


A false fear does often trouble and vex one more, then that which is a true
one. 5* False fear


None can judge of the work of the Spirit, but by the light of the Spirit: as
none can 6. To discern the spirit.
judge the light of the Sun, but by it self.

None can say they are asleep, which are so indeed: So none can say they are
secure, 7. Carnal security.
which in heart confess their security.

Leave off reasoning and complaining of your own corruption: but above all
things 8 Complaining.
beware you complain not of God.

Dispute not with GOD, least you be confounded; nor with Satan, least you be
overcome. 6. Disputation.


Be still persuaded that your punishment is far beneath your sin. 10*
Punishment.


Beware to say you cannot be helped; this is to hinder the work of God: if you
have so said, repent you heartily thereof, ask God forgiveness therefore for
Christ his sake. 11, Not to distrust Gods help.


Think not, nor speak not that secretly (unless it be complaining of your
self) which you would not openly think or speak.

Envy not the gifts of God in any, neither think too hardly of any for
their infirmities: 12. Secret thoughts and speeches.
fret not your self for the prosperity of the wicked. Judge not too hardly of
your self, because you see so many of Gods graces in others, which you cannot
find in your self.

Take not pleasure in hearing or seeing evil in any, or of any, but be
grieved rather: rejoice 13. Envy.
in the good of others. 14. How to be affected in others weal and woe.


In such multitude of God his mercies as you enjoy, marvel not you have some
crosses: God sends blessings with crosses, least we should despair: likewise
crosses with blessings, least we should presume.

In any outward blessing which you see you cannot have, beseech God you may
never 15. Crosses with blessings
be vexed for it. Any spiritual or corporal, inward or outward blessing which
you trust God will give you in time, beseech God you may not covet them too
much, but ^arie his 16. Want of an outward blessing.
good hour until you do enjoy them. If you will have an outward blessing, be
well content to want it: If you would have a cross removed, be content to go
under it, and bear it until the Lord remove it: If too greedily you covet any
such things, it is longer, or ere you shall enjoy them, and more danger to
abuse them when you have them. 17 Calling.


A wi^e walking in your calling is a means to avoid Temptations. 18. Motives
unto prayer.


1. Our need, etc. 2. God his goodness to his creatures. 3. His commandments.
4. His promises 5. Examples of others. 6. The benefits received before unasked.
7. The assistance 19. Sin.
of the holy Ghost. 8. The mediation of Jesus Christ. 9. The ministry of the
holy Angels. 20. Justification and sanctification.


10. The communion of the Saints. 11. Psalms and prayers, made of others, read
of us.

Think nothing so vile as sin: Nothing so precious as Gods mercy.

Water and blood were especially used in sacrifices; water signifies clensing,
blood reconciliation: therefore there gushed out of Christ's side both water and
blood, to declare 21 The blood of Christ must be sprinkled by the holy Ghost
in our heart.
that by him we have both sanctification and justification.

The blood of the beasts which were sacrificed was not only shead, but also
sprinkled upon the holy vessels, upon the book, upon the Tabernacle, and upon
the Altar; to signify that the shedding of Christ's blood is unprofitable to
us, unless our hearts be sprinkled with it by the holy Ghost; and that God
accepts no sacrifice at our hands, except his spirit come upon it to sprinkle
it with the blood of Christ.

Our Lord Jesus Christ fasting and praying at the entrance of his calling, is
our instruction: first, in respect of the greatness of the calling: secondly, of
gifts needful: thirdly, of Christ fasti^g and prayer.
the grievous perils which may ensue: fourthly, of the loss of our labors at
the least. He prayed in his own ministry often: and when he sent forth
others, Matthew 9* and Luke 21.

As Abraham feared more, so likewise Job, the nearer they came to the presence
of God. Job 39. 37. and 42. 5. Genesis 18. 27.

Circumcision was neglected in the wilderness forty years, likewise the
Paschal Lamb more; yet the Church of God was among them.

Certain rules for an afflicted mind, concerning several temptations.
THose temptations shall be laid to your charge, whereunto you yield, etc. No
motion 1
shall hurt you, whereunto you give not consent in heart. You have no sin,
Whilst in heart you long to be free from it: you want no goodness, which in
heart you covet to have. Romans 7.

Where sickness is at the highest, there is hope of diminishing: so likewise in
temptation.

It is a great mercy of God to discern a temptation, in time of temptation. 2


When you would do any good, or receive any good, offer up your endeavors,
actions 3
and means, in a sacrifice to God in Christ, beseeching God to give his holy
spirit to sanctify his own sacrifice.

As you pity your child in the fit of an ague, so the Lord will pity you in
a temptation. 4


If you have received but a little release of temptation, give thanks, and you
shall have 5
more.

It is a sin as well to deny God his gifts, as to presume of them. 6


Temptations smothered, as fire burn more inwardly. 7


Be persuaded always you are in the presence of God, and of his Christ. 8


Be more afraid of secret sins, than of open shame. 9


Lay this foundation sure, that there is mercy with Christ Jesus. 10


Remember the former mercies you have received; and think your present estate
to be 11
none other, than the estate of Gods children. If you be grieved, pray to God;
if relieved, praise him: there is a vicissitude of grief, and comfort, as of
light and darkness.

Beware of a discontented mind in any case, yea be contented to have your
desires denied 12
you of God; and if your prayer be not heard, vex not your self too much:
neither vehemently covet, nor be grieved for any thing, saving the having or
loss of the favor of God.

Let nothing pearce your heart deep, either in grief or fear, but sin and
unbelief. 13
Labor for meeknes and patience, be ready to kiss the rod, and to offer up
all to him, of whom you have received your self: for if you struggle, it will
fare with you, as with a bird in a grinne; the more she strives, the faster
she is, and more twitched. We must use the word in troubles and temptations,
as a sick man does meat; which though he eat against his stomach, and
presently feels no benefit of it, yet we know by experience it does him
good, and himself afterward shall receive the same.

In our great fear, we are less to be feared; those are to fear, which fear
not. 14


Sometimes the Lord does bring unbelievers that wander from him by crooked
ways, 15
unto himself.

Reverence those words and works of God, which you understand not. 16


As the sense of an aguish man is corrupt; so is the judgment of one that is
in temptation, 17
( Muscul.) so that things that are, either seem not to be, or not such as
they are.

The patient bearing of misery, is an acceptable sacrifice unto God. When the
Goldsmith 18
puts a piece of gold into the fire to make better use of it; it seems to
the unskillful that he utterly marreth it: so the children of God in affliction
seem to the judgment of the natural man undone and brought to nothing: but
spiritual things are spiritually discerned.

As none can discern of the Sun, but by his own light: so neither of the
Spirit. Hereof 19
arise the diverse judgments of the tempted, of themselves; because sometime
the good Note well this rule.
spirit does inlighten them, and other times they are left in their natural
blindness, and Satan also easily deluded them.

Believe always your estate to be the work of God, and vary not therein, for
your humiliation, 20
your consolation, the glory of God, and the good of others.

Beware that you do not often alter your judgment of your estate, as saying,
sometimes 21
it is God his work, sometimes Melancholy, sometimes your weakness and
simplicity, sometimes witcherie, sometimes Satan, for these diverse thoughts
will much trouble you: you may think Melancholy may be an occasion, but no
cause, and so of the rest. Look steadfastly to the hand of God, surely resting
on this, that he not only knows thereof, but that whatsoever is done,
directly, or indirectly, by means or immediately, al is done and governed by
him.

Beware of reasoning, of musing, of solitarines, of impatiencie of spirit, of
murmuring, of 22
anger, envy, wishes suspicions, ielousies, too often eating, etc. or
fastings, much meddling with wordly business, or much idleness, lying musing in
bed, vain mirth.

Say not you cannot be helped: for that may hinder the work of God. Say not if
I were 23
in such and such a place, I should be well.

Whereas in consideration of the falling away of many excelling you, both in
the ages 24
and graces of the new birth, you fear you shall not persevere to the end:
your meditation and collection is good so long as it preserues you from the
carelessness of your flesh: but it is evil, when it would dissolve the
assurednes of your faith. Indeed so long as you look upon your self you have
cause of fear, because you are unable to prolong, as you are to begin new
birth: but if you look to God, you have nothing but matter of faith, for that
whom he once loves, he loves for ever. Again, as a man swimming in deep
waters is Simile.
never in danger of drowning, so long as his head continues above the waters:
so, though you swim in deep fear of dangerous temptations, yet you are sure
and secure, because Christ Jesus your head is still above all your troubles,
and therefore is able to draw you his member to the shore of salvation, without
all peril of perishing.

It is hard to take up and bear the yoke of Christ: but much harder it is to
continue, 25
drawing and panting in it unto the end. This caused a godly father to
pronounce, that in godliness not so much the beginnings as the endings are to be
looked to. Judas began gloriously, but he ended shamefully: Paul began ill, but
he ended well. Then let us say to our own souls, Good Lord, what if our first
love be grown cold, how fearful is it to come a great way out of Sodom; and
in the end to become a pillar of salt? Oh, let us never put A sweet Prayer.
our hand to the plough, and look back: keep us dear God, from the
beginning in the spirit, and ending in the flesh. Oh, suffer us not to be the
first in outward vocation, and the last in inward sanctification: let us fear,
having been once lightened, to be darkened.

Remember how sometime thy heart has wrought and traveled in prayer, how the
26
springs of your joy have been in the Lord, and his Christ: how all thy
delights have been in his Saints: how it has been thy glory in singing and
praising to be familiar with thy God. These former fruits make me look for
after fruits.

A straight course of religion is somewhat an uncomfortable companion: but
blessed 27
be that mortificatio^ which so far estrangeth us from the world, that it
cha^geth us to the similitude of Christ, to whom we must be co^formed in
sufferings, that we may be like him in glory. Suffer not your heat to be
straight, narrow, and uncomfortable in heavenly things: this draws away both
the breath and bud, and the life of true godliness. The Lord keep you from
evil, and the Lord satisfy you with gladness, the Lord give you the spirit
of prayer, and hear your prayers, the Lord be your teacher, your guide and
your comfort, oh pray, pray, pray, it is the best sacrifice to God, and the
most comfortable duty you can do^. I am not loath to put you in mind of these
things, you have many careful for you in other things; O pardon me if I be
bold in this one thing, I trust I rejoice more in the good of your soul, than
ever I should rejoice in the fruit of mine own body: it would be a thousand
deaths to me, as ten thousand hels to see your soul misca^ie. O let me be
accepted more than a civil friend, more than a friend of the world, give me
this benefit to be thought further than a friend in the flesh.

No grief, shame, or sorrow pleases the Lord, which goes altogether
separated from 28
a sweet persuasion of his favor. Again, no pleasing our selves in the
assurance of pardon is acceptable to God, which altogether rejects the care
of espying, bewailing, and avoiding of sin. Wherefore let this be the bar
and bound of your affections in these cases: so long as Christ goes with you,
so long as the mercies of God accompany you, so A sweet counsel.
long as the grace of the Spirit shines upon you, be dealing with your sins,
and condemn them to death: likewise while you are tender of conscience,
afraid of sin, reverently prepared to walk holily with your God, laugh at
Satan's accusations, despise destruction, and set at naught the terrors of
hell. You never err one way or other, but by failing of one or both of these:
that is, either in your griefs you are grieved without comfort, or in your
joys you rejoice without reverence: whereby it falls out in the end, that as
in unnecessary griefs you can find no spiritual pleasure, so in unadvised
joys you can find no spiritual profit.

He was not so much moved at the reproaches of his enemies, as at the not
profiting of 29
his friends. Yet herein he had this comfort: first, if all profited not by his
speeches, yet so Friends not pr^fiting in godliness.
that one among ten profited, he thought he had the winnings that Christ had:
secondly, if they profited not which he spoke to presently, yet they might
profit hereafter: thirdly, if none of them profited, yet he knew the word
should not be in vain.

It is the policy of Satan, as to blind, and beset the world with a quiet
possession of an 30
unjust mirth, thereby to keep them from the true sight of their sins: so to
oppress the silly flock of Christ with false and causeless fears, thereby
to keep them from the glorious False fear.
feeling of their redemption. He knows to his grief that your joy may
temporally be interrupted, but not finally or eternally be denied you:
therefore he plieth himself, though he cannot extinguish it, yet to diminish
your just and royal right in your Christ: in regard whereof, you stand guilty
of not maintayning the Lords royalty given to his elect, if in the least
measure you yield to these slavish fears of the adversary. This subtle
Serpent is not ignorant, that by these pensive practices, he does wear to a
dulnes the edge of your prayers: and that he draws from you with an
uncomfortable tediousnes the fruits of your faith: and consequently by these
means, you are deprived of the fruit of a more comfortable service to your
God: the weak ones fearing also by your example the profession of Christ to be
strict and comfortless.

Of the power and privileges of Gods word.
THhe Word of GOD is mighty, and lively in operation, Heb. 4 12. 13. This
place commends unto us the Word, by it effects showing, that it is not a
sound in the air to tickle men's ears, and please their conceits, but it
works with further power like a two edged sword to humble men, and being
humbled, to raise them up again. Hereunto therefore is due a special
prerogative and honor, because the work of it shall be ratified in men's
consciences, whether they be good or evil, elect or reprobates. For the word
is the power of GOD to all, that an Anatomy of our corruptions laid before
us, we might be driven out of our selves to JESUS CHRIST.

First, of the words, then of observations out of the doctrine.

The word is lively. Therefore not dead, as the wisdom of Philosophy. It is
sharper then a two edged sword. This Metaphor is used Esaias. 48. 2. where the
Word is compared to a sword or an arrow, wherewith men are shot at. Also Ephesians.
6. it is compared to a sword.

And enters to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, etc. This
declares, how the word reuealeth inward hypocrisy, and tells us that all
our holiness is but dissimulation, all our wisdom foolishnes, all our
righteousness as a defiled cloth.

And of the joints, and of the marrow. This is added to show, that though we
hide our hypocrisy, and would ^urie it in the most secret parts, yet even the
bones shall tremble, and the marrow in the bones shall turn to rottennes: as
Job. 33. 19. Psalm. 51* 8 Psalm 32.

And is a di^cerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Here we see, that
where no law of man can take hold of us, there the Lord will find our intents
by his word, and will gage us to the bottom.

Hence arise three questions. First, how the word does thus work in men? It is
when we use good means, and God his Spirit works upon the means. The usual
means are hearing, reading, conferring, and meditating, and praying. This we
may see 1. Corinthians 10. Pro^. 29. Ephesians 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. by the virtue of the
word preached. To preaching we must join reading of it, Act. 17. As for
conference and meditation, we must know, that never any shall come to the
marrow of knowledge without this mean. For meditation is the life of learning,
the want where of causes, that the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men, Of
prayer, Matthew. 6. and 11. 1. Cor. 2. how needful this is so many must
acknowledge, as confess the word to be a mystery, and therefore not to be
conceived without the working of God his Spirit, which we must pray for. 2 Cor.
4.

Secondly, it is asked of what part of the word this is meant? I answer of
both, that is of the Law, and of the Gospel. Z^ch 12. 1. Cor. 14.

Thirdly: In whom these effects of the word are found? Both in the godly and in
the wicked, though not alike. Where we must know, that there is a feeling in
both of these men, which is inward and not seen. Secondly, this power is not
always presently felt, but it works in God his appointed time. We shall see
the word will often strike the ungodly, though they be loath to hear; and
although when they have heard, they would shake it off, by inglutting their
hearts with eating, drinking, and sleeping, yet it will wring them on their
beds, at their tables, in their chambers, when they are with their companions.
And although God his dear children do not always feel this power to
salvation, yet they have it in greater measure at one time or at another.

Hence observe three uses. First, we must come to know the word. For the devil
moves this fearful question unto many: How know thou this is the word,
rather than any other doctrine? To leave gross heresies, I answer by an
interrogatorie. Whose words, if he were but a man, and spoke as a man alone,
did ever drive thee to hell? whose words, did ever rip up thy secret and close
sins? who has drawn tears out of thine eyes and sorrow out of thy heart
with a conscience of thy sin, at which thou were wont to laugh? Whose words
have taken thee from the hell of thy conscience, to heaven? who has given thee
joy in sorrow, comfort in trouble? What words of Philosophers can make of a
Leopard a Lamb, of a viper a child, of a leacher a chaste person, of a
covetous carle a liberal man? All eloquent Orators without the word, are bare
Physicians to a troubled mind.

Secondly, the word needs none other helps. 1. Cor. ^. and 2, and 3. 2. Cor.
2. and 3. and 4. Howbeit we may use other words besides the bare phrase of the
Scripture: but we must beware of humane inue^tions, and take heed we use not
uncertain phrases for certain. If we use the authority of Heathen men, we do
ill. We may allege them, but most sparingly, and not naming them, but by way
of an argument we may show, that the Heathen saw this and that, and therefore
we should not be ignorant of it. Similitudes may be used, if they be natural,
and not constrained. We must use them as sauce to prepare us for better things.
We must not strain them, least we press out corruption. The milk in the
breast not strained is pure, too hard pressed it is corrupt.

Thirdly, the word works by diverse means. And I hope with Eliah that there
be ^oe profit by the word, than I see. John Baptist came mourning, Jesus Christ
came piping, but few profited. For many would follow John, until he required
repentance. They would hear Christ, until he spoke of the cross. Great is
the wisdom of God in using the vehemency of one, the mildnes of another, the
zeal of another. But some will neither profit by John nor by Jesus Christ, who
will rather be offended at the infirmities of the speaker, being few, than by
his good speeches profit, though they be many.

FINIS.
A LETTER AGAINST HARDNESS OF HEART.
I Beseech GOD the Father of JESUS CHRIST give me his good Spirit in writing to
give advice, and you in reading to receive it, Amen. Since the time that I
received Master S. letter, wherein he declared his careful compassion over your
estate: I have been not a little grieved, because, partly for want of a
convenient messenger, and partly because of my manifold distractions, with the
like occurrences, and other weighty affairs, I have been hindered from
writing hitherto unto you. And albeit even still I am in the same case; yet
conscience toward God, and compassion, and love toward you forces me to
overcome lets, which hardly I could otherways prevail against. And albeit I
cannot write as I would, yet of that which I shall write, proceeding from the
forenamed grounds, I look for some blessing from God through Jesus Christ, if
you will not too much faint in faith, and yield to the adversary: yea, if you
will but hope so well of yourselfe, as (in the fear of God I write it) I hope
of you. First, whereas it seems you are sometimes grieved, because you tarried
not still at Cambridge, according to my advice: you must know that I advised it
not as a thing necessary, but more convenient (as I then supposed:) but yet
that I advised you to obey your father, if his pleasure still continued to have
you home: whereunto you yielding, I cannot see how you offended: it being your
fathers pleasure you should so do. And who knows whether being here, you
might not have been as much troubled, there being no privilege for persons and
places, in such cases? And who knows whether it be the Lords pleasure, for the
ensample and instruction, and I hope the consolation of others in the end? And
albeit you will now think, that here you were nearer the more and stronger
means: yet know you and he persuaded, that GOD can, and does in such cases
work by fewer and weaker, according to his good pleasure. Besides, it is in
our corrupted nature, to make much of such means as we cannot have, and not so
to esteem those which God does offer us, as we should. I beseech you therefore
in the Name of Jesus Christ, humbly to praise God for those means which he
offers in mercy unto you, and to use them in faith accordingly: and so God
shall bless you by them; and then by such conference as you may have from
hence by letters. Wherein if I may stand you in any stead (rather for the good
opinion you have of me, then for any great matter I am able to perform) I
shall be ready to offer any office of love unto you, as God shall enable me,
and so far forth as I shall be instructed in your particular estate, by some
letters sent from you by convenient messengers. That which I presently perceive
by M. S. letters, is, that you are afflicted with the blindness of your mind,
and hardness of your heart, which cannot be moved either with the promises of
God his mercies, or fear of his judgments; nor affected with love and delight
of the things which be good, or with hatred and lothing of the evil. Great
cause you have of grief I confess; but no cause of despair dare I grant,
because I am persuaded, that your persuasion is somewhat false, partly for want
of a sound judgment of your estate, and partly for some defect of faith,
somewhat through your own default. First therefore know you for a certainty,
that this is no other temptation, than such as diverse of Gods children have for
a time bin humbled with, and afterward have had good issue out of. And if it
please God to move you to credit me, I myself have known others as deeply
this way plunged, as you can be. Remember therefore that God is faithful, and
will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you shall be able to bear,
etc. 1. Cor. 10. 13. And yet further to confirm you herein, the holy
Scriptures do record that this way God heretofore has humbled his own
people: In whose person the Prophet Esaias lamentably thus complained, chap. 63.
verse. 15. O Lord look down from heaven, and behol^ from the dwelling place of
thy holiness, and of thy glory. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the
multitude of thy mercies, and of thy compassions* they are restrained from me.
And afterward: O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and
hardened our heart from thy fear? And in the next chapter, verse. 6. We have
been all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes,
and we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquity like the wind does take us
away; and there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee: for thou have hid thy face from us, and have
consumed us, because of our iniquities. And before in the 59. chapter, verse. 10.
We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes: we
stumble at the noone day as in the twilight: we are in solitary places like
dead men: we roar like bears and mourn like doves. So complains Ezechias in
the bitterness of his soul: Esaias. 38 14 Like a cr^ne or a swallow, so did I
chatter: I did mourn as a dove. And Psalm. 51. 10. etc. when David cries,
Create in me, O God, a clean heart, renew in me a right spirit, restore to me
the joy of thy salvation, establish me with thy free spirit: does he not
declare, that his heart was unclean, his spirit crooked, the joy of his
salvation lost, and himself subject to the spirit of bondage; so that wanting
the spirit of liberty, or adoption, he could neither cry Abba father, nor
^^ue any power against sin? Thus you see how God his children may be blinded
in mind, and hardened in heart for a time, so that they feel in themselves the
graces of the holy spirit to be as it were perished and dead. Further, to
relieve the infirmity of your judgment in this point (because I know it may
much distress you) you must understand that there be two kinds of hardness of
heart: the one, which is not felt nor perceived: the other, which is perceived
and felt: and of the former, that there be two sorts: the first, which is most
fearful, when any do purposely resist the motions of God his spirit, and
wilfully refuse the means of their salvation. Of the which the Prophet
Zachary speaks, chap. 7. verse. 11 etc. They refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear: yea they
made their heart as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the Law and the
words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry of the
former Prophets. The outrageous sin of these men, the Prophet Esaias expresses
in these their own fearful terms, chap. 28. 15. We have made a covenant
with death, and with hell are we at agreement: though a scourge run over, and
pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have made falsehood our refuge,
and under vanity are we hid. This was a fearful estate indeed: yet for all
that, no man can say, but some of those having so hardened their hearts, might
be, and were afterward converted. The other kind of hardness of heart, which
is not felt nor perceived, or if perceived, yet not felt (which albeit it is
less fearful, yet it is dangerous enough) is in such, as, although they
wilfully resist not God his spirit in good means, yet securely, carelessly and
willingly they lie in sin without any remorse of it, or true taste of good
things. Such was David's state, by the space of a year, before Nathan the
Prophet came to prove him, and rouse him from his lulled sleep. Both these
kinds I am persuaded you are free from, otherways than in temptation Satan
may sometimes move you thereunto. The other kind and hardness of heart, which
is perceived and felt, is of two sorts; the one in them which are desirous of
means whereby they may be relieved, although they do find small or no ease in
themselves for a time. Of this kind the Prophet Esaias, in the name of some of
God his people complained, Esaias. 63. 15. And such was David's state after that
Nathan had reproved him, and God his spirit began ^^ work with him: yet
cries he out (as you heard before) of the loss of God his graces: and when he
says that God will accept of no sacrifices, be they never so many or precious,
without a contrite heart and broken spirit; he shows that for a time (even
after the Prophet had reproved him) he wanted both. This is your case, and
therefore you are in the state of salvation: for David was in this case, even
after he had confessed his sin, and had received absolution and pardon from
God, by the ministry of Nathan, although he neither felt joy thereof, nor
true grief for the other: yet because in truth of heart he confessed his sin
(as my trust is you do) and was certainly persuaded of the pardonablenes: of
it by God his mercy, as you must be if you will have mercy (although he was
far off from feeling it, or applying it to his woeful conscience) his state was
good and very well to be hoped of. And you must know and be persuaded; that
those things which are written of God his Saints; and namely of David, and
Peter, and such others, are ensamples for us, if we will stay our selves upon
the word of God in the ministry of his servants; and wait upon the Lords
good time, until he come nearer unto us by his spirit: nearer, I say, for he
is come already unto you (or it may be he never went from you) because to be
grieved and humbled with blindness of mind and hardness of heart, to believe
certainly the truth of God his promises in general, and to reverence the
servants of God, which bring the glad tidings of salvation, and to long after
comfort, using the means of the Word and Prayer, the Sacrament of the Supper,
and the company of God his children, contrary to hope under hope, yea, without
any present feeling; all this is a certain argument that God his spirit is
with such, and therefore with you. This estate though it may be very grievous,
yet it is never dangerous, much less is it fearful, unless any be so wilful
that they do persevere and continue in desperate refusing all good means:
unless they persevere, I say, for that through the subtle sleight of the
spiritual adversary, and his forcible power, whereby God suffers him
sometimes for a season to winnowe them as Wheat, they are so bewitched and
intoxicated, that they are carried by violent force of temptation to wax
weary of, or to refuse all means of comfort by fits: yea almost to have no
desire at all unto them: yea sometimes, even to speak evil of them. But all
this is but in temptation, and therefore God will be merciful unto them for
Christ his sake. Thus Job cursed the day of his birth, and wished to be
strangled: Jeremy also repented that ever he preached in the Name of the Lord:
both scarcely abstained from blasphemy. David moved with the spirit of
ambition, though dutifully admonished, wilfully went on in numbering the people.
Peter also vaingloriously presuming of his own strength, being most wisely and
effectually premonished of his weakness even by our Lord Jesus, yet wittingly
rusheth, as an horse into the battle, and then very cowardly yields, yea,
doubly denies, yea, strengthens his sin, with a threefold cord, and
fasteneth it with banning and cursing. And yet all these obtained mercy most
bountifully. For why? as Sat^a^ had desired to winnow them; so our Lord JESUS
CHRIST prayed for them, that their Faith though it were vehemently assaulted,
yet should not be overcome, although it was battered, yet that it should not be
destroyed, and though it were sore oppressed, that it should not be
extinguished. And here be you fully persuaded, that though (Luke 22. 32.) the
words seem to run as belonging but to Peter, (viz. I have prayed for thee,
that thy Faith should not fail) yet that he prayed as well for the rest of
the Apostles, yea, for all the faithful. For first he says not, Simon, Satan
has desired to winnow thee, but you. Why then (says he) I have prayed for
thee? Verily, because he should more grievously offend then the rest (although
their offense was very great) therefore his and our most blessed Savior
applied to him the promise, but did not impropriate it to him only, and
restrain it from the rest. Compare with this place, Ioh. 17. 20. and you shall
see that the heavenly verity affirms, that he prayed not only for the
Apostles, but for all those which should believe through their word. Yea
further, our Lord Jesus Christ was yesterday; is to day, and shall be for ever.
And as the forefathers were baptized into him, and did eat his Flesh and
drink his blood, so was his prayer effectual even unto them under the law,
much more unto us under grace. And when you can find testimony of your heart,
that when you would do well, evil is present with you, and that when you do
the evil you would not, then do you not it, but sin in you, when it leads
you captive, Romans 7. much more then when Satan works withal, buffeting you,
assure your self that God has pity on you, that the virtue of his power
shall be perfect in your weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 9. If you believe, according to
your faith it shall be done unto you. But you will say, you cannot believe that
this vile and crooked hardness of your heart, can be remitted and renewed: and
even this was the second point, which in the former part of my letter I gave
you to understand, was the cause of your excessive distress. I beseech you,
and I charge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will not
willingly lie, nor offer injury to God his spirit, nor to your self who have
received it: tell me, what is the reason why you think you have no faith?
Verily because you have no feeling, nor no other fruits thereof, as you
think. Well, first then agree with me herein (as you must, if you will not
disagree with the truth) that feeling is but an effect, and a fruit of faith.
And therefore there may be faith without feeling, as well as the cause may be
without the effect, and the tree without any appearance of fruit, yea of sap
for a season. And as a man sore wounded, or diseased; may for a season be
deprived, almost of all operations of the natural life to the outward show,
and his own judgment and feeling: so may a spiritual man be so sore wounded
by Satan, and diseased by present sight and feeling of his sinful
corruptions, specially in temptation, that he may think, yea and may appear
to others, that the life of the spirit is not in him. Thus Peter's faith did not
wholly fail (as you have heard) or else the prayer of our Savior prevailed
not. Thus when David, Psalm. 51. 12. declared that his heart was unclean, and
his spirit crooked or unstable, and verse. 14. that he had lost the joy of his
salvation, and the spirit of liberty or adoption: yet verse. 13. he prays
that God would not take his holy spirit from him, therefore he was not
deprived of the spirit of sanctification. Here seems repugnance, but there is
none. He was deprived for a season of the graces of the fanctifying spirit; but
none of the holy Ghost wherewith he was sanctified Which graces as God restored
unto him: so I am persuaded he will unto you: yea I doubt whether you are
deprived of them, but only, that partly melancholy, and partly Satan works
therewith, make you do injury to your self, and to the graces of the spirit
in you, which I beseech you take heed of. But the messenger cannot stay; and
therefore I cannot write as I would either of this, or of the remedies you
should use, which hereafter I will, as God shall enable me. And I pray you let
me understand (as I requested in the beginning) of your estate iu particular
somewhat more: and that by this bearer if you can, because he is of your
acquaintance, and will bring it unto me faithfully.

Only I add now, unto that I have written of hardness of heart at large, that
you must diligently observe the word, Create, which David uses Psalm. 51.
declaring how he had no feeling of his heart. To this join that which the
Prophet Esaias speaks in the person of God, chap. 57. 23. I create the fruit
of the lips to be peace, peace as well to him that is fare off, as to him that
is near. Therefore in faith you may as well pray with hope to obtain, as did
David Therefore say with him often, and with God his people, Esaias 64 12. O Lord
thou art our father: we indeed are clay but thou art our maker, and we are the
work of thy hand. etc. Know you that God can cause Wolves, Lions, Leopards,
etc. dwell lovingly with Lambs, Calves, Kine, Esaias 11. 6. etc, and that which
is impossible unto men, is possible unto God; even to cause a cable rope to go
through a needles eye; that is, to change the hard heart of the unbelieving
covetous wretched man; much more yours. Yea know you that all things are
possible to him that believes: cry then, I believe, O Lord help my
unbelief. And I dare promise you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you shall have your hearts desire in goodness. Thus abruptly I must make an end. I
commend you unto God, and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up,
and give you the right of inheritance among them which are sanctified. And the
very God of peace sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit, and soul,
and body may be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:
faithful is he which has called you, which will do it. Amen. I pray you pray
for me; and I trust, as I have, so I shall pray for you, and much more.

Yours in Jesus Christ to use in any need.

A LETTER CONSOLATORIE TO Mistress Mary Whitehead.
THe Lord Jesus Christ by whose blood you are justified, stay and strengthen
you now and for ever, Amen.

Seeing we be so miserable, blessed be God that we be also mortal: seeing
we be subject to sin, praised be God that we are also subject to
corruption. It would now grieve us to be mortal, because we sin, and by
sin purchase misery: it is sufficient that we shall then never die, when we
shall never sin, and then we shall no more taste of corruption, when we
shall no more so much as fear condemnation. In regard whereof (good Mistress)
look not so much to your grief for the death of your son (which you see to
be the common lot of al, and the happy lot of the godly) as upon his freedom
from misery, his liberty from sin, and his holy change to eternal felicity.

And albeit he was young in years, yet was he come to sufficient years to
go to God, that he that hitherto did grow in Christ, should now be gathered
and reaped up to the kingdom of Christ: so that we cannot think him to die in
his flowers, whose perfection grows to so blessed a maturitie before the
Lord. If then you rejoiced in him as he was the interest of the Lord: you are
not much to sorrow, that the Lord has his right. Which (if your love to him
was right) you know did ever appertain unto him. He must not of you his
earthly parents be deemed to be lost, which of his heavenly father is so surely
preserved. And without all question his very growing in godliness, under so
manifold afflictions in this life, could not have been so profitable to him,
and comfortable unto you; as the loss of a few and faint pleasures,
recompensed with so infinite and unspeakable joys in the life to come, are I
hope, and must be unto you.

Be not then so grieved for that you have lost that which Christ has found:
but be thankful if by hope you can rejoice that Christ has found that which
you have lost. Whose loss of yours, and gain of Christ's, as it was by the
will of God, you must yield to of necessity: as it was the wisdom of God,
and mercy of God, so to have it, you must resign him willingly. The Lord God
who gave your son as a pledge of his goodness, and who has received your son
as a pledge of your obedience, so over reach your griese of nature, by hope
above nature, that you may fulfill that remnant of repentance which yet is lent
you to the great praise of his holy name and endless peace of your own soul for
his Christ's sake.

Amen.
Master Greenhams care for the poor Scholars of Cambridge.
RIght Honorable, although it be a thing well known unto many, and specially
to your Lordshippe, that the number of students in the University of Cambridge
is greater of late years than has been heretofore; yet it may be many have
not heard, neither has your Honor understood, how many of good hope for want
of sufficient relief have been, and are forced, or tempted to forsake the
University.

Of the which number some have entered into the Ministry both unseasonably
and hurtfully, some taken upon them to be petty scholemaisters unprofitably,
some fallen to be seruingmen or to some other mean trades of life
inconuenie^tly, some have crept into popish gentlemen's houses at home, or
flying over sea have proved traitorous and unnatural Jesuits or Seminary
Priests.

Besides that which is as true as ruefull, some straining themselves for love
of learning to live in the University, for want of necessaries have either
pined away there, or shortly after they have departed from thence; or else have
lived there much discouraged to their far less profit in learning. Which
sore as I have seen of some to be espied, of some to be pitied, even with
desire of redress; yet have I not seen any sufficient care taken to salve and
recover the same.

True it is, that diverse men of diverse degrees, as in the city and elsewhere,
have somewhat largely yielded their helping hand hereunto: but by reason of the
multitude of the needy, and for that by want, either of the wise care in the
choice, or of a continued oversight of such as were chosen, diverse abuses have
grown in the receivers, the hearts and the hands of the giuers having been
much straightened.

These things often weighed wrought much compassion in me, so that I have
endeavored, according to my power and place, a good while to procure some
exhibition from diverse, for poor learned, and godly students in the same
University: whereunto I was and am induced, the rather by a special charge of
caring for the poor laid upon me (by a special occasion) at the time of mine
ordination into the Ministry; which I willingly went under, because the holy
Apostles Paul and B^rnabas did the same before me. Whose wise Gal. 2. 20.
and worthy dispensation about the Church alms, often admonishing me of no
less wisdom and discretion, than of duty and conscience to be used in this
behalf. And foreseeing some offensive inconveniences of the sole dealing of
one man in so great a cause; I have long thought of some men, most meet in
many respects to join with me herein. And to this end of late I resolved of
Master Whittakers and Master Chaderton; who, after diverse entreaties and
persuasions, have yielded the right hand of fellowship both carefully and
faithfully to labor with me in this matter.

The reason, why I rested rather on them than others, was, because as by their
place and residence in the University, so by long observation I have judged
them most meet, not only in regard of their promise to take pains, but also
for their faithfulness and fitnes to do good in it, being men well known unto
many Honorable, worshipful, rich and merciful persons.

And for testimony of our more faithful service herein, I, in their names, do
promise to your Honor our special care and conscience of employing that
benevolence, without respect of persons, upon those scholars only, that either
are learned or towardly in learning, and the same being religious, honest,
poor, and making conscience of the right and reverent use of their alms; and
that so long as they continue to be such.

Further we shall be ready each other year, or oftener, if your Honorable
wisdom shall think good, to make our accounts to Master Nowell Deane of
Paul's, Master Osburne of the Exchequer, Master Doctor Hammond, Master
Vincent Skinner, or some two of these, or any other, whom your Lordship shall
think meet herein. Now that with some good authority and greater hope of
success this matter might be performed, I come first and principally to your
Honor an humble petitioner, that you would vouchsafe by your Honorable word
and hand, to commend and authorize us as meet men to be employed in this
work; and then, if so it seem good to your Lordship, I will repair in the
same suite for like favor to Sir Frauncis Walsingham, Master Secretary
Dauison, Sir Walter Mildmay, or others of your most Honorable society, whom
your wisdom shall advise me unto.

In that I have been so bold to mention my self in this action, I humbly
crave your Honors favorable construction toward me, who, having received
great mercies of the Lord from the University, think my self much more
indebted to seek the good thereof, especially after so long waiting for others
to do it; and so now, if any will do it without me, or any other means more
fit than this may be used, I most heartily wish the same.

Thus I commend my self and the whole cause to your Honors wise and merciful
consideration, as desirous of the most fruitful success hereof, and humbled
in mine own inability to further it.

FINIS.
A LETTER AGAINST HARDNESS OF HEART.
I Beseech GOD, the Father of JESUS CHRIST, to give me his good spirit; in
writing to give advice, and you in reading to receive it, Amen.

Since the time that I received M. S. Letter, wherein he declared his careful
compassion over your estate: I have been not a little grieved, because partly
for want of a convenient messenger, and partly because of my manifold
distractions with the like occurrences, and other weighty affairs, I have
been hindered from writing hitherto unto you. And albeit even still I be in
the same case, yet conscience toward GOD, and love and compassion toward you,
forces me to overcome lets, which hardly I could otherwise prevail against.
And albeit I cannot speak In temptations strive to stand in faith and not to
yield to the adversary.
as I would, yet of that which I shall write (proceeding from the forenamed
grounds) I look for some blessing of God through Jesus Christ, if you will not
too much faint in faith, and yield to the adversary: yea if you will but hope
so well of your self as (in the fear of God I write it) I hope of you. First,
whereas it seems you are sometimes grieved, because you tarried not still at
Cambridge according to mine advise, you must know I advised it not as a thing
necessary, but more convenient, as I then supposed, but I advised you to obey
your father, if his pleasure still continued to have you home: whereunto you
yielded, I cannot see how you offend, it being your fathers pleasure you should
so do. And who knows whether being there you might not have been as much
troubled, there being no privilege for persons and places in such cases? And
who knows whether it be the Lords pleasure, for the example and instruction
(and I hope the consolation) of others in the end? And albeit you will now
think that here you were nearer the more and stronger means, yet know you and
be persuaded, that God can and does in such Our corruption desires and
delights in the means we cannot have.
cases work by fewer and weaker, according to his good pleasure. Besides, it
is in our corrupt nature to make much of such as we cannot have, and not so to
esteem those which God does offer us, as we should. I beseech you therefore in
the name of Jesus Christ, humbly to praise God for those means he offers in
mercy unto you, and to use them in faith accordingly; and so God shall bless
you by them. And then by such conference as you may have from hence by letters,
wherein if I may stand you in any stead, rather for the good opinion you have
of me, than for any great matter I am able to perform, I shall be ready to
offer any office of love unto you, as God shall enable me; and so far forth
Blindness of mind and hard nes of heart. Many false persuasions come to the weak
for want of sound judgment.
as I shall be at any time instructed in your particular estate in some
letters sent from you by convenient messengers. That which I perceieue
presently by M. S. Letter is, that you are afflicted with the blindness of
your mind, and hardness of your heart, which cannot be moved either with the
promises of Gods mercies, or fear of his judgments; nor affected with the
love and delight of the things which be good, nor with the hatred and loathing
of the evil. Great cause you have of grief I confess; but no cause of
despair dare I grant: because I am persuaded that your persuasion is somewhat
false; partly for want of a sound judgment of your estate, and partly for some
defect of faith, somewhat through your own default* First, therefore know you
for a certainty that this is no other tentation than such as diverse of Gods
children have been humbled with, and afterward have had a good issue out of
it: and if it please God to move you to credit me, I my self have known
others, as deeply this way plunged as you can be. Remember therefore, 1. Cor.
10 13.
that God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that which
you shall be able to bear. And yet further to confirm you herein, the holy
Scriptures do record, that this way God heretofore has humbled his own
people: in whose person the Prophet Esaias lamentably complains: O Lord, look
down from heaven, behold from the dwelling place Esaias. 63. 15.
of thy holiness, and of the glory. Where is thy zeal and thy strength, the
multitude of thy mercies, and of thy compassions? They are restrained from me.
And afterward: O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and
hardened our hearts from thy fear? And in the next Chapter, verse 6. We have
been all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
clouts: and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities as the wind do
take us away: and there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee: for thou have hid thy face from us,
and have consumed us, because of our iniquities. And before: We grope for the
wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes, we roar like Bears,
and mourn Esaias, 59. 10. Esaias. 38. 14. Psalm. 51. 10.
like Doves. So complains Ezechias in the bitterness of his soul. Like a
Crane or a Swallow so did I chatter. I did mourn as a Dove. And when David
cries: Create in m^e, O God, a clean heart, renew in me a right spirit:
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, establish me with thy free spirit:
Does he not declare that his heart was unclean, his spirit crooked, the joy
of The feelings of the faithful in temptation lost.
his salvation lost, and himself subject to the spirit of bondage? So that
wanting the spirit of liberty or adoption, he could neither cry Abba Father,
nor have any power against sin? Thus you see how Gods children may be blinded
in mind, and hardened in heart for a time, so that they feel in themselves
the grace of the holy Spirit, to be as it were perished and dead. Two kinds
of hardness of heart.


Further, to relieve the infirmity of your judgment in this case (because I
know it may much distress you) you must understand that there be two kinds of
hardness of heart: the one, which is not felt nor perceived; the other,
perceived and felt: and of the former, that 1 Not perceived, nor felt.
there be two sorts, the first (which is most fearful) when any do purposely
resist the motions of Gods spirit, and wilfully refuse the means of their
salvation; of which the Prophet 2. Perceived, and felt.
Zachary speaks, 7. 11. They refused to hearken, and pulled away their
shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear: yea, they made
their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they B. of 2. sorts.
should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of Hosts sent in his
spirit, by the ministry of 1. of purpose, to resist good motions.
the former Prophets. The outrageous sin of these men, the Prophet Esaias
expresses in these their own fearful terms: We have made a covenant with
Death, and with Hell we are at agreement: though a scourge run over and
pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have 2. Securely and
neglige^tly, to lie in sin.
made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hidden. This was a fearful
estate indeed, yet for all that no man can say, but some of these having
hardened their hearts, might be, and were afterward converted. The other kind
of hardness of heart, which is not felt, nor perceived, or discerned
or if perceived, yet not felt; (which albeit it is less fearful, yet it is
dangerous enough) The second kind of hardness of heart not felt.
is in such, as although they wilfully resist not Gods spirit in good means;
yet securely, carelessly, and willingly they lie in sin without any remorse
of it, or true taste of good things. Such was David his estate for the space of
a year before Nathan the Prophet came to reprove him, and rouse him from his
lulled sleep. Both these kinds I am persuaded Note the difference between
perceived and felt.
you are free from; otherwise then in temptations Satan may sometimes move you
thereunto. The other kind of hardness of heart which is perceived and felt, is
of two sorts; the one in them which are desirous of means, whereby they may be
relieved, although they do find small or no ease at all in themselves for a
time. 2. kind of hardness, perceived and felt is of two sorts.


Of this kind the Prophet Esaias (in the name of some of Gods people)
complained. And such was David's state. After that Nathan had reproved him, and
Gods spirit began to work with him, yet he cries out (as ye heard before)
of the loss of Gods graces: and when he says, that God will accept of no
Sacrifices, be they never so many, nor precious without a contrite heart and
broken spirit; he shows, that for a time (even after Esaias, 63.
the Prophet had reproved him) he wanted both. This is your case, and
therefore you a in the state of salvation. For David was in this case, even
after he had confessed his sin, and had received absolution and pardon from
God, by the ministry of Nathan; although A troubled conscience persuaded his
sin is pardonable, but yet not feeling it is pardoned, yet it may be God has
pardoned it, as we see in David.
he never felt joy thereof, nor true grief for the other: yet because in
truth of heart he confessed his sin (as my trust is you do) and was
certainly persuaded of the pardonablenes of it by Gods mercy, (although he was
far off from the feeling of it, or applying it to his woeful conscience) his
state was good and very well to be hoped of. And you must know to be persuaded,
that those things which are written of Gods Saints, and namely of David and
Peter, and such others, are examples for us, if we will stay our selves upon
the word of God in the ministry of his servants, and wait upon the Lords
good time, till he come nearer unto us by his spirit: nearer I say, for he is
come already unto you; or it may be he never went from you: because to be
grieved and humbled with blindness of mind and hardness of heart, to believe
certainly the truth of Gods promises in general, and to reverence the
servants of God which bring the glad tidings of salvation, and to long after
the comforts, using the means of the word and prayer, the Sacraments of the
Supper, and the company of Gods children, contrary to hope, under hope, yea
without any present feeling: all this is a certain argument, that Gods spirit
is with such, and therefore with you. This estate although it be very grievous,
yet it is never dangerous, much less is it fearful: unless any be so
wilful, that they persevere and continue Satan drives the faithful in their
teptations to be weary of yea sometimes to refuse the means.
desperate refusing all good means: unless they persevere I say, for that
through the spiritual adversary, and his forcible power, whereby God
suffers him sometime for a season to winnow them as wheat, they are so
bewitched and intoxicated, that they are carried by violent force of
temptation, to wax weary of, or to refuse all means of comfort by fits: yea,
almost to have no desire at all unto them, yea sometimes to speak very evil
of them: but all this is but temptation, and therefore God will be merciful
unto them, for Christ's sake.

Thus Job cursed the day of his birth, and wished to be strangled, Jeremy
almost repented that ever he preached in the name of the Lord: both scarcely
abstain from blasphemy. David moved with the spirit of ambition (though
dutiful admonished) wilfully went on in numbering the people. Peter also
vaingloriously presuming of his own strength, being most wisely and
effectually preadmonished of his weakness even by our Lord Jesus, yet wittingly
rushing as a horse into the battle, even then very cowardly yields, yea
doubly denies, yea strengthens his sin with a threefold cord, and
fasteneth it with bannings and cursings: and yet for all these he obtained
mercy most bountifully. For why? as Satan had desired to winnow them, so our
Lord Jesus prayed for them, that their faith, though it was vehemently
assaulted, yet should not be overcome; although it was bartered, yet that it
should not be destroyed; and though it was oppressed, yet that it should not be
extinguished. And here be you fully persuaded, that albeit Luke 22. 31. the
words seem to run as belonging but to Peter* viz. I have prayed The prayer
of Christ belongs to us as well as to the Apostles. 10. 17.
for thee that thy faith should not fail; yet he prayed for the rest of the
Apostles, yea, for all the faithful. For first he says not; Simon, Satan has
desired to winnow thee, but you: Why then says he, I have prayed for thee?
Verily because he should more grievously offend than the rest (although their
offense was very great) therefore his and our most blessed Savior applied to
him the promise, but did not appropriate it unto him only, and restrain it
from the rest. Compare with this place, John. 17. 20. and you shall see that
the heavenly verity affirms, that he prayed not only for the Apostles, but
for all those that should believe Heb 13.
through their word: yea further, Our Lord Jesus Christ was yesterday, is to
day, and shall be for ever. And as the forefathers were baptized into him, and
did eat his flesh, and did drink his blood; so was his prayer effectual even
to them under the law, much more to us under grace. And when you can find
testimony in your heart, that when you would do well, Romans 7.
evil is present with you, and that you do the evil you would not; then do
not you it, but sin in you, when it leads you captive: much more when
Satan works withal buffetting 2. Cor. 1. 23.
you, assure your self that God has pity on you, that the virtue of his
power shall be perfect in your weakness. If you believe, according to your
faith it shall be done unto you. But you will say, you cannot believe that this
vile and crocked hardness of your heart can be remitted and renewed: and even
this was the second point which in the former part of my letter I gave you to
understand was the cause of your excessive distress. I beseech you, and I
charge you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will not willingly
lie nor offer injury to Gods spirit, or to your self who has received it.
Tell me, what is the reason why you think you have no faith? Verily because
you have no feeling, nor any other fruits thereof, as you think. Well, first
then agree with me herein (as you must, if you will not disagree with the
truth) that feeling is but an effect and fruit of faith; and therefore there
may be faith without feeling, as well as the cause may be without the effect,
and the There may be faith with out feeling.
tree without any appearance of fruit, yea of sap for a season. And as a man
sore wounded and diseased may for a season be deprived almost of all operations
of the natural life to the outward show, and to his own judgment and
feeling: so may a spiritual man be sore wounded by Satan, and diseased by the
present feeling of his sinful corruptions, specially in temptations; that he
may think, yea appear to others, that the life of the spirit is not in him.
Thus Peter's faith did not wholly fail (as you have heard) or else the prayer of
our Savior prevailed not. Thus when David declared that his heart was
unclean, or his Psalm. 51. 3. 10. Verse. 11. Verse. 12.
spirit crooked or unstable, and that he had lost the joy of his salvation, and
the spirit of liberty or adoption, yet he prays, that God would not take
his holy spirit from him: therefore he was not deprived of the spirit of
sanctification.

Here seems to be repugnance, but there is not any: he was deprived indeed
for a time of the graces of the sanctifying spirit, but not of the holy Ghost
wherewith he was sanctified: which graces, as God restored unto him, so I am
persuaded he will do unto you. Yea, and I doubt whether you are deprived of
them; but only that partly Melancholy, Satan and melancholy disquiet
afflicted souls.
partly Satan working therewith, make you do injury to your self, and to the
graces of the spirt, in you: which I beseech you to take heed of.

But the messenger cannot stay, and therefore I cannot write as I would, either
of this, or of the remedy which you should use; which hereafter I will, as God
shall enable me: and I pray you let me understand (as I requested in the
beginning) of your estate in particular somewhat more, and that by this bearer
if you can, because he is of your acquaintance, and will bring it to me
faithfully. Only I add now unto that I have written of hardness of heart at
large, that you must diligently observe the word Create, which David uses,
declaring Psalm. 51. Esaias. 17. 19.
that he had no feeling of heart. To this join that which the Prophet Esaias
speaks in the person of God: I create the fruit of the lips to be peace,
peace as well to him that is far off, as to him that is near. Therefore in
faith you may as well pray, with hope to obtain, as did David: therefore say
with him often, and with Gods people; O Lord, thou art our Father, we indeed
are clay, but thou art our maker, and we are the work of thy hands, etc. Know
also, God can cause Wolves, Lions, Leopards, etc. to dwell lovingly with
Lambs, Esaias. 11. 6.
Calves, and Kids, etc. and that which is impossible to men is possible with
God, even to cause a cable rope to go through a needles eye; that is, to
change the hard heart of the unbelieving covetous wretched man, much more
yours: yea, know you that all things are possible to him which believes. Cry
then, I believe, O Lord help mine unbelief, and I dare promise you in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you shall have your hearts desire in
goodness. Thus abruptly I must end, I commend you to God and the word of his
grace, which is able to build you up, and give you the right of inheritance
among them that are sanctified. And the very God of peace sanctify you
throughout, that your whole spirit and soul and body may be kept blameless
until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which has called
you, which will do it. Amen. I pray you pray for me, and I trust as I have, so
shall I pray for you, and much more.

Yours in Christ Jesus, to use in any need, R. GREENHAM.

ANOTHER COMFORTABLE LETTER BY MASTER R. G. TO MASTER M.
BRother, beloved in our LORD JESUS CHRIST, seeing you have had heretofore not
only Knowledge, but also experience of Gods gracious and merciful goodness
in Jesus Christ, of your own unbelief, and of Satan's subtlenesse; I could
marvel why you should give such place, and not keep your ground no surer, if
I were not much acquainted with such occurrences. I know not therefore whether
with words of rebuke, or of comfort, I should seek to relieve you. Because I
cannot come unto you, my counsel and desire is, that you would come up to
London the next Term at the farthest; that so I might ask of God to frame my
speech to your good. In the mean season (I beseech you) to call unto mind
that which you cannot be ignorant of; that in the Law Sacrifices were offered
Leuit. 5. 15.
for Gods people, not only at their first entrance into covenant with the
Lord, but Numb. 15. 38.
also afterward many times: and that not only for sins committed by
ignorance, but Ignorance and error differ.
also by error, that is, Forgetfulness, Frailenes, Retchlesnes, Carelesnes, etc.
If you have not Tremelius his Translation by you, you must take heed of the
English that has ignorance: for they failed that so translated it.

It is manifest, that the sin of error is there opposed against the sin
committed with an high hand, that is, a blasphemy with contempt of God: and
making his Law of no effect, Gods children may fall after their calling into
many foul faults.
but to be in vain. Which sin I am sure you are most far off from; I would
you were as far off from unbelief and distrust. That Gods children may fall
after their calling, into diverse foul faults, may appear by many proofs.
First, in the Law, when the Lord speaks in his Majesty, and proclaims his
glory, yet in how many words commends he his mercy, and for how many
several sorts of sins? Does not Esaias the holy Exodus 24. 6. 7.
Prophet call the people of his days, the people of Gomorrah; and their
Princes the Princes Esaias. 1. 10. 11.
of Sodom? Does not he accuse them as grievous transgressors, both of the
first and second Table? and yet does afterward promise them, that though their
sins were as crimson, Verse. 8.
Esaias. 31. 6.
they shall be as white as snow: though they were red like skarlet they should
be as wool. Does Esaias. 63. 10.
he not charge them that they were sunk deep in rebellon, and yet exhorts
them to Esaias. 63. 9.
return unto the Lord? Yea, does he not charge them not only with rebellion,
but also with vexing the holy Spirit of God? And yet read what is written,
Pray, as there you may learn of Esaias, chap. 63. verse. 7. 15. 16.

What? does not the holy Prophet Jeremy show, that Ephraim was as an untamed
calfe? Iere. 31. 18. 20.
etc. yet so soon as he mourned, and was ashamed of himself, does not the
Lord show that his bowels of mercy were troubled for his estate? Does nor the
Lord offer mercy unto the profane and forgetful transgressors of his holy
covenant? Is not this part of the covenant made with all the sons of David in
Christ Jesus, that if they not only omitting Psalm. 50. 5. 22.
many good things, but also committing rebellions and iniquities, that though
he may visit them, yet it shall be with the rod of his children, and that his
mercy he will not take from them, nor break off his covenant made with them in
Jesus Christ? Therefore Psalm. 89. 30.
remember that the holy promises, threatenings, precepts, and examples are
written, that we should not sin: but, If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
the just, and he is ^he reconciliation of our sins, and not for our sins
only, but for the sins of the whole world. Does not the blessed Apostle Paul
charge the Corinthians (whom he affirms 1. Cor. 1. 6. 7.
to be rich in Christ, and destitute of no spiritual gift) to be more carnal
than spiriuall, yea babes in Christ, yea to be fallen into idolatry,
committing of evil things, fornication, 1. Cor. 3. 15. 2. 3.
tempting not only of God but of Christ, yea murmuring against them: yet does
he not herein comfort them, that no temptation has taken hold on them, but
such as appertains 1. Cor. 10. 7. 13.
to man, and that God will be merciful unto; David prays against
presumptuous Psalm. 19. 13.
sins, that they should not reign over him: signifying, though he sinned
presumptuously, yet if he did not persevere in presumption obstinately, without
desire to repent, that such sin or sins were pardonable. Now the Lords
covenant toward his in Jesus Christ, is not to deal after their sins, nor
to reward them after their iniquities, much less will he not regard in
wrathful displeasure their infirmities. For if he should so mark what is
said or done amiss, who were then able to abide it? But with him is mercy in
Jesus Christ, that he may be feared. Therefore lift up your hands which hang
down, and strengthen your weak knees, and say unto your soul; Why art thou so
cast down and unquiet within me? I will yet trust in Jesus Christ, and wait
upon the merciful graces of God purchased by his merits. Consider that true
humility arises of faith in Jesus True humility proceeds from faith.
Christ, and that is true Faith that ingendreth humility; as we may not
diminish our sins, so may we not too much aggrauate them, nor diminish Christ's
merits: have evermore in your mind the example of the prodigal son, who
says not, I am not thy son: but, I am no more worthy to be called thy
son: he says not, Let me be thy bond-slaue; Nay he says not, Let me be
thy hired servant; but Let me be as one of thy hired servants: his Father came,
and met him, and fell on his neck, etc. So shall it come to you good brother.
I need make no more application: the holy annoynting which you have received,
will bring the old mercies of God upon others, and upon your own soul, unto
remembrance, and lead you into all truth, which shall be requisite for your
salvation. Put your trust in the Lord, and be you assured, believe his
Ministrrs and you shall prosper. The Lord Jesus came not to break the
bruisedreede, nor to quench the smoking flax; his grace shall be evermore
sufficient for you, and his virtue shall unto the end manifest it self in your
weakness. Now therefore I beseech him to preserve your body and soul, and
spirit, unto his most glorious appearing. Faithful is he that has called
you, and promised, who will also perform it, Amen. From my house in London, in
Warwick Lane, Ann^ 1591. Feb. 24.

Yours in Jesus Christ, as he has been, RICHARD GREENHAM.

A LETTER CONSOLATORIE, WRITTEN TO A FRIEND AFFLICTED IN conscience for sin.
Grace and peace in Jesus Christ.
MY very good and loving friend in the Lord Jesus, I understand by M. H. who
often trauaileth into those parts, that you require of me letters of comfort for
relief of your afflicted and distressed conscience. Wherein I could be glad
to perform any duty that is within the compass of my poor ability. But
your best and soundest comfort (as I take it) lies in those that have
themselves been exercised with that trial: who from the comforts of Christ
that 2. Cor. 1. 4.
have abounded in them, are best able to comfort those that are in like sort
afflicted by the hand of God. Again, I have written unto you many times of
this argument: if my Letters remain with you, they may always speak for me
that which I am able to say to that point. If you require more than I have
written before this; then were it reason you should send me my former letters,
that I might know where to begin that which remains. My leisure is not great,
as you know, and there is nothing whereinto I enter more unwillingly, than into
this labor of writing. Yet that you may understand that I have not altogether
forgotten your old love toward me, nor have suffered mine affection toward
you utterly to decay; I will endeavor at once as briefly as I may to remember
unto you, so far as I can call to mind, the sum of all that I have written
unto you heretofore. The question (as I take it) that lies in controversy
between your conscience and the enemy, is of the assurance of your salvation.
Wherein I would have you first to consider what is, or at any time past has
been the testimony The testimony of the spirit.
of the spirit of God unto your spirit, and then I doubt not, but either from
present sense of the same spirit of God, crying in your heart, Abba Father; or
from the remembrance of the days of old, wherein you had a comfortable
assurance of Gods favor, you shall be able to repel the force of this
temptation, considering that the holy Ghost cannot lie, that God, whom he
loves, unto the end he loves, and because his gifts and calling (as the
Apostle says) are such as whereof he does not, nor cannot repent him. Then
consider the nature of faith, which how weak and imperfect soever it be, it
cannot be divided The nature of faith.
even by Satan himself, to be faith: according to that which is said, I
believe, Lord help thou mine unbelief. And if you have faith even as much as
a grain of mustard seed, Ma^k. 9. 24.
Matthew. 17. 2.
etc that faith apprehends Christ Jesus, in whom there is all sufficiency of
salvation, and in whom we are complete: so that whatsoever scruple arises from
our selves, or is enforced Colos. 2. 10.
of the enemy from any imperfection that is in us, it need not at all to
dismay us, because we save not our selves, but are saved by him, Who is made
unto us from God, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: that who so glories
should glory in him. And indeed there is no surer refuge when the enemy
distresseth us, than renouncing our selves to profess the only name of Christ
Jesus, who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification. For if
the enemy shall say, we have sinned: our answer is, Christ has dyed for us,
yea is risen again, yea is ascended into heaven, etc. If he say, we Romans 8. 34.
want the righteousness of the Law, we must answer, Christ has fulfilled the
Law, that we Romans 5. 19.
by him might be made the righteousness of Christ: If he say, we are in nature
corrupt, and 2. Cor. 5. 21.
therefore both unworthy and unfit for the kingdom of heaven; we must answer
him with the words of Christ himself: For their sakes have I sanctified my
self. Finally, whatsoever shall be objected against us by the enemy, our
answer must be, that in Christ all 2. Cor. 1. 20.
the promises of God are Yea, and in him they are Amen. That all fulness
dwells in him, Colo^. 1. 19.
and that in him we are perfected: so that we may boldly say with Saint Paul,
There is no Romans 8. 1.
damnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. If Satan's importunity and
impudency will not thus be answered, we must end all disputation with him by
our selves, and send him unto Christ, who amongst other parts of his office
toward us, performs also this for us, both before his heavenly father, and
against all our adversaries, that he is our advocate to plead and defend our
cause, which yet is not so much ours as his own; because the question is 1.
Ioh. 21.
not of our merits or satisfactions, which we freely renounce: but of the merit
of his obedience, and of the value of his death unto the salvation of those
that believe in him. So shall we at once stop up the mouth of the enemy, when
refusing to plead our own cause, we refer our selves unto Christ, whom we
know to be the wisdom of God, and able to answer all that can possibly be
objected against us. For seeing Satan is a wrangling and Dispute not with
Satan intemptation.
subtle Sophister, it is our surest and safest dispatch, to break off all
dispute with him, and to send him thither where he may receive his best
answer; and we need not to doubt, but he that has answered the justice of
God, and cancelled the obligation that was against us before his heavenly
father, will easily defeat whatsoever the old Serpent our accuser the devil
is able to allege against us. But if we cannot so avoid his assault, but needs
we must enter the combat with him, let us take unto our selves that courage
that becomes the soldiers of Christ, and in the name of the Lord Jesus
manfully oppose our selves, knowing that he which has brought us into the
battle, will both save us and deliver us out of all dangers. Then if the
enemy shall say that we have no faith, and therefore have no interest Whether
we have faith or not.
in Christ, we may answer, that our believing depends not upon his
testimony, it is enough that our selves do know, and feel by the grace of
God, that we do believe. As for him, we do the rather persuade our selves of
faith, because he says that we believe not: knowing that he is not only a
murderer, but also a liar from the beginning and the Ioh. 8. 24. 25.
father of lying. Now, he that was neither ashamed nor afraid to charge God
himself with untruth, will make less scruple to deal falsely with us, and
that therefore we utterly reject his witness, as the witness of a notorious and
treacherous deceiuer, unworthy all credit, and whom we cannot believe, even in
the truth it self without danger. For which cause he Mark. 2. 24.
was so oftentimes silenced by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, even then
when after Act. 16. 18.
his deceivable manner he bare witness unto the truth. Again, when the
question is of our faith in Christ, whether we believe in him or not, we must
beware that we stand not here upon perfection of knowledge, which in the best
Divines is imperfect: or upon the perfection of our persuasion, which in all
flesh is mingled with imperfection: It is enough for our present comfort, and
to the silencing of our adversary, that we have a competent knowledge of the
mystery of our salvation by Christ; far removed from that ignorance and
implicit understanding, which Satan has planted in the kingdom of
Antichrist. For persuasion also, we acknowledge, that partly by the corruption
of nature, and partly by his assaults, by the grace of God it is such, as the
same is oftentimes assailed and shaken; yet fails not, nor falls unto the
ground, but stands invincible against all his attempts and invasions
whatsoever. And finally, for that faith whereby we rest for our salvation upon
Christ Jesus, we glory not in our own strength: but we say every one for
himself with him in the Gospel, We believe, Lord help thou our unbelief.
For if faith he, as it is indeed, a repose, settling, placing, and putting of
our trust and confidence A desciption of faith.
for our salvation in Christ whom the Father has sealed; then we doubt not to
prove against Satan and all his instruments of infidelity, that we do
believe: and that the weakness of 2. Tim. 1. 12.
our faith, which we willingly acknowledge, and that remnant of unbelief which
yet hangs upon us, is so far off from dismaying us, that it is both a
warning and motive unto us of great force to stir us up, and to set a work
by all good means to establish and to increase our faith, when we find the
good hand of the Lord not to be wanting unto us, and his ears not to be shut
up against our prayers; in which we always say with the Apostles of Christ,
Lord increase our faith. If it shall be objected, that because we have not
the same sense and feeling of faith which sometime we had, as Satan himself
could not then den^e, therefore we have now no faith, but have utterly lost the
same: we may answer, the argument follows not: for even in many diseases of
the body it is so Simile.
with them that have them, that they seem little better than dead corpses, and
yet there is life in them, which hidden for a time, after is recovered and
raised up again: so it is many times with the children of God, that being
ouerborne and distressed with extremity of affliction and temptation, they
seem for the time both to themselves and others, to have lost the life and
light which once they enjoyed. Yet so it is, that when the tempest is
ouerblowne, and the gracious countenance of the Lord again begins to shine
upon them, the faith which was as it were hid for the time, takes life, and
steweth forth it self, and plainly proves, that as the trees when they budde
in the spring time and bring forth Simile.
their fruit, were not dead in the winter as they seemed to be: so the faith
of Gods children, springing afresh after the stormy winter of temptation,
declaring manifestly that it was not dead when it seemed so to be, but was
only respited for the time, that afterward it might bring forth more fruit:
and whereas the afflicted soul desires nothing more The afflicted desires to
be leeue, and cannot discern his estate.
than to believe, though it feel not a present operation of comfort by faith;
even that desire argues a secret sense that cannot easily be discerned,
together with assurance of better estate in time to come, according to that of
our Savior Christ: Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be satisfied. And that of the blessed Virgin, He fills the
hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent empty away. Also that
bewailing and deploring Matthew. 4.
of unbelief which is found in the afflicted, is not only a st^p unto their
former comfrort, but a certain proof and demonstration of the return thereof.
For the Lord working by his spirit in the hearts of his childrens gronings that
cannot be expressed, thereby assures the^ that in his good time he will hear
them and grant their requests. And so much the more we may be persuaded
hereof, because the love of God toward us, as it began not of us (as S. John
says) so it depends not upon us, but upon the truth and constancy of Ioh. 5.
him, with whom there is no change nor shadow of change. Again, the temptation
it self, Temptation what it may teach us.
from which our affliction does arise, though it have of itself a most bitter
and sharp taste, even unto the wounding of our souls near unto death: yet
has it also in it an argument of comfort, the Lord himself out of darkness
raising up light unto his children. For even by this, that Satan so busily and
so fiercely assaileth us, it does appear, that as once he lost his possession
in us, and was cast out by one more mighty than himself, which is Christ: so
now he finds no peaceable entrance, but a strong and mighty resistance, and
therefore there yet remains such part of the former work, which he could not
hitherto overthrow, nor shall be able for ever, which is the secret seed of
faith still sustained and nourished by the spirit of God in us, when we would
think it were utterly extinguished. For as the fire when it wrastleth with the
water thrown upon it, cease not till it have overcome: so this resistance of
the spirit against the flesh, will not cease until the full victory be
obtained, and Satan himself trodden under our feet. Neither is there any more
sure testimony, either of our present deliverance begun, or of our full and
perfect victory in time to come, than this, that by the word of God we do
(though but weakly) resist the temptations of the enemy, and continue in the
battle against him: mourning indeed and travailing under the burden of
affliction, but yet standing upright before the enemy, so that he cannot fully
prevail against us, much less overthrow and destroy us. But here one thing
must carefully be looked unto, that we be not so far discouraged, either with
want of feeling, or ouerborne with desire of that we have not, as we forget
what mercy hereto fore we have received. When Job so earnestly, and (as one
would think) impatiently wishes the good things he had sometimes enjoyed, he
does not only express the great affection he had to be restored unto his
former estate, but also gives the attentive reader to understand a secret work
of that grace of God; from the remembrance of that which had been, insinuating
an hope of that which should be, as the event it self afterward declared;
which issue of his troubles S. James would have us diligently to consider when
he says: Ye have heard of the sufferings of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord. But it fares in this case with the afflicted soul many times, as it
does with those that greedily strive for the goods of this world; their
affections Simile.
of having more is so strong, and does so violently possess and carry them,
as it not only depriueth them of the use of that they have, but also makes
them forget the same, and which is yet more, protest against it, as if they had
it not at all. So the humbled and afflicted spirit, one borne for the time with
present grief and anguish of mind, not only uses not the comforts it has,
and cannot presently discern; but also causes an utter forgetfulness of them,
and which more is, protests against them, as if they were not: yea (as we see
often in Job) he so complains of the contrary, as if the Lord had not only
forsaken his servant, but had armed himself, and did fight against him to
destroy him. Here therefore we must bridle and chastise our impatient and
murmuring spirit: and remember that of Job, so far contrary to the other,
that though the Lord should destroy him, yet he will trust in him. Neither
must we so much vex and unquiet our hearts for that we want, as labor to make
use of that we have: which though it seem little unto us for the present,
Resistance in temptation a sure sign of faith and grace.
yet in truth is more than Satan by all his force is able to overcome, as may
appear unto us by that endless resistance which the spirit of God dwelling in
us makes against him. For he that so fights is not yet captive: and he that
stands in face of the enemy, and endures all his assaults, is not yet
vanquished. Yea for that he holds out in so great weakness of his own,
against so strong and furious assaults of the enemy; it plainly argues, that
he stands by a greater strength than his own; by which, as he is presently
preserved that he falls not into the hand of his adversary; so need he not
doubt thereby to be finally delivered, and crowned with victory and triumph in
despite of Satan and all he is able to work against him. But the enemy,
whose quarelling with us is endless, as Remedy in temptation.
his malice is insatiable, will not thus leave us and give us rest, then (as I
said before) it is our best and safest way, at once to end all disputation
with him. And we cannot better shake 1. Dispute not with Satan.
him off, than by exercising our selves in prayer, reading, and meditation of
the word of God, and by diligent walking in the works and labors of our
calling: for there is no greater opportunity nor advantage that can be given
unto the adversary, than if he shall find 2. Exercise, prayer, reading.
us idle and unoccupied. If the mind be already possessed of, and occupied in
good things, it cannot so easily be transported unto that which is evil: but
if he find the house empty and fit for him, he then enters without
difficulty. In the question of faith we have comfort 3. Be painful in the
works of thy calling. Faith proved by the fruits.
also from the works and effects thereof in our selves: For as the tree is
known by the fruits; so faith wants not her fruits whereby she may be
discerned. These are of diverse sorts, sorrow for sin past, hatred of evil,
care and endeavor to avoid it both in general and particular, the love of God
and of his righteousness, desire and care with labor and contentation to
please him, both in general and particular duties. And here again we have a
lawful and necessary recourse unto time past. For albeit we have nothing to
Psalm. 77. 6.
glory in before God, when the question is of the cause of our salvation; yet
the effects of the grace and favor of God toward us in the former fruits of
our faith, may yield us no small comfort in the time of our heaviness and of the
anguish of our spirits; hereof it is that the Prophet in the Psalms does so
often protest his obedience unto God* and care to do Psalm. 119.
his commandments: hereof it is that Job, unto the comforting of his
distressed conscience, Job. 31.
remembers the course of his former life, led in the fear of God and
obedience of righteousness. For although we may not attribute any merit unto our
works, but must give the Romans 3. 28.
whole glory of our salvation unto Christ alone; yet our works do witness for
us, that we are the children of God, because we are guided by his spirit, and
as the Apostle says, though Romans 8. 10.
the body be dead in respect of sin, yet the spirit is life for
righteousness sake. Also the gracious effects of Christ himself dwelling in
our hearts by faith, are sure and certain testimonies that we are members of
his body and do belong unto him, because as branches implanted into him which
is the vine, we bring forth fruit according to the nature of the vine. It is
said we do yet sin; our answer is, that that happens unto us not from the
new Ioh. 15. 2.
creature, but from that other part yet remaining in us still subdued under
sin, in which the Lord of mercy does not esteem us, but in that new man which
is fashioned again according Romans 7. 17.
unto his own Image. In so much as S. Paul doubts not to say, that the sins
of the Romans 6. 2.
faithful proceeding from the remainder of corruption, yet abiding in them,
are not their Death the complement of mortification.
works, but the works of the flesh, which being already wounded unto death by
the power of the death of CHRIST, languisheth more and more, and shall finally
be abolished by death, which is the end and accomplishment of our
mortification, and fully ends the battle between the flesh and the
spirit. What shall I say of the loathing of this life, and the vanity thereof,
and of that desire which is in the children of God, to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ? of contentment in all estates, patience in afflictions, constancy
in truth, love toward Loathing of this life, etc.
those that love the Lord, pity toward those that are in misery, and the
desiring of Phil. 1. 21.
the good (even of their enemies) and those that hate them? Which virtues,
though they bear not an equal sail, by reason of the weakness of the flesh,
and of the malice and resistance of the enemy; yet are they undoubted
testimonies of our love toward God, which is not but in those who are first
beloved of him, and have tasted how good and gracious he is. If we shall look
unto the exercises of piety, and of the worship of God, though we may Comfort
from the exercises of piety.
here (a^ elsewhere) complain of our wants and defects, yet we shall through
Gods goodness find matter of comfort. Remember therefore what mercy the Lord
has showed you in this part; with what desire and affection you have heard the
word of God: how precious The hearing of the word.
it has been unto you, above gold, even the most fine gold: how sweet and
comfortable, even above the honey and the honey comb. Remember with what fruit
of knowledge in the will of God, increase of Faith in his promises, purpose and
endeavor of amendment of life, you have oftentimes heard the same. Call to
mind with what zeal and earnestnes of spirit you have sometimes called upon
the Name of God, both publicly and privately, with Prayer.
others, and alone by your self: with what joy and rejoicing of the soul you
have praised Praising of God.
the Lord for his mercies toward his Church, and toward your self. Call to
mind what has been in you at any time, the power of those Sacraments which
are annexed as seals Sacraments.
unto the promise of salvation by Christ, and how far they have by the
blessing of God, erected your mind in hope and assurance of his goodness
toward you.

If your present discouragement resist the comfort of these meditations, it is
no new thing, that in our weakness we should after the manner of those that be
sick, disadvantage our selves of that which might do us good: yet remember
how injurious a thing it were, to esteem the children of God by their present
agonies and conflicts of conscience, rather then by the comfort of that estate
wherein the grace of God shined plentifully upon Simile.
them and in them. For as when men are diseased, it cannot thereof be
concluded, that they were never in health: so the present discomforts of the
children of God, though they take away the sense of his mercy for a time, yet
they are no repeal of his former goodness To record our faith, and comforts
past.
and favor toward them, nor deny them to have been, even in their own
judgment and feeling dear unto the Lord, and still to be, though the storm
and tempest of their present affliction suffer them not so lively and
comfortablie to enjoy the same, as before. Heb. 10. 32. 34.
Job. 29, 3.
For which cause they must with Job and David call to remembrance the comforts
of times Psalm, 77, 6, 12.
past, from thence to assure themselves of the return of the good hand of the
Lord in due Psalm, 23, all.
time. I doubt not, but you can be witness unto God, and to your own self,
that the time has been when your comfort and assurance of Gods favor was
such, as Satan himself could not deny the testimony which then the spirit
of God did bear unto your spirits. Rom, 8, 16.
Now the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and whom he loves
he Rom, ^1, 29.
loves unto the end: neither does our salvation depend upon any thing of our
own, (for Ioh, 13, 1.
then we should a thousand times perish and fall before the enemy) but upon
that eternal and everlasting love of God, wherewith he has loved us in JESUS
CHRIST, before the The testimony of the spirit of adoption, better the^ the
testimony of men and Angels.
foundations of the world were laid: which love of his, if it has at any
time been made known unto us, and apprehended of us, we have assurance greater
then the testimony of men and Angels. But you will say, that which sometimes I
felt is now gone, and in stead thereof I am perpetually oppressed with the
horror of the wrath of God, just against me for my sins. It is true, that the
power and sense of Faith is not always alike in the children of God: yet is it
a false and sophistical conclusion, suggested from him that is a liar from the
beginning, and the father of lying, to say, we feel not faith, therefore there
is no faith in us. For in many diseases of the body we have no sense of life,
and yet we live: the Sun shines not in the night season, nor when it is
obscured with clouds: shall we Simile.
say therefore that there is no Sun, or that it has utterly no operation?
Admit also (which yet may not be admitted) that the Lord had for a time utterly
given us over: can we conclude thereof, that he will never again be merciful
unto us? Nay, he that found us when we sought him not, will surely return
unto the work which he has begun, though he seems for a while to have
forsaken it. There is sometime as it were an eclipse of our An eclipse of faith.
faith, and of the feeling of the grace of God toward us: but let us assure
our selves, that as the Sun and Moon do not perish in their eclipses, nor
loose their light for ever: so in this eclipse which happens for a time unto
our faith, and sense of Gods goodness, the same shall not perish or lose his
virtue for ever: but shall in good time be restored, or rather quickened in us
again, unto our further and more assured comfort. This you have seen in many
dear children of God, whose heaviness has been known unto you, that they
have not been forgotten for ever, but that the Lord, who seemed for a while to
frown upon them, did in the end cause his most gracious and loving countenance
to shine upon them again: you have felt it in your self, that there has
been an interchangeable course of sorrow and comfort, of faith and fear, and
that the one has continually succeeded the other, that the same hand that
humbled you, did raise you up again; that he that inflicted the wound into
your soul, applied thereunto the most sweet and sovereign remedy of his
grace. So ancient and so experienced a soldier as you are in this spiritual
battle, should now be valiant and strong unto the combat: and though victory
be not to be hoped from the weakness of flesh, yet the experience we have had
of the goodness of God in our former troubles, ought to assure us of the
return of his helping hand in all our necessities. Shall I put you in mind of
the grace of God toward you in your comforting of others, even then when your
self have been in some discourageme^t? If others have received comfort from
you, raise up the same comforts unto your self. Neither is there any cause you
should fear, least the spirit which in you was able to erect and confirm
others, should not be able to refresh and comfort your own soul. In other
things we love our selves too much, and do well unto our selves rather than to
others: but here many times by the fraud and deceit of the enemy, we are made
cruel unto our In temptations how we conspire with Satan against our selves.
own bowels, and become his abused instruments to torment our selves: Who will
put a sword into the hand of his adversary to wound himself withal? And who
will strengthen his enemy that is already too strong for him? Yet this is our
folly, that we will conspire with Satan against our selves, and arm him with
weapons unto our own destruction. Saint Peter says, Resist the devil being
strong in faith. We must not therefore yield our 1. Pet. 5. 9.
selves unto his tyranny, nor cast away that weapon of faith by which alone
we may be 1. Ioh 5. 4.
able to overcome. But I will urge this argument no further. Ephesians. 6. 16.


I know that the benefits of this life are common for the most part, both to
the reprobate Co^mfort from the benefits of this life.
and to the elect; yet both in those which are common, there is a great and
large difference, and there are some so singular as carry with them a stronger
testimony of the favor of God, than that it may without impiety be denied.
In common benefits it holds, that as things most adverse are yet turned unto
our good, so much more the good gifts and blessings of God do carry with them
a testimony of his love and favor toward us. For as the Lord speaks unto us
in the word and by his spirit; so his good and fatherly Romans 8. 28.
providence toward us, is not without voice, but sounds aloud unto the
declaration of his love. But there are (as I said) some benefits so special,
that the use of them is proper only unto his children. Remember with me the
first time of this trouble and dismaying of your conscience; and remember
withal how many means the Lord has ministered unto you for your comfort What
shall I say of those whom the Lord has put even into your bosom, the more
nearer to apply his mercy unto you, Master C. Master B. Master R. etc. all
so furnished unto your comfort, that you may well think, they were as so many
hands stretched out from heaven to support and strengthen your weakness withal?
If I should set myself to remember how many other the servants of God have by
divine providence been directed to minister comfort unto you, the number would
be innumerable: Master S. A special favor of God to have his faithful
servants to pity us in our afflictions.
Master F. Master D. Master B. Master G. Master G. and almost who not, of those
that have been trained and brought up in that school. Consider how great a
mercy this has been, that so many excellent Physicians of the soul, should
at several times apply themselves, if not unto the cure, at the least unto the
mitigating of your disease, I will not examine how many and great comforts you
have received from them by word in presence, and by letters in absence: this
only I ask of you, whether you have not known all these to bear unto you
the same testimony, to speak the same comfort, and to confirm you in the
same assurance of the love of God toward you?

Now what spirit must that be, that shall contradict the spirit of God in the
mouths of so many and faithful witnesses? My good friend, mark what I will
say unto you: as the patient that is sick in body willingly resigneth himself
unto the sentence and direction of his skillful and faithful Physician; so
must the children of God in their spiritual maladies, yield themselves unto
the Physicians of their souls, so much the more, because the Lord has given
unto the ministers of his Gospel the power of binding and loosing, both Matthew.
18. 18.
in the public ministry of his word, and also in the private consolation of
his children. I will not speak of that which is public, although not
altogether unfit unto my purpose, considering that that which is publicly
spoken as unto all, has also a particular address Esaias.
unto those that are the Lords. As when the Lord says by his Prophet, Blessed
are all they that mourn in Sion. I will for the present rest in that use of
this power of binding and loosing Iam. 5. 15*
which is private and particular. Remember that of Saint James, who says, that
upon the prayers of the Elders of the Church, the sins of the diseased shall be
forgiven him: which words can have no other sense, but that by them shall be
pronounced unto him the forgiveness of sins. A most excellent practice whereof,
we have in our Savior himself, Luke 7. where first he proves by argument
unto Simon the Pharisie, that the mourning sinner was Verse. 41.
pardoned all her sins, and therefore was now no sinner and wicked one, as
he uncharitably esteemed her to be; then turning himself unto the distressed
soul, first says, Thy sins are forgiven thee; and afterward, Thy faith has
saved thee, go in peace. Wherein, though there be some things extraordinary in
our Savior Christ as the son of God; yet Ioh. 20. 23.
is it that power which he has communicated unto all his servants, saying,
Whose sins you How Gods faithful Ministers bind and loose.
forgive, they are forgiven, etc. which is nothing else, but, whose sins upon
due examination and trial of their repentance, you pronounce to be forgiven,
they are forgiven. Here again remember (my dear friend) how many of the
faithful and expert servants of Christ have examined your estate by conference
with your self, and have found all signs unto health and salvation. Unless
therefore Satan dare contradict the spirit of God, speaking by the mouths of
so many witnesses, he cannot say but you are the Lords. Now for your self, I
am assured that you will not, nor dare not say, but this has been the
constant testimony of all the servants of God sent unto you; and that they
were such as you had no cause to suspect their partiality or flattery in any
sort. How is it then, that the voice of so many should not be unto you as the
voice of God himself? Who, though he do not speak unto us now immediately from
heaven, as in some times past; yet he speaks unto us by the mouths of his
servants, his Prophets. When David said in the horror of his soul, I have 2.
Sam. 12. 13*
sinned against the Lord; was it (think you) a small comfort that Nathan said
immediately unto him, The Lord has pardoned thy sin? I will say nothing of
the prayers of so many of the servants of Christ as have commended your cause
unto the Lord, which cannot be frustrate, the Lord himself directing them to
pray according to his word, and upon the assurance of his promise. Read Job
33. 23. If there be present with him (that is, with the afflicted Notes out of
Job. 33. 23. for the comfort of the afflicted.
soul, as verse 22.) a messenger from God, an interperter (of the will of God)
such as is one of a thousand, who may signify unto man the equity of the
Lord, and entreating him for favor shall say: Redeem thou him that he go
not down into the pit, by that redemption which I have found; when he has
humbly be sought the Lord, he does graciously receive him that he may behold
his face with joy, and he restores unto man his righteousness. In which words
there are many excellent things to be noted for the comfort of those that are
afflicted. The first is, that the anguished soul finding no comfort at home
and in her self, by reason of the strength of temptation, must seek relief
abroad at the hands of those whom God has appointed to make glad the
sorrowful mind, and to give rest unto the wearied and distressed conscience.
Wherein you must consider with all thankfulness, how great mercy the Lord
has showed unto you: for I do persuade my self, as before I have said, that
since the time of your affliction, there has not been almost one, that has
any special gift in that kind, who by conference, writing, or otherwise, has
not bestowed some part of his travail unto your comfort. I could my self name
a great number besides those above mentioned, but yourselfe can remember many
more. Now the testimony of many faithful servants of Christ witnessing the
grace and goodness of God toward you, must be as the voice of God himself,
who is not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that he should
repent, or alter that which he has once testified. And if Job do acknowledge,
that the comfort of one faithful witness on the behalf of God, is enough to
the erecting and cherishing of the heauiest mind, what can Satan say unto the
testimony, not of two or three witnesses which the law only requires, but
unto the testimony of two or three score, the meanest and weakest whereof
should be able to answer in your behalf unto all that the enemy is able to
object against you? The second 2
thing I note, is that these have not come unto you by error or by chance, but
by special address of Gods providence, as sent from the throne of grace to
bind up your wound, and to minister comfort unto your conscience. The third,
that these speak not their own 3
words, nor of themselves but are the faithful interpreters of the will of
God, not indeed immediately from himself, but by viewing and esteeming of the
work of God, and the fruits of his grace in those that are his. The fourth,
that as they declare unto the afflicted, 4
that favor of God toward them, which themselves are not able for the present
to discern, so they commend them by prayer unto the Lord, who has promised to
hear and to grant their requests. The fifth, that for comfort in this case, we
must pass out of our selves, 5
in whom there is nothing that may ease our grief, and cast our eye and
cogitation only upon Christ, in whom al fullness of salvation does dwell,
considering that this is one of the means whereby Satan does most distress
and anguish the afflicted souls, that he holds them in the cogitation of
their sins and transgressions against God, and suffers them not to see that
length, breadth, height, and depth, and to know that love of Christ Ephesians. 3.
18.
that passes all knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fullness of
God. The sixth, 6
that the Lord both mercifully blesses the labors of his servants in
comforting his children, and also graciously hears their prayers and
supplications made in their behalf unto his Majesty. And the last, that God
in his good time erecteth the minds of the afflicted, 7
and opens their mouths to praise his name and to protect his goodness, that
he has brought again their soul from the pit, and has shined upon them with
the light of life* Which effect of the grace of God, because you have both
seen in others, and felt in your self many times, you have great cause to
hope and expect the return of his comforting hand in due season, who also
shall once determine these conflicting days, and set us in that peace which
shall never be interrupted, and wherein all tears shall be wiped away from
Apo^. 7. 18. 14. 13.
our faces for ever.

The malice of the enemy, during this life, has no end nor measure at all,
and therefore we may justly fear all extremity of attempt against us; but we
must strengthen our selves in him, who can and will enable us unto all things.

The last and most grievous assault of Satan against the afflicted is, that he
calls into Against the doubt of election.
doubt their election. For that salvation is only of the elect, he labors
by all means to snake this ground and pillar of comfort, and if it be
possible to subvert and overthrow the same. It behooves us here to take heed
how we carry our selves, as in that temptation which of all others is most
difficult and dangerous. First therefore, we must beware of that gulf wherein
the enemy hops to devour us, that we enter not into the secret and hidden
counsel of God. For the secrets of the Lord are for himself; but the things
Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
that are revealed, are for us and our posterity after us for ever, as Moses
says. What then has the Lord revealed concerning our election? First, the
spirit of God witnesses unto our spirits that we are the children of God: then
it teaches us to cry Abba Father, and stirs up in us those gronings that
cannot be expressed. From these let us descend unto 3
faith it self: the voice whereof, if it be not suppressed by the
grieuousnesse of temptation, sounds cheerfully unto us, that we are beloved
of God, redeemed by Christ, and fellow heirs with him of his fathers kingdom.
If here also the enemy have darkened our 4
senses and obscured our light, we must of necessity with Job, relieve our
selves from the Job. 31.
fruits of our faith: These what they are has already been said. If
necessity do so compel 5
us, we must fly unto the times that are past, and refer our selves unto the
testimonies of the faithful ministers of God: who as they are for their
wisdom and manifold experience better able to judge of our estate than our
selves: so have they power and authority from God to decide the controversy
between us and our enemy, and to plead our cause against him. Also where the
enemy from our present trouble and torment of 6
mind, seeks to drive us unto despair, we are to use against him his own
weapons: for among many testimonies of our estate in grace and favor with God,
there is none more evident and sensible, than is that conflict which we find
and feel in our selves of the spirit against the flesh, of faith against
unbelief, of a sanctified mind against that part that is unregenerated: and
finally, of the new creature against the old man, and of Christ himself 7
in us, against the power of Satan. If he reply that this is not so, but the
contrary; we may answer, that albeit there have been many times, wherein we
had a more present and mighty hand of the Lord upon us; yet even now Satan
himself cannot deny, but we hate sin and love righteousness: that we love
God and (to our power) obey his will, and fly the baits and occasions of
evil: whereof if there were for the present no manifest and apparent effects,
(as yet by the grace of God there are) notwithstanding the only affection and
desire of the heart, thirsting and longing after Gods kingdom and his
righteousness, are sufficient arguments of the work of grace begun in us, which
shall so long be continued by the good hand of our heavenly father, until it
be consummated and perfected in the life to come. For if it be God (as the
Apostle says) that gives both the will and Phil. 2. 13.
the deed: he that has given us to desire to obey his will, will also enable
us unto the doing of the same. And seeing the work of sanctification begins
in the heart, and thence flows into our whole life, we nothing doubt, but
God, who has given us joy in the holy Ghost, and thereby a love unto him and
unto his law, will further confirm and strengthen us, that we may be vessels of
honor unto his name, and glorify the Gospel of our profession with fruits
agreeable and according thereunto. Yea the thoughts, meditations, and desires
of the heart, are deeds before God, and principal parts of that obedience
which he requires at our hands. And therefore if the faithful man should be
taken away by death before he has done any of the outward works of the law;
yet should not his faith be without fruits, in that being sanctified in the
inward man, he does now in soul and spirit serve the Lord, and desires
ability and opportunity in act to do his will, and to honor his name; as
appeared in that penitent malefactor that died with our Savior Christ. Luke
23. 42.


Another thing I am to admonish you of, that you be not as the covetous men of
the world, who so gape upon that they further desire, as they consider not, but
rather forget The afflicted conscience like the covetous man.
that which they already have, and having much indeed, in their opinion have
nothing: and to all purposes and uses do as well want that which they have, as
that which they have not. So it oftentimes happens to the dear children of
God, that whilst they look and breath after that which they have not yet
attained unto, they forget and neglect that which they have received, and use
it not to their comfort and rejoicing, as otherwise they should. This
ouerreaching and importunity of theirs, Satan abuses against them, from the
opinion of having nothing, to blind their eyes not to see the present grace and
goodness of God toward them. It is true that the Apostle says, that in the
course of godliness and Phil. 3. 11.
religion, we may not think we have attained the goal, or are come unto the
end of our race: but, forgetting that which is behind us, and endeavoring unto
that which is before, must contend (as to a mark) unto the reward of the most
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. But he speaks it not to this end, that
we should not in thankfulness acknowledge the former mercies of God bestowed
upon us, or not use them unto our comfort, as testimonies of his love and
favor toward us: but that we may not stay in our present profiting but add
daily a new and fresh increase; that as from a larger and greater heap o^
benefits, we may more and more assure our selves, that we are beloved of God,
and shall enjoy the inheritance of his kingdom. When the Apostle says, Work
your salvation, etc. and labor Phil. 2. 13.
2. Pet. 1. 10.
to make your calling and election sure: though the meaning be not, that we
should put confidence of salvation in works, yet it tells us, that the works
and fruits of our faith are testifications of Gods spirit dwelling in our
hearts more evident and pregnant, than that Satan himself can or dare deny
them. We may not suffer our selves to be so ouerborne of the enemy under the
color of zeal and desire to do well, as not to remember wherein the Lord
has already given us some part of well-doing: not so to strive unto that we
have not, as to forget that which by his grace we already have: but rather with
all thankfulness acknowledging the goodness of God, from thence assure our
selves of the continuance and finishing of the work begun. In the courses of
the world, as slownesse gets nothing, so He that believes, makes no have.
preposterous haste loses all. It is the subtlety and malice of the enemy,
when he cannot hold us with himself, to hasten and push us on so fast and so
headlong, as by rashness we may fall into that, which by forwardness we had
escaped. Good things to come therefore we must hold them in hope, and pursue
them in peace: but the good we have already attained unto, we must so far
rejoice and comfort our selves in, as from thence we may be able to sustain
and support our cause against the enemy, and from that we have, to let him
understand that we doubt not of that which remains: that the Lord will both
continue and confirm the work of his own hands, and not forsake the same
until it be accomplished in his kingdom of glory. Thus I have in great have
and confusedly set down so much as presently came unto mind, of those things
which often heretofore I have written unto you: humbly beseeching the Father of
all mercy and God of all consolation, who has anointed you with the oil of
his grace, sealed you with the spirit of adoption, and given you a sure earnest
and pledge of everlasting salvation, to increase upon you, and in your heart
the measure of faith, and multiply your fruits in all manner of well doing,
make you strong against the face of your enemy, and crown you with victory
in the day of battle, that you may praise his name in the day of your
deliverance, glorify him in the whole course of your life; and finally enjoy
with the rest of his Saints, that eternal kingdom of glory, prepared for all
those that love and fear him.

Amen.
FINIS.
MASTER GREENEHAMS PRAYER.
O God most mighty, glorious and righteous: O father most loving, gracious,
and merciful, which keep covenant and mercy in Jesus Christ for all those
which receiving the first fruits of thy holy spirit, walk before thee in
uprightness of their heart: we thy unworthy children come unto thee in the
name of thy only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord: beseeching thee to
renew and increase thy holy spirit in us, and to purify our hearts more and
more by faith, that we may have a clearer sight, and a surer persuasion of thy
fatherly goodness unto us, and that we may more readily perform our dutiful
obedience unto thee. For we do acknowledge and confess unto thy sacred
Majesty, that we have yet never hitherto worthily esteemed thy mercies toward
us, nor sufficiently expressed the fruits of our bounden duty toward thee:
but that still we remain ignorant, and forgetful of many good things, which
we ought, and might know. And we confess Lord, we are slack unto those
things which thy holy sp^^t offers to our minds, unapt to do them, soon
weary of well-doing; and wherein we please thee something, we please our selves
too much. Moreover we likewise confess that we are ignorant of many evil
things, that we have done, do, or may do: forgetful of diverse things, which
sometime we have had knowledge and remorse of. And now the things which come
to our remembrance, and are in our sight, do not appear to be so^sinfull in
any measure as they are, and ought of us to be regarded. Yea we are beguiled
ere ever we are aware with our present corruptions, and they clean so fast
unto us, that we can hardly leave them, but most hardly be brought to true
repentance of them. We beseech therefore thy sacred Majesty, to work in us by
thy holy spirit, a wise and careful searching out of and into our sins, that
by the law we may be convinced of them, awakened by thy threatenings, rebuked
for them by thy judgments, executed upon the wicked, and exercised toward thy
children, servants, and friends, that so we may fear and tremble for them.
And by the serious premeditation of the uncertain hour, of a most certain
death, of the day of thy general, inevitable and dreadful judgment, of the
horrible and everlasting pains of the wicked in the helles, and their loss of
the inestimable joys of the heavens, stir up our dead hearts to seek thee O
Father in thy Christ, and thy son our Lord and Savior in the Gospel. And
finally, we pray that we may be even confounded in our selves, by the
fruitful remembrance of thy blessed sufferings, the most precious
blood-sheading and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, that so we may be humbled
after that manner and measure thy children should be: beseeching thee, that
we may so aforehand accuse our selves before thy blessed Majesty, that our
adversary may have no power hereafter to accuse us, so judge our selves that
we be not judged by thee: so with shame, sorrow, fear, and trembling,
acknowledge the vileness of our sins wholely before the throne of thy justice,
that we find it to be a throne of grace and mercy unto us in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Now O Lord, the searcher of the hearts and reins, thou knowing this to be the
humble and single desire of our hearts, we fly unto thee for refuge,
beseeching thee by thy holy spirit to work in us a clearer sight of the
wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby our minds may be further cleared from
blindness, and we have a clearer sight of the whole ministry of our salvation
in him; and grant us God a fuller persuasion of the discharge of all our
sins in his death, and of the imputation of his righteousness unto us, in
his resurrection: that the guiltiness of our conscience may daily more and
more go away from us, and peace of the same be confirmed in us; especially in
the time of our temptation and trouble, the day of our death, and the hou^e of
judgment. And next (most merciful Father) grant us a more powerful
experience of his death, killing sin in us, and of his resurrection, raising
us up unto a new life, that daily we may be less sinful, and more holy,
righteous, and sober in this present life: that so also we may have a more
sure and steadfast hope in his redemption, and may more strongly resist the
vanities of this world, in false pleasures, profits, and glories: and more
patiently endure all manner of miseries of the same, which may befall us,
until his glorious appearing when he shall come to be glorious in his Saints,
and made marvelous in all those which believe in him, Amen.

Furthermore O Lord, whereas we are privy to our selves, ere it is known unto
others, or unto thee, that thereby any sin or sins more strange in us
through our corrupt nature or custom, or the temptation of others, or of the
tempter; we beseech thee that there we may labor to find the precious death
of our Lord Jesus Christ more powerful in subduing the same: and whereas
through inability of nature, want of means, or grace, we are weaker in any
duties of well-doing, there we may strive to find the virtue of his glorious
resurrection more effectual in raising us up in means of life: so that our
familiar corruptions being cured, and our special infirmities being relieved,
we may be also endued, as with general graces meet for all Christians, so
with such peculiar graces as may be meet for our callings, and enable us to
glorify thy holy name, build up others in well-doing, and treasure up the
fruits of a good conscience, for our selves at all times, and especially in
our need. And in this behalf the desire of our heart is, that thy holy spirit
work in us the renouncing of our reason so far forth as it is blind, and
the crucifying of our affections so far forth as they be corrupt, that so we
may offer them up with soul and body in sacrifice of humiliation: and that
having received these graces, we may also offer them up in sacrifice of
obedience unto thy gracious Majesty. And wherein soever we have, do, or shall
with thy graces obey thee, we desire to offer up thy graces, our obedience, and
our selves in a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and praising of thy holy and
blessed name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. All thy ways O Lord, we
acknowledge to be mercy and truth; we beseech thee therefore, give us the holy
fruits of all the good means thou have heretofore wrought our good by: as thy
holy and sweet promises preached unto us, read of us, meditated upon by our
selves, or conferred of with others, the prayers, thankesgiuings, Psalms and
Hymns of our selves, our friends and thy Church, thy sacred Sacraments, the
ministry of thy holy Angels, the communion of thy Saints, and admonition which
has been given us for our good: most humbly entreating, that we may have
sanctified unto us the remembrance of thy former mercies bestowed upon thy
Church, upon any member thereof, or upon our selves, either in benefits, or in
crosses: and albeit our nature is most impatient either of reproaches offered
unto us by our enemies, or any injuries by our friends, yet herein we ^eruently
ask of thy wise and merciful goodness, that we may reap a good fruit even of
such evil means. And because we grow to be acquainted with the pride of our
spirits, and sloth fullness of our flesh, and few means are left us, and many
offenses (by our selves conceived; by others and Satan offered) do already,
and are daily like more to assail us: O Lord, thou which have been our God,
even from our first birth, especially since our new birth, be thou the God of
our middle age, yea of our old days, (if we live so long) until thou finish
the last work of our new birth begun and continued thus far in us. To this
end we ask of thee that we may vow (and receiving grace from thee, we do
vow) to use all these forenamed good means of our salvation, more mercifully,
than yet ever we used them; in using of them we ask more fear of thy
Majesty, faith of thy promises, pureness of our hearts, love unto others, and
withal, blessing and fruit more abundant, that our latter works may be
better then our former.

Woeful experience (O blessed Savior) teaches, and moves us to call upon
thee, as for these former things, so to be preserved and protected by thy
almighty and merciful grace, from our own corruption to come, from all
Satan's temptation and accusations, from all manner of contagion of the ungodly
in their injuries, reproaches, and their benefits, praises, their ^orceries,
enchantments, yea from any hurt of thy children (as they be not regenerate)
and from any hurt by thy creatures, so far forth as any of these things may
hurt our salvation. Former experience O mighty God and merciful Father, ought
not only to teach, but also to enforce us to give thee thanks, praise, and
glory, for thy former mercies upon us and thy Church bestowed: but wherein thou
have provided for us many arguments of strength, of faith: or ignorance,
forgetfulness, negligence, and want of reverence of thy mercies received,
minister just cause of humiliation: and therefore in some faith in, and
thankfulness for thy former merciful blessings, and yet in much weakness, in
the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord: with our whole heart, we beseech thee
give us a good portion of thy spirit, to call carefully thy benefits to our
remembrance, wisely to understand them, and reverently to regard, and truly to
be thankful for them, in mind, in heart, in word, and deed, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen. We beseech thee most mighty God and
merciful Father, to make partakers of our prayers, and thankesgiuings, all the
whole Church, and every member thereof, especially where duty most charge,
promise binds, necessity craves, and thy glory chalengeth, etc.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHIEF POINTS OF DOCTRINE HANDLED IN THIS VOLVME, GATHERED INTO
AN Alphabeticall order.
A
ABstinence used, 807. want of it hurt the godly, 808. Admonition, 28. 256, 789
to whom it is to be given, 205. and in what manner, 547. 698. 58. of
inferiors to superiors, 257. how it should be taken, 58. Rules of it in
general, 629. 630. 631. Adoption, what it is, and trials thereof. 450
Adultery, what it is, and how many ways committed, 676. 767. 790. Remedies
against it. 635. 636. Affection natural is corrupt, 1. 103. 638. 681. 727. 57.
515. 325. always to be suspected, 274. 651. the trial of it, 1. 671. 680.
how it is renewed, 243. 175. 742. goood affections required in good works,
264. 161. Dead Affections, 459. 827. Affliction, 2. 262. 638. causes of it, 35.
640. 197. 234. 235. necessity thereof, 80. how grievous a thing, 97, joys in
it. 686. 782. who are afflicted, 95. 96. 639 766. the end and use of
affliction, 1. 2. 112. 686. 533. 334. how to comfort the afflicted. 6. 106,
1107, 114. 116. Affliction soon tries godly and godless, 489. three rules
for it. 864. 865. Ambition, 99. how to fight against Ambition, 466. Amity
turned into enmity, 798. Anger, godly, 243. evil anger, 79^. cause of it,
466. Trial of anger, 3. 641. 204. 547. Angels watch over ve^, and how; 3. 646
not seen, but extraordinarily. 641. evil Angels. 310. 311. 312. Antichrist.
666 Apparel. 712. Apostasy how great a sin, 627. An Arrian Heretic. 110.
Armor of a Christian, 308. 309. Assurance of salvation, 322. 323. 328. See
Salvation. Astonishment. 24^. Atheism. 3. Austeritie. 769.
B
Baptism, 642. Our vow in Baptism, ever to be remembered, 477. on what day
to be remembered. 157. Belieuers like children 18. the belieuer not hasty, 408.
Blessedness, 314. the causes of it, 207. the effects of it, 209. true blessedness
wherein it consists. 394 Blessing denied because of sin, 784 786. the way
to obtain temporal blessings, 644. these are no signs of Gods favor, 645.
Blindness of men, 165. causes of it, 197. Book of GOD, especially to be taken
up, with the examples thereof, 421. All that can delight the heart of man,
contained in the book of God, 446 Brethren most vehement in Love, and so in
hatred, 685. Brownists, 258
C
CAlamities, public, fearful Tokens thereof, 464. causes of it, 791. public
most, affect us most, 2^ Calling, general and special, 645. misliking thereof
dangerous, 4. 30. 38. 613. 493. Of calling upon GOD, with diverse circumstances
thereof. 449. Care immoderate of outward things hurtful. 464 644 Catechizing
of Children whiles they are young required, 2* 8. 642. 664. families must be
catechized, ^9^ how and by whom it must be done, 649 6^5 distinguished from
preaching: ibid. reasons for it. 665 Cause good, why it has ill success, and
who are enemies to it. 8. constancy in it. 50 how to prosper in a good cause,
461 they may look to be potected, that have a good cause, and handle that
cause well, 504 (256 651 Censuring of others how it must be done, 4 Ceremonies
787 their first original, 152 good and profitable, 652 evil, and to be hated.
353 321 364 Charity, 820 void of suspicion 79 Chastity, 78 CHRIST, 654 his
excellency in all knowledge, 751: how, and where we must labor to find
CHRIST, and to apply him, 397 his Temptations, 490 his Passion in ^oule, ^4 186
his Burial, and the use of it: 84 his Resurrection; 85 178 he holds his
Kingdom by two Titles; 655 two Crowns, 6^6 his incercession, how he must be
followed; 692 654 his power; 852 Christians; their estate; 308 who be true
Christians, 231 A Christians life is the Meditation of the Law of GOD, etc.
459 Difficulties in Christianitic, 384 Church, why called holy and Catholic;
the Authority and dignity of it, 648 the prospetitie thereof should make us
rejoice, 275 a care of the prosperity, a note of Gods children, 620 wants in
it, and yet tolerable, 74 648 819 Children foolish, 276 why God gives such to
parents, 2^2 how to be brought up* ibid: 662 66^ how to be corrected, 278
marks of Gods children, 853 316 their calling and privileges, 782 their
comfort in this life, 341 their love to parents, and the Trial of it 76:
chastized, and wherefore, 640 787 subject to two extremities, 307 how Gods
children have many changes in this life, and wherefore, 497 Gods goodness
toward them, when he plagueth the wicked, 499 Circumcision, 668 705 Combat of
the faithful, 81 Comfort for a troubled mind, 6. 33 109 112 681. 768. See
afflicted; false comfort. 778. Company of the wicked to be avoided, 332
Communion with CHRIST 1^2 with his members, 1^3 318 the benefit of observing
all Gods commandments, 395 He that offends in any one commandment is
guilty of all, ibid. Concupiscence, how to avoid it. 8. (458 Conference
necessary, 5. 614, 12^, 647. 662 Confession of sin. 38 484 Confession of
sin, 649. of all* 690, of special, 107 hard to confess sin, 32 33 the
benefit of the confession of our sins 409. confession two fold: public,
private; to God, to men, 360 361 Conscience afflicted, 5. 6. 37. See afflicted,
Of sin, 701. tormented, 9^. 99. 639 hardness, 651. a good conscience, 5. notes
of i^, 313. examination of it, 650, peace of it, 650 209 tender, 650 773. 611
troubled, yet pardoned 867 Scriptures for a weak conscience, 854 what it is,
3^8 Consta^cie in a good cause, in the faith, 511 Contempt of the Gospel
punished, 791 Contention, 801 419 Contentation, 26 678 759 770 Cont^act of
Matrimony used of the heathen 122 commended in Scripture, 123 what it is, and
how the contracted must be taught, 123. 124. a form of contract. 1^8
Controversies, how far permitted in the Church, and wherefore. 727
Conversion, 281 how hard a thing 252 the only outward means of it. 282
Correction; how the Lord corrects, and why, 34, 6^2 7^5. How men ought to
rect, 278 651 See Censure, Corruption natural, 8. 636 703 secret corruption,
10^ how known, 58. knowledge and feeling of it necessary, 11. 681 delights
in means it cannot have, 92 hinders good actions. 27 Covenants particular.
477 Covering infirmities. 7 Covetousness insatiable. 643. 6^4 how discovered.
6^0. 604. how to fight against it, and overcome it. 466 Courtesy of the wicked
what it is, 837 Counsel. 612 Creation, what it is, 82. right use of the
creatures. 312 783 what it is to be a new creature, 370 joy therein, ^64
Crosses refine the Faithful, 2. 38. 117* they are necessary, 649 the use of
it 116 joys under it. 68^ three things required to find comfort therein, 2
the wicked cowa^ds under the cross 48^ Cross of CHRIST, what is meant
thereby, 366 36^ how crosses of wood and other things came. 36^ Curiosity, 475
Curse, a secret curse, 662 680 Custom, 332
D
David, 552 his adultery, 7^2 ^auncing a sin, 169 Death sudden, 66^ good,
465 violent, ^8 quiet, to some men an evil ^ig^^, 2^1 measurable fear of it
commendable, ^ 250 wishes of it unlawful, 9 meditation of it profitable, 656
6^3 how to die the death of the righteous, 49 the godly die in the fittest
time, 45 their sin abolished by it, 875 806 no man to be judged according to
his state in death, 9 Debt two kinds of it, 754 Decalogue, 73 Deceir, 688
Delights, 612 D^sertion, what it is, 398 It is twofolde, Ibid. Three ends for
which God uses desertions, 401 the use that Christians ought to make thereof,
402 Desire, 735 respected of God more then the deed, 9 6* 8 How to examine it,
680 800 7^2 man's desire insatiable, 6^3 why we have it not, 760 Despair, and
remedy against it, 8^9 Diet, 10 charitable judgments of professors in cases
of desperation, 400 their judgment to be left to God, ibid. D^^t, 10
Difference between persons and callings, 49^ D^ligence to serve God, 55
D^sobedience, 3^0 Discipline of the ancient Church, 768 842 Discretion
necessary therein, 84^ Dispraise, 10 Distraction from a good matter, and the
cause of it. 10 Divine, ^. things make a good divine, 410 D^uell* how he may
hurt, 2 how he tempts and accuses* ^04 his subtilty, 7^4 his strength, 7^0
of diverse names given unto him, 845 Doctrine, 772 three rules to examine it by
11 false doctrine infections, 491 Dreams, the causes and use of them, 10, 326
Dulnes and deadnes, 10. causes of it, 6* 30 273. 496. 584. how to avoid it,
160. 662 329 the most perfect earhly things are imperfect, and shall have an
end. page: 4^2
E
ECclesiastes, a brief sum of it, 628 Education of children, See children.
Elders, 352 Election, 719 Elect, their privilege, 782 Enmity, 798 the way to
overcome our enemies, 464 rules to be observed when we pray against them. 512
Envy, 732 Error, 817 Examination of our sins, 101, of our selves, 31, 284 1^7.
642 671. 703. Example, 247, 249* 263, 268, 96, 632, use of example, 9 666, how
far to be followed, 11 720 721 Excommunication, what it is, and how
dangerous to despise, 842 discretion required therein, 843 who were
excommunicated in the ancient Church, 792 Exercises of religion public, 11 75
private, 158 498 the use and benefit thereof, 6^3 to strengthen judgment, to
whet affection, 19 778 to whom unprofitable, 241 498 wherefore the Lord does no
more bless public exercises, 498 Exhortation, Legal, Evangelical, 3^9
Experience. 11 Bucharist, what we eat and drink therein, and how, 192 why,
193 examination before, and the reasons thereof, 187 Eye of idleness 676 Eyes,
the government of them 671 677 not governed, how hurtful, 792 5^ the vanity
of them, 416
F
FAlling, the child of God may fall, 13 the strongest may fall, 761 Family,
what care is to be had of it, 12 278 the whole family punished for the sin
of the master. 684 Family of Love. 453 Famliaritie with the wicked, forbidden,
punished* 492 Fasting 8. no set time for it, 135. public fast. 152. How
expedient in our Time, 151. the austeritie of the Fathers in it. 653. Humility
therein required, 674 Favor of God, 682. found in affliction, 687. to be
sought more then the favor of men, 686 Faires on the Sabbath day, 165 Faith,
11. what it is, 81. How needful, 12. 484. faith works, 588. trial of it,
640. 814. How the faith of Gods children differs from the vain imaginations
of the wicked, 492. the trial of our Faith, when God delays to perform his
promises, 508. decay of it, 176. 510. Eclipse of it, 265. the life secret, 54.
without feeling. 655. 662. faith only justifies, 86. want of faith, and of a
good conscience, make many barren in good things, 464. Spirit of faith, 484
faithful, how far they are said to be wise, 461 Fear: Three kinds of
fear, 682: properties of it, 683. godly fear, 248. 528. 3^3. 353. 55.
difference of the godly and wicked therein, 31. 53. immoderate fear, 504. 13.
504. scrupulous fear, 1^5. false fear, 857 few men truly fearing. 491
Feastings 14. on the Sabbath day, hazard souls, 168 Feeling, 1. 6. 12. 40.
273. 286. 679. 777. 804. 481. under the cross, 27. of the forgiveness of
sins, 254. of a spiritual grace, 655. David lost it, 248. 866 867. of wants,
507 Figures, 132 Fire, the properties thereof. 244 Flesh, what it is, 289. 224.
how it must be kept under, 808. combat between it and the spirit, 221. 225
Fools, who be, 625. diverse kinds of folly, 732 Forgetfulness, the cause of
it, 609, Fornication, 501 See Adultery.

Why God seems sometime to forsake his children 397 39^

Frailty to be borne with, 545 Friendship, Rules to be observed therein, 14,
with whom it should be made, 624 Friends, not profiting in godliness, 857
Free Will, 477, 525 Freedom of joy, and freedom of sorrows, 484 Fruits, 12
Furies, 589
G
GIfts extraordinary, 15. of the spirit, 694 Glory, vain. 273 God, his
patience and mercy, 694, his countenance, 544. to see and feel it, 662 two
notes of his goodness, 847. three notes of his favor, 680 his works, 748 his
Temple, 804 his judgments, ^^^ no flying from it, 6^8 his Anger and wrath, 696
his word, the power and privilege thereof, 8^8 his providence, 466 850
Godliness, 533 hard to come to 466 the mirror of it, 525 true godliness and
religion to be preferred before all worldly things, 383 two special things to
attain true godliness, 466 godly often troubled with unbelief, 495

Blasphe*mers of the godly, 3. ^orts, 419

Good name, 264 261 259 Good works, 15 See Works. Gospel, what it is, 72 88
772 824 the trial of our love to it, 766* contempt thereof punished, 649 ^24
How it is said to kill, 20 Grace, 649 692 decay of Gods graces how dangerous,
15 what misery grace does free us from, 38 what good things it makes us to
enjoy, 381 the fruits and effects thereof, 381 382 the price of Grace, Ibid.
the rareness of it, 382 the continuance of it, ibid. He which is once in the
estate of Grace* shall be in the same for ever, 398 how God takes away one
grace from his servants, and puts another in the room thereof, ibid. Grief,
25 7^8 522 for sin, 15 242 for other men's sin, 457 good to be grieueed,
102 681 grief, because we cannot grieve, 194 Gripings fallen in the body, 2
H
Hardness, 716 79^ the cause thereof, 16 57 two kinds thereof, 255 a great
plague, 718 to have a feeling thereof is good, 681 Harvest, 165 Haste to do
good things, 36 800 too great haste hurtful. 2^1 Hatred of sin. 320 Health
not to attribute it to Physic. 639 Hearing of the Word. 72. the best hearing.
708. how we must hear, 196. 34^. preparation thereto, 709. 53. profit
thereby. 59. how many sorts of hearers, and what to be observed therein. 834.
835 Heart, 1^. 5. 271. 115. two causes of watching over it. 24. nourishing of
evil in the heart. 171. fainting of it. 6^1. circumcision of it. 70^. In
of^ering our selves to Gods service, we must search and dig deep into our
hearts, 387. Five marks of an upright heart 387. 388. he must have a sound
heart, that would have sound happiness

38^. The description and properties of a sound heart, 386. 415. 416

Hell; the t^rmens of it. 658. 695 Help in need. 728 Heresy, ^7. 45^. 471.
dangerous, 720 why men detest it not, 472 Here^ikes, 529. how different from
Christians. 54. Civil conversation of heretics, 454. They are discovered by
the cross, 455. why so few heretics converted, 467 Holy Ghost, of the
sending of it, 216 See Spirit. Hope. 497. 754 Humility, 18. 796. 467. true,
28^. in the godly, 269* a special grace, 825 86^. from whence, 8^0. the
means of it two ^34. 3^5. want of it hinders in godliness, 520.
fantastical. 270 Hypocrisy, 19. 140. 574. gross, and close, 266. Marks,
717. vn^ased 8^0. Trial of it. 44. kinds, 202. how it differs from
godliness, 715 Hypocrites, God has a quarrel against them, 386. he loathes
their seruic^s. ibid. they live in continual danger, ibid.
I
I Dolatrie, occasions of it to be a^oyded, 220. Idleness is occasion of
sin, 646. of st^alth. 78 Jealousy godly over our selves, a thing most
necessary. 510 Jests, 20. foolish ^estings. 52 Ignorance of the people, must
make the Ministers wary. 209. 15^. of old age, 685. cause of disobedience,
733: the Saints bewail it. 501 Ignorance a cause to humble us, 475. wilful
ignorance and voluntary perdition. 473 Ignorance and error differ, 869
Imaginations if rouing dangerous, 467 Impatiencie, 7. 8. the cause of it, 704.
a good meditation against it. 674 Impenitencie,, the causes of it. 781 Impiety
discovered. 764 Impudency, how it comes, 79^. of our time. 848 Incredulity
in Gods children, 537 Infidels have no good name. ^61 Infirmities, to see, and
to be grieved for them, 727 Injury how to bear. 727. what are to be borne.
730 Judgment, 727. what strengthen it, 19 how to attain to it, 175. who are
hasty therein, 202. corrupt judgment, 466. day of judgment, 648. 657. how it
is said to be near, 658. sudden, 7^8 three things in it. 65^. consideration of
them, 469. four reasons approving Gods judgments to be good, 414. judgment
for the word of God, 406 a visible judgment of God, 501 Iusticiaries, 103
Justification by Faith, 678. 848. Arguments of it, 243 Justice two Courts of
it, 679 Joy, 323. true, 46. sweet. 986. of a good conscience. 693. to the
Word, 14. trial thereof, 16. it may be lost, 248. Difference of the godly
and godless therein, 31. Two kinds of it, 725 Joy of salvation how great,
293* to labor for it, 294. two sorts of joys in receiving of the Word, 294
K
Kingdom diversely taken, 287. none shall appear in it, which make not an
entrance on Earth, 289. What must be sold before we can possess it, 302.
Kingdom of CHRIST how to know where it is, 221 Keys of the Kingdom committed
to all Ministers. 288 Knowledge. 664. ^4 general. 20. their knowledge pur^lind
that either know little, or knowing never so much do practice nothing: 474. to
what end God gives knowledge: 410. the use and abuse of knowledge, ibid. true,
where and how to find it. 6^4. wrought by the Spirit, 229. how confirmed, 498.
sins after it: 10^. to sin against it a tempting of God: 8^6. why we
profit not thereby: 196. corrupt kinds of it. 721 Knowledge ministerial. 453
L
LAw of God: 138. what it is: 72. why given to all: 132. moral and natural
differ: 154. moral before Moses: 829. moral and ceremonial how abrogated:
133. how to be preached: 59. difference of the Law and the Gospel. 889 Learn
what a christian should specially desire to learn, 396: and where, ibid.
League none with the wicked. 611 Liberty to take heed unto it. 10^, 457
outward liberty brings inward bondage. 468 Libertines against them. 380 Lies.
659 Life, and the shortness of it, 659: it is but the present time. 660 Light
refused for darkness. ^73 Love, a true token of it, 14, 520, of God, 113, 695,
4^4* 545, of our brethren, 685 of the word, 87, 766* arguments of our love to
God, 454, 456, natural love must give place to heavenly love, ibid. we may not
love that best which the world esteems best, 516, to love God only as we be
taught in his word, 49^, duties of love, 160, how to love best, 516, how to
love superiors equal and inferiors. 120 Love of the creatures hinder, 20.
carnal love. 637 Lust, remedies against it. 635
M
Madness, the cause of it. 20 Magistrates how they may win the peoples favor,
260, they must be men of wisdom, 38, have a care of Gods glory, pray for the
people, 778, their sin most dangerous, 79^, si^s of the people cause evil
Magistrates. 53 Marks of Gods children, 25, See children of God. M^riners that
s^ile on the Sabbath. 164 Matrimony, notes to know whether it be of God, 20,
consent of parents, 21, choice in it, 742, the spousage before known by the
light of nature, 122, the end of it. 806 Means, 27, of salvation, 42* all good
means must ^e used, 615, ^70, we ought to attend thereon 736, neglect thereof a
tempting of God, 674, by what means we draw to God, 690, to keep us from
sin. 7^8, the virtue and power of the means in God, 844, means of least show
bring greatest graces. 290 Mediator who it is, 80, how dangerous to appear
before God without him. 694 Mediocritie. 29 Meditation, 615* 159, 574, 564, in
labor, 4, how we be hindered therein, 10, commodities of it, 22. rules for it,
23. of Christ his death: 19^, of death in or on the word, 450. to redeem the
time for it. 471 Meditation must be continued, 459: we will always meditate
and think on the things we love. 459 Melancholy: Satan and it disquiet
afflicted souls. 257 Memory: helps for it, 23, ^5: 447 Mercy, 209: of God*
9* 522. the rich mercy of God to the faithful, in opening their eyes when many
millions are left in darkness and misery. 503: it is either in giving or
forgiving: 697, to the poor: 69^: how it works in the wicked, 247: to whom
the mercies of God are dear^. 782 Merit. 509 Messengers of God how they bind
and loose: 877, must be prepared for trouble. 747* their evil life, how
dangerous. 752 messengers of Satan within us. 306 Mind 52, cast down: 95,
distempered. 482 Ministers* 24. the necessity of the^. ^39. ^40 the use
whereunto they are appointed 341. their duty, first to read and study. 342.
secondly to teach the word. ^43 how, where, and what he must teach. 344 when,
345. to pray for himself and the people, 345. thirdly, he ought to live a
godly life, ^46. fourthly, he ought to teach privately, as well as publicly*
347 how a Minister may ^^^e, 347. Miniets the porters of heaven, 288. means to
bring us to Christ. 288 Ministers and Auditors are not always alike. 448
Ministry. 24, 646, the haste of young men to it. 24, the dignity of it. 747,
the necessity of it, 340. whether a man may desire it, 52. negligent in it,
752: 790: sufficiency for it, 546: covetous in it. 735 Miracles given in mercy
and in judgment. 736 Mirth, 25: the way to godly mirth. 724 Moral and
Ceremonial, 132. See Law. To know things moral and ceremonial. 138
Mortification go together with remission of sin. 105 Mother, 76: three good
mothers breeds three evil daughters. 830 Motions secret unto sins, 108: the
spirit restraines evil motions, 89: the godly are not free from evil motions,
681: we must watch over them, 703: the first motion to sin must be crucified
in us. 467, why so few good motions come to us, 522: sudden motions to good.
476 Motes: what sins are called motes, and what beams. 632 Multitude to
follow is dangerous. 704 Murmuring, the policy of Satan therein. 26: how
common in our days, 249. remedies against it, ^51: 758. how ready we are in
our days to murmr. 815
N
NAme, good name how precious, 259 260. See good name. Nature good and evil,
29: natural men measure others by themselves. 715: they count all spiritual
things as paradoxes. 457 Necessity two kinds thereof. 166 Neighbor, who is
our neighbor. 79
O
OBedience what it is, 50: to the word, 826. it must be free, 44: trial of it.
544: strict obedience to be labored for, 292. popish observations and works
of supererogation in the point of obedience confuted. 393 Occasion of evil must
be avoided. 25: 263 Offenses, 721: 47, 74, 90, 702. small sins great
offenses. 727 Oppression. 780 Order necessary in all things. 833 Oaths. 75:
476
P
PApists, 3, 673, disquieted in mind. 96 rest in the work wrought. 689. never
felt the power of Christ his grace. 787 popish objections against the Gospel,
802, popish superstition. 455 Papists go beyond carnal Protestants in outward
things. 805, 455 How papists follow Peter: 483. papists may not be spared for
their civil honesty. 455 Popish Doctors of reason. 520 Parents immoderate
love, 2^: folly, 258: for what cause the Lord afflicts parents in their
children, 277: their consent in marriage, 743: consideration in correcting their
children. 798 Pastors, the ^inne of the flock their sin 259. their office
772. See ministers. Patience: 6^9, 759, 56^: trial of it, 25, properties of
it, 254: under the cross, 761 768: the use of Gods patience. 694 Pe^ce
threefold, 7, of mind, 97, of conscience, 209: false peace, ibid. of the
wicked 6^0, of the Church. 542 People their duty to their Magistrates, 76 to
their Ministers. 349 Perfection, God looks not for it at our hands. 390
Perjury, how men fall into it. 333 Persecution, 670, popish persecution how
great. 791 Perseverance, 496, 694, 721, 116, in the use of the means, 15, 764,
a sure trial both of knowledge and faith. 510 P^ruert, who they be that
pervert others. 730 Physician, properties of him. 794 Pity, who are to be
pitied. 25 Plague, 79^, boldness and fearefulnes in it. 2 extremities, 104,
plague threatened. 790 for the contempt of the word. 513 A perfume for
christians against the plague. 444 Pleasure, 653, 734, how we may take
pleasure, 726, use of it with restraint, 7, 9, of sin. 323 Pollution, the
polluted person polluteth all things. 189 Policy of the world evil. 838
Polygamie. 586 Posterity, care thereof. 798. Iehosaphat punished in his
posterity. 462 Posts on the Sabbath. 165 Poverty the cause and use of outward
want. 26 Poor, 261, zealous in defense of them. 258, poor in godliness, 784,
collections for them on the Sabbath. 161 Praise. 27, 733, 749 Preaching, with
prayer before and after. 272 the power thereof, 283, 708, sincere bring men to
Christ, 139, needful by sea, 164 distinguished from catechizing, 664, the
only means to work faith, 690, 346 173 Preachers how they win favor, 8^1
how they should carry themselves, 358 247, a true mark of a faithful
Preacher, 375: See Minister. Prayer, 2, 38, when to pray, 26: to offer up our
prayers to God albeit in perplexity of spirit we know not how to pray, 484
public for the sick, 34, want of it cause want of faith, 177, what it is 90,
a remedy in temptation, 873, how it is hard, and what does season it, 507, 619,
how profitable, 776, motives thereunto, 777, the more grace a man has, the
more need he has to pray, 46, 47, it is the best sacrifice, 8^, private
prayer* necessary, 501, rules for prayer, 562, 563, it must be joined with the
word, 775, ^36, with faith and knowledge, 711, it must be seruent, 56, we must
stir up our selves in prayer: 84: how to pray against enemies: 5^^: rules
thereof ibid. how many ways God hears our prayers: 409: why God hears not
our prayers always at the first ibid. in the soul, 317, what the Lord
requires of us therein, 237, hard to perform, 238, circumstances in prayer,
240, taken for the whole worship of God. 8^9 Predestination, 764, popish. 770
Preferments how often bestowed. 668 Preparation to holy exercises. 709
Presumption a remedy against it. 40. what it is, 141, two ways of presuming,
765 difference between it and faith. 622 Pride, 212, 4^0, how it is corrected,
34, privy pride, 269, it consumes many good gifts, 80, it is the last sin,
306, it is in four things, 711, spiritual pride. 272 Profession double, 801,
verbal. 819 Promise, 12^, Gods promises under the Gospel, 481, Gods promises
ought to stir us to obedience, 753, ^81, how hard to rest on Gods promises.
490 Prophets why called Seers, 6^7, what prophecy is, 7^0, the duty of a
Prophet, 771, three kinds of false Prophets, 771 prophecies tried, and notes
between the true and false Prophets, 772, what they respected in their
teaching. 519 Prophanenes. 54 Pro^perity has no feeling of good things, 27,
not to desire it too greedily, 272, in it to think on adversity, 710, 766, it
should draw us near unto God, 770, it is dangerous unto some. 116 Protestants
most bound to good works, 827, ignorant, 807, carnal Protestants, 70^, 464,
4^5, false Protestants. 119 Providence, ^^^, 184, 4^6* 5^^, 316, faith in it is
a remedy against murmuring, 252 it is general and particular, 253, in it is a
trial of our faith, 644 it is admirable, 677 the worldlings know it not, 731,
how to depend on it, 774: God in his providence will watch over us: 486: God is
just in it: 5^5: how great it is toward man* 850 Several punishments for
several sins. 500
R
RAce, how the Race of Christianity is ^unne by Christians. 413 Reading: 38:
joined with preaching: 15^ publicly: 225: directions for the reading of
Scriptures: 174: 175: 176: who should read Scripture. 6^4 Reason natural is
against faith: ^43: 645 18^: it must be renounced: 298: to fight with it a hard
matter: 299: how to strive against it. 467: 4^7 Rebuking of sin: 257: who
ought to be reproved. 633 Reconciliation. 798 Recreation: 169: on the Lords day
unlawful. 839, 840 Regeneration: 6: good natures do not further it, nor evil
natures hinder it: 29: it can never be utterly lost: ^45: feeling of sin an
earnest thereof: 11^; far more excellent than our first creation: 4^:
meditations of the regenerate: 453: 482 how wonderful it is, 803: strife in
the regenerate. 785 Relapse, cautions observed therein, 13, 58^ the state of
men after it, 249, how to rise again. 64^ Religion, not to have it in respect
of persons, 119, we must not be of a dark religion, 801, a singular grace to
love it when it is commonly hated, 515, trial of it 803, better to be
religious than seem, 305, to be truly religious is to have the means in due
estimation. 384 Religion is the way to happiness, page 380 Religion corrupt,
life cannot be vncorrupt, 454, the true religious and irreligious discerned in
temptations. 455 Remedies against troubles of mind. 102 See conscience
afflicted. Against unclean lusts. 635 Remission of sin and mortification.
105 See pardon. Repentance, 282, what it is, how to begin it and to continue
it: 281: 282: 283: 284 285: 286: 6 7: 87: notes of it: 780: it must be speedy
and continued: 781: it is the gift of God: 782: fruits of it: 796: the
necessity of it: 46: 48: 61: late repentance. 799 Reports evil, the use that
is to be made of the^ 64: 65: how an evil report should be stayed: 161: how it
should be borne: 652: two occasions of evil reports: 266 false reports the use
of them. 267 Reproaches, trials in it. 29 Riches, 624, no arguments of Gods
favor, 251, the nature of them and how they are thorns, 643, their use, 644,
they have two ends, 735, their abuse, 783, how to have earthly and heavenly
riches, 784 the unworthy possession of them dangerous. 78^ Righteous marks
of a righteous man. 613 118, 680, 839: See Justification. Rule for a man to
examine himself. 516 Restitution 78 Resurrection, 252, 178, co^forts arising
from it: 85: few do truly believe it, 180, of the rest of Enoch and Eliah:
180: Gods judgment and mercy require it. 183 Revelation ordinary or
extraordinary. 770 Revenge, 68^, remedy for it, 727, against desire of
revenge. 481
S
SAbbath, inconveniences and commodities in keeping it, 128, how it is
profaned, 138, what it is to sanctify it, 132 809, when first ordained, 133,
not a sign onley, 134, no ceremony, yet rest as needful for us as for the
Jews, 132, a Sabbath days journey: 14^: works of the Sabbath: 144:
profaning of it in harvest, 146, the special use to remember three benefits,
156, private exercises before and after the public, 157, 158 works forbidden
on the Sabbath, 162 whether all callings ought to rest, 306 609, etc. the
breach of it punished, 810 8^9, means for the sanctification of it. Ibid.
Sacraments, 30, 687, 825, in time of the Law had two ends, 133, neglect and
contempt punished with death, 787, sacramental phrases, why used. 788 We renew
our covenant so often as we come to the Sacrament. 478 Sacrilege of our time to
be spoken against. 749 Sadness, 29, not to be sad. 782 Saffron not to be
gathered on the Sabbath. 167 Salvation, 36, notes thereof, 171, the golden
chain thereof, 207, joy thereof how great, 293. See Joy. A desire thereof, 610
assurance, see Assurance. Sanctification evident tokens thereof, 13 241, 246,
247, it cannot be utterly lost, 245, how wonderful, 803, it must not be of one
part, 80^, it must be continual. 806 Satan is master of all sinners, ^9^,
their services to him, and their reward for their service ibid. Satan and his
practices, 35, 796, 55, ^11, ^12 in temptation, ^99* he is a Surgeon to cure
the faithful, 618, how to answer him in temptation, 111, 112, Satan and
melancholy disquiet afflicted souls, 86^, 868, how he fights, 90, his
policy 801, of diverse names given him in scripture. 845 Schism. 39, 37, 647,
796 Scorners, who are scorners. 623, 112, ^01 Scripture, a general rule
concerning it. 153 directions for reading of it publicly in the Church, 173,
privately every day, 174 general observations for it, 7^, abused, 757, the
certainty of it, ^71, scripture for a weak conscience, 854, ap^ similitudes
for all degrees therein, 844, why we profit not in them. 519 Secret corruption
threatens a downfall, 103, hinders success in good actions. 27, comfort for
Gods children when they feel it. 681 Carnal security. 46^ Security a
forerunner of gross sin, or of some cross, eue^ the causes of it, 30, how
dangerous, 274, 116, 659, 79^, in public calamities: 767: a sign of
security, 792, heresy or prophanenes like to folfow it. 586 Seeking of God.
836 Sermons, ^6, twice on the Sabbath. 563 Servants, their masters duty. 163,
177, their duty to their masters. 784 Shame and shamefastnes. 851 Shepherds
and heardsmen. 306 Sickness in mind how cured, 5, 794, all are sick, 793,
their impatiencie to be borne with: 7: rules for them: 34: to visit the sick:
275: what they should do in their sickness. 640, 715 Sign of grace, 170, how
it differs from a figure. 138 Silence in meetings not good, 5, not too
strict. 64^ Similitudes of things natural and better known applied to things
divine, and less known unto us, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18 20, 21, 29, 4^, 4^, 244,
245, 247, 262, 264 285, 613, 100, ^52, 162, 164, 166, 174 874, 875, 876, 877,
294, 265, 636, 640 651, 652, 655, 656, 659, 661, 673, 676 682, 685, 689, 693,
7^4, 710, 713, 717 752, 722, 776, 785, 79^, 793, 802, 809 813, 819, 822, 829
Simplicity godly. 715 Sincerity. 161, 209 Sin, to find out specialll
sins: 5: and to confess them: 10^: 484: cause of it within us, 30, in what
respect worldlings leave it: 616: fearful to make a sport of it: 626 secret
sins: 37: 262: 272: 610: 5^1: secret sins not repented of: 461: sins not
equal: 631: every sin has two reasons for it: 670: the death of it in the
faithful: 682: first motions of sin must be crucified: 467: particular sight
and loathing of special sins: 475: wisdom of Gods children to prevent sin:
514: of three things which may keep us from it: 697: two heads of many sins:
703 ripenes in sins: 712: four companions of sin: 7^0: the cause of the loss
of many blessings: 786: dominion of it: 527: 528: presumptuous sins: 852: to
leave sin and to repent: 85^: differ: 858: to leave it not sufficient: 304:
sin of apostacy, and five reasons to dissuade therefrom. 627 A marvelous
great prerogative to be freed from the bondage of sin, 90, we must deal with
our sins as the judge does with malefacters. 4^9 Singing of Psalms with
feeling. 30 Sleep, trial therein. 36 Slothfulnes. 1 Sobriety at all times
required, 769, 214, Society, 14, of the wicked ought to be shu^ ned, 610, 612,
^93, Gods children how sweet. 458 Sophistry of the devil. 734 Sorrow, two
extremities in it, 16, not to delay sorrow for sin, 29, worldly, 265, godly
sorrow, 282, signs of it, 284, it must be continued, 286, it is the way to
heaven, 285, foolishly put off. 95 Soul the consumption thereof, 4^7, starued.
846, 847 Speech, good in meetings required of duty, 647, to speak pleasing
things and serve the time. 750 Spirit of God comes by the word, 12, two works
thereof, 13, singularity of spirit, 37, religion unprofitable to those that
want the spirit, 241, precepts of not quenching the spirit, 242, testimony of
it, 875, of faith, 484, of cheerefulnes. 556 Spiritual man must have an
alteration, 42 Superstition, 35, 41, it breaks off love in all estates, 801,
popish superstition described. 345 Surmises evil against others. 263, 666
Swearing. 659, 790 Swine who be. 455
T
TO be taught of God, 469, temptation, 37, 702, 47, when and how it breeds, 39,
we must not yield in it, 865, 866, how to know whether we be tempted, 816,
why many are overtaken therewith, 300, how we conspire with Satan therein,
876, how God tempts us, 813 what it may teach us, 874, resistance of it a
sign of grace, 874, dispute not with Satan. 874 Terrors of mind sudden. 48
Thanksgiving, 812, of al sacrifices most acceptable, 40, 483, to God for
feeding our souls: 177: it was a chief exercise of David. 458, 459 How a
Christian may say unto the Lord, I am THINE. 449 Thoughts evil, resting in the
mind how dangerous: 267: why Gods children are often exercised therewith: 27^:
evil thoughts on the Sabbath deprive us of the fruit of Gods worship, 171, two
kinds of thoughts, 704, what Satan does suggest into men: 748: Conscience of
thoughts. 543 Thief on the cross: 794: notes and marks of faith in him. 693
Time, the ^ithe of it to Gods worship. 1^5 To redeem it for good meditations.
471 Tinder, the efficacy of it in our nature. 676 Traveling on the Sabbath.
167 Tree of life, Adam had it for a sign. 133 Troubles necessary to feel
them for four causes. 439 Two things sustain us in our troubles. 508 Trust.
29. to trust only in God. 494 Truth how we ought to speak it. 622 Truth and
peace go together: 728: how God punishes such as receive not the truth in
love, 802, 3. kinds of truths. 818
V
Vanity both of life and religion is deceit. 501 Virtue, two special fruits
of it. 260 Visitation of the sick. 275 Unbelief, the godly often troubled
with it. 95. why we see it not. 5^7. how it is showed us. 549 Ungodliness. 41
Unmercifulness how great a sin. 837 Unthankfulness, 41, punished, 269, cause of
it. 678 Use of the creatures. 41, 813 Vainglory. 518 Why God visits his
dearest sernants. 445 Visions how far to be believed. 41 Vows rash, 822,
what a vow is, 477, two things hinder us from holy vows, 478 to vow against
drunkenness. 479 Vows in baptism must be remembered. 477 against Whoredom,
Ibid. 41. Vows in holy purposes. 397 Usury. 41 Vulgus how it may be taken.
667
W
WAiting on God, properties thereof. 17 Wan^ to lament it in others. 457
Wantonness ends in wickedness. 727, 799 468 Watchfulnes, 703, 527, two causes
of watching over our hearts. 616, 304 Way, in it three things to be considered,
703, evil way, two things to be considered therein. 416 The way of lying what
it is, 411, why it is so called ibid. the good way must be chosen ibid.
Wearines in good things. 531, 453 Warfare of a Christian. 531, 29^, 298
Description of a wicked man, and why he is so called* 450, 451 Wicked, their
society to be avoided, 610 how they walk in sin and know it not 614, the
devil helps them in meditation, 463, punished. 699 Wickedness and
wantonness. 468 Wife, how the husband should govern her. 124 Will free, 525,
how accepted for the deed. 61 Wisdom how to hold it fast, 609, what it is,
625, 99, how the faithful are wise, 124 461, our own wisdom to be
suspected. 57 Difference between true and false wisdom. 414, 415 Wits, the
devil chooses the best for his service. 62 Witchcraft, 468, advertisement
against it, 42, how cured: 822: consulting with witches is to ask counsel of
the devil. 578 (581 Wonders to beware of. 822 Word of God: 649: 549:
preparation to hear it: 42: true arguments of Love thereto: 453: the power of
it: 282: 283 857: it is a treasure and hidden: 289: few love it therefore: 290:
wherefore so many neglect the word: 462: how it is found before it be sought:
291: famine of it: 791: love to it: 440: 5^4: 44^: it is necessary for safe
direction: 475. to keep it in a good conscience brings wisdom: 466: it
yields most profit, pleasure and glory: 457: whole felicity therein: 470
direction thereof safe: 475: why Gods word is wonderful: 410: it never
deceives: 501: hard to believe it: 508: six means to profit by it: 173. 174:
etc: with out it no faith: sacrament or repentance: 237: three questions of the
operation of it: 857: a good note of our love to the word wherein it
consists: 470: a true mark thereof, 471, general plagues for the contmpt
thereof. 513 Words idle and evil profane the Sabbath. 170 World: 43: their
judgment of the godly: 262: the love of it: 721: in what respect it loves
s^nne: 616: how far it favors the Gospel. 820 Works: 15: 826: two rules
of good works: (...) the reward is of mercy, not of merit: ^^7: motives
thereunto: 827: they are necessary for all: 828: works without warrant are
works of darkness: 475: why good works are to be done. 838 Worship, God
requires the use of the body as well as the soul in it. 808: 147: wilworship
condemned. 810, 826 Wrath, what sin brings i^^ 651 how to speak of the wrath
of God: 696 how great it is. 197
Y
YOuth, the sins thereof: 100: unbridled affections thereof, and how
dangerous: 636: 726: it is dissolute: 637: it being spent in vanity, commonly
ends old age in profaneness: 464: Satan labors especially to poison it:
653: it must renounce pleasure: 800: it is blessed of God. 465
Z
Zeal, properties of true zeal, and rules of it. 255. 256. 829. 830. 50. 542.
543 etc. trial of it. 653. 814. incident to all, 517. diverse kinds of it. 541.
zeal of the flesh. 46^.
FINIS.

