To the Reader.
THat which Hierom said was his condition in publishing of some of his labors,
do I now expect to fall upon me, i e. plu^imorum morsibus patere, to lie open
to many censures; I have ever thought my self below Envy, which being the
d^ughter of Pride (as S. Ambrose said) will not abase her self to l^ok ^n so
small a thing as me: yet because (as S. Ch^ysostome has observed) there are
some men (like Carrion Crows, that fly over fair Meadows and sit on Fenns; and
like Flies, which pass by sound flesh, and seize on Ulcers) fly over and
pass by men's better parts, and feed upon their Imperfections: I do therefore
emplore thy favor in ^e^ding these papers, that what Accidental defects o^
Erra^aes thou find therein, thou would reform with thy Pen, that the
Carrion Crows and corrupt Fl^es may not find^ whereon to full: If there be any
erroneous matter, thereof inform me, and I shall retr^ct it; for though I may
err, yet I will not be an Heretic; if any thing thou ^^ndes^ go^d, that
ascribe to the Father of Lights, to whose glory ^ daily profit I de^ote my
se^f, craving no retribution but thy prayer, for me, that whilst I preach to
others, I my self may not be a Cast away, so shall I be

Ever thine in Christ Jesus, F.B.

GREENES Mourning Garment, Given him by repentance at the funerals of Love,
which he presents for a favor to all young Gentlemen that wish to weane
themselves from wanton desires. R. Green.

Vtriusque Academiae in Artibus Magister. Sero sed Serio.

LONDON Printed by I. W. for Thomas Newman. 1590.

GREENES Mourning Garment.
IN the City of Callipolis seated in the land of Auilath, compassed with
Giho^ and Euphrates two rivers that flow from Eden, there sometimes dwelled a
man called Rabbi Bilessi, lineally descended from the seed of holy Sem, aiming
in his life to imitate his predecessors perfection, as he was alyed unto him in
parentage. This Rabbi Bilessi was a man upon whom Fortune had powered out the
Corn^copia of her favors, and prodigally had wrapped him in the vestment of her
riches, seeking as far to exceed nature in excellence, as nature had
ouer-reacht her self in cunning: For he was the chief G^^gamaster of the
whole City: aged he was for the Palm tree had displayed her blossoms on his
head, and his hairs were as white as the silk yt is sold in Tire, honor had
pitched her pa^^lion in his tresses, and the tramelles of his hair were full of
reverence, his countenance grave as became his years, and yet full of leuitie
that as the Eagle has talents to stricke, and wings to shadow, so his looks
carried threats to chastise, and favors to encourage. This old man being
thus graced by nature and fortune, has the gifts of the mind so in^erlarded
with the excellence of all virtues, that if Aristotle had been alive he would
have confessed this Rabbi to have attained unto the perfection of his summum
bonu^. Thus every way happy Fortune not content to enrich him with these
favors, that he might be the Phoenix of all ^^licitie, gave him by one wise
two sons iss^ed of such a tree as might discover the trypartite fo^^e of his
life.

The description of his Eldest Son.
THe Eldest whose name was Sophonos, was so behoulding unto nature for the
lyneamentes of his body, as he could not wrong her with any default of
cunning, for she had so curiously leueld every ly^^ as though she would present
virtue a subject wherein to flourish. His exterior proportion was not more
pleasing to the eye, than his inward perfection to the care, resembling the
Panther in excellence of hue, and the Siren in harmony of virtues, young he
was, for as yet the prime of his years was in the flower, and youth sat and
basted him Calendes in his forehead. But as the Synamon tree looks tawny when
he is a twigge, and the Halciones most black when they are most young: so
Sophonos in his tender years carried grave thoughts, and in the spring of his
youth such ripe fruits, as are found in the Autum of age: yet was he not
Morosus tied to austerne humors, neither so cinicall as Diogenes, to mislike
Alexanders royalty, nor such a Timonist but he would familiarly converse with
his friends, he counted Cato too severe, and Cassius too sullen, and both too
fond, not laughing once a year with Apollo, but houlding all honest and merry
recreation necessary, so it were not blemished with any excess: yet as he was
indewed with these special qualities, nature was spotted with some little
imperfections: the Phoenix amongst all her golden plumes may have one sick
feather, and yet a Phoenix: the purest Pome granates may have one rotten
kernel, and the perfectest man is not without some blemish, and so was
Sophonos: for as he was grave, wise, virtuous, and affable, yet he had that
fault which Tully called defectum Naturae, and that was cowardice, fearful
he was of his flesh, and thought it good sleeping in a whole skin, he
preferred the Olive before the sword, and the Dove before the Eagle, peace
before wars: and therefore giving himself to Marchaundize, he remained at
home with his father.

The description of the youngest son.
THe youngest, who was called Philador was so beautified with exterior favor,
that Natura naturans which the philosophers call the exquisite former of
features, seemed to set ( non vltra) on his liniaments. When Nature had cast
this curious mould, that she might triumph as the mistress of al perfection,
she infused such interior and vital spirits into this carcass, that it
seemed repollished with the purity of the senses. For Philador had so pregnant
a wit, and such a swift inseeing and reaching capacity, as it seemed the
graces in some Synod had powered out the plenty of their influence. Quick it
was and pleasant, fall of such witty facetiae and affable sentences, that
those Epithetons that Homer assigned to Ulysses, might very well have been
ascribed to Philador: he was courteous to salute all, counting it commendable
prodigality that grew from the Bonnet and the Tongue, alluding to this old
verse of Chawcer.

Mickle grace winnes he
That's frank of bonnet, tongue, and knee.
To court amongst the beautiful Dames of Callipolis, he had such a ready
insinuation of present prattle, powdered with such merry questions, sharp
replies, sweet tauntes, and delightful jests, that as he was an Adamant to
every eye, for his beauty, so he was a Siren to every care for his eloquence,
drawing women desirous of his company, as Orpheus the Bachanals with his
melody. Fit he was for all companies, as a man that had wit at will, his
countenance at command, and his thoughts in his fist. He could with
Cleanthes study with a Candle, and with Brutus determine in the night, and yet
with Salern^ say, Balnea, vina, venus, etc.
Haec nocent oculis sed vigilare magis.


With Diogenes he would cate Coleworts, with Aristippus delicates, with
Aristotle he would allow Materia prima, with Moses, that there was no forma nor
priuatio, but fiat. To be brief, he could cretizare cum Cretensibus, and pay
sterling where he had received money that was current: he contrary to the
disposition of his brother frequented such company as was agreeable, both to
his years, and his thoughts, spending the time as pleasant as his wit could
devise, and his pursse maintain, and would have done more if old Rabby
Bilessy his father had not ouerlooked him with a careful eye: but as the
Storke when he sees his young too forward to fly, beats them into the nest,
so Bilessy when he saw his son beginning to soar too high with Icaru^, he
cried to him, Medium tutissimum, with a fatherly voice, so reclayming him from
proouing too ravening. Philador feeling his father he is the reins of his
liberty with a hard hand, and that if he bated never so little, he was checked
to the fist, thought to desire that he might travel, and see the world, and
not to be brought up at home like a meacocke: finding therefore one day his
old father sitting alone in an Arbor, he began thus:

Philadors request to old Rabby Bilessy.
SIr, quoth he, when I consider with my self, what experience Ulysses got by
traversing strange Countries, what Aphorisms the Philosophers sought into, by
seeking far from home, I may either think your fatherly love too tender,
that limits me no further then your looks, or mine own ^olly great that covet
no further trauelles. Tully said, every Country is a wise man's native home,
and Thales Milesius thought, as the Sun does compass the world in a day, so
a man should cut through the world in his life, and buy that abroad with
travel, which at home could be purchased with no treasure. If Plato had lived
still in Greece, he had never fetched his strange hieroglyphics from the
Egyptians, if Aristotle had still like a my^her been stewed up in Stagyra, he
had never written his works De natura Animalium to Alexander: Travel (father)
is the mother of experience, and for every penny of expense, it returns home
laden with a pound of wisdom. Men are not borne to be tied to their Cradles,
nor ought we with the Tortoise to carry our house upon our back: the Egles no
sooner see the pens of their young ones able to make wing, but they pull
their nests asunder, and let them fly. What? Fortune hates meacockes, and
shuts her hand to such as fear to seek where she is: here at home I deny
not but I shall have wealth, but gotten by your labors, and lands purchased by
your travels, so like a Droane shall I feed on that honey which others have
brought home unto the Hiue: in Callipolis I may learn to traffic, and to
take a turn up and down the Exchange, I may for pleasure take a walk about
your pastures, and either with the hounde course the Heart, and with the hawke
fly the Phesant: recreations they be, and fit for such as think no smell
good, but their Countries smoke. But in traveling foreign nations, and
traversing the Paralels, I shall see the manners of men, the customs of
countries, the diversities of languages, and the sundry secrets the mother
earth ministers, I shall be able at my return with the Geographers to describe
the situation of the earth, with Cosmographers to talk of Cities, Towns,
Seas, and Rivers, to make report what the Chaldees be in Egypt, the
Gymnosophists in India, the Burgonians in Hetruria, the Sophi in Gretia, the
Druydes in France, to talk as well as Aristotle of the nature of beasts, as
well as Pliny of Trees and Plants, as Gesnerus of mineralles and stones: thus
wit augmented by experience, shall make me a general man, fit any way to
profit my Common wealth. Further, I shall have a deep insight into customs
of all countries, I shall see how the Gretians prise of learning, how they
va^^^^ Chivalry, and practice their Youth in both, so shall I taste of a
Scholar, and savor of a Soldier, able, when I return, in peace to apply my
Book, and in war to use my Lance. Seeing then (sir) I am in the prime of my
youth, living at home, only to feed your looks, let me not so idly pass
over the flower of mine age, but give me leave to pass abroad, that I may
return home to your joy and my countries comfort. Old Rabby Bilessy hearing
his son in this mind, began to wonder what new desire, to see strange
countries, had tickled his sons humor, but knowing young wits were wandering,
he began to reclaim him thus:

Rabby Bilessies answer to his son Philador.
Son, quoth he, thou see my years are many, and therefore my experience
should be much, that age has furrowed many wrinckles in my face, wherein are
hidden many actions of deep advice, my white hairs, I tell thee, have seen
many Winters, and further have I traveled then I either reaped wisdom or
profit. Son, as yet thou have not eaten bread with one tooth, nor has the
black Ox trodden upon thy foot, thou have only fed on the fruits of my
labors, and therefore do thou covet to taste of strange pleasures: But
know thou Philador what a long harvest thou should reap for a little
corn? What hie hazards thou should thorough for little amends? What large
prejudice for small profit, thou would say, Nolo tanti poenitentiam emere.
First, (my son) note thou art here in thy native country loved of thy
friends, and feared of thine enemies, here have thou plenty at command, and
Fortune daunceth attendance on thy will. If thou will be a Scholar, thou have
here learned men with whom to converse: if a traveler, and desirous to know
the customs and manners of men, here by Jews, Grecians, Arrabians, Indians,
and men of all nations, who may sullie descipher to thee the nature of every
climate, for the situation of the world, thou have Mappes, and may wander
in them as far with thine eye, as thou would repent to travel with thy
foot. Seeing then thou may learn as much in Callipolis as Ulysses found in
all his weary and dangerous iornies, content thee with these helps, and rest
at home with thine old Father in quiet, for (my son) in travel thou shall
pocket up much disparagement of humor, which I know will be greeuefull to thy
patience: thou must fit thine humor to the place, and the person, be he never
so base. If he wrong thee, thou must either bear his brave, or feel the force
of his weapon, thou shall be feign to content thee with the meridionall heat
that scortcheth, and pass thorough the septentrional clouds that freeze, often
in danger of thieves, many times of wild beasts, and ever of flatterers. In
Creete thou must learn to lie, in Paphos to be a lover, in Greece a
dissembler, thou must bring home pride from Spain, lasciviousness from
Italy, gluttony from England, and carowsing from the Danes. Thus (my son)
pack thee forth with as many virtues as thou can bear, thou shall
disourthen them all, and return home with as many vices as thou can bring.
Therefore rest thee from that foolish desire to travel, and content thee at
home with thine old father in quiet. All these perswasiue principles of the
old Rabby could not dissuade Philador from the intent of his travels, but that
he replied so cunningly, and so importunately, that the old man was feign to
grant, and bade him provide him all things necessary for his journey.
Philador was not slack in this, but with all speed possible, did his
endeavor, so that within short time he had all things in a readiness: at
last, the day of his departure came, and then his father bringing forth in
coin great store of treasure, delivered it unto his son as his portion, and
then sitting down with his staff in his hand, and his handkercher at his
eyes, for the old man wept, he gave his son this farewell:

Rabbi Bilessies farewell to his son Philador.
NOw my son, that I must take my leave of thee, and say farewell to him that
perhaps shall fare ill, yet before we part, mark and note these few precepts
which thy father has bought with many years, and great experience.

First (my Son) serve God, let him be the author of all thy actions, please
him with prayer and penance, least if he frown, he confound all thy
fortunes, and thy labors be like the drops of rain in a sandy ground.

Then forward let thine own safety be thy next care, and in all thy attemptes
foresee the end, and be wise for thy self.

Be courteous to all, offensive to none, and brook any injury with patience,
for revenge is prejudicial to a Trauailer. ^^ and passed up into the continent
almost a whole day without discrying either town, village, hamlet, or house,
so that wearied, he allighted and walked a foot down a vale, where he
descryed a Shepherd and his wife sitting keeping flocks, he of sheep, she of
Kids, Philador glad of this, bad his men be of good cheer for now (quoth he) I
have within ken a country swayne, and he shall direct us to some place of
rest, with that he paced on easily, and seeing them sit so me together, and so
lovingly, he thought to steal upon them to see what they were doing, and
therefore giving his horse to one of his boys, he went before himself, and
found them sitting in this manner.

The description of the Shepherd and his wife.
IT was near a thickie shade,
That broad leaves of Beach had made:
Joining all their tops so nie,
That scarce Phoebus in could pry,
To see if Lovers in the thick,
Could dally with a wanton trick.
Where sat this Swayne and his wife,
Sporting in that pleasing life,
That Corridon commends so,
All other lives to ouer-go.
He and she did sit and keep,
Flocks of Kids, and foul^es of sheep:
He upon his pipe did play,
She tuned voice unto his lay.
And for you might her Huswife know,
Uoyce did sing and fingers sow:
He was young, his coat was green,
With weltes of white seamde between,
Turned over with a flappe,
That breast and bosom in did wrappe,
Skirtes side and plighted free,
Seemly hanging to his knee.
A whittle with a silver chape,
Cloak was russet and the cape,
Served for a Bonnet often,
To shroud him from the wet aloft.
A leather scrip of color red,
With a button on the head,
A Bottle full of Country whigge,
By the Shepherds side did ligge,
And in a little bush hard by,
There the Sheapheards dog did ly,
Who while his Master began to sleep,
Well could watch both Kides and sheepe^
The Shepherd was a frolic swayne,
For though his parrell was but plain,
Yet done the Authors soothly say,
His color was both fresh and gay.
And in their writtes plain discusse^
Fayrer was not Tytirus,
Nor Menalcas whom they call,
The Alderleefest Swayne of all,
Seeming him was his wife,
Both in line and in life.
Fair she was as fair might be,
Like the Roses on the tree:
Buxsane blie^^, and young I ween,
Beauteous like to Summers Queen,
For her cheeks were ruddie hued,
As if Lyllies were imbrued,
With drops of blood to make thee white,
Please the eye with more delight,
Love did lie within her eyes,
In ambush for some wanton pryse.
A leefer Less then this had been,
Coridon had never seen.
Nor was Phillis that fair may,
Half so gawdie or so gay:
She wore a chaplet on her head,
Her cassacke was of Scarlet red,
Long and large as straight as bent,
Her middle was both small and gent.
A neck as white as Whales bone,
Compast with a lace of stone,
Fine she was and fair she was,
Brighter then the brightest glass.
Such a Shepherds wife as she,
Was not more in Thessalie.
PHilador seeing this couple sitting thus lovingly, noted the concord of
Country amity, and began to conjecture with himself what a sweet kind of
life those men use, who were by their birth too low for dignity, and by their
fortunes too simple for envy: well, he thought to fall in prattle with them
had not the Shepherd taken his pipe in his hand and began to play, and his
wife to sing out this Rondelay.

The Shepherds wives song.
AH what is love is it a pretty thing,
As sweet unto a Shepherd as a King,
And sweeter too:
For Kings have cares that wait upon a Crown,
And cares can make the sweetest love to frown:
Ah then ah then,
If Country loves such sweet desires do gain,
What Lady would not love a Shepherd swayne.
His flocks once foulded he comes home at night,
As merry as a King in his delight,
And merrier too:
For Kings bethink them what the state require,
Where shepherds careless Carroll by the fire.
Ah then, ah then,
If country loves such sweet desires gain,
What Lady would not love a shepherd swain.
He kisseth first, then sits as blyth to eat,
His cream and curds, as does the King his meat,
And blyther too:
For Kings have often fears when they do suppe,
Where Shepherds dread no poison in their cup.
Ah then, ah then,
If country loves such sweet desires gain,
What Lady would not love a shepherd swain.
To bed he goes, as wanton then I ween,
As is a King in dalliance with a Queen,
More wanton too:
For Kings have many griefs affectes to move,
Where Shepherds have no greater grief then love,
Ah then, ah then,
If country loves such sweet desires gain,
What Lady would not love a shepherd swain.
Upon his couch of straw he sleeps as sound,
As does the King upon his beds of down,
More sounder too:
For cares cause Kings full often their sleep to spill,
Where weary Shepherds lie and snort their fill,
Ah then, ah then,
If country loves such sweet desires gain,
What Lady would not love a Shepherd swayne.
Thus with his wife he spendes the year as blyth,
As does the King at every tide or sith,
And blyther too:
For Kings have wars and broils to take in hand,
When shepherds laugh and love upon the land.
Ah then, ah then,
If country loves such sweet desires gain,
What Lady would not love a shepherd swayne.
The Shepherds wife having thus ended her song, Philador standing by, thought
to interrupt them, and so began to salute them thus: My friends (quoth he)
good fortune to your selves, and welfare to your flocks, being a stranger in
this Country, and vncooth in these plains, I have stragled all this day
weary and thirsty, not having discryed town or house, only your selves the
first welcome obiectes to our eyes: may I therefore of courtesy crave your
direction to some place of rest, I shall for such kindness requite you with
thanks. The Shepherd starting up, and seeing he was a Gentleman of some
calling by his train, put off his bonnet and answered him thus: Sir, quoth he,
you are welcome, and such courteous strangers as your self, have such simple
swaynes at command with your looks in greater matters then direction of
ways, for to that we are by courtesy bound to every common Trauailer. I
tell you sir, you struck too much upon the South, and so might have wandered
all day and at night have been glad of a thicket, for this way there is no
lodging, but whereas me thought you said you were weary and thirsty, first
take my bottle and taste of my drink, scorn it not, for we Shepherds have
heard tell, that one Darius a great King, being dry, was glad to swincke his
fill of a shepherds bottle: hunger needs no sauce, and thirst turns water
into wine, this we earne with our hands thrift, and this we carowse of to
ease our hearts thirst, spare it not sir, there is more malt in the floor.
Philador hearing the shepherd in such a liberal kind of phrase, set his
bottle to his head, and drunk a hearty draught, thinking it as sauorie as
ever he tasted at home in his fathers house: well, he drank and he gave the
shepherd thanks, who still went forward in his prattle thus: now that you
have quenched your thirst for the way it is so hard to find, as how charely
soever I give you direction, yet unless by great fortune you shall miss of
the way, and therefore seeing it is night I will leave my wife and my boy to
fould the flackes, and I my self will guide you on to the view of a town.
Philador gave him a thousand gramercies, and excepted his gentle proffer, and
the shepherd he telling his wife where to fould, went with Philador, and as
they past down the way there was a pillar erected, whereupon stood the picture
of a Storke, the young one carrying the old, and under was engraven this motto
in Greek, (...) Philador demanded of the Shephearde what this picture meant,
marry ^ir quoth he, it is the representation of a Lombe, for here was buried a
lusty young shepherd, whose name was Merador: who having a father that was so
old as he could not go, was so kind to his old sire, that he spent all his
labors to relieve his fathers wants, nourishing him up with such fare as his
flocks could yield or his penny buy, and when the man would covet to take the
air even to this place from his lodge would Merador bring him on his
shoulders, resembling they say, herein the Storke, who when she sees the damme
is so old she cannot fly, the young takes him on his back, and carries him
from place to place for food, and for that Merador did so to his father, after
his death they buried him here with this picture: It was well done (quoth
Philador) but if I be not grievous in questions what monument is that which
stands on yonder hill, our way lies by it (quoth the shepherd) and then I
will tell you it. In the mean time look you here quoth he, and with that he
showed him a stone lying upon the ground, whereupon was engraven these words.

Non ridet periuria Amantum Jupiter.
Here was buried a shepherd, who in this place forswearing his love fell mad,
and after in this place slew himself, and was here buried, whereupon in
memory of the fact, the shepherds erected this monument as a terror to the
rest to beware of the like treachery. By this they were come to the hill where
Philador saw a Tomb most curiously contrived with stately architecture, as it
seemed some cunning caruer had discovered the excellence of his workmanship,
upon it stood the picture of a woman of wonderful beauty naked only, her
hair trussed up in a caull of gold, and one leg crossing an other by art to
shadow that which nature commandes be secret, in her left hand she held a
heart, where out issued drops of blood, in her right hand she held a pillar,
whereon stood a black Swan and the old verse written about.

Rara Auis in terris nigroque simillima Cigno.
Philador seeing by the beauty of the Tomb, that it was some monument of
worth, demanded of the shepherd who was buried there, at this the shephearde
stayed, and with a great sigh, began thus, I will tell you sir, quoth he,
here was intombed the fair Thessalian maid, so famozed in all writings under
the name of Phillis, for love she dyed, and since it is a wonder that weomen
should perish for affection, being as rare a thing as to see a black Swanne,
they have placed her here houlding a black-Swanne with the poesy, and since we
have yet a mile, and more to the place whether I mean to bring you, I will
rehearse you the course of her life, and the cause of her death, and so the
shepherd began thus.

The Shepherds tale.
HEre in Thessaly dwelled a shepherd called Sydaris, a man of mean parentage,
but of good possessions, and many virtues, for he was holden the chief of all
our Shepherds, not only for his wealth, but for his honest qualities: this
Sydaris lived long without any issue, that he meante to make a sisters son he
had, his heir, but Fortune that meant to please the old man in his age, even
in the winter of his years, gave him by a young wife a young daughter called
Rosamond, which, as she was a joy to the old Shepherd at her birth, so she
grew in process of time unto such perfection, that she was the only hearts
delight that this old man had. Rosamond went with her fathers sheeepe to the
field, where she was the Queen of all the shepherds, being generally called
of them all, Diana, as well for her beauty as her chastity, her fame grew so
great for the excellency of her feature, that all the Shepherds made a feast
at Tempe, to see the beauty of Rosamond, where all the Thessalonian Uirgins
met, decked in the royalty of their excellency, al striving to exceed that
day in outward perfection: gallant they were, and glorious, wanting nothing
that Art could add to Nature, filling every eye with admiration, but still
they expected the coming of Rosamond, insomuch, that one Alexis a young
Shepherd, who was the paragon of all proportions, above the rest said, that
when Rosamond came, she could not bring more then she should find: as he
spoke these words, in came old Sydaris, and after him his daughter, who
seeing such a company of bonny lasses, and Country swains in their bravery,
bewraied her modesty with such a blush, that all the beholders thought that
Luna and Tytan had iustled in her face together for preferment: every eye at
her presence stood at gaze, as having no power to draw themselves from such
an heavenly object, wrapped their looks in the tramels of her locks, and snared
them so in the rareness of her face, that the men wondered, and the women hung
down their heads, as being eclipsed with the brightness of so glorious a
Comet. But especially Alexis, he poor swain, felt in him a new fire, and
such uncouth flames, as were not w^nt to broile in his breast, yet were they
kindled with such delight, that the poor boy lay like the Salamander, and
though he were never so nigh the blaze of the bauine, yet he did not Calescere
plus quam satis. As thus all gazed on her, so she glaunced her looks on all,
surueying them as curiously, as they noted her exactly, but at last she set
down her period on the face of Alexis, thinking he was the fairest, and the
featest swain of all the rest. Thus with looks and chearing, and much good
chat, they passed away the day till evening came, and then they all departed:
Sydaris home with his Rosamond, and every man else to his cottage, all talking
as they went by the way, of the beauty of Rosamond, especially Alexis, who the
more highly commended her, by how much the more he was deeply in love with
her. The affectes of his fancy were restless, and his passions peremptory,
not to be pacified, unless by her perswasiue arguments, and therefore did
Alexis find sundry occasions to walk into the fields of Sydaris to meet with
Rosamond: often would he feign he had lost one of his Ewes, to seek amongst
the sheepecotes of Sydaris, and if Fortune so favored him, that he met with
Rosamond, then his piteous looks, his glaunces were glased with a blush, his
sighs, his silence, and every action bewrayed the depth of his passion, which
Rosamond espying, smiled at, and pitied, and so far grew into the
consideration of his affects, that the thoughts thereof waxed in her
effectual, for she began to love Alexis, and none but Alexis, and to think
that wanton Paris that wooed Enone was not like to her Alexis, insomuch, that
on a day Alexis meeting with her, saluted her, with a blush, and she abashed:
yet the swain imboldened by Love, took her by the hand, sat down, and there
with sighs and tears bewrayed his loves, she with smiles and pretty hopeful
answers, did comfort him, yet so, as she held him in a longing, and doubtful
suspense, part they did, she assure^ of her Alexis, he in hope of his Rosamond,
and many of these meetings they had, so secret, that none of the Shepherds
suspected any love between them. Yet Alexis on a day lying on the hill, was
said to frame these verses by Rosamond.

Hexametra Alexis in laudem Rosamundi.
Often have I heard my liefe Coridon report on a love day,
When bonny maids do meet with the swains in the valley by Tempe.
How bright eide his Phillis was, how lovely they glaunced,
When fro the Aarches Eben black flew looks as a lightning,
That set a fire with piercing flames even hearts adamantine,
Face Rose hued, Cherry red, with a silver taint like a Lilly.
Venus pride might abate, might abash with a blush to behold her.
Phoebus wyers compard to her hairs unworthy the praising.
Iunoes state, and Pallas wit disgracde with the graces,
That gracde her whom poor Coridon did choose for a louemate,
Ah, but had Coridon now seen the star that Alexis
Likes and loves so dear, that he meltes to ^ighes when he sees her,
Did Coridon but see those eyes, those amorous eielids,
From whence fly holy flames of death or life in a moment,
Ah, did he see that face, those hairs that Venus Apollo
Basht to behold, and both disgracde, did grieve, that a creature
Should exceed in hue, compare both a god and a goddess:
Ah, had he seen my sweet Paramour the taint of Alexis,
Then had he said, Phillis, sit down surpassed in all points,
For there is one more fair then thou, beloved of Alexis.
These verses do the Shepherds say Alexis made by Rosamond, for he often times
sung them on his Pipe, and at last, they came to the ears of Rosamond, who
took them passing kindly: for sweet words, and high praises, are two great
arguments to win women's wills, insomuch, that Alexis stood so high in her
favor, that no other Shepherd could have any good look at her hand. At the
last, as Fame is blab, and Beauty is like smoke in the straw, that can not be
concealed: the excellency of Rosamond came to the Court, where it was set out
in such curious manner, and desciphered in such quaint phrases, that the King
himself coueted to see her perfection, and therefore upon a day disguised him
self, and went to the house of Sydaris, where, when he came, and saw the
proportion of Rosamond, he counted Fame partial in her prattle, and man's tongue
unable to discover that wherein the eye by viewing might surffet: he that was
well skilled in courting, made Love to her, and found her so prompt in wit, as
she was proportioned in body, insomuch, that the King himself was in love
with her. The Noble men that were with him, doated upon her, and each envied
other as jealous, who should court her with the most glaunces, but all in
vain, her heart was so set upon Alexis, as she respected King nor Keisar in
respect of her Country Paragon, in so much, that the King returned home with
a flat denial. This caused not his Noble men to cease fro their suits, but
they daily followed the chase, insomuch, that the house of Sydaris was a second
court, some offered her large possessions for her dowry, other, as great
revenues, some were caualiers, and men of great value. Thus every way was she
hanted with brave men, that poor Alexis durst not come near the sight of the
smoke that came out of the chimney, past all hope of his Rosamond, thinking
women aimed to be supremes, that they prise gold before beauty, and wealth
before love, yet he houered a far off, while the Courtiers fell together by
the ears, who should have most favor, in so much, that there arose great
mutinies. Whereupon the King fearing some manslaughter would grow upon these
amorous conuents, and that Rosamond like a second Helena would cause the ruin
of Thessalie, thought to prevent it thus: he appointed a day, when all the
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, with the country swains of his land, should
meet, and there before him take their corporal oath, to be content with that
verdicte Rosamond should set down, which amongst them all to choose for her
husband, he to possess her, and the rest to depart quiet. Upon this they
were resolved, and sworn, and Rosamond set upon a scaffolde, to take view of
all, the King charging her to take one, and, quoth he, if it be my self
(sweet heart) I will not refuse thee. Here Rosamond dying all her face with a
Uermillion blush, stood, and viewed all: the King in his pomp commanded all
the Realm, and asked her if she would be a Queen, and wear a Crown: but
she thought over high desires had often hard fortunes, and that such as reached
at the top, stumbled at the root, that inequality in marriage was often
enemy to Love, that the Lion, howsoever yoked, would ouerlooke al beasts but
his phere, and therefore the mean was a merry song. Beauty, though she is but
a flash, and as soon as that withers, the King is out of his bias, I must be
loathed, and he must have another lemman. Then she looked lower amongst the
Lords, and considered how sweet a thing wealth was, that as riches was the
mother of pleasure, so want and poverty was a hateful thing, yet quoth she,
all is but trash, I shall buy Gold too dear, in subiecting my self to so high
a husband, for if I anger him, then shall he object the baseness of my birth,
the newenesse of my parentage, and perhaps, turn me home into my former
estate, then the higher was my seat, the sorer shall be my fall, and
therefore will I content me with mean desires, as I was borne, to low
fortunes. Thus she surueyed them all, seeing many brave youths, and lusty
Caualiers, that were there present for her love. But as she looked round about
her, a far off on a hill saw she Alexis sit with his pipe laid dawne by
him, his arms folded, as a man ouergrowen with discontent, and upon his arm
hung a willow garland, as one in extreme despair to be forsaken, seeing so
many high degrees, to snare the thoughts of his Rosamond, his looks were such
as Troilus cast toward the Greekish tents to Cressida, suing for favor with
tears, and promising constancy with coutinuall glaunces, so sat poor
Alexis, expecting when Rosamond should breathe out the fatal censure of his
dispayring fortunes. Rosamond seeing her lover thus passionate, comforted him
thus. She told the King that she had taken a general view of all the
Thessalians, that Love with her alluring battes had presented her with many
shows of Beauty, and Fortune had there sought to inuegle her with the enticing
promises of dignities: but sir, quoth she, my parents are base, my birth low,
and my thoughts not ambitious, I am neither touched with envy, nor disdain,
as one that can brook superiors with honor, and inferiors with love. I am
not Eagle flighted, and therefore fear to fly to nigh the Sun: such as will
soar with Icarus, fall with Phaeton, and desires above fortunes, are the
forepointers of deep falls. Love, quoth she, is a queasie thing, and great
Lords hold it in their eyes, not their hearts, and can better draw it with a
penseil then a passion. Helena shall be but a hang-by, when age ^its in her
forehead. Beauty is momentanie, and such as have only love in their looks,
let their fancies slip with time, and keep a calender of their affection, that
as age draws on, love runs away. Seeing then high estates have such slipperie
fancies, let honors and dignities go: Venus holds the needful, but not
necessary, and welcome the mean estate, and the Shepherds loves, who count
it religion to observe affection: and therefore seeing I must choose one, and
of al these but one, yonder ^its the lord of my love, and that is the young
Shepherd Alexis. With that he started up, and the King and all the rest of the
company looked on him, and saw him the dapperest swain of all Thessalia,
being content to brook the choice of Rosamond, for that they were bound
thereto by oath and promise, all accusing Love, that had made so fair a
creature look so low. Well, home went the King with his train, and Alexis a
proud man guarded with the Shepherds, went toward the house of Sydaris, where
with great feasting the match was made up. Alexis remaining thus the possessor
of the fairest Nymph of Thessalie, went to his cottage, determining with
himself when the wedding day should be. As thus he was about to resolve, it
chanced that Love and Fortune armed themselves to give poor Rosamond the
frumpe, and that on this manner. Alexis going one day abroad, met with a
shepherds daughter called Phillida, a maid of a homely hue, nutbrowne, but
of a witty and pleasant disposition, with her he fell in chat, and she, to
tell you the truth, with her Alexis fell in love. In love did Alexis fall with
this nutbrowne Phillida, that he quite forgote his ^^ire Rosamond, and Phillida
perceived that she had won the fair shepherd, left not to inuegle him with
her wit, til she had snared him in, that Alexis could not be out of her sight,
which at last came to the ears of Rosamond, but she incredulous, would not
believe, nor Alexis confess it, till at last Sydaris espied it, and told it to
his daughter, wishing her to cast off so inconstant a lover. But Love that was
settled in the center of her heart, made her passionate, but with such patience,
that she smothered the heat of her sorrows, with inward conceit pining away,
as a woman forlorn, till on a day Alexis ouerdoating in his fancies, stepped to
the Church and married him self to Phillida: which news for certain brought
unto the ears of Rosamond, she cast her self down on her bed, and passed
away the whole day and night in sighs and tears: but as soon as the Sun
gave light to the world, she leapt from her couch, and began to wander up and
down the fields, mourning for the loss of her Alexis, wearied at last with
tracing through the fields, she sat her down by Tempe, and there wrote these
mournful verses.

Hexametra Rosaemundae in dolorem amissi Alexis.
Tempe the Grove where dark Hecate does k^ep her abiding.
Tempe the Grove where poor Rosamond bewailes her Alexis,
Let not a tree nor a shrub be green to show thy reioicing,
Let not a leaf once deck thy boughs and branches, O Tempe,
Let not a bird record her tunes, nor chaunt any sweet Notes,
But Philomele, let her bewail the loss of her amors,
And fill all the wood with doleful tunes to bemone her,
Parched leaves fill every spring, fill every fountain,
All the meades in mourning weed fit them to lamenting.
Echo sit and sing despair in the valleys in the mountains,
All Thessaly help poor Rosamond mournful to bemone her,
For sh'is quite bereft of her love, and left of Alexis,
Once was she likte, and once was she loved of wanton Alexis:
Now is she loathed, and now is she left of trothlesse Alexis.
Here did he clip and kiss Rosamond. and vow by Diana.
None so dear to the swain as I, nor none so beloved,
Here did he deeply swear, and call great Pan for a witness.
That Rosamond was only the Rose beloved of Alexis,
That Thessaly had not such an other nymph to delight him.
None, quoth he, but Venus fair shall have any kisses.
Not Phillis, were Phillis alive should have any favors.
Nor Galate, Galate so fair for beauteous eiebrowes,
Nor Doris that less that drew the swains to behold her,
Not one amongst all these, nor all should gain any graces,
But Rosamond alone to her self should have her Alexis.
Now to revenge the periurde vows of faithless Alexis,
Pan, great Pan, that heardst his oaths, and mighty Diana,
You Dryades and watrie Nymphs that sport by the fountains,
Fair Tempe the gladsome Grove of greatest Apollo,
Shrubs, and dales, and neiboring hills, that heard when he swore him,
UUitnes all, and seek to revenge the wrongs of a virgin,
Had any swain been liefe to me but guileful Alexis,
Had Rosamond twinde Myrtle boughs, or Rosemarie branches,
Sweet Holihocke, or else Daffadill, or slips of a Baie tree,
And given them for a gift to any swain but Alexis:
UUell had Alexis done to have left his rose for a giglot.
But Galate nere loved more dear her lovely Menalcas.
Then Rosamond did dearly love her trothlesse Alexis.
Endimion was nere beloved of his Citherea,
Half so dear as true Rosamond beloved her Alexis.
Now seely less, hie down to the lake. haste down to the willowes.
And with those forsaken twigs go make thee a Chaplet,
Mournful fit and sigh by the springs by the brooks by the rivers,
Till thou turn for grief, as did Niobe to a Marble,
Melt to tears, pour out thy plaints, let Echo reclame them,
How Rosamond that loved so dear is left of Alexis.
Now die, die Rosamond, let m^n ingraue o'thy toombe-stone,
Here lies she that loved so dear the yongster Alexis,
Once beloved, forsaken late of faithless Alexis.
Yet Rosamond did die for love false hearted Alexis.
These verses she wrote, and many days after she did not live, but pined away,
and in most pitiful passions gave up the Ghost, her death did not only
grieve her father Sydaris, but was bruted abroad unto the ears of Alexis,
who, when, he heard the effectual essence of her loves, and entered in to
consideration of his wrongs, he went down unto the water side, and in a fury
hung himself upon a Willow tree. This tragic news came unto the ears of
the King, who being certified of the whole truth by circumstaunce, came down,
and in mourning attire lamented for the loss of fair Rosamond, and, for that
he would have the memory of such a Uirgine to be kept, he erected this
Toombe, and set up this Monument.

The shepherd had scarce ended his tale, but they were within ken of a town,
which gladded the heart of young Philador, for had not this History of
Rosamund made the way somewhat short, he had been tired long before: well, the
Town once descryed, yonder (quoth the shepherd) sir, is your place of rest, a
pretty City it is, and called Saragunta, good lodging you shall find, but the
people within it are passing false, especial (if a plain country man's
counsel might avail) take heed of the sign of the Unicorne, there sir is a
house of great riot and prodigality in youth, it is like rust in iron that
never leaves fretting till it be consumed: besides there be three sisters, all
beautiful and witty, but of small honesty: their eyes are hooks that draw
men in, and their words birdlyme that ties the feathers of every stranger,
that none can escape them, for they are as dangerous as the Sirens were to
Ulysses. Some says they are like Circes riches, and can turn vain glorious
fools into Asses, gluttonous fools into Swine, pleasant fools into Apes,
proud fools into Peacockes: and when she has done, with a great whip scourge
them out at doors, take heed Master (quoth the shephearde) you come not
there, unless you have the herb that Ulysses had, least you return someway
transformed. Thus Master I have brought you to the foot of the hill, now will
I take my leave and home to my wife, for the sun will set ere I can get to my
little cottage. The Gentleman gave the swain hearty thanks both for his
pains and his prattle, and rewarded him well, and so sent him away. The
shepherd gone, Philador takes his way to the City, and for that he had heard
him tell of the three sisters, he went to take up his lodging there, and so
make experience of the orders of the house, and qualities of the women: in he
rode and inquired to the place, and there alighted: these merry mynions seeing
such a frolic gallant come ryding in, thought that now their purses should be
filled if his abiding were long there, and his coffers full of any crowns, his
boy no sooner held his styroppe and he lept from his horse, but the Eldest of
them all, a gallant and stately Dame, came and saluted him, and gave him a
hearty welcome, showing him her own self straight to his chamber, where he
found all things in such order, that he thought he was not come into a common
I^^e, but some stately palace. Philador seeing so fair an Hoastis, and such
good lodging, said to him self the old text.

Bonum est nobis esse hic,
And so thought to set up his rest for a week or two, as he was in a
quandarie what he should do, came in the second sister more brave then the
first, a woman of such comely personage, and so sweet a countenance, that
Philador turned his doubt to a peremptory resolution, that there he would stay
for a while: this cunning Courtesan gave him friendly intertainment and a
welcome with a smyle, and a cup of wine to wash down, all which, Philador
took kindly and desired her they might have good cheer to supper, and to
promise that both she and her sisters would be his guests, a little entreaty
served, and she made faithful promise, which indeed was performed: for when
supper time came, and Philadors servants had served up the meat, in came (for
the last dish) the three sisters, very sumptuously attyred, but the youngest
exceeded them all in excellency, upon whom Philador no sooner cast his eye,
but he felt himself fettered. He that could his courtesy intertayned them
all as graciously, and welcomed them on this manner. Fair Gentlewomen (quoth
he) I would by outward demonstration you could conjecture how kindly I take it,
that all three of you would vouchsafe so friendly to come and hear a Gentleman
and a stranger company, now I have no other means to requite you, but
thanks, and such simple cheer as you have taken pains to provide, but where
so ever I come I shall make report what favorable intertainement I have found
in this place, and give me leave to seat you. The eldest straying back a
little, before she sat made this reply: I am glad sir if any ways we have
wrought you content, but sir I pray you think it not a common favor that we
use to every stranger thus to bear him company, for our custom is to
attend below, and to be seen little above, especially altogether, in such
equipage: if your fortune be better then the rest, then say you came in a
luckie hour: but we are not so blind but we can discern of colors, and
though they be both christallaine, yet discover a Diamond from a Saphir, and so
sir I will take you this night for mine Host, with that she and both her
sisters sat down to supper. Philador seeing these, thought on the three
Goddesses that appeared to Paris in the vale of Ida, and though he were passing
hungry with long travail, yet had fed his eyes with beauty, as well as he
did his stomach with delicates, so that every sense for supper time was
occupied. When he had well victualed himself, and that his belly began to be
full, he thought to try their wits with chat, and therefore began thus. Now
Gentlewomen do I find the old Proverb true, better fill a man's belly then
his eye, for your sauorie vituals has stayed my stomach, but mine eye
restless, takes such greedy survey of your beauties, as I fear by long
looking he will surfeit, but I am in good hope, if I should fall loue-sicke, I
might find you favorable Physicians. It is sir (quoth the eldest) a
dangerous disease, and we have little skill in herbs, yet in what we might we
would seek to ease your malady with weomens medecines: I pray you quoth
Philador, let me ask you all a question without offense, you may sir (quoth
the eldest) if it be not offensive, and how if it be (quoth Philador) then
pardon sir (quoth she) if we be as lavish to reply as you to demand. Howsoever
you take it (quoth Philador) then this it is, I pray you fair Ladies, are you
all maids, at this they blushed, and the Eldest made answer they were. And so
(quoth Philador) long may you not continue, for fear any of you should die
with her virginity, and lead Apes in hell, but it is no matter, maids or not
maids.

Been vixit qui been latuit, Caute si non Cast.
The Cat may catch a mouse and never have a bell hanged at her ear, and what
needs the hand a Taber when he means to catch the Hare, I believe and hold
it for a principle that you are all maids: now then let me crave so much
favor at your hands, as to tell me if you were to choose husbands at your
own voluntary, and it stood in your free election, what manner of husbands
would you choose: I (quoth the Eldest) would have one that were beautiful, the
second said, witty: the youngest, valiant. We have nothing to do (quoth
Philador) after supper, and therefore may it please you severally to show me
the reasons that do induce you to this choice. The Gentlewomen agreed to this,
and the eldest began thus.

The discourse of the eldest sister.
I Hope sir (quoth she) you expect no Rhethoricall insinuation, nor no curious
Circumquaque to fetch my exordium in with figures, only you consider I am a
woman, and therefore look for no more but bare reasons without Sophistry or
eloquence. Such Philosophers generally as have written de sensu as Aristotle
and other Naturalistes, or such Physicians as by anotomizing have particularly
set down the parts of man, affirm that the sight is the most pure, quickest,
and busiest of all the senses, and therefore most curious in the choice of his
object: and so precious a sense it is that nature to comfort it made all
things upon the face of the green, because the sight above all, delights in
that color. The eye being the suruayour of all exterior objects, pleases
himself in those that are most beautiful, and coueteth that every superficies
be fair and pleasing, commending it straight to the fantasy as a thing of
worth. For in flowers it allows with favor of the fairest as the Carnation,
the Rose, the Lyllie, and the Hiacynth. In trees the eye likes of the tail
Cedar, before the low Beech, and prayseth the stature of the Oak, before the
smalnesse of other plants. So in stones the Diamond is preferred before the
flint, the Emerauld before the Marble, and the Saphir highlier esteemed for the
hue, then the Porphuer for his hugeness: and so by consequence in humanie
creatures, love being of all the passions in man the most excellent, allotteth
her self to the eye of all the parts the most pure, thinking that the fight
will be soonest imi^agled with the fairest, and what fairer thing can there be
then beauty: so that love bringing a beautiful creature, presents it to the
eye, and that liking it for the property, conueyes the affect thereof to the
heart, and there is knit up the simpathie of desires. By these premises sir
then I infer that the eye is loves Cator, and who so pleases his eye
contenteth his affectes, then why should not I choose a beautiful man to my
husband, whose exquisite perfection every way may content my fancy, for if the
eye find any blemish in deformity, straight love begins to wax cold, and
affection to take his farewell. A beautiful man why he is a pearl in a woman's
eye, that the lyneaments of his feature, makes her surfeit with delight, and
there can be no greater content then to enjoy a beautiful and comely
personage: and in my opinion by so much the more are well proportioned men to
be loved, by how much the more they excel she deformed. In all things the
perfection of the inward qualities is known by the exterior excellence, the
rose being the fairest of flowers, has the most precious savor, the brightest
Diamonde the most deepest operation, the greenest herb the most secret virtue:
nature has ever with a provident foresight harbored the most excellent
qualities in the most beautiful carcass: Diogenes had a deformed body, so
had he a crooked mind: Paris welfauoured and full of courtesy. Thirsites ill
shapen, and none (says Homer) full of more bad conditions, Achilles comely and
courteous: if then sir, the more a man be beautiful, the more he is virtuous:
Gratior est pulchro v^niens e corpore virtus.


Let me have for my husband, such a one as may content mine eye with his
^^^utie, and satisfy my sight with his proportion.

The discourse of the second Sister.
I Can not deny (quoth the second) but beauty is a precious thing, and
Metaphusicall as being divinely infused upon man from above, but yet he that
commended it most writ upon it this distichon.

Forma bonum fragile est quantumque accedit ad annos,
Fit minor and spatio carpitur ipsa suo.
The fairest Rose has his canker, the brauest, branch his Caterpillars, the
brightest sun his cloud, and the greatest beauty his blemish. Helena had a
skar, Leda a wenne, Lays a spott in her brow, and none so fair but there is
some fault: but grant all these be graces, as Paris called Helens skar, Cos
amoris, yet at length she looking in a glass, sight to see age triumphant in
her forehead. There is none so fair but the sun will parch, the frost nippe,
the least sickness will change, or the least exterior prejudice blemish, and
then where is love that grows from the pleasure of the eye, vaded, and
vanished, and turned to a cold mislike. But give me that which is permanent
that feeds the ear with delight, and increases with age, and that is wit,
far excelling beauty, for by how much the more the interior senses are more
precious, and the gifts of the mind more excellent then the exterior organes
and instruments of the body, by so much the more is wit to be preferred before
the outward proportion of lineaments: wit is a simpathie of those perfections
that grows from the mind, and what can delight a woman more then to have a
man full of pleasant conceits, witty answers, and eloquent devises: were not
the Philosophers for their wits fellow companions to Kings. Ovid that was the
grand-master of love, wanne he not Corinna more with his wit then his beauty:
yes we find that as the herbs are more estimated by the inward virtue, then
the outward color: so the glories of the mind are more then the glosses of
the body, the Cedar is beautiful, yet less vaiued then the crooked Synamond,
for that men measure the pro^ite more then the proportion, weeds are gathered
for their oper^tion, not for their outward excellence, and such stones, whose
secret nature works most, are worth most, and so in men, Cicero was not so
anuable, but he was eloquent, and that pleased Terentia, Ulysses whom Homer so
highly commendes in his Odissea, wounded Ci^ces, not with his beauty, but with
his wisdom, in so much that he is called facundus Ulysses. How sweet a
thing is it when every word shall as a harmony ^all in a cadence to please the
ear, every syllable weighed with a pleasant wit, either turned is a grave
sentence, or a pleasant ^est, having that salem ingenij which intangleth more
the all the curious features in ye world: Pallas helped Pari^ more then Venus,
or else Helena had still remained in Greece, Mercury was fame in all Amors to
be Jupiters messenger, and to wi^ch more with his wit, then he could do with
his Dietie. Therefore seeing wisdom is so pleasing a thing, if ever I marry
God send me a witty husband.

The discourse of the third sister.
YOu have said well sisters, quoth the youngest, to have made a good choice,
both to please the ear, and the eye, in electing wit and beauty, as two
objects fit for such excellent senses, but yet to feed my fancy, give me a
man of valor, a Soldier, a Caualire, one, that with his sword dare
mainetaine right, and revenge wrong. What is it for me to pin a fair
meacocke, and a witty miski^p on my ^^eeue, who dare not answer with their
swords in the face of the ennemy? Shall I brave mine ennemy with beauty, or
threaten him with wit? He will then either think I bring him a fair fool, or
a wise Coward. Was it the wit of Alexander that won him so much fame, or his
courage? Was it Caesar's pen, or his sword that installed him Emperor? Paris
got Helena, but who defended her? Hector. When the Greeks lay before ^ro^
might not Andromache stand on the walls, and see Hector beating Achylles to
his tent, with more honor then Helena Paris ^etting in his silks. Yes, and
therefore she rested her whole estate in his prowess, and said: Tu dominus,
tu vir, tu mihi fraier eris.


The Oak is called Arbor Iouis for the strength, the Eagle king of Birds for
his courage, the Lion for his valor, the Diamond is esteemed for the
hardness, and men esteemed for their magnanimity and prowess. Hercules was
neither famoused for his beauty, nor his wit, but his valiant resolution, made
him Lord of the world, and lover of fair Deianira. Thesus was a Soldier,
and therefore Ledas daughter first liked him, and rewarded him with her
virginity. Tush, Venus will have Mars to be her paramour. Love cares not for
cowards, faint heart never won fair Lady, a man is the mark all we aim
at, and who is a man without valor? Therefore a Soldier for my money, or else
none.

Philador hearing them discourse so wittely, began to (...), and iumpte in
with them thus. Gentlewomen, so mary heads so many censures, every fancy
likes a sundry friend, and what is an Antidote to one, is an Aconito^ to
another: you like a fair man, you a wise, you a valiant, but tell me, what if
there came in a man endued with wealth, who like to Mydas could turn al to
gold with a touch, should he be thrust out for a wrangler, or might he not
rather displace beauty, disgrace wit, and put down valor: I speak this for
that I have heard them say, that women's eyes are of the nature of Chrisocoll,
that wheresoever it meets with gold, it mingleth with it, and their hearts
like the herb Aurifolium, that if it be not rubbed with gold once a year,
it dirth. I know sir, quoth the youngest, the conclusion of this induction, you
would with these enigmaticall allusions prove, that women are covetous, and
care more for an ounce of give me, then a pound of hear me. I deny it not sir,
but wealth and women would be Relatiues, and therefore sir, in our choice, Quod
subintelligitur non deest, when my sister chose a beautiful man, she meant he
should be rich, and when the second spoke of wit, she understood wealth, and
think you me so simple sir, that I would have a beggarly Soldier? No, no
sir, whether he be beautiful, wise, or valiant, let this stand for a
principle: Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere for as.


Gramercy for that, sweet wench, quoth Philador, give us one cup of claret
more, in vino veritas. I see women are no liers, they will tell truth in those
matters that require no conceited secrecy, so he drunk to them all: and for
that it was late in the night, they all took their leave of him, and went to
bed. Philador once being alone, began to commend his fortune that had
brought him to so good a lodging, where, with three such witty Wenches he
might make his dinners and suppers with pleasant chat philosophica conuiuia,
but especially he highly had in his thought the excellency of the youngest,
being already over the shoes in a little love forsooth, taking but a little
sleep for his new entertained fancy. The next morning he up very early, and
bade the Gentlewomen good morrow with a cup of hipocras, and after, calling
the youngest aside, where he courted her a great while, and at the first found
her coy, but at the last they ended with such a courteous close, that he
commanded his horses to be put to grass, intending for a time there to make
his residence. The Gentlewomen seeing the fool caught, thought to be quick
Barbers, and therefore spared for no good cheer, and the more daintely they
fared, the more he thanked them, so it might content his young Mistress, on
whose favor depended his whole felicity, he was not content in gluttony to
spend his patrimony, but sent for such copesmates as they pleased, who with
their false dice, were often sharers with him of his crowns. Thus sought they
every way to disburden him of that store with which he was so sore combred.
Tush his purse was well lyned, and might abide the shaking, and therefore as
yet he felt it not. The young Courtesan his Paramour, thinking all too little
for her self, began as though she had taken care of his profit, to wish
him, seeing he meant there to make some abode, to live with a less charge, and
cassier some of his men, which Philador seeing it would spare him somewhat, and
to please his Mistress fancy and for his own profit, put them all out of
service but one boy. The Seruingmen seeing the vain of their young Master,
were sorry that he took that course of life, to be ouer-ruled with women,
but his will stood for a law, and though it were never so prejudicial, yet
would he be peremptory, and therefore they brookt their discharge with
patience, but one of them that before time had served his father, hearing what
farewell old Rabbi Bileisi gave him, thought to take his leave with the like
adieu, and so being solitary with his Mistress at his departure, he told him
thus: Sir (quoth he) I see well if Ulysses stops not his ears, the Sirens will
put him to shipwreck, if he carry not Moly about him, Circes will inchaunt
him, and youth if he bush not at beauty and carry antidotes of wisdom
against flattery, folly will be the next Haven he shall be in. I speak this
by experience, as seeing the Sirens of this house following your ears with
harmony that will bring you to split upon a rock, and here I find be such
Circes as will not only transforms you, but so inchant you, that you will at
last buy repentance with too dear a price. Ah Master do you not remember the
precepts that your father gave you, especially against women, nay chiefly
against such weomen as these, whose eyes are snares, whose words are charms,
whose hands are birdlime, whose deceit is much, whose desires are insatiable,
whose covetousness is like the Hidaspis, that the more it drinks, the more
thirsty it is, whose conscience is like a Pomice stone, light and full of
hoales, whose love is for lucre, whose heart is light on your person, whose
hand heavy on your purse, being Uultures that will eat men alive. Ah master
be not blinded with a Courtezan, there are more maids then maulken, if you
will needs be in love, love one and marry, so shall you have profit and
credit, if not lie not here in a consuming laborinth, the idle life is the
mother of al mischief, it fretteth as rust does iron, and eats as a worm in
the wood, till all perish. Live not here Master without doing somewhat, Mars
himself hates to be ever on Venus lap, he scorneth to lie at rack and
maunger. Consider how the Caldes have set down in their writings, that from
the first creation of the world idleness was had in hatred, and man was
commanded to satisfy his thirst with his hands thrift. Adam tilled the earth,
and fed himself with his labors: Iuball exercised Music, and spent his time
in practicing the simpathy of sundry soundes: Tubalcaine did work in
mettalles, and was a graner in brass: Noe having the world before him for his
inher^^ance yet planted Uineyardes, tush, all the holy Israelites lived by
their labors, and men hated to have an hour idly spent: Traian numbered not
that day amongst the date of his life, which he had wholly consumed in
idleness. If then this lascivious kind of life be so odious, shake off these
Calip^es, travel with Ulysses, see countries, and you shall as he did return
to Ithaca with credit. Be a Soldier, win honor by arms: a Courtier win
favor of some King with service, a Scholar, get to some university, and for
a while apply your book, sit not here like Sardanapalus amongst women, be not
bewitched with Hercules, to spinne by Omphales side, leave all, yet may ye
stop before you come to the bottom, but if you be so besotted, that no
counsel shall prevail, I am glad that I may not see your future misfortunes.
Although these words of his man drive him into a dumpe, and made him call to
remembrance his fathers farewell, yet did he so doat on his young love, that
he bade his man be iogging, and so went down into the parlour to shake off
melancholy with company. Thus did Philador lie in the fire, and dally in the
flame, and yet like the Salamander not feel the fire, for this is an old
theological action.

Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati.
He counted fornication no sin, and lust, why he shadowed that with love, he
had a veil for every vanity, till that he might see day light at every hole.
While thus he lived in his iollitie, there fell a great dearth in the land,
corn was scant, and the poor were oppressed with extreme penury, and in
such sort, that they dyed in the streets. Philador heard by the chapmen how
the market went, and might perceive by the cry of the poor, what famine was
spread throughout the whole Country, but he had gold, and want could not
wring him by the ^ingar, the black Ox could not tread on his foot, and
therefore he stopped his ears, and proved half merciless: only his care
was to spend the day as deliciously, as he thought the night delightful,
having ever his paramour in his presence, whose finger was never far from his
pursse: tush, all went upon wheels, till on a day looking into his coffers,
he found a great want, and saw, that his store was in the waining: whereupon
he put away his boy, and sold his horses, he had enough of him self, and too
many by one. This yongsters pursse drew low, but as long as he let angels
fly, so long they honored him as a god. But, as all things must have an
end, so at last his Coffers waxed empty, and then the post began to be
painted with chalk. The score grew great, and they waxed weary of such a
beggarlie guest. Whereupon on a day, the eldest of them told him, that either
he must provide money, or else to furnish him of a new lodging, for there was
a great dearth thoroughout the whole country, victualles were dear, and they
could not pay the Baker and the Brewer with chalk. Upon this he went unto
his truncke, and all his rich apparel and iewelles walked to the Broakers, and
for that time he cleared the score. Which, when he had done, he got him into
his Chamber, and sitting down, began to call to remembrance the precepts of
his old Father: but as soon as his young Mistress was in sight, she banished
all such thoughts out of his remembrance. Long it was not before he grew
deeply indebted again in the house, and so far, that he had not
wherewithal to discharge it, and then very early in the morning the three
sisters came up into his Chamber, seized of his truncke, and that apparel that
was left: yea, so near they went him, that they took his Doublet that was on
his back. Philador seeing the cruelty of his hostess, and espetially, how
forward his Mistress was to wrong him, rose out of his bed, and putting on
his hose, sitting on the bed side, began thus:

Why (Gentlewomen) have I been so ill a guest, that I deserve such extremity,
or so bad a paie-maister, that so hardly you hold Bayarde in the Stable? Are
these the favors that I was promised at my first welcome? Are women's
courtesies such sharp showers? Now I do see, although too late, that all is
not Gold that does glister, that every Orient stone is not a Diamond, all
Drugges that are dear, are not precious, nor every woman that can flatter, is
not faithful. Did you at the first deck me with Roses, and now do you beat
me with Nettles? Did you present me with Perfumes, and now do you stiffle me
with Hemblocke? Did yoou say, I should never want, and now do you wrong me,
when I do want? Then must I brook it with patience, and accuse you of
perjury. I have spent my portion in this house, my revenues are all fallen
into your pursses, and now for a few pence will you seek my prejudice? Be not
(and with that he looked on the youngest sweet Mistress) so cruel, if you
cannot relieve me, yet entreat for me to your sisters, that they bereave me
not of my clothes, to the disparagement of my credit: remember the favors I
have showed you in my prosperity, and requite them with some courtesies in my
adversities, think what promises and protestations have passed between us.
No sooner had he spoken these words, but she cried out: What a beggarlie
Knave is this, quoth she, for to challenge promises at my hands? and for to
tell me of favors, If thou have spent thy money, thou have had meat, and
penny woorthes for thy pence. Could thou not (like a prodigal patch) have
looked better into thine own life, but thou must strain further then thy
sleeue would reach? Repentance is a whippe for such fooles^ and therefore,
were thy Hose off, thou should go in thy Shirte, unless that thou do
pay the uttermost Farthing. Philador hearing this, fetched a very great
sigh, and said, Is there any grief to a troubled Soul? Or any mischief
unto the mischief of a woman? Why? insatiable are her fetches. You have had
here my blood, will you have my heart? My living you have amongst you, and
now do you aim at my life. Fie upon such gripes as cease not to pray upon
poor Prometheus, until they have eaten his very entrails. What sister, quoth
the youngest, shall we suffer this Rascal for to ra^le against us, and be in
our debtes? Come, let us beat him out at the doors: with that they do call
up the Servants, and so thrust him out of the Chamber, naked as he was, and
beat him sore, in so much, that they did shut him out comfortless and
wounded. Being ashamed of himself, he durst not tarry in the city where he
was known, but in all the haste he got him ^ut of the Gates and hied him
far from the city, least that he should be discovered by some of his
acquaintance. In the mean while, the three sisters began for to count what
gains they had gotten by their nouice: and as they did smile at his pelf, so
they laughed at his penury, and wished that they might have many such
guestes. Thus were they very pleasant, whilst Philador like unto a poor
Pilgrim wandered on still upon his way, going now naked that ^arst came
riding with such pomp, and seeing himself to be in the depth of misery, that
thought no frown of Fortune could shake him from Felicity: after that he
had wandered a long while, being weary, hungry, and thirsty, with grief,
he sat him down by a Brooks side, where he did drink his fill, and for
very sorrow he fell asleep, and when he awaked, and entered into the
consideration of his present misfortune, looking upon himself, he melted into
tears, and at last burst forth into these passions.

Unfortunate Philador, and therefore unfortunate, because thou would neither
be directed by advise, nor reclaimed by counsel. Thy Father, whose years had
reaped much experience, whose white hairs were instances of grave insight,
whose age contained a multitude of reverent aduertisementes, foretold these
misfortunes, and with forepointing actions, gave thee caueats of these most
bitter Crosses. The Fawn does choose his ^oo^e by the lay of the old Bucke:
the Li^n does teach his young Whelps: and the young Eagles make not flight,
but as the old ones do learn them to carry wing, yet I instructed by my
father, both fly from nature as a haggard, and refuse nurture as one that
would ever prove ran^ning. Selfeloue is a fault that follows youth, and like
the ^^^ng of the Tarantala fretteth inwardly before it paineth outwardly: I
thought my fathers counsel to be good, but too grave for my young years,
quoth I, these precepts are too ^e^ere for the Kalendes of my youth. What? he
does measure my quick coals by his dead ^^^ders, and thinks that I should
^ee in the prime as he is in the wane. No, his Aphorifanes are to far fetched
for me, and therefore, Quae suprae nos nihil ad nos: What? I can see what is
good for my self, and also prevent a prejudice if it be imminent. Thus did I
flatter my self, until such time as too late Repentance has given me a
Mouening Garment. Oh now I do plainly see, when my Father gave unto me
precepts, he gave me more then pence, for counsel is more worth then co^^^,
but I did then ^ightly regard it, and therefore do I now heau^ly repent it. Ah
Philador, thou werte warned not to be prodigal, and who more riotous? Not for
to strain above thy reach, and yet thou wou^^est needs beyond the Moon. Now
dooest thou sorrow at thy ^osse, and they do smile that have gained: whilst
that thou had Crowns ^rammed in thy coffers, thou had friends enough at
commandment, and were able to take many flatterers with trencher-flies, thou
had such as soothed thee in thy follies, and fed upon thy fortunes, that
did ordinarily pay thee with a cappe and a knee, and that could trick thee
up with Titles of honor. But now (Philador) now that thou art in want,
they are all vanished like unto an empty Cloud: now that ther^ is no wealth
left, they are all lost, thy Gold is flowne, and they are fiedde: thus (^^ore
man) sit thou comfortless and friendlesse, having haught wit too dear,
and only gotten this verse for all thy gold: Nullus ad amissas ibit ami^^^
(...)


Thus as Philador sat debating with him self of his former Fortunes, and
present misery, such melancholy entered into his thoughts, that he feared to
fall in despair, and therefore rose up and went traveling into the Country,
passing over three or four days without any so^^e, that he was almost
famished, till at last it was his good hap to meet a citizen that had a
farm in the country, him Philador humbly saluted, and desired him of service,
the Citizen looking earnestly upon him, seeing he had a good face, p^ttied the
extremity of the poor young man, and answered him thus: My friend (quoth he)
thou ^eeest there is a general dearth over the whole Country, and many perish
through pe^^^^ie, ^^od is so scant that our servants are ready to famish, and
therefore every man coueteth to make his charge less, yet for that I pity
thy youth, and favor ^y personage, I will place thee in a farm house of mine
hard by adjoining, where thy labor shall be to feed my swy^e, wherein if thou
show thy self (...), thy recompense shall be the greater. Philador glad of
this, with tears in his eyes for joy, made this answer. Master (quoth he)
pe^^^ie is a sore pinch, and I think there is no sharper sling, then
necessity, therefore doubt not of my labor, for I will take any pains to
please, and brook any toil to content, and so I beseech you to favor me, as
you shall find me dutiful. With that the Citizen took him into service, and
sent him to his farm house, where Philador kept the swyne, but himself had
very hard fare, in so much that for extreme hunger he eat the husks with
the hogs, and yet had not enough to satisfy his stomach. Sitting down at
last, and seeing the hogs feed, having a husk in his hand, he wept and
blubbered out these passionate complaints.

Ah hunger hunger, the extremest of all extremes, now do I see that high
desires have low fortunes, that thoughts which reach at stars, stumble at
stones: that such as gase at the heavens, fall on the earth: that pride will
have a fall, and every fault is punished with the contrary. Ah Philador thou
that of late did swim in gluttony, art now pinched with penury, thou that
did invent what to eat, have not now any thing to eat: thine eye could not
be contented with mean cates, that now demisheth for want of any fare, where
be thy dainties, thy excess, thy wines, thy delicates, all past with
Philexenus, through thy throat, and thou left to eat husks with swine in the
deepest extremity of hungar: ah miserable Philador how art thou Metamorphosed,
where be thy costly abyliments, thy rich roabes, thy gorgeous attire, thy
chains and thy ringes, Omnia vanitas, they are ^allen to the Lombard, left at
the Brokers, and thou here ^ittest poor and naked brooking this misery as
patiently, as thou did spend thy goods riotously. But now Philador, enter
into consideration of thy hard hap, and see into the cause of thy froward
Fortunes. What shall I attribute it to my nativity, and say the Planets did
calculate as much at my birth? no, there is no necessity in their influence,
the stars determine, but God disposes, tush Sapiens dominabitur Astris.


What then shall thou accuse, ah nothing but the folly o^ my youth, that would
neither accept of advice, nor vouchsafe of counsel. Love Philador love, ah
no, shadow not vanity with the vale of virtue, not love but lust brought me
to this bane, wanton affectes forced me to this fall, and the pleasure of mine
eye procured these bitter passions. Beauty, ah beauty the bane that poysoneth
worse then the juice of the Baaron. Beauty the Serpent that infecteth worse
then the Basiliske. Beauty the Siren that draws unto death. Beauty that
leads youth captive into the laborinth, where rests that merciless
mynotaure. But rather fond man that delightest in such a fading flower, in such
a manifest poison, in such an open prejudice. The Dear knows Tamariske to be
deadly, and will not brouse on the branches, the mouse hates the trappe, the
Be hemlocke, the Serpent the Oliphant: but man runs greedely after that
which works his fatal disparagement. Ah Philador, did not thy father
forewarne ^hee of weomens beauty, did he not say they were Adamants that drew,
Panthers that with their painted skins do al^ure, if my son (quoth he)
thou surfetst with their beauty, thou drinkest Aconitum and so do perish.
Tush, but I little regarded his precepts, but now have I bought his axioms
with deep repentance: now do I find that their faces are painted sepulchers,
whereas their minds are tombs full of rotten bones and serpents, their brows
contain like the Diamant, virtue to relieve, and poison to kill, their looks
are like Calendes, that can determine no certainty, but as the leaf of the
Liquonico when it looks most moist, is then most dry, so when they smyle,
they imagine deceit, and their laughters are tempered with envy and revenge.
Ah Philador, what are weomens vows? words written in the wind: what are
their promises? carracters figured in the air: what are their flatteries?
figures graven in the snow, which are blown with the wind or melted with the
Sun: what are their loves? like the passage of a Serpent over a stone, which
once past can never be seen. They will promise mountains and perform
moulhilles, say they love with Dido, when they feign with Cresida, and follow
Demophon with Phillis, when they are more straggling then Luna, they have tears
at command as the Crockadile to betray, and smyles at voluntary to bewitch:
as long as thou have gould they are horse-leaches, and will not out of thy
bosom: but they hat^ an empty purse, as the Hiena does the sight of a man,
and will fly from thee when thou art poor, as the foul from the Faulcon. Ah
Philador might thou be the last who were intrapt by their love, it were
well, and happy were thou to be an instance to all other gentlemen, nay might
young youth bridle their follies by thy fall, they would ere day say to
themselves: Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.


But alas Philador, Troilus fortunes could not make others fear the like
foolish end. Though Theseus bought Helens love dear, yet Paris would not be
warned, but brought her home to Troy, so thou art but one Swallowe, and make
not summer: and young gentlemen will say, thy folly will not be every man's
fortune: but when repentance shall cover the^ with a Mourning Garment, then
they will say had I wist is a little too late. But Philador why sitst thou here
discoursing against love, against women, against beauty, leave the^ as refuse
and things too low for thy looks, and provide for thy body, for thou art here
almost famished, and sit eating of husks with the hogs, whereas the meanest
of thy fathers servants, his hynd Mercenaries has bread enough to eat, and
thou sit and feel the extremity of hunger. What shall I do, shall I
home? will my father vouchsafe of such a prodigal son, who in so short a
time has consumed so large a portion: can he look on him with favor that
has committed such folly, or receive him into his house, that has despised
his counsel. Ah why not Philador, love is more vehement in descent then in
ascent, nature will plead for me, if nurture condemn me, fathers as they have
frowns to chastise, so they have smyles to pardon: as they can lowre, so they
can laugh: and they are as ready to forgive, as thou to be penitent. Then will
I home to my father, and say to him, father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of
thy hired servants: with this he fell into bitter tears, and in this
resolution continued, and taking leave of his master hied him home toward the
land of Hauilath, by the way traversing many Countries, and noting the manners
of men, he saw how folly had wrapped many in the snares of weomens beauties,
amongst the rest one day as he lay in a thick to shrowde him from the heat
of the sun, hearing a great noise, he heard the complaint of a forsaken
lover, who exclaymed against ye cruelty of weomen, that denied to grant love
for love, and grew so far into passions, that pulling forth his rapier, there
he resolved both to end his love and his life. As he was ready to have fallen
on his sword, Philador stepped out of the thick, and caught hold of him: the
Gentleman turning his head, and seeing such a poor snake to hinder his
attempt, thought to check him with a frown: but Philador used these speeches
unto him. Sir, marvel not that so mean a man has dared to stay you from so
bad a deed, for to this I am compeld by manhood, desperation is a double
sin, and final impenitence has no remission. There is no hap past hope,
and therefore bewray your grief, perhaps I may persuade with reason, or
relieve with counsel, measure me not by my rags, ne estimate not my present
fortunes, but think as the fowlest weeds has often the most virtuous
operation, so the hoode makes not the Monk, nor the apparel the man, but I
may sooner apply a medicine for your meladie, then a seemelier Physician. The
Gentleman hearing such a sensible induction did straight conjecture that
whatsoever his present estate was, his nourture had been good, and there
looking him in the face, and leaning on his rapier, he began to discourse
unto him how long time he had been a votarie unto Venus, and a servant unto
love, that he was snared in the beauty of a young Damsel, who the more she
perceived him passionate, the less she was pitiful, and by how much the more
he sought to show manifest signs of his affection, by so much the more she
made little regard of his fancy: in so much that wearied with love, and seeing
no hope of favor, he thought with a momentarie death, to end those passions
wherein still to linger were worse then any death. At this Philador sell into a
great laughter, and after into these terms: what (quoth he) art thou so
mad to die for love, or so fond to grieve thy self at the frown of a
woman. I tell thee sir (quoth he) if thou knew how Fortune favors thee,
and how the stars agree to make thee happy, thou would count thy self
not the most miserablest, but the most fortunate of all men: ah my friend
did thou as well as I know the effects of love, and the wyles of women,
thou would say: O me felicem quantis me periculis fortunae mea eripuit.


If she be fair whom thou love, first consider that beauty is a flower to
day fit for the eye, to morrow withered and to be cast into the furnace:
that love which grows from such a fading object is momentarie, and subject to
every accident: besides beauty bringes with it suspicion, fear, and gelosie,
seeing every man's eye will feed on a fair face, and every man's thought will
seek to be partner in thy fancies, and how weak vessels weomen be,
especially if they be beautiful: I refer thee to Helena and Cressida. But
thou say she is coy, ah my friend, weomens faces are not ye Christals of
truth, nor their words Gospel, what she hates in outwardly, she likes
inwardly, and what she thrustes away with one finger, she will pull again with
both her hands: but as long as thou fawnest upon her, she will be froward, but
be but a little absent and she will wish thy presence: weomens thoughts are like
babies fancies, that will and will not, proffer them meat, and they refuse it,
offer it to an other, and they cry after it, so weane thou thy self but from
her for a while, and frequent the company of some other as fair as she, and
so either shall thou draw her on to be fond, or else by such absence, shake
off thine own folly. But suppose love and fortune favor thee, that thou have
her love, did thou know what a world of woes thou do enter into by
taking a wife, thou would say, fie on love, and farewell to weomen. Be she
never so fair, thou shall find faults enough in her face shortly to mislike:
and besides, the fairest flower has often the most infectious savor, the Cedar
is beautiful, but bears no fruit, the Christolite of an orient hue, yet of a
deadly operation: and so in the fairest proportion shall thou find often the
least perfection, and the sweetest face, the most prejudicial qualities. Who
was fayrer then Venus, but such a wanton as she would never want one.
Clytemnestra beautiful, but a giglot. I tell thee sir they are sullen, and be
Morosae, as was Zenia the wife of Antisthenes, or scouldes as she that
ouer-ruled Socrates, or froward, as Marpesia: deceiptfull, flattering,
contentious, sick with the puff of every wind, and lowering at the show of
every storm. These vices are insident by nature, though they seem never so
virtuous by nourture. Penelope had furrows in her brow, as well as she had
dimples in her chinne, Artemisia could frown, as well as she could smile, and
Lucrece though she were chaste, yet she could chyde. Sir, believe me, I speak
it by experience, if thou marry one fair and dishonest, thou weddest thy
self to a world of miseries, if thou marriest one beautiful, and never so
virtuous, yet think this, thou shall have a woman, and therefore in despite of
Fortune a necessary evil. At this period the passionate Gentleman put up his
Rapier into his sheath, and told Philador his medecin had somewhat eased his
malady, and his counsel mittigate the force of his dispayring passions, in
so much that his hot love was waren a little cold, and the heat of his
fancy was qualified with the lenatiue plasters that grew from his experience
advice. Therefore sir (quoth he) as the Date tree is not known by the bark,
but by the bloomes: and the precious balm not by his color, but by the
operation: so the outward show did not always manifest the inward man, but the
effects of his virtues: and therefore not measuring your parentage by your
present estate, nor your calling by your adverse fortune, I first (as one that
coueteth not to be ungrateful) render thanks for your Patheticall precepts,
and seeing you have kindly relieved me with your counsel, as Terence
wishes: Remeate adiuuabo:


I will supply your want with my wealth, and change your Fortunes with my
possessions, so that what I have in treasure shall be parted between us with a
friendly proportion. Philador gave him great thanks for his courteous proffer,
and told him, that such urgent haste of his journey called him away, as no
alteration of his fortune how beneficial so ever, might stay him. My way
(quoth he) is long, and my weariness great, I have many places to tread, and
many thoughts to meditate upon, I go laden with much sorrow, and little hope:
yet despair I must not, for though my miseries be many, and my friends few,
yet do say in my self to salve my passion: O passi grauiora? dabit Deus his
quoque finem.


Therefore sir, if my counsel have done you any comfort, or my words been
so effectual, as to mittigate your affects, think love has brought me to
these Fortunes, and therefore beware of the like follies, for he that shunnes
Scilla, and falls into Charibdis: that will accuse Circes for an
inchauntresse, and yet wed himself to Calipso, that thinks he may shake off
fancy for a moment, and entertain love for a month, shall tread upon glass,
and work himself into a laborinth of ouerweening fooleries. The sun waxes
low and my Inn is far hence, therefore must I lean you, and yet quoth he,
because I see you are willing to learn, take this scrowle as a president how
to eschew much prejudice, the only favor that I request, is that you will be
as ready to deliver precepts of virtue, as I have b^ene to set down axioms
to you, with that he gave him a paper soulded up, and shaking him by the hand,
bad him farewell. The Gentleman with great courtesy bad him adieu, and so they
parted, Philador toward his fathers, and he toward his lodging: yet longing
to see what was in the scrowle, he sat him down and unfolded it, where he
found these strange Aphorisms.

The Contents of Philadors scrowle, Ouidius. Hei mihi quod nullis Amor est
medicabilis herbis.
Love is a thing I know not of what it comes, I know not from whence: it
grows, but unknown whereof: goes we know not whether, and begins and
ends I know not which way: yet a passion full of martyrdom, misery,
grief, and discontent, having pleasures, but tempered with pains, and a short
delight mixed with a long repentance.

The Hidaspis has a fair skin and a sweet breath, but his sting is fatal,
gaze not too much least thou attempt to touch and so perish.

The Crockadile weeps, but then she works wyles, for her tears pretend
relief, but intend destruction, rue not her sorrows, least when she
rejoices, thou repentest.

The Sirens fits and singes in a calm bay, but her seat to ^^uironed with
rocks, beware of her melody, for if it please the ear, it pincheth the heart.

When the Tigre hides her claws, then she menaceth for her pray, see either
her claw open, or hold her at thy rapiers point.

The eye of a Basiliske is as bright as a stone, but as preiuditiall as a
thunder-bolte, whilst thou look with delight, it wounds with death, hold
thine eyes from such objects, least thou become an abject.

Cyrce^ amongst all her potions had one most sweet, and that turned men to
asses, taste not of that, without before thou chaw on Moly.

The Hiena will fawn on thee and smile, but if thou follow her, she leads thee
to a demie full of Serpents, either shun her flatteries, or wear the horn
of a Heart that drives away infectious vermin.

There are no Hawks sooner manned then they of India, none eat more, and fly
less, while she is full gorged she keeps the fist, but keep her low, and she
proves ravening, either be not a Falconer, or beware of such fowls.

Give a Cammell store of prouender, and she will strike thee with her foot,
beat her, and she will kneel till thou gettest upon her back, for such a
beast, wear a cudgel, then when thou see it her lift her heel, thou may
strike.

If these Aphorisms be too enigmaticall, become a Lover, and experience will
quickly set thee down a comment, but if thou can, find them out, and be
philosopher to thy self.

The Gentleman read these obscure principles, and perceived they all tended to
the discovery of women's qualities, wherefore he held them most precious: but
looking upon the page, there he perceived certain verses, which were these.

Philadors Ode that he left with the despairing lover.
When merry Autumn in her prime,
Fruitful mother of swift time
Had filled Ceres lap with store
Of Uines and Corn, and wickle more,
Such needeful fruits as do grow
From Terras bosom here below,
Tytirus did (...)
(...) A gaudy Chaplet on her head,
A Chaplet that did shroud the beams,
That Phoebus on her beauty streams:
For Sun it self desired to see
So fair a Nymph as was she,
For, viewing from the East to West,
Fair Galate did like him best:
Her face was like to Welkins shine,
Crystal brooks, such were her eine,
And yet within those brooks were fires,
That scorched youth and his desires.
Galate did much impaier
Venus honor for her faire^
For stately stepping Iunos pace,
By Galate did take disgrace:
And Pallas wisdom bare no prise,
Where Galate would show her wise.
This gallant girl thus passes by
Where Tytirus did sighing lie:
Sighing sore for love strains
More then sighs from lovers veins,
Tears in eye, thought in heart,
Thus his grief he did impart.
Fair Galate but glaunce thine eie^
Here lies he that here must die,
For love is death, if love not gain
Lovers salve for lovers pain.
Winters seven and more are past
Since on thy face my thoughts I cast,
When Galate did haunt the plains,
And fed her sheep amongst the swaines^
When every shepherd left his flocks,
To gaze on Galates fair locks.
When every eye did stand at gaze.
When heart and thought did both amaze.
When heart from body would asunder,
On Galates fair face to wonder.
Then amongst them all did I
Catch such a wound as I must die,
If Galate often say not thus,
I love the shepherd Tytirus^
It Is love (fair nymph) that does pain
(...) Say Galate, often smile and say,
Twere pity love should have a naie:
But such a word of comfort give,
And Tytirus thy love shall live:
Or with a piercing frown reply,
I can not love, and then I die,
For lovers nay is lovers death,
And heartbreake frowns does stop the breath.
Galate at this arose,
And with a smile away she goes,
As one that little card to ease
Tytir, paind with Loves disease.
At her parting Tytirus
Sighed amain, and said thus:
Oh that women are so fair,
To trap men's eyes in their hair,
With beauteous eyes Loves fires,
Venus sparks that heates desires:
But, oh that women have such hearts,
Such thoughts, and such deep piercing darts,
As in the beauty of their eye,
Harbor naught but flattery:
Their tears are drawn that drop deceit,
Their faces, Kalends of all slight,
Their smiles are lures, their looks guile,
And all their love is but a wile.
Then Tytir leave, leave Tytirus
To love such as scorns you thus:
And say to Love, and women both,
What I liked now I do loath,
With that he hied him to the flocks,
And counted Love but Venus mockes.
The Gentleman having read over this Ode, held it as a treasure, and went home
as free from Love as Tytirus was from affection, wondering what this poor
pilgrim should be that had given him such enigmaticall precepts, and praying,
that his fortune might be answerable to his qualities. Well, leaving him thus,
free from his passion, again to Philador, who wandering homewardes met with
many adventures, and saw many sights that had made him for to wonder at the
follies of the world, at the last he came within the sight of his fathers
house, the which he no sooner saw, but it was such a piercing object to his
eye, striking such remorse to his heart, that he sat him down and melted into
tears, thinking on the prosperity of his former estate, and the misery of his
present fortunes, as thus he sat in a deep passion, lifting up his eyes, he
saw where his aged Father was walking in the pastures to take the air,
although his adverse fall were a means to make him bashful, yet the sight of
his father kindled so the fuel of nature in him, that imboldned, he arose up,
and went toward him in those robes of distress, that he was banished out of
his Inn. And when he came near, naked, and poor, he went to his father, and
falling flat upon the ground, said: Father, I have sinned against heaven and
against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Old Rabby Bilessy
looking in his visage, and seeing it was his son, Nature that has never such
dead cindars, but there be Quaedam scintillulae certain sparkles of secret
affection, began to draw remorse into his face, pity into his heart, and
tears into his eyes, that, throwing down his staff, he stepped to his son,
and fell on his neck, weeping bitterly, and yet with such an ecstasy, as the
storm pretended both joy and sorrow, the one for his hard fortunes, the other,
for his happy recovery. Philador seeing his father thus passionate, took heart
a grass, and on his knee began thus.

Philadors submission to his father at his return.
I Know not (sir) what insinuation to use for your favor, so many, and so
monstrous are the number of my follies, nor can I plead any excuse, the
distress of my present fortunes are so manifest, only submission must sue to
nature for a pardon, and my repentant sorrows put in plea for some fatherly
remorse. Ah the wanton desires of youth, why they be like to the giddiness of
ravening Hawks, that bate at the sight of every bush: and the prime of young
age is as the flowers of the Pine tree, that are glorious to the sight, but
unsavory, and without smell. Uanitie is the mask wherein it marches, and
folly is the Page that waits attendance upon the actions of youth, so that all
his affects are slippernes, and the effects full of preiuditiall disparagement,
had I regarded the grave Aphorisms of your advised counsel on the golden
precepts delivered from the experience of your years, or the sweet actions
that drop as balm from the silver tr^sses of your hair, neither had my fall
been such, my distress so great, nor my fortune so miserable: fools are they
which say: bought wit is best, espetially, if it be rated at my prise.
Counsel is the sweet conserve, and advise the purest antidote: happiest is
he that is ware by other men's harms, and such most miserable, that are wise by
their own woes.

Piscator ictus sapit.
But hard is his hap that flies from the viper for her sting, that hates the
Tarantala, for that he has felt her venom, and unfortunate is that man that
can anotomise misery by his own distress: Ah father, had I reverenced my God
as I honored my goddess, and offered as many Orisons to his deity, as I powered
out passions for her beauty: the^ had I bin graced with as many favors as I am
crossed with misfortunes. But I thought he had not seen my faults, and
therefore went forward, in hue I thought their faces to be Adamants, their
beauties to be like the spots of devouring Panthers, had I deemed them to be
prejudicial Sirens, had I believed what I was foretold, Philador had been
less miserable, and more fortunate. But I counted their beauties
metaphisicall, their qualities divine, their proportions heavenly, themselves
Angels: I thought, as the Phoenix had none but precious feathers, as the Myrrh
tree has no caterpillars, as the Topas has no operation but excellent, so I
thought women to be such perfect creatures as had nothing in them but
supernatural. But at last I found the precepts of Rabby Bilessy to be
authentical, that as the Sinamon tree, though it has a sweet bark, yet it
has bitter leaves, and the Pirite stone, though it have one virtue has twenty
prejudicial operations, so women though they were never so beautiful, yet
were they the painted continents of flattery, of deceit, inconstancy, and the
very guides that lead men unto the pernicious labyrinth of endless distress.
Had I thought prodigality superfluous excess, my coffers had been full of
Crowns, and my heart void of cares, but I counted expense the empress of a
gentleman, and gifts the thing that graced a traveler: as Traian numbered not
that day amongst the date of his life, wherein he had not done something
worthy of memory, so I did hold that Nefanda dies wherein I did not triumph in
magnificall prodigality. Tush, I did think come to be called current a
currendo, gold, why I held it as dross, and counted it the deepest dishonor
to be counted frugall: Par symonia, why, quoth I it is pal^^y, and spa^ing it
is the badge of a pesant. The Chaldes in their Hierogliphickes described a
Gentleman with his hand always open, meaning, that to give was heroical. And
T^tus the Emperor said, give, if thou will be worthy the worlds monarchy: I
counted Cyancynatus the Dictator a fool for his frugality: I discommended the
small diet of Ca^^s Fabritius, and said A^athocles was base-minded that drunk
in earthen vessels. But for Lucullus, I commended his sumptuous fare, and the
prodigal thoughts of ^ulinus. Thus did I glory in excess, and thought not
that measure was a merry mean. While thus I flowed in the conceit of my folly,
I had many that like trencher ^^es waited upon my person, more for the hope of
my pursse, then for any perfect love. And as the Doves fl^cke where the house
is fair, so where the c^rrion is, thither such hungry Eagles resort. I can
best compare them unto empty Uesselles that have l^wde soundes, to painted
sheathes that have rusti^ ^^des, unto glorious flowers that have no smell, and
so they pretend much friendship, and contain nothing but superficial
flattery. For as soon as by drawing too o^te the well waxed dry, that my
pursse began with so many purging glisters to wax not only laxatiue, but
quite empty: then these insinuating hangbies flew away like vapors, and left
me unto the deep fall of my fortunes. This experience has poor- Philador
bought with much sorrow, and this Wit has he purchased with great
Repentance, in so much, that the loathsomeness of my faults is more then the
pleasure of my follies, and the hate of such vanities is greater then the
desire of such vices: (...), thou grant pardon unto him that is penitent, have
remorse upon him that groaneth under the burden of his sins, let thine eye
behold me, and thy heart pity the extreamitie of my dist^esse, And if my
offenses be so great that thou will not entertain me as a son, yet make me as
one of thy hired servants.

Rabby Bilessy hearing the penitent passion of his son, felt nature pleading
for the reconciliation of so sorrowful a Pilgrim, and therefore folding his
arms about his neck, and wetting his cheeks with tears, he made this
fatherly reply.

Rabby Bilessy his comfortable answer to his son.
I tell thee Philador, quoth he, though I have tears in mine eyes, yet I have
joy in my heart, these drops are not signs of sorrows, but instances of
content: I conceive as much pleasure in thy penitence, as I reaped grief at
thy disobedience. Ah Philador, had thou followed thy fathers counsel,
thou had not tasted of this care, and my precepts suncke into thy heart,
these misfortunes had not been rewards of thy follies. But to rub the sore
afresh, by recounting thy offenses, is but to make thee more passionate, and me
deeper perplexed. Therefore omitting all matters that are past, hoping these
protestations are not present sorrows, but continual penitence, I admit thee
into former favor, forgiving and forgetting the follies of thy youth. With that
lifting up Philador he embraced him afresh, covered him in a new robe, but
with a garment of black, as a man mourning at his hie faults and low
fortunes, and so carried him home to his house, where he commanded all his
servants to make preparation for a solemn feast, which was done with all
diligence. Sophonos being from home, and at his return hearing of this, had
his face full of frowns, and his heart of grief, that such a prodigal
unthrift sh^ulde so soon be reconciled, and so boldly entertained, in so
much, that discontent, he sat him down at the door, and would not come in.
News was brought unto Rabby Bilessy, that Sophonos was malecontent. With that
the old man stumbled out of the doors, and coming to his son, persuaded
him to think nothing if he graciously accepted of his penitent brother.
Sophonos with a lowering countenance made him this answer.

Sophones to old Rabby Bilessy.
Why sir, quoth he, have I not reason to frown when I see you so fond, and to
be deeply discontent when I see you so diverse in your actions? one while with
Diogenes to exclaim against pride, an^ straight with Aristippus to ^et in
surcoats of gold, aged thoughts should have but one period, and the
resolution of gray hairs ought always to be pere^ptory: has not Rabby Bilessy
inueighed against the follies of youth? and does he not now mainetaine it in
his own son? has he not said, that a prodigal man is like to a flood that
over flows, which inforceth prejudice to the whole plains? and now he welcoms
him with feasting that has spent all in riotous expense. What is this but to
foster folly, and to nurse up vice? I speak not this as envying my brothers
reconciliatio^, but that Sophonos has deserved more grace, and yet has found
less favor. Ah son, quoth Rabby Bilessy, have thou not heard that inexpected
cha^ces, are most welcome, that losses recovered are most sweet, that nature
likes best seldoms seen? Ah Sophonos, and art thou angry then with thine old
father, for entertaining his son that was lost, and is found, that was dead and
is alive again, for welcoming home of Philador, that returns back poor, but
penitent, crossed with ill fortunes, but careful for his faults, distressed,
but vowed to devotion, his mind has altered with a strange Metamorphosis, he
has (Sophonos) bought wit, and now will beware, better late then never:
Nunquam se^a est ad bonos mores via. Then (my son) if thou be son to Rabby
Bilessy, and be as kind as I am natural, ^eme, and welcome home with me,
thy brother Philador, greet him with favors, as I have done with tears, be
as glad to see him come home, as thou werte sorry to see him depart, and for thy
courtesy thou shalt have his brotherly love, and my fatherly blessing. With
that Sophonos was content, and his old Father carried him in: and then
Sorphonos as kindly as his stomach would suffer entertained Philador, and
then frolickely they went to feasting. Old Rabby reioicing at the great change
of his sons manners, in that he went forth full of vanity, and returned home
tempered with gravity: all the company were pleasant, and a feast it could not
be without music: the shepherds they came in with their Timbrelles and
Cimballes, and plaide such melody, as the Country then required: amongst them
all one swain slept forth, and as they sat, revived them with this song.

The song of a country Swain at the return of Philador.
THe silent shade had shadowed every tree,
And Phoebus in the west was shrouded low:
Each hiue had home her busy laboring Be,
Each bird the harbor of the night did know.
Even then,
When thus:
All things did from their weary labourlinne,
Menalcas sat and thought him of his sin.
His head on hand, his elbowe on his knee,
And tears like dew be drencht upon his face,
His face as sad as any Swaynes might be:
His thoughts and dumpes befitting well the place
Even then,
When thus:
Menalcas sat in passions all alone,
He sighed then, and thus he began to moan.
I that fed flocks upon Thessalia plains,
And bed my lambs to feed on Daffadill,
That lived on milk and curdes poor shepheardes gains,
And merry fate, and pyp'd upon a pleasant hill.
Even then,
When thus:
I sat secure and feared not fortunes ire.
Mine eyes eclipst, fast blinded by desire.
Then lofty thoughts began to lift my mind,
I grudgd and thought my fortune was too low;
A shepherds life it was base and out of kind,
The taulest Cedars have the fairest grow.
Even then,
When thus:
Pride did intend the sequel of my ruth,
Began the faults and follies of my youth.
I left the fields and took me to the town,
Fould sheep who list, the hook was cast away,
Menalcas would not be a country clown,
Nor shepherds weeds, but garments far more gay,
Even then,
When thus:
Aspiring thoughts did follow after ruth,
Began the faults and follies of my youth.
M^iutes were silk, my talk was all of state,
^ stretched beyound the compass of my sleeue,
The brauest Courtier was Menalcas mate,
Spend what I could I never thought on grief.
Even then,
When thus:
I lasht out lavish then began my ruth,
And then I feit the follies of my youth.
I cast mine eye on every wanton fa^e,
And straight desire did hale me on to love,
The lover like I prayed for Venus grace,
(...) ^he my mistress deep affects might move.
Even then,
When thus,
Love trapt me in the fatal bands of ruth,
Began the faults and follies of my youth.
No cost I spared, to please my Mistress eye,
No time ill spent in presence of her sight,
Yet often we fround^ and then her love must dye,
But when she smyl'd, oh then a happy wight.
Even then,
When thus,
Desire did draw me on to deem of ruth,
Began the faults and follies of my youth.
The day in poems often did I pass,
The night in sighs and sorrows for her grace,
And she as fickle as the britt^e glass,
Held sunshine showers within her flattering face.
Even then,
When thus,
I spied the woes that weomens loves ensues,
I saw and loath, the follies of my youth.
I noted often that beauty was a blase,
I saw that love was but a heap of cares,
That such as stood as Dear do at the gase,
And sought their wealth amongst affectious thares.
Even such,
I saw,
Which hot pursuit did follow after ruth,
And fostered up the follies of their youth.
Thus clogged with love with passions and with grief,

