GREENES News both from Heaven and Hell.

Prohibited the first for writing of Books, and banished out of the last for
displaying of Connycatchers.

Commended to the Press By B. R.



AT LONDON, Printed, Anno. Domini.

1593.

To the renowned Gregory Coolle, chief Burgermaister of the Castle of
Clonarde, Marquess of merry conceits, and Grande Caualier amongst Boune
companions and all good fellowship; At his chaste Chamber at Dublyne in
Irelande, B. R. sends greeting.
IT was my fortune (Sir) not long since, to travail between Pancredge Church
and Pye-corner, being somewhat late in the Evening, about an hour after the
setting of the Sun: and casting up mine eyes toward the skies, to behold
the twinkling stars that had then but newly discovered themselves, I might
see how the Man of the Moon was beating of his dog. This fearful aspect
did wonderfully daunt me, with doubt of some angry accident that might
shortly betide me; And I had not paced many steps, but directly in the path
before me, there appeared a most grisly ghost wrapped up in a sheet, his face
only discovered, with a pen under his ear, and holding a scrowle of written
paper in his hand. I crosled the way of purpose to shun him, but cross as I
could he was euer-more before me, that pass I might not, unless I should
run over him; I remembered my self how old Fathers were wont to say, that
Spirits in such cases, had no power to speak to any man, until they were
first spoken unto, and therefore taking unto me a constrained courage, I asked
him what he was, and what was his meaning to trouble me in my passage? who
answered thus. I am (said he) a Spirit, yet fear thou nothing, for my
coming is not to do thee any manner of harm, but to request a matter at thy
hands which thou may not denay me, for thou must understand, I am the
spirit of Robert Green, not unknown unto thee (I am sure) by my name, when
my wrytings lately privileged on every post, has given notice of my name unto
infinite numbers of people that never knew me by the view of my person.

The matter that I would request thee to perform, is the committing of these
papers to the Press, wherein, because I have there manifested the very drift
of mine own devise, I may therefore be the more sparing unto thee, in relating
the circumstances: this may suffice, nor fail not thou to do as I have willed
thee.

Heere-withall, popping the papers into my hand, I can not tell what account I
should make of his departure, or whether I might say he flew into the air, or
sunck into the earth, he was so suddenly vanished out of my sight, but I was
glad I was rid of his company, and homewards I went hastily to my
lodging: where calling for a light, I began by my self to peruse over these
lines, wherein I found such a mess of altogether, that I knew not what I
should make of the medlie.

Spyced it was here and there with Mystlin, a kind of grain that is made of
Knave and Rye, mixed both together, pleasurable it was in many places to be
read, and therefore fittest for melancholy humors. And bethinking me of my
friends to whom I might commend it, in the end I resolved of your own good
self: and the rather finding it to be delightful and pleasant, I thought it a
fit restoratiue to recall you from that melancholy conceit, that has so long
pe^erd your brains, for the loss of a Myll, dismembered and shalion down by
the rage of a pelting puff of wind, but such a paultry tempest should not
dismay a man of your spyrite, when it is well known to every Gamster, that
although the knave of trumpes be the second Card at Mawe, yet the fiue-finger
may command both him and all the rest of the pack. I could ^el you a tale
(Master Gregory) of an Ass, who leaving the place where he was first soald,
fortuned to stray into a strange Forest, and finding the beasts of that
Desert to be but simple, and had never seen the majesty of the Lyou, neither
had they felt the cruelty of the Tygar, nor had any manner of ways been
wronged by the oppressions of the Leopard, the Bear, the Panther, or any other
devouring or ravening beasts.

This paltry Ass, seeing their simple plainness, found means to wrap
himself in a Lions skin, and then with proud looks and lofty
countenance, raunging among the Heardes, he would stretch ou^ his filthy
throat, bellowing and braying (as nature had taught him) with so hideous and
horrible a noise, that the poor beasts that were within his hearing began
already to tremble and shake for fear. Then he began to tyrannise, commanding
what himself pleased amongst them, and no^ contenting himself with that
obeisance, which had been fit for an honorable beast, and more then was due to
an Ass, would many times take upon him some duties proper to the person of
the Lion himself: and in the end became a notable sheepe-byter, worrying and
deuou^ng whole flocks of poor sheep, that happened within his precinct or
jurisdiction.

The Wolf that had layne all this while close amongst the Mountains, and
having gotten understanding of the nature and disposition of this Ass, thought
him a fit companion for his consortshyppe, and combyned with him in such a
freendly league, that between them the one taking opportunity to filtch and
steal in the night, the other using his tyrany to raven and devour in the
day, the poor harmless Cattle that lived within their reach, were still
oppressed, and never free from perril. The Ass grew to that greatness that he
was surnamed (...) superbus, not that Tarquine that ravished Lucretia of her
honor, but it was that Tarquine that ravished a Church of her lyuings: and an
Ass I found him, and so I will leave him.

Peradventure (Ma. Gregory) you expected a wiser conclusion, but what would you
look to come from a man that has been lately so skarred with sprites, that
he has not yet recovered the right use of his senses: it may be true that
devils are afraid to pass by a cross, but I am sure knaves are not afraid to
shroude themselves behind a Condite. You may perceive (Sir) my wits are set
a wandering, but knowing your discretion enough to conceive my meaning, I will
trouble you no further, but with this abrupt conclusion will bid you heartily
farewell.

Your assured friend. B. R.

Greenes news both from Heaven and Hell.
BE not dismayed (my good friends) that a dead man should acquaint you with
news, for it is I, I per se I, Robert Green, in Artibus Magister, he that was
wont to solicit your minds with many pleasant conciets, and to fit your
fancies at ye least every qnarter of the year, with strange and quaint devises,
best beseeming the season, and most answerable to your pleasures. Having
therefore so many times taken the true measure of your appetites, and finding
the very height of your dispositions inclined to novelties that you might the
rather see how willing I am to satis-fie your humors, I have sent you here
the whole discourse of my adventures, what has be^yde me since I left the
terrestiall world, with a very true report of my infernal travails. Strange
per adventure for you to understand of, but for the truth of the matter, if you
shall any where stand in doubt, do but compare the place with that golden
volume of Legenda Aurea, or with the works of that famed wise man Sir Thomas
More, in his Book of Quoth I to your friend, and quoth your friend to me, in
his discourse of Eutopia, and The suppli^ion of souls in Purgatory. If your
conscience be yet scrupe^, and that these authentike authorities will not fully
satis-fie you: turn over then to the Remish Testament, and leaving the
Chapters and words of the Evangelists, look into the notes inserted by that
holy fraternity of I^suites, and that blessed brood of Seminaries, and tell me
then if you do not find matter seeming more incredible the^ any by me here
alleged, and yet I dare boldly avouch it, (and that without blushing) if you
consider duly of the circumstances, you shall find no less cause to laugh at
the one, then to believe the other. Having thus prepared your minds to receive
the certainty of my discourse, now likewise set open your ears, and be
attentive to the rest, for thus it follows.

When pittiles Death had sommoned my soul to leave his transitory estate,
infusing his frosty humor through all the parts of my body, leaving my
breathles corpse a fit pray for the sepulcher, my deceased ghost wandering now
to and fro in many obscure and unknown ways, desirous to find a place of rest,
at the length lighted into a straight and narrow tract, so ouergrowne with
briars and brambles, that there was almost no passage left, and as it should
seem unto me, did lead unto some ruinated place, where all former trade and
traffic was decayed, the solitarines whereof (me thought) was best befitting
and answerable to my humor: so that with great difficulty scratching through
the bushes, it brought me at the length to the foot of a mighty steep Hill,
whose height I was not able to discern, but by the vnpleasantnes of y^ path,
leading over monstrous Rocks craggy and ill favored to pass, I perceived it
to be the high way to Heaven. But should I tell you here the toil^ y^ I had to
climb this Mountain, with what labor I attained it, how many breathings I
took by the way before I could reach it, what folly I found in my self to
undertake it, and should I discribe unto you at large how many inconveniences
they find that undertakes this passage to Heaven, peradventure I might so
discourage you, that a great number would never desire to come there at all,
but this I can assure you for your better c^mforts, he that has a willing
mind to undertake this travail, let him bring with him a pottle of that
lyquour, which I was wont to drink with my Hostess, at the Red lat^esse in
Tormoyle street, and he shall find it more auailable in the furthering of
his journey, then a whole poke full of the Popes pardons.

When I was gotten up to the top of the Hill, after that I had a little
panted for breath, looking forward over a fair green, (as my high way did
direct me) I might perceive (a little distant from me) where two were fast
together by the ears: weapons they had none, more than their bare fistes, but
with them they laid on such load, that I perceived the one was loath to
remain in the others debt; and I somewhat mending my pace, when I was come
unto them, presently knew them both to be of mine old acquaintance, the one
Velvet breeches, the other Cloth breeches, between whom I had (not long
before) been a stickler, and (as I supposed) had taken a quiet order between
them for ending of all controversies. But they never the more upon my ariuall
forbear the one the other, but sometimes with downright blows, enough to
have feld a Bullock: sometime with bobbes at the lips, able to have dashed
out their teeth: otherwhiles lugging one an other by the ears, as if they had
committed some offense in listening too lightly after foolish speeches: but
Velvet breeches being in the French fashion, with a goodly lock hanging down
his left cheek, wherein Cloth breeches had so snarled his fingers, that when I
thrust in between them to have parted them, I could not pluck away his hand,
till he had plucked away hair and all that he had hold on: but having once put
them a sunder, I wild them as they were men to hold their hands, why (quoth. I)
do you know what you do, or do you remember the place where you are? I am
sure we be not far from Heaven gates, and if S. Peter should understand of
your abuse, I know he would commit you both to the Porters Lodge.

Velvet breeches, who was so far out of breath that h^e was not able to
speak, in the end, when he had a while well blustred and blown, delivered me
these words.

This base fellow, whom I have ever disdayned, and although in our late
controversy, by the inconsideration of a partial Jury, he prevailed against
me, sentence being given on his side, the which I think does encourage him
the rather in his presumption toward me, but I ever scorning him, denying him
(as he is) unworthy to converse with a Gentleman of any quallitie or trayning
up: and as I was yerwhiles quyetly, traveling all alone in a solitary muse,
how I might behave my self when I came to heaven, what salutations I might
render to the Saints, with what grace I might give the Baseles manes to the
Monarchs and great Princes that had reigned in the world, and what countenance
I might carry, best beseeming a Gentleman of my reputation and calling, newly
coming amongst so many strangers of al sorts, amongst whom I was altogether
unknown, and had no manner of acquaintance: as I was painfully and with great
difficulty traveling up the hill, in these and other like cogitations, this
barbarous fellow (whose rude training up has better enabled him to endure
labor and toil, than those that have lived in pleasure and ease) was followed
hard at my heels before I was aware of him, which in truth at the first made
me half afraid, but looking back and seeing who it was, my fear was turned
into disdain, and my stomach meruailously began to swell against him: but
without any mann^r of word speaking unto him ^ kept my way, the which being so
straight (as you know) that there can pass but one at once, I held him behind
me, till I was gotten up to the very height of the hill, where the passage
growing more spacious, he makes no more ado at the matter, but without any
word speaking steps before, and began to hold on his way as though I had been
but his man, and should have waited on him in his journey, the which my
stomach not able to brook, I reproved his malipart sauciness; he by and by
began to grow into comparisons, both of my self and my petegree, when it is
well known that Velvet breeches was never less than a Gentleman, and Cloth
breeches never more than a Pesant, and that I have ever kept company, where
such a vassell as he is might be ashamed to show his face, and therefore hold
it in great scorn, that he should take the way of me, now traveling to so
glorious a presence. Cloth breeches, that stood all this while with his head
hanging on the one side, and biting of his nether lyppe, answered him thus.

Velvet breeches, touching thy parentage, from whence thou art descended, what
thou may claim for thy gentilitie, and how thou maintaynest thy bravery,
thou know has been already sufficiently disputed upon between us, and by
the verdict of a Jury, (whom thou falsely accusest of inconsiderat partiality)
they have pronounced against thee, and decreede on my side, the which sentence,
until by a new trial thou do seek to auerre, thou art not till then able
to avoid: I will not therefore reitterate any matter already handled and fully
concluded, but briefly to answer thy passed speeches; Thou saydst thou were
half afraid when I first ouertooke thee, and I believe thee, for I perceived
by thy blushing, that either thou wast in doubt of a Cunstable, that had
followed thee with Hue and cry, or of a Bayliffe, with a writ out of the Kings
Bench, that had come to arrest thee: for the geneeositie thou braggest of,
acknowledging thy self to be a gentleman, and accounting me for a pesant, I
will deal plainly with thee in that: there be some fools in deed like thy
self, that do call thee Master Velvet breeches, and me they call goodman
Cloth breeches, but look generally through all the parts of England, and you
shall see the goodman Cloth breeches at home keeping good Hospitality, when
Ma. Velvet breeches sels away his house, or keeps his ^oores shut and will not
be spoken withal: for the company which thou say thou have kept, where I
might be ashamed to show my face, I know not where it should be, unless in some
brothel house, for those be the places where thou most frequentest: wherein thou
have truly spoken, for there in deed I would be much ashamed to be seen.

Velvet breeches would feign have replied, but that I interrupted him in these
words, saying.

My Masters and very good friends both, I perceive you have not read al my
books, which I have purposly put forth for the benefit of my Countrymen, for
if you had but seen Greenes farewell to folly, me thinks the bare title,
without turning over leaf to look further into the matter, might have moved
you to this consideration, that the very ground of your contention is mere
folly and flat foolishnes, the which you should have shaken hands withal, and
so to have bid it adieu, taking a fair farewell of a foul oversight: and in
one other of my books, called Greenes groats worth of wit: why, if there were
but one penny worth of wit equally distributed between you both, you would
never use to quarrel, and fall together by the ears as you travel by the way:
blame me not my good Countrymen, though I use bitter expulsiues to expel your
gross errors, you are traveling I perceive to a place of blessed peace and
quiet rest, what would you think to enter with malicious minds? no, the Porter
is circumspect, and can look narrowly into men's dispositions. You Master
Velvet breeches, you are a Gentleman, and you are bravely suited and gallantly
apparrelled, and you peradventure will look for pre-eminence: but do you
think that either your great title or gay clothes will any thing at all stand
you in steed: no, for S. Peter will first look into your Scutchine, (for if
you be a Gentleman you must show your arms, otherwise you will be proved but
a counterfeit, and those S. Peter cannot abide) and if there shall be found
either in the coat or crest, any bloody or cruel beast, any ravenous or
devouring foul, or any other mark or token whatsoever, whereby it may
appear, that your gentry has been advanced by rape, by raven, by bribery,
by deceit, by oppression, by extortion, by usury, by perjury, and to make
short, by any manner of fraud and subtlety, you are utterly undone, he will
lock the gates against you, he will not suffer you to enter. And you goodman
Cloth breeches, peradventure you under your simple attire and homely habit, you
think to find so much the more favor: but I can tell you it will not serve
the turn, for S. Peter shuts out forty false knaves in a year, that come
creeping thither in Friars coats, and Monks Coules.

I am now to put you in mind of an other of my Books, called Greenes never too
late: O that you had but read over that Book in time, but now it is too late
for me to spend such wishes, and more later for you to redress your former
follyes, it rests then that we agree together like friends, and travel
together like loving Countrymen: let us not exhibit complaints one against an
other, for you shall find we shall be charged with matters more than we shall
well be able to answer.

Truly said Velvet breeches, your wise persuasions has so lene^ed my
cholloricke passion, that I am contented for this present journey, to admit of
Cloth breeches as a companion: neither is it himself that I do so much
despise, but his mean and simple attire.

And for my part (answered Cloth breeches) I can be contented to pass in
friendly manner with Velvet breeches: neither is it his gay apparel that I
find fault withal, but with his several and sundry abuses.

Well then (said I) I hope the greatest part of this quarrel is at an end for
the present, let us therefore spend no longer time with any further
discoursings, but let us go forwards till we have likewise ended our journey:
agreede said they, and forwards we went, and within a very small distance we
might perceive a far more clear and radient light, than ever before till
that present we had beholden, and immediately we might behold the tops of the
heavenly buildings, whose towers and turrets were of such exceeding brightness,
that our eyes dazeled, we were not able directly to look upon them, which gave
us so great comfort, that we mended our pace, till at the last we might hear
the most sweet and delectable melody, that ever (I think) happened to any
ears, the harmony not possible to be descrybed; and by this time we were come
hard to heaven gates, which we found shut and fast locked, and at the least,
a hundredth persons walking up and down with sad and heavy countenances,
conferring now and then by two or three together, making semblance by the show
of their behavior, that their minds were perplexed with some distressed
grief. This spectacle made me wonderfully to muse, what I might think of the
matter, but we three holding still in company, passed too and fro by them, and
they likewise by us, we knowing none of them, nor they knowing none of us: at
the last meeting with one al alone by himself, whose grave and sober aspects,
argued a stayed and discreet mi^, and leaving my company for the time, I
singled him out, first saluting him with a courteous Conge, the which he as
kindly returning me again, I began in this sort to enter parle with him.

Courteous Sir, if a strangers boldness might not breed offense, I would
request you to satisfy me but in this one demand, I am (as you may perceive)
unacquainted in this place, having taken a tedious and painful travel, and
being now arrived, would be glad to understand the success of my journey, and
I have walked too and fro here this long hour, and in all this space I could
never see any one pass either in or out, nor the gate so much as opened, which
seems strange unto me, considering the multitude which do frequent the
place, it makes me jealous, that all should not be well in heaven, and to grow
into suspicion of I know not what.

Truly my good friend (answered this grave sir) it should seem you have never
bin a suter, that would look for so quick a dispatch, you have walked up and
down (you say) here this hour, and there be here in this company, that have
traveled as far as you, and have walked up and down here this month,
peradventure a year, perhaps more, and would be glad if they might be
dispatched yet, within a week, a fortnight, or a month, yea, if it were
somewhat more, they would be glad even then to come to an end of their suits,
you must (Sir) therefore be contented to stay your time, and to take your
fortune, and think you came hither in a very happy hour, if you be dispatched
in a quarter of a year. Your news sir (said I) does not a little make me
wonder, but if without offense I might but deal thus much farther with you,
what might be the cause I beseech you, that there is no more regard to ye
dispatching of poor suitors, that have labored and tired themselves many ways
in hope to have here a speedy release, as well for ye redress of their
sustained wro^gs, as also to be rewarded as they shall be found worthy by desert?
for as it is supposed, this is the very place where Justice and right is most
duly administered, and therefore is accounted the only place of comfort: but can
there be any greater wrong, than for a man to be so long deferred from his
right? or may there be a more discomfort, than when a man shall never hope to
have end of his suits?

My good friend (answered the other again) although you have said no more than
is truth: but yet something for your better satis-faction, your consideration
must have some referrence to y^ time, for one of y^ greatest matters that does
hinder the forwarding of suits at this instant, over it has been in times
past, is this, in brief to be spoken, the wonderful affairs of great
importance, and the continual business that S. Peter is daily troubled withal.

What I pray sir (said I) is S. Peter more troubled with business now, than in
times past he has been?

O sir (said the other) you need not doubt of that, and there is great reason
for it, that it can not otherwise be, he has so many affairs to run through,
that it is almost thought impossible how he should execute the^ all: for first,
he is Knight Porter here of heaven gates, a place I warrant you of no less
charge than trouble: then, he is constituted the Prince of the Apostles, and
confirmed in that authority by all the Popes, for this three or four hundredth
ye^re, so that all the rest of the Apostles can do nothing without his
allowance, and whatsoever he does they cannot recall: then, he is the Popes
Factor, and has the handling and determining of all causes for him, and has
lately bin more troubled with his brablements, for the holding up of S. Peter's
chair, than with all the Kings and Princes again in Christendom: fourthly, he
is the Master of the Requests, chosen by the papists to present their prayers
to God, and they ply him every day with more pelting peti^ons, than his leisure
will permit to look over in a month after: these and so many other matters
he has still to look into, that if he had six able bodies, they were all
too little to run through his other affairs.

Why (said I) this is a pitteous case, that having such infinite business, as I
perceive by your spceches, that he has not some assistants to help him, and
that so many troubles should not lie all on one man's neck.

Well (said he) this is your opinion, you have given your verdit, but have you
not learned, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos: it is not for you and me to say what
is beho^ull for Saints, they know their times and what is necessary, better
than you or I can instruct the^, and therefore not to be found fault withal in
any of their dealings.

These speeches ended, giving him great thanks for his courtesy, I returned
again to my two Companions, Velvet breeches and Cloth breeches, to whom I
imparted all my news, which struck them both into a sudden dumpe, but
especially Cloth breeches, whose trayning up had not been accustomed much to
give attendance, but it fell out, the very same after noone, that our Lady,
with the eleauen thousand Uirgins, had been walking in the garden to take the
air, and in her coming back, fortuning to look out at a Casement, she saw
us altogether as we were walking, and calling to her Gentleman usher, she
demanded what we were. He answered, that we were Suitors, which there did
give our attendance. Alas poor souls (said she) I did perceive in deed by
their pittious looks, that their minds were troubled with sorrow and grief,
and without any other words speaking, she departed, and causing all other
business to be for the time set a part, she took order that all suitors should
presently be dispatched.

The next morning something early, S. Peter came forth to a place where he
uses to sit for the hearing of causes, for that there is a custom, that if
any man do but once get his feet within heaven gates, he is never after
thrust out, and therefore he takes assured order that none may enter, but
such as shall be thought worthy for their deserts to continue the place. S.
Peter having now seated himself, order was taken that every suter should
successively be heard, he that had remained longest to be first called, and so
to proceed to the second in due course accordingly. I and my two companions
were the latest that were there arrived, and therefore the last to be
dispatched: the rest were examined by one and one, and that in such severe and
straight manner, that amongst every ten, there were scarce one admitted to have
entrance into heaven, the Articles that were objected against them, were too
many in this place to be rehearsed, but one thing I noted well, which was,
there were some that showed him the Popes Pasport, sealed with lead under his
privy Sygnet, but Jesus how S. Peter did be soole them, to show him such a
writing, being not confirmed under the hands of the four Evangelists, he
commanded them presently to avoid and to come no more in his sight.

Our turns being now come to say for our selves, I was the first of the three
that was called for: S. Peter demanded of me what might be my name, and what
trade I had ^sed. I told him my name was Robert Green, by profession a
Scholar, and commenced Master of Arts. O (quoth S. Peter) I have heard of
you, you have been a busy fellow with your pen, it was you that writ the
Books of Conycatching, but sir, could you find out the base abuses of a
company of petty varlets that lived by pilfering cosonages, and could you not
as well have discryed the subtle and fraudelent practices of great
Conny-catchers, such as rides upon footeclothes, and sometime in Coatches, and
walks the streets in long gowns and velvet coats: I am sure you have been
in Westminster Hall, where you have seen poor Clyants animated to commence
actions, and to prosecute suits till they have brought themselves to beggary,
and when all is spent they are turned off like fools, and sent home by
weeping-crosse. And let me see now if any of your Crosbyters, your Lyfters,
your Nyppers, your Foysters, or any other of the whole rabblement of your
Conny-catchers, call him by what name you list, be like unto these, or more
mischiuous in a Commonwealth. Then have you couitous Landlords, that does
daily so exact and cheat of their poor Tennants, that they were better light
into the laps of a Cutpurse, then to dwell within the precincts of a
Cut-throte. Yet have you a proud kind of Conny-catchers, that having but a
Penner and yn^rne hanging at his gyrdle, yet creeping into some great man's
favor to become his Clarke or Secretary, by plain Conny-catching, within very
few years, will purchase three or four hundred pound land a year.

Or should I put you in mind of great Conny-catchers, placed in Offices, who
are continually building of houses, and still purchasing of revenues to leave
to their heirs, perhaps by deceiving the Prince, or cossoning the Subject, but
how should they compass so great abundance, but by some practice in
Conny-catching: unless they be such which the Prince does favor, of whom she
bestows many gracious and liberal gyfts: I will not say there be
Conny-catchers amongst Clergy men, that will catch at a Benefice sometime
before it falls, and now and then by Simonie or other corruption having
catched two or three, can be contented likewise to catch their Tithes from
their poor flock, but very seldom to ^eede them, or to catch any of their
souls to the kingdom of heaven. But now my friend take this for your answer,
you that could busy your self to fable out so many follies without
indifferency, and to become a writer with such partiality, I must tell you
truth, heaven is no habitation for any man that can look with one eye and
wincke with the other, for there must none rest there that does use to haulte,
but such as be plain and true dealing people.

I would very feign have replied in mine own excuse, but S. Peter cut me off,
telling me that I was answered, and that having mine answer, I should
trouble him no further. And forthwith speaking to him that stood next me,
asked him his name. Who told him that he was called Velvet breeches. S. Peter
asked him further, what Countreyman he was. He answered an Englishman. I
cannot think you to be a natural Englishman, said S. Peter, for that I never
heard of any of your name in that Country. Yes Sir (if it please you) said
Velvet breeches, my auncesters came in with the Conquest, and my predecessors
have still continued Gentlemen both of Worship and credit.

As Velvet breeches had ended these words, there happened to come by, diverse
Princes that had reigned Kings of England, all of them mounted upon great
Horses, and had been abroad upon the green running at the King: the which
Princes being espied by S. Peter, he called unto the^, requesting them a little
to stay: and then poynting to Velvet breeches, he demanded if any of them did
know him, or any of his name remaining in England, in the time of their
reigns and governments? But they denayed altogether that ever they had seen
him, or ever known any Gentleman of English birth that was of his name.

Amongst this royal troop, was King Henry the third, and he confidently
protested, y^ in the time of his reign, there was no such person to be found,
for said he, I sent one of my servants to buy me a pair of hose, and he
returned again with a pair that was but of six shillinges and eight pence
the price: wherewith I being displeased, fold him that I would have had him
bestowed a mark of a pair, but he said there were none such to be got. But
as for the other Cloth breeches that stands by him, I know him very well by
his looks, he does so much resemble his auncesters, and has the very lively
picture of his Predecessors, the which were very honest plain dealing men,
without any manner of falsehood or deceit.

S. Peter thanked them of their pains, and thus the Princes departed, who
being gone, S. Peter said: You have heard Ma. Velvet breeches what has
passed, but yet because you have avouched your self to be a Gentleman, you
shall have this favor, we will examine some other of later time, who
peradventure may better call you to remembrance. There stood a Messenger by,
whom S. Peter willed presently to go fetch him some Englishman, that was but
of some ten or twenty years residence in the place, charging him to go with
speed, and to make a quick return. The Messenger met with a company that
were new come out of a Tennis court, amongst whom was a Mearcer, that within
these ten years had dwelt in Cheapside, him the Messenger brought to S.
Peter, who demanded of him, if he did know a Gentleman in England, called by
the name of Ma. Velvet breeches. Yea marry said the Mearcer, I know him to my
cost, for this is he that stands by me, and here I avouch it before his face
that he is no Gentleman, but a proud dissembler, and a cosoning counterfeite:
which if it shall please you to give me leave, I will prove before this holy
company. Saint Peter answered, we do not only give you leave, but also do
straightly command you to speak a truth, and withal, to speak no more then
is truth, what you are able to charge him withal, and how you are able to
pr^ue your words.

The Meareer answered, it were too much impiety for a man in my case to raise
any slander, or maliciously to accuse any man wrongfully: but to the end the
truth of the matter might more evidently appear, I must crave pardon a little
to use circumstances, and thus it follows.

About fourteen or fifteen years since, when I kept a shop in Cheapside,
following there my trade, this counterfeit Gentleman, being consorted with
another of his own pitch, a bird of the same feather, although in times past,
his only samiliaritie was but with Dukes, Earls, Lords, and such other
worthy personages, yet at this day an ordinary companion, and conversant with
every skypiacke, and himself of base condition and a common Cosoner, his name
called Silk stockings. These two copesmates, Velvet breeches and Silk
stockings changing their names, and because I will not be offensive to other
Gentlemen, that peradventure be of the same name which they then took to
themselves, I will call Velvet breeches master White, and Silk stockings, he
shall be master Black, these two counterfeite Gentlemen, master White and
master Black, providing themselves of Lodgings, Master White as it might be
in Graties street, in a house where no body knew him, and Master Black in
Fanchurch street, fast by where he found as little acquaintance. Their
Lodgings being thus provided, Master White walking into Poules, and seeing
many bills set up on the West door by such as wanted Masters, perusing the
bylles, and finding one that he thought might be ^itte for his purpose, (and in
truth was as cosoning a knave as he himself) gave notice under the bill, that
he should repair into Graties street, and at such a sign enquire for
Master White.

The fellow finding his bill subscribed, (and hoping now to light upon some
cheat) made have the same night, and came to Ma. Whites Chamber: Sir (says
he) I perceive your Worship wants a servant, and I am the party whose byll it
has pleased you to subscribe, and would be glad to take any pains with a good
Master to please him. O says Ma. White art thou he? Marry it is truth, I
would give entertainment to a young fellow that would be dilligent and
trusty. If it please you sir, (answered the party that meant nothing but
deceit) I will find you suerties for my truth and good behavior. Thou
say well (says Ma. White,) but trust me, I like thy looks well, me
thinks thou have a good honest face: but tell me if thou will be with me, I
must have thee immediately.

Sir, answered the other, if it please you to give me leave till the Morning,
that I might fetch some few things that I have to shift me withal, I will then
attend your Worship. Uery well (says Ma. White) thou may do so, and till
then farewell.

Here was now a Master and a man well met, for the Master meant to use his
man but to serve his turn for a point of cosonage, and the man meant to use
his Master, til he might find opportunity, to run away with his purse or
some other of his apparel, as he had done before with many others. But
according to appointment, in the Morning trusty Roger came, and was received of
his Master, who now with his man at his heels, frequented his friend Ma.
Blacks Chamber for a day or two, and the one of them could not be without the
others company, but master Black must dyne with master White at his Chamber,
and Ma. White must suppe with master Black in his Chamber: but the sequel
was, master White with his servant attending of him, walking into Cheapside,
and lighting into my shop, demanded of my servant where their Master was,
they told him that I was within, and that if it pleased him to have any thing
with me, they would call me. Yes marry would I (says he,) I pray you call him,
for I would speak with him. One of them telling m^ that there was a Gentleman
in the shop that would speak with me, I came down, and Ma. White first
courteously saluting me, began in this sort to discourse with me.

Sir, I am a Gentleman, belonging to such a Noble man in the North parts of
England, and in truth the Steward of ^ys house, and having now some business
for my Lord here in the ^itty, which I am come to dispatch, I must disburse
some money upon Ueluets and other Silks both for my Lords and Lady, and I tell
you truth they are such wares as I have little skyl to make choice of: the
matter why I was desirous to speak with you, was but to commit that trust to
your self which I durst not adventure with your man, and my request is, that
you would deal so honestly with me, as I might not be deceived in the choice
of my stuff, the bene^e that you shall win by your good usage is, you shall
receive ready money for such wares as I mean at this present to buy, and you
shall win a customer, of whom hereafter you may take greater sums.

I hearing his smooth speeches delivered under pretense of honesty, and seeming
otherwise, both in the show of his apparel and the dutiful attendance of his
man, that he had been (indeed) some Gentleman of reputation and good
reconing, desirous so much the rather to win such a customer, I told him that
I would not only fit him with as good stuff as any man in London should
show him, but also in the price I would use him with such reason, as in any
other place they were able to affoorde him: the which promise (in very deed) I
meant faithfully to perform.

Heere-withall, he drew a paper forth of his pocket, wherein he began to read:
Item for my Lord, two yardes and a half of Black velvet, and two yardes and a
half of Kusset velvet, for two pair of Hose, with three yards and a half of
Black sattine, and as much of Kusset for ^blyting. Item for my Lady, fourteen
yardes of the best three pylde velvet for a loose Gown, with six yards of
Peach colored satine for her Petticoate. Item for Mistress Jane and Mistress
Fraunces, fourteen yards of double tursfed Taffita for each of the^ a Gown:
and twelve yardes of Cornation satine for their Petticoates. To conclude he
brought me out so many Items, that the prices of the wares amounted to 50. and
od pounds, the which when I had sorted him out, he began to find fault that
they were too high rated, praying me to set my lowest price, for that he
meant to pay ready money, and therefore if I would not be reasonable, he must
be driven to seek some other shop. I very loath to drive him away, pitched
him a price so reasonable, as in truth I was not able better cheap to afford
them: but his mind being only set upon cosonage, told me he durst not
adventure to give so much money, and thus away he went.

Within an hour after, having sent away his man, which of purpose he had
done, he returned again, and finding me in my shop, he asked me if I would
abate no money in my stuff: I thinking he had been some other where to
cheapen, told him I had rated them so reasonably, as I was able to afford
them: and that I was sure, in any shop where he had since been, he had not
found the like wares for the like price.

Nay truly, (said he) I have not been in any other place to cheapen any
such stuff, but yet since I left your house I have disbursed forty pounds in
other things, that I have sent to my Lodging by my man: but I see you are
hard, and yet since I have dealt thus far with you, I will not forsake you,
come therefore and cut me of the parcels. The which accordingly I did, and
laying them together, he desired me to cast the total sum, the which as
before I have said, amounted to fifty and od pounds.

Sir, (said he) I must crave to borrow one of your servant, to help me home
with this stuff, and he shall bring you your money: I have sent mine own man
about business, and have no body here now to help me. Uery well Sir said I,
my man shall wait upon you, or do any other courtesy.

And thus willing one of my men to take up the stuff and follow him, I
delivered him a note what money he was to receive. Together they go, til they
came to his Chamber in Graties street, where they found his man remaining, who
(indeed) was somewhat perplexed in his mind, because there was nothing there of
his Masters, that was worth the carrying away, unless he should have taken
the ^tes from the bed, but that he deferred, hoping shortly to light of a
better cheat. But Ma. White demanded of his man, if Master Black had not
been there since his coming into the Chamber? who answered him no, neither
had he seen him all that day.

Master White with that seemed as though he began to be angry, and willed his
man presently to have to his Chamber, and to will him withal speed, to bring
away the two hundred pounds ye he was to receive, or at the least to bring one
of them with him immediately, for that he was to pay the greatest part of it to
one that stayed in his Chamber for it. Away went his man, and in the mean time
Ma. White entertained my man in this manner. He asked him if he had any
acquaintance with some Goldsmith in the row that was his friend, and would use
him well in the buying of a Chain and a pair of Bracelets, and not to exact
too much of him for the fashion. My man told him, that he was well acquainted
with two or three that would deal very reasonably with him.

He seemed to give my man great thanks, and ^old him, that so soon as his man
was returned, and that he had paid him his money, he would himself go back
with him and buy them. His own man in this mean space, was come to Master
Blacks Chamber, whom he found within, provided for the purpose, and was as
busy with a Standishe, a great many of papers lying before him, and a whole
set of Counters in his hand, as though he had been casting up of as huge
sums as the King of Spain receives from the Indyes. He had likewise lying
before him, a great bag full stuffed, making show as if it had been a great
bag of money: the sight whereof gave the Messenger so good an apetite, that he
wished the bag and himself ten miles out of the place. But doing his
Masters message, master Black answered him that he was so full of present
business, that he could not stir forth from his Chamber, but (says he, the
money thou see where it lies, and if he will come hymse^, or send some other
to tell it and receive it. Why Sir (said the other) if you please to deliver
me the money, I can carry it. Yea (says Master Black) but your Master I
perceive is in such haste, as he would be offended if you should stay the
telling of it, but go your ways to him and tell him what I have said, and
then let him choose whether he will come or send, the money is here ready for
him, away goes this companion, comforting him with the assured hope, that the
carrying of this bag would have lighted to his lot, which if it had, he meant
to have given them all the slyp, or his cunning should have failed him: but
coming to his Master, he told him that Master Black was so busy in his
Chamber casting up of accounts, that he could not come, but Sir (said he) the
money I did see lying upon the Table ready for you, and he would have delivered
it unto me, but that I feared my long staying in the telling of it might have
offended you.

Why then (said Master White) go your ways back again, and I will
entreat this good fellow to go with you, (meaning by my man) to whom he
further said: I pray thee my good friend do so much as go with my man, and
first pay your self according to your note, and help him then to tell out the
rest, for I think his skill will scarce serve him to tell so much money, and
drawing out of his pocket, a pair of gold weights, which he delivered to my
man, he said, and I beseech you if any part of his payment be in gold, see that
it be neither cracked nor crased, and that it carries weight, and I pray you in
your coming back again with my man, do so much as call in here, and I in
the mean time will dispatch a little business, and will by that time be ready to
go with you unto the Goldsmythes row, where I must crave your help for the
buying of this Chain and Bracelets. My man suspecting no manner of deceit,
went a long with his man: but coming to Master Blacks Chamber, there was no
body to be found, neither could any of the Servants of the House, say
whither he was gone, they saw him go forth but a little before their
coming in, but whither he went they could not tell; whereupon, they both
together returned back again to certify Master White: but coming to his
Chamber, he was likewise gone, and had carried away all the same stuff which
my Servant had left with him: my man beginning but now to suspect, when it was
too late, immediately caused the Officers to lay hold of Master Whites man,
and he was carried directly to the Counter, where he began to curse the
time that ever he met with such a service, con^essing that he had coosoned
many Masters before, but now he had met with a Master that had a little
ouer-reached him. But I upon my man's return, came to the places where they
had been lodged, and made what inquiry I could, but there was no body that
had any manner of knowledge of them, for they came thither not above four or
five days before, making show that they were new come forth of the
Country, and that the Carryers were not yet come with their Trunckes and
apparel, and during the time of their aboade, had never spent penny in the
house, for meat, drink, nor lodging, which made them protest, it should be
a warning unto them, what guestes they received again so long as they kept
house, and here was all the remedy that I could have, but in the end I had
intelligence of many other like coosonages, they had committed in the City,
and the parties were well known to be Master Velvet breeches and Master
Silk stockings, two counterfeit Gentlemen, that to maintain their bravery,
practiced such deceipts, and would not stick many times to rob by the high way:
for the Uarlet committed to the Counter, whom I could no ways charge with any
practice toward me, I released him freely, but for some other villainies
which before he had committed to others, and by himself confessed, he was
whipped at a Carts arse, and after burnt through the ear, and so commanded
to audyde the City.

Thus much (as it has pleased you to command me) I have truly signified,
what knowledge I have had of this Gentleman, Master Velvet breeches.

S. Peter standing up, said: Velvet breeches, thou have heard what has been
avouched against thee, and I wonder how thou durst presume to present thy
self in this place, knowing the guiltiness of thine own conscience: but I
see thou art shameless, and for such persons as thou art there is an other
place prepared, to the which thou must depart, for here thou may not bide:
then speaking to Cloth breeches he said, and for thee Cloth breeches, of whom I
have heard so good report, thou may seperat thy self from thy two
companions, and enter into that bliss, where thou shall find a happy reward
for an honest life; and thus as her was (by seeming) ready to depart, he espied
where one was coming alone by himself, within a little distance, whom S.
Peter perceiving to be a stranger, stayed his coming, and then speaking unto
him, he demanded of him what he was: who answered, that he was a poor
Yorkeshyre man, a Brick-layer by his occupation, and one that had truly
labored for his living all the days of his life: and (said he) our Master
Vicar has many times told us, that if we get our lyuings honestly with the
sweat of our brows, we shall go to heaven, and there we should have such
peace, such quiet, such joy, such comfort, such pleasure, and so many God
morrowes, I cannot tell what, but (of his words) I have had but an ill-fauoured
journey hither, and what I shall find I cannot tell yet.

S. Peter seeing his simplicity, said, why then my friend come and follow
me, and tell me hereafter how thou likest of the place.

The fellow hastily replied, saying: I pray sir let me first ask you a
question, do use to let any women come into Heaven amongst you?

Why not (said Saint Peter) what should make thee to doubt of that?

Why then I pray sir (said the other) did there not a woman come hither about
a six weeks a go, with a bleare eye, a snottie nose, a blabber lip, a
stinking breath, her voice was very shrill, and her speech thick and short.

But how do thou call her name (said S. Peter) whom thou have described,
with so many lovely tokens?

Her name (said the other) is called Margery Sweet, but yet more oftener
called by the name of Mannerly Margery.

Why she is in heaven (said S. Peter) and if thou have any thing to say to
her, thou may there find^ her?

Mary God bless me from thence (said the other) if she be there, I know her
fashions too well, to come any more where she is, she was my wife, and I was
married to her sixteen or seventeen years, and I faith all heaven would be
too little for her and me, and if we should once meet again, but I am now
rid of her, and I hope I will keep me so, she shall not cast it in my teeth,
that I was so far in love with her to follow her, as she has many times done:
telling me, that if I had not been she might have had a Minstrell, that would
have got more money in a week with his Fiddle, than I could get in a month,
with laying of Brick.

S. Peter, with the rest of the company, hearing the mad disposition of the
fellow, departed, leaving behind him, my self, Velvet breeches, and this
Brick-layer, who forsook to go into heaven because his wife was there; you
may easily guess, Velvet breeches and I were perplexed with sorrow enough, but
it was too late now for us to bethink our selves what we should have done,
and rested only for us to determyne what we must do, and the further we
found our selves bereaved of all possibility, to recover again what we had
lost, the nearer approached the horror of our grief and torment: but we had
received our final sentence, and there was no place longer for us to stay in,
the comfort that was left us, was to see if we could find means to get
into Purgatory, hoping there to find some release, by the prayers and
charitable devotions of good people, and with this resolution we set forward of
our journey: the Brick-layer ouertaking us, desired us to accept of his
company, protesting that he would be a partaker of our fortunes, whatsoever did
betide us.

Velvet breeches demanded of him what was his name: The other told him that
before he was married, they called him Ruffling Richard, but after that he was
married, they never used better addition than plain Dick. Truly friend
Richard (said Velvet breeches) me thinks you are too plain, and more simple,
to forsake heaven because your wife is there. I pray you sir (said Richard)
were you ever married? Yes mary was I, (said Velvet breeches) but what of
that? I do not understand you (said Richard) for I demand of you, if ever
you had a wife? And I tell thee I had a wife, (said Velvet breeches) why do
thou ask me that? Good Lord (said Richard) I never heard a wise man make so
foolish an answer, for I ask you if you were married? and you say yes: and
when I demand if ever you had a wife, you answer, I mary had I, and what
then? And do thou call that a foolish answer (said Velvet breeches) what,
would thou have me say, yes foorsooth? No sir, no, (said Richard) but I
will teach you some wit how to answer to such a question; when a man does
ask you if you have a wife, you must say, yes I thank God, or, yes I cry God
mercy, for so a man shall directly understand you: for if you say, yes I thank
God, by that we may understand you have a good wife, for the which you are
bound to thank God highly, because few men does happen of the like: but if
your auns were be, yes I cry God mercy, Sub intelegitur, such a wife as mine
was, and then you would never have accounted me simple, to leave heaven to
^hunne her company, because a man shall live more quietly amongst all the
diuelles of hell, than it is possible for him to do, that lights on such a
wife.

Hearing these pleasant speeches in this manner delivered by Richard, I could
not choose but smile, notwithstanding my cause of grief: and taking it to be
a benefit of fortune, that had vouchsafed to favor us with the company of this
merry conceited Brick-layer, whereby to beguile our pensive thoughts with his
pleasant discourses, in this our tedious travel. I questioned with him of his
wife, what she was when he married her, whether a widdowe or a maid, by what
means he came acquainted with her, and how she became so unruly. Richard in
this sort began to discourse.

When I was young (said he) I was as hansome a fellow, as any was in the
parish where I was borne: and for my valor, I durst have traveled into any
Gentleman's Buttery, when all the Barrels had been full, without either sword
or dagger about me: for my resolution, if I had once gotten under a maidens
Chamber window, I would never have started, till they had emptied a Camber pot
on my beade: for my courage, I duist have gone into any baudy house, and would
have come ^ut again as honest a man, as when I went first in: for my credit, I
might have run on the skore for six pottes, with any Alewife that kept house
within five miles where I dwelt: for my quallities every manner of way, I had
the pre-eminence amongst all the youths that were in our quarters, for at
May-tyde, who was the ringleader for the fetching home of a May Pole, but I:
at Midsommer, I was chosen the Summer Lord: at every Bridal, who must dance
with the Bryde, but Ruffling Richard: Thus for a pleasant life, the Cunstable
of the Parish lived not more merrily than I, and for my reputation, I was
almost as much reverenced as our Churchwardens: but, as the stoutest Stond of
Ale, at last is set a tilte, and the fattest Goose comes soonest to the spitte;
so, my former fortunes were drawn to their laiest date, and my prime of
pleasures concluded with mishappe: but oh love, O cruel love, that wast the
first frunte to my felicities; But who can resist love, if it be once crept
into the bottom of a man's belly? O what a rumbling it makes in his guts, and
how it bethrobs him about the heart: and see now the sequel of my mishap. I
fortuned to be at a Sheepe-shearing, where I met with Margery, she that was my
wife, in a fine red petticoate, with damask upper bodies, a white apron before
her, and upon her head a broad felt hat, with a brave branch of rosemary
sticking in her bosom, appointed amongst ye rest with a pair of sheeres, to
help sheare Sheep, and I having brought forth a lusty young Ram, would have
laid him in her lap, but she resusing to take him, said unto me: now good
friend Richard if you love me, bring me none but poulde sheep, for of al
things in the world, I cannot away with these horned be^stes. When I heard
these mild words, thus gently spoken, and how kindly she pronounced this
sentence (Good friend Richard if you love me) O heavens (thought I) what a
sweet charm is this: then nothing her modesty, that she could not abide the
sight of a horned beast, I began to think with my self, how happy might that
man be accounted, that could light of such a wife, and having but a little thus
given scope to mine own affections, Love, that had his tinder box ready to
strike fire, by this time had set my fancy of such a flame, that not longer
able to endure the heat without a cup of Sack, I said unto her; Margery, your
manner of phrase has wonderfully troubled me, for in your first speeches you
call me your good friend Richard, and then you come in with a doubtful
demand, in these words, (if you do love me) as though I could be your good
friend and yet did not love you: but Margery, since you have popt me such a
doubfull question, if you and I were alone by our selves, I would poppe you
such an answer, that you should well find that I loved you, and that
hereafter you might leave out your if, and say, Richard ass you love me.

With these words pretily casting her head at one side, she gave me such a
learing look, that might as well have daunted me with despair, as given me
comfort and hope of grace: for the one of her eyes was bleard, and seemed as
though she wept, the other was a pretty narrow pinckeny, looking ever as
though she smylde, so that in her very countenance at one instant, you might
behold pleasure and pain, pity and rygor, courtesy and cruelty, love and
disdain: and then with a sweet voice, like one that were asking an alms,
she said.

Richard, if you love me as you say, your love shall not be lost, but men
are so crafty now a days before they are married, that they will make a maid
believe they love her, till they have got up her belly, and then they will
not stick to deny their own children, and that makes women when they be once
married, to play their husbands such a cast, that they shall not know their
own children: but if your love be no such love Richard, you shall not find me
unkind. When I heard the wisdom of the wench, it made my pulses so to beat,
that I had thought my codpisse point would have fallen a sunder: but for
answer I said.

Margery, your sober speeches so wisely delivered, together with your sweet
countenance so lovely placed, has so prevailed with your good friend Richard,
that for the better confyrmation of my love, receive here this token, as a
pledge of my good will: and taking then a two penny piece which I had in my
purse, I bowed it and gave it to her, the which when she had received, she said.

Well Richard, now I do account you as mine own, and at night when my Mother
is gone to bed, if you will come home, we will there talk farther of this
matter: and for your welcome, I will bestow of you a mess of Cream.

Margery (said I) look you keep your promise, for I will be there, and
because you will be at so much cost with a mess of Cream, I will bring with
me a penny worth of spycecakes: And although we had thus referred over farther
speeches till our next meeting, yet during the time that we remained there in
place, O how many amorous glaunces and loving countenances there passed still
too and fro between us: but at night my appointed time being come, thither I
went, and Margery was at the window watching for my coming, who having once
espied me, she opened the door, where she received me with such a sweet
kiss, as if her breath had been lately perfumed for the purpose, whose dainty
smell was as sauery, as if it had been a red herring that had been newly
roasted: her lovely lips pleasant and soft, like a lock of wool that was
but then come out of the seame basket: but should I tell you of all the other
love tricks that passed between her and me that night, I might either oppress
your stomach to think of it, or otherwise perhaps make you ashamed to hear
it: but let this suffyce, before I departed, our marriage day was appointed,
and Margery in time made her Mother acquainted with the matter, who nothing
misliking of her Daughters choice, gave her her blessing, with many other good
helps to furnish forth her bridal day, the which when time had drawn to be
solemnized, and that the lusty youths of the Parrish were gathered together
to go with us to Church, and the young Damsels were flocked on a heap to
wait on the Bride, attending her coming forth. The good old woman her
Mother, who had been ever chary of the lovely Chickin her daughter, and even at
the very instant when we were ready to go to Church, she was scooling of her
with this exhortation.

Margery, (said the) the day is now come for the which you have so much longed
after, it is twenty years ago since you first wished for a Husband, and byr
Lady daughter you were then seauenteene or eyghteene years of age, so that at
this present you want not above two or three of forty: now if wit went by
years, you are old enough to be wise, but I being your Mother, besides my
many years which might advance my skill, so I have buried four several
husbands, (the heavens be praised for it) which has so much the more confirmed
my experience in the dispositions of men, and can the better judge of their
natural inclinations: and by all that I have gathered by mine own proof and
practice, I have found it still by trial, that the fantasies of men, are
evermore best fitted with the follies of women. But leaving generalities, and
to come to so much as concerns but thy self, that art now to be married to a
husband, who in respect of his age thou might be his Mother: and could
thou now but consider, what a comfort it is for an old Woman, to be lovingly
embraced by a young man, O daughter daughter, thy mothers mouth begins to
water, but with the very imagination to think of the pleasure, and therefore
happy may thou deem thy self, that art so likely to enjoy it.

But here is now a great piece of discretion to be used, for as age conceiueth
such contentment with the society of fresh and pleasant youth, so youth will
quickly fall a loathing of cold and crooked age, if the parties be not wise to
enforce that by art, that they are otherwise denaied by nature: which is, to
show a youthful disposed mind, how far so^ they be spent in years: for it
is a tired Jade that cannot cry weehee, and a sorry Mare that cannot wag her
tail. Thou art now to consider the inequality of the years between thy
self and thy husband, and therefore a little to whet him on to make him to
like of thee the better, it shall not be amiss for thee to show some youthful
conceit, especially being thy bridal day, it is tolerable for thee a little
to play the wanton.

I can tell thee daughter, men are well pleased to see their Wives youthfully
given, and there is nothing yt does more delight them, then to see them
wantonly disposed: and this is the mean to win your husbands lik^ng, and to
draw him to yt appetite, which your many years might quench: remember
therefore what I have told you, and fail not for your advantage, to show some
youthful trick.

Margery making a mannerly curtsie, said: Yes forsooth Mother, I will remember
all that you have told me.

By this time all things being prepared, to Church we went, where the Priest
having once done his office, we returned again, and were accompanied with our
neighbors and friends that went home to dinner with us: for whom there was
provided Fyrmentie and Minced Pyes, besides other good meat both roste and
sodde: the which being all ready, Margery was placed at the upper end, between
two of the most substantial honest men, according to the custom of the
Parrish, and my self likewise, (as the manner was) did wait that day at the
Table, with a napkin hanging on my shoulder.

But O what a comfort it was unto me, to see how daintily Margery fed of
every dish that came near her, and how lustily she laid about her for her
victuales And (thought I) if it be true as some will say, that a good feeding
Horse will go through with his labor, then I warrant if I give Margery her
meat, I need not fear to ride her where I list. But Dinner being almost at
an end, and the Cakebreade and Cheese ready to be set on the Table, the good
old Woman her Mother, who had likewise been very busy that day in taking
pains to fill the pottes, and to carry away empty dishes, began to cheer
up the company, bidding them welcome, and telling them she was sorry there
was no better cheer for them.

Margery presently upon the sight of her Mother bethought herself what she had
to do, and calling now to mind what lesson she had given her, and how she
had willed her that day to show some youthful trick, thereby to purchase the
favor of her husband, and picking out at that very instant a fit opportunity
to perform it, she called to her Mother in this youthful manner, Munna, up
and cacke. The old Woman hearing her Daughter, said: Why how now Margerie? ^e
for shame, will you speak bugges words? Could you not pretily have said: I
pray you Mother have me up to pick a Rose, nay now I see you play the
wanton too much.

Then speaking to the company that safe by, she said: I pray you bear with my
Daughters childishnes, for I know it is the Firmentie that does so much anoy
her, for even from her very infancy, if she had taken any spoone meat, she
was still troubled in the bottom of her backside with a great ventositie.

The neighbors seeing the clenlinesse of the wench, did ever after that call
her by the name of Mannerly Margerie. Thus much to answer your former demand
concerning my wife, whether she were a widow or a maid: by the circumstances
whereof, you may perceive she was a maid, although a very old one, and yet not
so far spent in years but she was able to play a youthful trick. And now for
the rest yt concerns but the tragedy of mine own misfortune: to signify the
matter at large, would be tedious for you to hear, and fearful for me to
declare, the very memory whereof were enough to make me tremble, but that I know
I am far enough from her that was the minister of my woe.

Let this suffice, within a very few Months after I was married, Margery
began to grow ielous, for if she had once been thirsty, and that I wanted
money to send to the Alehouse, she would tell me that I spent a way my thrift
amongst some other young Queanes: here began our first falling out, and to set
forward the matter, there dwelt at the very next house by me, a Tailor, who had
a wife yt was sure once a day to measure the breadth of her husbands shoulders
with his own mete-yard.

Margery and this Tailors wife grew to be acquainted, and amongst other
conclusions it was agreed between them, that to prevent diseases, and to
preserve them in health, they would every morning next their hearts, take a
phisical diet, which was, a full quarte of the quintinsence drawn from an
Ale-tub, warmed by the fire, with a grated Nutmeg, half a yard of
Black-pudding roasted on a grydyron, a quantitle of salt, with a measure of
fine Wheate-flower, first made into paste, and after baked in a loaf of
bread: these ingrediences, after they had incorporated altogether, they would
afterward lightly fast till noone. And they found such a commodity in using
this Medicine, that if the Tailor and I had not every morning given them money
to pay for the simples, it had not been good for us to have come that day
after in their sights: for the Tailors wife, she could handle a mete-yard or a
cudgel passing nimbly, but Margery had gotten the practice of all manner of
weapons. For besides that she had ye use of her nails, which she employed many
times about my face, she could likewise handle a pair of bellows about my
pate, a pair of tongues a thwart my shins, a firebrand sometimes should fly at
my head, a ladle full of scalding liquour other-whiles in ^y bosom, a three
footed stool, a pot, a candlestick, or any other thing what soever came next
her hand, all was one to her: and she had learned such a dexterity in the
delivery, that they should have come whirling about mine ears.

In the end, devising with my self a remedy for these mischieues, I found the
means to be made the Cunstable, hoping that mine Office would have been a
protection to me for a year, and that she durst not have stricken her Matesties
Officer. But within a day or two, it was my fortune to hit on a pot of strong
Ale, which she had set up in a corner for her own drinking, and I (being
thirsty) gave it such a soupe, that I left very little behind. The which
afterward when she came to seek for, and found her store so pittisullie
impaired, against my coming home at night, she provided her self of a waster,
and I was no sooner entered the doors, but forth she comes with her cudgel in
her hand, and with such a terrible countenance, that were able to affright
any man that should behold it.

Richard, said she, I had thought you would never have given me occasion to be
ielous of you, but now I see you love a cup of strong Ale better then you
love me, and do you not think then that I have great reason to be displeased
with your unkindness toward me, and to beat out that lack of love that does
make you so lightly to regard me.

Margery, said I, take heed what you do, for you know that I am her Majesty's
Officer, and here I charge you in the Queens name, that you hold your
hands. What Master Cunstable, said she, have you gotten an enchauntment for
me, or do you think that your charm shall serve to excuse you? No sir no, for
now you have deserved double punishment: first, you being an Officer if you
offer wrong, your punishment must be so much the more grievous, and is it not
mere injustice to take that which was not provided for you: next, you have
deserved to be well punished, for the little reverence you have used in the
execution of your office: commanding me in the Queens name to hold my hands
with your cap on your head, nor using any other duty or reverence: but Matster
Cunstable, I will teach you how to use an Office, and with that she let fly
at my head, at my shoulders, at my arms, and still she would cry, remember
hereafter how you do your Office, remember your duty to the Queen, remember
when you command in her Majesty's name, that you put off your cap, and do it
with reverence: and such a number of other remembraunces she gave me, as I
think there was never poor Constable before nor since, so instructed in an
office as I was. To tell you of many other like remembrances which at ^ther
times she bestowed on me, I should but trouble you, but the conclusion is, I am
now rid of her, and they say that the distaunce between Heaven and Hell is
great, but if they were a sunder five times further then they be, if I might
understand where she were in the one, I would never rest till I were got to
the other.

Richard having thus discoursed the whole course of his life, of his lyking, of
his love, of his pleasure, of his pain, although the subject of the matter
were scarce worth the hearing, yet considering the place whether we were going,
it kept a fit Decorum with the iourny we had in hand: and as the tale it
self was tedious, so by this time we were over passed a long and wearisome
way: the best commodity, the tract was large and spacious, and still descended
down a Hill into the bothome of a Ualley, glooming and melancholy to behold,
where we might epsy one with a Wax Candle lighted in his hand, who was
walking by himself, prying and tooting in every corner, and many times
stumbling, and ready to fall where the way was plain and smooth, that we took
him to be some blind man that had lost his way, whereat we began to wonder what
he should do with candle light, that could not see to guide his steps at high
noone days. But we keeping on our way, were drawn so near him that we might
perceive he had the use of his eyes, yet he never perceived us, till I saluted
him, and bade him God speed. Whereat he suddenly started, as if he had been
half in a fright, but when he had awhile taken the gaze on us, he demanded
of us how far we had come that way. I told him that we were come from
Heaven, and that we were going to seek out the place of Purgatory, desiring
him that if he were acquainted in those quarters, that he would direct us the
ready way to go thither.

Alas Gentlemen (said he) that is the place that I have been seeking for this
long Month together, and I think there is no corner between this and Hell
that I have left unsearched: and were it not for this holy Candle, whose
virtue is able to defend me from the inchauntment of any spirit or devil, I
would think I were Goblyn lead, I have wandered so far about, ^uermore
hitting into dangerous high ways that leads to Hell, and could never find
out the path that should bring me to Purgatory.

Truly my friend (said I) if I be not deceived, the light which you carry in
your hand (wherein you repose your greatest confidence) is the very mean of
your mistaking, and has so much dimmed your sight and dazeled your eyes, that
you cannot see the right way, but makes you thus to run stumbling about, and to
wander to and fro, that you your self knows not whether, I would wish you
therefore to leave it, and you shall see so much the better how to direct your
steps. What said he, would you have me leave my holy Candle, marry God and
good S. Frauncis bless me out of that mind: but if you be of that Religion, I
would be sorry to tarry in your company, unless I might induce you by
persuasion to think more reverently of holy things.

Truly (said I) a little inducement shall suffice to persuade me to any
reasonable matter, and good counsel is evermore to be embraced, but especially
at this instant, my case being now as it is.

Why then (said he) I will tell you a true tale, wherein you shall perc^ue the
wonderful effect that Holy water has in working against the devil, and this
it is. There was not not long since, a very proper young woman, that was
possessed of a fiend, who did so torment and vex her, that althou^h she would
not go to any Sermons, nor would ever receive the Communion, yet she would
sometimes go to Church, and say her Pater noster in English, and now and then
eat flesh on Fridaies, and would commit many other heresies, which this devil
tempted and led her to do. But you shall see now, there was a good honest holy
Priest that was a Seminary, who being in place where this Woman was, and
lyking her very well, did begin to pity her case, and of mere devotion pricked
forward by a san^ified love, he devised with himself, how he might fully
reclaim her to the holy Church: and having attempted many practices in vain,
and finding that neither persuasion, charm, nor any manner of coniuration, was
able to remove the wicked spyrite from her, his last help was, he gave her a
glister of holy Water, the which he had no sooner put up into her body, but
the devil immediately forsook her, that she after became a most Catholic
vessel, and was able to reason so profoundly in that Keligion, that but with a
little blast of her back side, she would have made the proudest Protestant that
stood next her to stop his nose.

An other like miracle I am able to protest of mine own knowledge, and this is
it. There was a Gentleman that is living at this present hour, whose name and
dwelling place if I list I could deliver: this Gentleman had been married
full out ten years, during which space he never had issue, although both
himself and his wife were very desirous to have children. But it fell out that
a holy Father a Jesuit was privily harbored in this Gentleman's house, who
seeing the Gentlewoman to be a lusty and well lyking wench to bear children,
did minister unto her the holy sacrament of extreme unction, anoyling her
parts of generation with holy oil, and laying the sign of the cross over
her as she lay on her bed, and this Gentlewoman for three years together that
this holy father lay in her house, had every year a child: and therefore most
happy may those people think themselves, that does retain and foster such
holy guestes now in these dangerous times, if it were but to have their Wives
hallowed, and to be made holy vessels.

But if I should here enlarge further, what miracles has been wrought, by
Holy Water, Holy Candles, Holy Ashes, Holy Oils, Holy Lambs, and many other
holy Keliques, I know I should minister so much contentment to your conceit,
as the pleasure would make you heartily to laugh.

Sir said I, your miracles are strange, and they may be true, but yet I am of
opinion, that for the casting out of diuelles, the name of God is of groater
authority, than a whole tubbe full of holy water, and for a woman to be made
fruitful in children, is likewise the blessing of God, and I do think that
for the attaynment of any thing that is good, it is rather to be requested in
the name of the Creator, then otherwise to be sought for, by the means of the
creature.

The other answered again, but men that be of your Religion, are not able to
look into their own errors: for if they were not wilfully blind, they should
find it in common experience, that he that will look to prevail in his
suits, shall sooner be dispatched by the mediation of the Saints, than if he
presumed to prefer his cause to GOD himself, and should find more grace by
the means of the creature, then if he requested in the name of the Creator:
and because I would be glad to confirm you the better, I will ^ewe you you an
example.

Admit now that your self were in a Princes Court, and had some suit, that
might not only concern your own, but that it stretches so far, as to the
advancement of Gods glory, the profit of the Prince, and the general
benefit of the whole Country. You are now to prefer this suit: what, will
you go to the Prince himself? (who in this place represents God) why you
shall attend a long while before you shall come to his presence, and then,
although he be mild, affable, gracious, and full of clemency, and in deed
with as many royal virtues as appertains to a godly Prince, yet he will
turn you of to some one grave Counsailer, or some other great personage that
is about him, to look into your cause and to consider of it: (who in this
place does represent the holy Saints, which must be your ^diator:) Now this
Counsayler is so troubled with so many other affairs, and such business of
great importance, that he has no leisure in the world to remember you: then
must you ply his Secretary, or some other that is near about him, and you come
to him (whith your cappe in your hand and (...) courtesy) and say, I beseech
you Sir remember my suit to your Master, I have lain long here, and I have
spent all that I am able to make, and I pray you Sir even for Christ's ^ke, and
for the t^er mercy of God, get me an aunsw^re: (here you come in the name of
the Creator:) Now sir, I will (for example sake) make my self an adverse
against you, and I will come to the same party, and say unto him, Sir, I
understand that such a one (meaning you) has presented such a suit, and I
beseech you Sir, even as you love an hundredth Angels, (I come here in the name
of the creature) procure me your Masters lets against him, and let me have
your assistance for the stay of his suit: tell me now your own conscience,
will not these visible creatures, glistering in this man's eyes, work a quicker
expedition, than the bare name of your invisible Creator but sounding in his
ears? I am sure you will never make question of the matter: for the very
presence of an hundredth angels but looking him in the face, will make him to
enter into any attempt, yea, and sometimes to abuse his Master, be he never so
wise, be he never so grave, or be he never so honorable, and to make him by his
information perhaps to commit some error.

Sir (said I) if the matter were worth the reasoning, I could easily answer
your fond comparisons, but I am not disposed to argue of these matters, and will
therefore let them rest with this conclusion, that God is God, and only good,
and men are men, and no man without fault, nor free from offense. This is very
true (answered Richard) for the Vicar of our parish in a Sermon that he made on
Midlent Sunday, did speak so much in Latin and said, N^mo sine briberi
viuit: I remember his words well enough, and brought so much of his Sermon away.

Richard had no sooner thus added his finatiue conclusion, but we might
suddenly hear a loud and pitteous skrike, which by the shrilnes of the noise,
seemed to be some woman's voice, that was put into some fear, or offered some
vyolence: and bending both our eyes and our steps, toward the place from
whence the noice resounded to our ears, we might see a woman hastily coming
toward us, with a trusse or fardle under her arm, to whom I said; Good
woman, to seems you should be distressed, although I know not for what cause,
but say, what is the matter of this your hasty flight? Alas sir, (said she) as
I was traveling toward hell, with certain wares that I have here in my
fardle, which I am sent withal to show them to Proserpina: fast by here in
the high way, there encountered with me the most deformed and yll-fauoured
Monster, that ever I did s^tte mine eyes on, whose ougly countenance did so
afright me, that it makes me in this sort to retire, not daring to hold on
my course.

I pray thee goodwife (said I) what wares should they be, that thou art
carrying to hell? or do thou carry them to sell? or be they sent as a
present?

Sir said she, I have here Perewigs of the new curle, Roules, and other
atlyres for the head of the new fashion, Ruffes of the new s^tte, new
Cuttes, new Stitches, new gardes, new imbroyders, new devised French
Uerdingales, new French bodies, new bumbasting, new bolstering, new
vnderlayings, and twenty new deuyses more than I have now spoken of, which I
am carrying to hell amongst the Ladies and Gentlewomen that are there, who
when they lived in the world would let slip no fashion: and I am sure now
they be there, would be right glad of the fashions now in use, both to see
them and to have them.

In good faith (said I) they ^e wares fit for such customers, for from hell
they came, and thither they will, there they were first devised, and therefore
fittest to serve that Market.

You are much deceived ^r (said she) for I have fashions here that (...) a
Lady nor Gentlewoman that is in hell, ever saw the like, (...) never a Cu^an,
or any other strumpet that lived in the world, did ever wear the like, such
perewigs, curled and ^ed by art, such roules of hair per^umed an^ platted by
proportion, such ruffes (...) will ask one whole day to wash and starch, and
an other days labor but to pin them in the fashion, that (alas poor women)
they are feign to take great pains to go to the devil: but I beseech you
Gentlemen, if your occasions be not the greater, do so much as conduct me a
lytttle part of the way, till I be p^st this ill favored Monster that has so
affright me. We yielding to her ^quest, had not gone far but we might
discern a most de^ormed creature, with a monstrous pair of horns, growing
from the uppermost part of his Forehead, the tippes where of turned round into
his eyes, and growing there again into his head, had made him stark blind,
that he had no manner of sight; Our Companion so confidently persuaded in the
virtue of his holy Candle, that he thought no spirit was able to hurt him,
stepping forward said, In nomine Patris, what art thou that walk in this
fort, thus disturbing the High ways.

The other answered, What I am thou may see very well, but how I came to
be thus perplexed, that thou must understand by a further cyrcumstaunce. Know
then that I was a Myller, sometimes dwelling in Kent, where I kept a Mill,
which (as it seldom times wanted water, so at no time it wanted grist) for
that it had the custom of the Country, at the least five or six miles about:
It fortuned that a very wealthy and substantial Farmer, dwelling two or three
miles from me, sent a sack of Corn to my Mill by his daughter, which came on
horseback to have her corn grownd, intending to have gone back again with
it before night: which might very well have been done, saving that we
Myllers are tied to this custom, which is, when any young women does fortune
thus to come to the Mill, we use as well to take toule of themselves, as of
their sackes: and I, firing mine eyes upon the wench, seeing her to be a very
hansome young Maiden, not above nineteen or tweentie years of age, was very
loath to let her escape toule-free, and therefore set down a plot how I might
acquainte her with our custom: the which I could not by any means per^rme,
but by making her to stay all night, wherefore I ^posly put my Myll out of
temper, and spent all the after noone in repayring and trimming of my Myll, and
brought her corn to the hopper, when the (...) so far passed, that it was not
possible it could be grownd off, till it were very late in the night; But the
young Maiden seeing her Corn upon the Myll, and desirous to have it home with
her, stayed with the better will, the which being once grownd off,
notwithstanding the evening was very far spent, yet she would have departed
home: but I, pretending much good will to her Father, told her that if a dog
of her Fathers, were in my house at this time of the night, I would not shut
him forth of the doors for his Masters sake, much less your Fathers
daughter: wherefore I will entreat you to stay this night in my house, and you
shall have a homely bed, and a clean pair of sheets, with such fare as I
hope shall content you, and for your horse, he shall likewise be turned into
a good pasture fast by my Mill, and in the morning all things shall be ready
for you to depart so soon as you please.

The maiden being well persuaded by my fair speeches, seemed content, and I
went to my wife, and told her that for as much as my Mill had been out of
temper all the day, I must sit up all night to grind, willing her further to
make ready a spare Chamber, for the young Maiden my Neighbors daughter: who
had stayed so long for the grinding of her Corn, that it was too late for her
to go home, and willed her, to better our supper with a ca^on or a dish of
chickins, as she her self thought good; But my wife, who many t^es before had
taken the true measure of my foot, and had picked out at her fingers ends the
whole drift of my pretense, winking a little with one of her eyes, answered
smoothly, Husband all shall be done as you have willed: and although I had
been suffici^ntly instructed in this old Axiom, which says, Trust not an
old quean^, if she once begins to wink: yet by my wives smooth de^eanure, I
was free from all suspicion, and contemplating my self in hope of my nights
happiness, I never had leisure to bethink me of any precpts of good
counsel: but my wife having made all things ready, and that we were called in
to such (...) as she had provided, and we likewise having ended our supper, I
told the young wench, that when she were (...) take her rest, my wife should
bring her to her Chamber, and wild my wife likewise at her own leisure to get
her to bed, for that I was to watch all night, that I might be ready in the
morning to serve my customers according to my promise: and thus leaving them
twain together, I departed about my business; but, my wife that had conceived
the very depth of my devise, lodged the maid in her own bed, and having but
one other Chamber, which I always reserved for a friend, and where I thought
the maid should have been placed, there my wife ^ily and cunningly lodged her
self: but I that was more doubtful of mine own fortune, than suspicious of my
wives practice, perceiving every body to be in bed, did think it now high
time to make trial of my pretense, and conueying my self featly into the
Chamber, and then coming to the bed side (with a soft and low voice) I
began to persuade this young Maiden (as I had thought) that she should not
stand in doubt or fear of him who was come unto her only for good will, whom
love and liking had made bold and hardy, to request some courtesy and
kindness at her hands, and heere-withall, throwing one of mine arms over
her, I began to hunte after her lyppes, and to have bestowed of her a loving
kiss.

But my wife, whose cunning had served her to train me into this mistaking,
could tell how to be have her self in the rest, to confirm me in mine
error: for, although she would render me no manner of speeches, whereby I might
discover her by her voice, yet in the rest of her demeanure she counterfeited
so cunningly, such a kind of maydenly nycitie, that a man would rather have
taken her for some young ignorant puny, that had never dealt the cards, than
for an old beaten gamster, that knew well enough how to make the stakes: for
although she knew what it was whereat I leuelled, and was most desirous to
have had me hit the mark, yet she delayed me off with a counterfeit kind of
striving, and would never yield, till seeming for want of breath she was not
able to resist, and then panting (as it were to take the air) she seemed to
(...) overcome (as it were) by force: and (...) that was not be^er able to
discern of Cats in the dark, but that they were all gray, feasted my self
with a fulsome repast, in steed of a dayntie dish, for blind conc^it had
given me an appetite to feed on that diet, which if I had seen, would
quickly have cloyed my stomach: but having well satis-fied my self, and that
I was now at leisure to look into mine own fortune, and considering what
perrill might ensue for a little pleasure past, if the wench should fortune to
complain of that one nights lodging forty weeks after, the which would not
only redounde to my great shame and reproach, but like enough to fall out to my
wrack and utter undoing, her Father being an able and wealthye man, that
would not let to seek revenge; to prevent these and other mischiefs, I did
bethink me of this devise.

I had a lusty young fellow to my man, called Rafe, about the age of four or
five and twenty years, whom I had left to see to my Myll now in mine
absence: this Companion I knew would be pat for my purpose, and one I was
sure that would never flynch, to spend his sir pence at his drink or his
dra^be: and calling to mind an old president, drawn from one of mine own
coat, I mean, from the Miller that had taught his man to counterfeit so long,
till he was hanged up in his Masters room, I determined with my self
likewise, to make mine own man the instrument that should stand between me
and all future mischiefs.

Heere-uppon fayning an occasion to go look to my Mill, and taking my leave
for the instant with a kiss, I came where my man was, and questioning with him
of many idle matters, amongst the rest I demanded of him how he lyked of the
young maiden?

Mary Master (said he) I do like so well of her, that I would think it a
most happy turn for men of our occupation, if all the diuelles of hell were
such as she is, because there are very few Millers that do use to go to
heaven: and then if hell were no ^rse surnished tha^ with such, I ^old not care
if I did take my journey thether-wards to morrow so soon as it were day.

Why Rafe (said I) thou know where she lies in the guest Chamber, and what
will thou give me if I turn thee in to her, and give thee instruction how
thou shall behave thy self, that she shall not refuse to render courtesy for
thy kindness. I could scarce make an end of my words, but my man, as if he
had stayed too long, hastily answered.

Master, I have nothing in the world, but a sheep and a Lamb, which (as you
know) do go in the Mill close, perform your words, and I (...) give you
them both, and that with all my heart.

I rejoicing in mine own conceit, to think how kindly I had coosoned my man,
would needs clappe hands with him for the better confirmance of the bargain:
the which being thus agreede on between us, I wylled him to go into the
Chamber, and without any fear ^o get to the maids bed, and there to use no
manner of speeches, but to work all his enterprises, but only by dumb
persuasions.

But will you see how cunning was here caught in his own net: I had
thought to have coosoned my man, but he kissed me kindly for my acquaintance, and
(according as I had directed him) into the Chamber he went, where my wife in
the dark could no better discern between me and my man, than I was able
before to judge between her and the maid: but he, using no words because I
had so instructed him, and she forbearing to speak for ^arring her own
Market, but thus in silence between them, I was coosoned on both sides, for
they agreede so well together, that I think they were loath to part, for my
man seemed to like so well of his entertaynment, that the day was ready to
break, before he would leave his game. My wife on the other side, in
condition like unto those, that when they have sped well, cannot keep their
own counsel: she gat her self up immediately after, and then calling the
young maiden, who had slept quietly all night, knowing nothing how matters had
passed amongst us, and the day light being by this time a little cleared up,
between my man (...) I we set her upon her horse, with her sack of meal
under her: and she gyuing me hearty thanks for my courtesy, departed thus
toward her Fathers house.

Here began Rafe and I again to recreate our selves with the remembrance of
our nights pleasure, I smild in my ^eeue to think how I had cosoned my man: my
man laughed to remember how he had deceived the maid: and being thus together
in the midst of our sports, in comes my Wife, seeming by her countenance to be
as merry as the best, and taking me by the hand, she prayed me to go in with
her, I thinking she had somewhat to say, coming into the house, she had
provided for my breakefast a warm caudle daintilie made, with a couple of
Chickins roasted, and stood hot upon the Table. I that saw this
extraordinary diet, meruailing what conceit was got into her head: asked her
what might be the cause of this her sudden kindness: she that looked me in
the face as wantonly as if she had come lately where the frolike had run
round about the house, answered me thus.

Byr lady husband you have taken pains to night, and I perceive you are not
yet so far over spent, but that you are worth the cherishing: you have
deserved a better breakfast then this: for he that has watched as you have
done all night, had need be well comforted in the morning. These suspicious
words thus delivered by my wife, brought me well near into the fit of an
Ague: but being desirous to be better satis-fied in her meaning, I said.

And what pains have I taken this night, more then I have done at other
times? I have watched many a night before this, when I found no such kindness
at your hand in the morning.

Husband (said she) how so ever you have watched in times past, I know not,
but this nights labor has deserved no less then a comfortable (...), and in
st^d of Potato roots, I have made you a warm Caudle next your heart: be not
ashamed man of that you have doon^, for it was I that supplied the young wenche
^lace night in the guest Chamber, and it was you that came thither and playde
the propper man. But I think husband, how soever you have ouer-reached me
before, I have cried quittance with you to night. And now comfort your self
whilst your meat is warm, pluck up your stomach and fall to your breakfast.

I that was not able with patience to endure her words, bursting out in
choler, said. The devil take thee and thy breakefast, for thou have given me
a breakfast and a dynner to, that will stick in my stomach whilst I live. And
going my way in this chafe into my Myll, where my man perceiving my sudden
passion, demanded of me the cause of my unquietness? Uilaine (said I) thy self
art the cause why I am thus perplexed, for thou have line with my Wife: I
Master (said he) you are much deceived, and I protest I would not do you so
much ^rong, for so much corn as would fill the Hopper.

Thou have done it (said I) for she has confessed it unto me, and it was she
that did lie to night in the outer Chamber in the young wenches room. That was
more then I knew of (said my man,) but since it was so, I will have my Sheep
and my Lamb again, for the bargain was between us, that you should have
sent me in to the Maid, and I upon this condition, promised you my Sheep and
my Lamb, but since you have broke your promise, by Saint Anne I will not stand
to my bargain.

These speeches of this varlet, did more vex and grieve me then before: and
yet I wist not how I should be revenged, nor better remedy could I devise, but
after I had freated my fill, I commanded the knave to take his sheep and his
Lamb, and presently to get him out of my service, nor never after to come
within my doors, nor into any other place in my wives company.

This gaul of grief continually fretting and gnawing in my conscience, might
have been thought a sufficient punishment though Rigore himself had
pronounced the sentence: but my terrestiall penance not enough to appease the
angry Gods, they have decreed this final conclusion: that as I was the
author of mine own harms by mine own blindness, so mine own horns shall
for evermore so grow in mine own light, that being not able to discern which
way or how to direct my steps, I should wander in this solitary place, bereft
of all other society, and so to continue world without end.

The Woman that stood by all this while, and had given attentive ear to this
discourse, stricken as it should seem into some remorse, upon what consideration
I know not, but thus she said.

Alas poor Myller, if thy punishment be so grievous for a small escape
ignorantly committed, woe is me to be-thinke what shall betide to an infinite
number yt are daily infected with this common calamity, this horne-plague I
mean, the general sickness of our time: a malady that has so much infected
both City, Town, and Country, that there are few places free, which are not
spiced here and there, with this forked generation: amongst the which there be
a number of honest Gentlemen, some of them my very good fr^nds and customers,
whose horns does hang so much in their own lights, that they are well
contented to suffer their wives to pranke themselves up in every new fashion,
whereby to set themselves to sale, and to make open show how lightly they are
disposed: but the horne-plague shall never depart his house, that has his wife
so garishly inclined.

But alas for pity, what shall become of a number of kind hearted Wittoles,
that will not only be contented to hoode wink themselves from their Wives
adulteries, but also to become Bawdes and Brokers, yea and sometimes will not
stick to keep the doors, whilst their Wives shall be within, playing the
harlots with their customers.

Blame not me that am touched with some remorse, for these be the people that I
do live by, for what should I do with my new-^ed trashe, if there were not
as lycencious Women to buy them? And why should they (...) themselves so
Curtisan-like to the view of the world, but to mani^est their unchaste
appetites, that they might be the rather desired of men.

The woman had no sooner ended these speeches, but she as suddenly burst out
into such a vehement laughter, that for the time, she was not able to deliver a
word: but in the end, with much a do, recovering the use of her tongue, she
said: Now truly I cannot choose but laugh to think of my husband, how ill
favored he will look with such a pair of spectakles hanging over his brows
as this Myller has got.

We that stood by, and were more mindful to see an end of our travails then
disposed to prolong the time in idleness: I asked of the Miller if he did know
where abouts the place of Purgatory was, or if he could give us any direction
which way we might get thither, he answered thus.

My good Friends, what soever you be, you shall understand, that thirty
years and odd are already over passed since I first frequented these infernal
paths, in which mean space, though I have not been able to discern mine own
footesteppes, yet by the reports of sundry trauailers that has passed these
ways, I have learned thus much concerning Purgatory.

The persons that were the first founders of the place, were not perfectly
sighted, but like as the Owl which cannot abide the light of the Sun, flies
evermore in ye night, so those men, not able to endure that excellent
brightness which is the only true light to every perfect understanding,
framing all their platformes in obscurity and darkness, amongst other idle
inventions, would needs take upon them the building of Purgatory. The place
where they had seated it, was so obscured with such fogges and filthy mystes,
that no man that had the perfect use of his wits, was ever able to find the
situation. The foundation whereon it was laid, was lies and foolish fantasies,
the rest of the (...) buildings, was dreams and doting devises. All the whole
edifice, was of such light and rotten stuff, that after they had been two or
three hundred years patching and peecing it together, a poor silly Swain
naked and thread bare, called Truth, blowing against the building but with a
little blast of breath, the gale was of such force against it, that the whole
matter and substance, together with the Founders, Patrons, Proctors, Protectors
and Defenders, were al blown immediately into Hell: so that who soever he be
that seeks for Purgatory, there he shall be sure to find it: and for these
thirty years that I have wandered in these places, there never came any to
enquire after it but mad men and fools.

Why then said I (to our companion that stood by with his Candle,) I perceive
you had some reason to bring light with you when you came to seek Purgatory,
since the place is so dark and so dainty to be found. But now you know
assuredly where you may find it, your Candle will stand you in some steed to
light you to Hell.

He breaking out into sundry passions, sometimes raging against the Myller,
saying that he was but an ignorant and a lying Heretic: then calling to his
memory the long time he had spent in seeking of Purgatory, he began as
vehemently to rail against the Pope, and as bitterly to exclaim against his
Jesuits and Seminaries, that had promised to instruct him in the high way to
Heaven, and directly sent him the very next way to Hell.

In these angry fittes he blewe out his Candle, and throwing it from him, was
contented to hold us company in the rest of our iourny.

Whilst we were wandering thus together, we had not paced the distance of a
furlong, but we might hear the sound of a Horn, which was blown with such
shrilnesse, that the ^ho redoubled again in the air, and looking about us, we
might perceive a far of, where one came ryding post all in black as fast as
his horse was able to fling, and with his quick speed immediately passing by
us, we knew him by his balde pate and his Coule hanging at his back, that he
was a fat squaddy Monk, that had been well fed in some Cloister, who with
his great haste was suddenly out of our sights: and we had not travailed
far, but we might see Hell gates standing wide open, with abundance of
people that were flocking out of all quarters, preasing in as thick, as if in
the Term time they were thronging to Westminster Hall. And presently we might
behold a clear auoydance in the gates, and a multitude coming forth, with
Belles, with Banners, with Torches, with Crosses and with Copes, in a very
solemn manner of Procession, singing Salve festa dies.

We standing still in a gaze as they passed by, I demanded of one of the
train what might be the meaning? Who answered me that there was a Post newly
come from Rome, with news that the Popes Legate was hard at hand, with some
great Cmbassage: and that solemnity was only to entertain him, to show what
reverence they did bear to his Master. The thronge that followed was so
e^ding, that we were mightily shouldered to and fro amongst the company, but
V^luet breeches and I, determining to see what would follow, we took the one
the other by the hand, following in the prease til at length this holy Legate
was seen where he was coming, so that it was not long but they met. The
Legate yt was a chuffe-headed Cardinal with a pair of fulsome cheeks,
stretched out like one that were playing on a bag-pipe, alighted from his
palfry, and presenting himself before Lucifer, who was there in place to
receive him, he fell down upon his knees, praying the Prince of darkness, to
bestow his fatherly benediction upon the Popes holiness, his thief Uicar and
Uizegerent upon earth: the only man that he was especially beholding unto, who
sent him from time to time whole Millions of souls for the increasing of his
kingdom: from whom I am sent with matters of much importance to be here
considered of, and whose person in this place I d^ now represent.

Lucifer lifting up one of his paws, and waging it over the Legates head,
said: That blessing that God gave unto Caine for the killing of his Brother
Abel, light upon thy Master and his successors for ever. Then taking him by
the arm, he said.

Stand up, for considering whose Ambassador thou art, it were an embacing to
thine estate, if thou should show any sign of humility or lowlines. Thou
d^st here represent the person of Antechrist, whose pride could never yet
surrender it self to any manner of obedience, I will not therefore in this
place yt any thing be imbeiseled, that might derogate the least dignity from
that Chair of pe^ilence, I mean the holy Sea of Rome.

Then was there brought forth a most stately Chair, which was prepared of
purpose, in which Chair Ambition and Pride having placed the Cardinal, old
Ignorance and young Obstinacy, (the one blind, the other froward,) taking it
upon their shoulders, as if the Pope himself were carried in his
Pontificalibus, and then a rich and sumptuous Canapie being spread over him,
and borne by four supporters, which were, Idolatry, Hypocrisy, Heresy, and
Blasphemy, thus in this pompious manner (being placed in the Procession next
Lucifer himself) they returned to Hell, whose gates I noted to be so large and
spacious, that a Princes Army though it were martialed in any proportion of
battle, with Fyllets, Troops and Wings, might well have marched in without
any manner of dysorder. And although the inner rooms did so exceed in
greatness, that it passes human reason to conceive of them aright, yet he
that should behold the abundance of people that resort thither daily, and the
infinite number that are there to be seen flocking in every corner thereof,
would more wonder to think what place could so contain them.

Being thus come into Hell, they went to the Chapel, where Pope Hildebrand
the first founder of Trasubstantiation was ready to say Mass, the which being
ended, Satan (who can in no wise endure the deferring of matters that does
concern his own estate, went immediately into the Convocation house, where
calling about him a most abominable company of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Pryors, Abbots, and other Clergy men, that has been for this four or five
hundred years, still of his privy Counsel, the Legate was willed to deliver
the effect of his message, who making his entrance with a brief Dration,
tending to the commendation of the Popes carfulness, how many stratagemes he
had endeavored against England, France, and Ireland, for the better
establishing of the Kingdom of Antechrist in those places: and he was now to
let them understand, first for England. Where he had thought to have
accomplished his purposes by the means of his Jesuits and Seminaries, whom he
sent thither in flocks, to ^drawe the people from their obedience, to stir
them to sedition, rebellion and uproar: to practice treasons against their
Sovereign, yea and to undertake many horrible enterprises against the person
of the Prince, whom God has still mightily defended, not only preserving her
from their traitorous practices, but likewise has so revealed the conspiracies
of the practisers, that from time to time they have been still apprehended, and
so sent to Tyburne, to say In manus tuas.

Being therefore exempted from all manner of hope to find any good success in
these former platformes, his Holiness craves your Hellish instructions, what
course he might now follow for the recovery of that Country.

For France, it would ask a long time here to be dyscoursed, what
trecheries, what treasons, what mischieues, what murders, and what massacres
his Holiness has there from time to time effected: and although he has now
stirred up his vassaile the King of Spain, who has from the dignity of a
magnificent Prince, surrendered himself to become a slave to the Pope, to come
and go as he appoints him, and to be the executor of all his damnable devises,
and has his forces now in that Country, in the assistance of Traitors and
Rebels, against their natural Prince and lawful King: yet his Holiness can
have no assured hope to suppress the light of the Gospel retained among^
them, or utterly to subvert the professors of it, without some devilish
devise, platted and contrived from this infernal pit of hell.

Now lastly for Ireland, if that Country might still be continued in that
state as it now stands, there were many hopes to be expected, not necessary
in this place to be openly revealed: for although the natural people of that
Country, (yea even in the most barbarous places) be of themselves very
zealously inclyned, and without all peradventure, would casily be drawn ^o the
true knowledge and worship of God, if they had such a Minister amongst them, as
might instruct them, as well i^ wholesome doctrine, as in good example of l^e:
but the (...) so well provided for the place, that the whole Country ^ooth
swarm with Jesuits, Seminaries, and massing Priests, yea, and Friars, that
have recourse into Dublyne it self, and these do keep such a continual and
daily buzing in the poor peoples ears, that they are not only led from
all duty and obedience of their Prince, but also drawn from God by
superstitious Idolatry, and so brought headlong by heaps into hell: for
through the whole Country, the people are so confidently persuaded in the
doctrine of Antechrist, that they think our Lord will do nothing without the
mediation of our Lady, of Mary, or of John. And to speak truly of the Clergy of
that Realm, if there be one that seeks to uphold the glory of God, there is
ten for that one that seeks to uphold the kingdom of Antechrist; neither is
it to be doubted, but that there be some few, which both in preaching and
living she weth all sincerity and godliness of life: but there be a number of
others, which neither say nor do, neither preach well, nor live well. Some
other there be that now and then will get up into a Pulpit, and there they will
spend an hour, chyding against the Pope in the course of their speaking, and
they are no sooner come down but they will de^e God himself half a year
after, in the manner of their living: and this example of their ungodly
behavior, is no little corrasiue to weak consciences, that do behold their
wickedness. For what is it for a Clergy man, be he Parson, be he Vicar, be he
Deacon, be he Archdeacon, be he Bishop, be he Archbishop, or let him be what he
will, if he be one that will rather endeavor himself to fleece his flock than
to feed it, that has not so much care of the children of God, committed to his
charge, which he suffers daily to perish: as he has to provide marriages for
his own children, in their very infancy, and when they are under age: that
does build houses, and purchase rents by corruption, extortion, and briberie,
that does eat and drink the sins of the ignorant people daily at his table:
that will not admit of a pardon from the Pope, yet dares not be without five
or six several pardons from the Prince, for treason, for murder, for theft,
for robbery, for conspyracy, for confederacy, for rasyng, for forging, for
extortion, for bryberie, and for many other filthy matters, shameful to be
spoken off, were it not before this haggish assembly: and what though from a
base and beggarly parentage, he could show himself lofty in mind, lofty in
looks, and lofty in all the rest of his demeanures: Would not such a Prelate
be fit for the deuilles Chapel? The Legate had no sooner made an end of these
latter words, but in comes Dick Tarlton, apparrelled like a Clown, and singing
this piece of an old song.

If this be true as true it is,
Lady Lady:
God send her life may mend the miss,
Most dear Lady.
This sudden jest brought the whole company into such a vehement laughter,
that not able again to make them keep silence, for that present ty^e they
were feign to break up: and as Velvet breeches and I were walking arm in
arm through the prease, we fortuned to meet with Commens, one that some few
years ago, had been a Sargeant in London, who no sooner espied Velvet
breeches, but he got up a firebrand, wherewith he gave him such a stroke
over the shoulders, that the coals flewe all about the place. Velvet breeches
again up with his fist, and gave him such a blow under the ear, that had
like to have stryken him over: with this they closed, and began to pommell
one an other as fast as their fists could walk, the company that stood by
began to cry Clubbes, Clubbes, Clubbes, and immediately they came rushing in
about us, with ^lesh-hookes, with Coal rakes, with Fyre-forckes, and with such
other furniture, as a man would have thought were all come out of a Kytchin:
and with some little a-doe they parted the fray, and the parties were presently
by the Officers brought before Lucifer, and I being a stranger in the place,
was likewise carried with them for company: where Commens be^ing charged to be
the first Author of the broyle, in his own excuse rendered this reason.

I was (said he) sometimes an Officer under the Sheriffs of London, and
being feed by a Towns man to arrest Velvet breeches, I was brought unto him
where he was in a Barbers shop, sitting with a Basin before him, full of
sopie water, wherewith the Barber was rubbing his cheeks, and dashing of him
about the lips, and I seeing him thus in trymming, thought of courtesy to
forbear the doing of mine office, till the Barbar had ended his business,
and setting my self down without any word speaking, Velvet breeches by
chance espying my Mace under my Gown, suspecting a-ryght the cause of my
coming, suddaynelie (before I was a-ware of him) threw all the water so
directly in my face, that the Soap getting into mine eyes, did so smart and
grieve me, that for my life I was not able to hold them open: But whilst I
stood stark blind for the time, wyping and rubbing of mine eyes, Velvet
breeches packt himself out of the doors, that I could never after come where
he was till this present, and I vowed then to be revenged of him the next
time that ever I saw him: and I am now to crave the privilege of the place,
for it is directly against our ancient custom, that there should be any
quarrels or controversies taken up here, or that there should be found any
peacemakers in hell: with this the whole multitude began to grow into an
uproar, and they fell immedia^lie to taking of parts: and first there stood up
in Commens behalf, a great number of cruel creditors, crafty Lawyers,
Merchants, Retaylers, S^ners, Broakers, and a most shameful and filthy company
of usurers.

Velvet breeches on the other side, he wanted no friends, for there were a
great many that knew him: and those that took his part, were swashers,
swearers, whore-maisters, thieves, robbers, ruffyans, roysters, and coosoners.

As they were growing into this commotion amongst themselves, there were
gathered together an infinite number of Cony-catchers, which came to take part
with Velvet breeches: who seeing me to stand by, they began to grow into
confused exclamations against me, some said, let us tear the villain in
pieces, that has written so many books against us: other said, let us fley
of his skin, and cut the the (...) from his bones in small gobbets, that has
so manifested the secrets of our trade and profession, to the world: some other
said, let us cut the tongue out of his head, and put out both his eyes, that
has been an enemy to the art of Cony-catching, and has so shamefully
inueyed against the practices; Then came there forth an infinite number of
women Cony-catchers, and they swear they would geld me, for marring their
Market, and hindering them of their taking. Thus was I threatened on all sides,
every man stood wondering at me, no man to take my part: But Lucifer
perceiving the cause of their griefs, by the manner of their clamors, and
willing to appease their passions with any punishment, commanded me presently
to be thrust forth of hell gates and charging me so to remain a restless
spirit, wandering through the world, and never after to make any return
again to that place.

Thus for the writing of books, I was first banished from Heaven for my over
much parciallitie, and now exiled from hell, for my too much plainness: I
remain now (as I have told you) a walking spyrite, restless and remediless
to wander through the world; I would therefore wish my friends to beware how
they walk late a nights, for I will be the maddest Gobline, that ever used to
walk in the Mooneshine. For I will sometimes be a spirit of the Buttery, and
I will so intoxicate their heads, that do frequent the places of my haunt,
that at night they shall not be able to find the way to their beds, till they
have taken their first sleep on the flore.

Sometimes I will be Robin Goodfellowe, and will meet with a wanton wench in
a dark corner, and let her bless and cross her self as well as she can, I
will put her in such a bodily fear, that for forty weeks after, she shall
think that young bugges are crawling in her belly.

Sometimes I will show such dreams and vysi^ns to women whilst they be
sleeping, that they shall make their Husbands Cu^ds when they are waking.

Sometimes I will trans-forme my self into diverse shapes, and will walk
through all trades, all (...), and all occupations, and some I will infect with
the spirit of Avarice, some with misery, some with deceit and all manner of
subtlety, that they shall leave no practice unsought for, whereby to rake and
gather pelf, to leave to their heirs, that the old Proverb might be
verified: Happy are those children, whose Fathers go to the devil.

In the Term time, I will be in Westminster hall amongst the Lawyers, whom I
will make so capable in the quyllityes of the Law, that they shall coosen
twenty Clyents of their coin, before they will bring one to an end of his
cause; and will not stick now and than to get me up to the bench, amongst the
Judges themselves, to let them taste a little of the sweetness of corruption.

You may easily think that I mean to frequent the Court, where I will oppose
my self a professed enemi^ against Good desert, and let him come thither and
pl^e his many years service in the wars: let him show his (...) and maymes,
gotten in his Countries defense: let (...) signify his time and patr^ony spent
in his Princes quarrel, to maintain himself, and to relieve such as were
about him: or let him pretend many other endeavors, in the service of his
Sovereign, that might worthily move a favorable con^eration, if there shall
be found one that will affoorde him a favorable look, or a comfortable
sp^ch, there shall be two for that one to requite him with disdainful
countenance, and churlish checkes.

I will not tell all, how grievous I will be to Largess and Lyberallitie, nor
how miserable I will show my self in shutting up of the Prin^ bounty: Let
this suffice, he that shall become a Suter at the Court, without gold in his
purse to ^ee a brybing Groom, let him look for small grace in his suits: for
I will strike such a deafness into the ears of the Clerks and Secretaries,
appertayning to great men, that when a penylesse Suter comes unto them with cap
and courtesy, they shall not understand what the ^oole means, nor be able to
hear one word that he speaks, without a bribe. I might mar all if I
should tell all, how I meant to be stir my self amongst the Courtiers of all
sorts, but they say, Enough is as good as a Feast.

The Clergy must not think to escape me scotfree, for I must needs be
acquainted with these double beneficed men, and will many times converse with
such as be Non residents; and sometimes I will get up into the Pulpit and
preach, but you may easily discern me, for my text shall be, Do as I say,
but not as I do; My conclusion is, Good friends take heed how you come in
those places where I walk, for you may perceive I am bent upon mischief, I
can but therefore wish you to look to your selves: and so fare you well.

FINIS.

