PANDOSTO.

The Triumph of Time.

WHEREIN IS DISCOVERED by a pleasant History, that although by the means of
sinister fortune Truth may be concealed, yet by Time in spite of fortune it is
most manifestly revealed.

Pleasant for age to avoid drowsy thoughts, profitable for youth to eschew
other wanton pastimes, and bringing to both a desired content.

Temporis filia veritas.

By Robert Green Master of Arts in Cambridge.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Cadman, dwelling at the Sign
of the Bible, near unto the North door of Paul's, 1588.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS HEALTH.
THe paultring Poet Aphranius being blamed for troublinge ye Emperor Traian
with so many doting Poems: adventured notwithstanding, still to present him with
rude and homely verses, excusing himfelfe with the courtesy of ye Emperor,
which did as friendly accept, as he fondly offered. So Gentlemen, if any
condemn my rashness for troubling your ears with so many unlearned
Pamphlets: I will straight shroud my self under the shadow of your
courtesies, and with Aphranius lay the blame on you as well for friendly reading
them, as on my self for fondly penning them: Hoping though fond curious, or
rather currish backbiters breathe out slanderous speeches: yet the courteous
Readers (whom I fear to offend) will requite my travel, at the least with
silence: and in this hope I rest: wishing you health and happiness.

Robert Green.
TO THE RIGHT HOnorable George Clifford Earl of Cumberland, Robert Green
wishes increase of honor and virtue.
THE Rascians (right honorable) when by long gazing against the Sun, they
become half blind, recover their sightes by looking on the black Load
stone. Unicorns being glutted with brousing on roots of Licquoris, sharpe^
their stomachs with crushing bitter grass.

Alexander vouchsafed as well to smile at the crooked picture of Vulcan, as to
wonder at the curious counterfeite of Venus. The mind is sometimes delighted
as much with small trifles as with sumptuous triumphs, and as well pleased with
hearing of Pans homely fancies, as of Hercules renowned labors.

Syllie Baucis could not serve Jupiter in a silver plate, but in a wooden
dish. All that honor Esculapius, deck not his shrine with Jewels. Apollo gives
Oracles as well to the poor man for his mite, as to the rich man for his
treasure. The stone Echites is not so much liked for the color, as for virtue,
and gifts are not to be measured by the worth, but by the will. Mis^n that
unskillful Painter of Greece, adventured ^o give unto Darius the shield of
Pallas, so roughly shadowed, as he smiled more at the folly of the man, then
at the imperfection of his art. So I present unto your honor the triumph of
time, so rudely finished, as I fear your honor will rather frown at my
impudency, then laugh at my ignorancie: But I hope my willing mind shall
excuse my slender skill, and your honors courtesy shadow my rashness.

They which fear the biting of vipers do carry in their hands the plumes of a
Phoenix. Phydias drew Vulcan sitting in a chair of luory. Caesar's Crow durst
never cry, Aue, but when she was pearked on the Capitol. And I seek to
shroude this imperfect Pamphlet under your honors patronage, doubting the dint
of such inuenomed vipers, as seek with their slaunderours reproaches to carpe
at al, being oftentims, most unlearned of all: and assure my self, that your
honors renowned valor, and virtuous disposition shall be a sufficient defense
to protect me from the Poisoned tongues of such scorning Sycophants, hoping
that as Jupiter vouchsafed to lodge in Philemons thatched Cotage: and Phillip
of Macedon, to take a bunche of grapes of a country pesant: so I hope your
honor, measuring my work by my will, and wayghing more the mind than the
matter, will when you have cast a glaunce at this toy, with Minerua, under your
golden Target cover a deformed Owl. And in this hope I rest, wishing unto you,
and the virtuous Countess your wife: such happy success as your honors can
desire, or I imagine.

Your Lordships most duetifully to command: Robert Green.
THE HISTORY OF DORASTUS AND FAWNIA.
AMong all the Passions wherewith humane minds are perplexed, there is none
that so galleth with restless despite, as ye infectious soar of Jealousy:
for all other griefs are either to be appeased with sensible persuasions, to
be cured with wholesome counsel, to be relieved in want, or by tract of tune to
be worn out, (Jealousy only excepted) which is so sawsed with suspicious
doubts, and pinching mistrust, that whosoever seeks by friendly counsel to raze
out this hellish passion, it forthwith suspecteth that he gives this advise
to cover his own guiltiness. Yea, who so is payned with this restless
torment doubts all, dystrusteth himself, is always frosen with fear, and
fired with suspicion, having that wherein consists all his joy, to be the
br^eder of his misery. Yea, it is such a heavy enemy to that holy estate of
matrimony, sowing between the married couples such deadly seeds of secret
hatred, as Love being once rased out by spightful distrust, there often ensues
bloody revenge, as this ensuing History manifestly proves: wherein Pandosto
(furiously incensed by causeless Jealousy) procured the death of his most
loving and loyal wife, and his own endless sorrow and misery.

IN the Country of Bohemia there raygned a King called Pandosto, whose
fortunate success in wars against his foes, and bountiful courtesy toward
his friends in peace, made him to be greatly feared and loved of all men. This
Pandosto had to Wife a Lady called Bellaria, by birth royal, learned by
education, fair by nature, by virtues famous, so that it was hard to judge
whether her beauty, fortune, or virtue, wanne the greatest commendations.
These two lincked together in perfect love, led their lives with such fortunate
content, that their Subjects greatly rejoiced to see their quiet disposition.
They had not been married long, but Fortune (willing to increase their
happiness) lent them a son, so adorned with the gifts of nature, as the
perfection of the Child greatly augmented the love of the parents, and the
joy of their commons: in so much that the Bohemians, to show their inward joys
by outward actions, made Bonefires and triumphs throughout all the Kingdom,
appointing Iustes and Turneyes for the honor of their young Prince: whether
resorted not only his Nobles, but also diverse Kings and Princes which were his
neighbors, willing to show their friendship they ought to Pandosto, and to
win fame and glory by their prowess and valor. Pandosto, whose mind was
fraught with princely liberality, entertained the Kings, Princes, and noble men
with such submisse courtesy, and magnifical bounty, that they all saw how
willing he was to gratify their good wills, making a general feast for his
Subjects, which continued by the space of twenty days: all which time the
Iustes and Turneys were kept to the great content both of the Lords and Ladies
there present. This solemn triumph being once ended, the assembly taking their
leave of Pandosto and Bellaria: the young son (who was called Garinter) was
nursed up in the house, to the great joy and content of the parents. Fortune
envious of such happy success, willing to show some sign of her
inconstantie, turned her wheel, and darkened their bright sun of prosperity,
with the mistie clouds of mishap and misery. For it so happened that Egistus
King of Sycilia, who in his youth had been brought up with Pandosto, desirous
to show that neither tracte of time, nor distance of place could diminish
their former friendship, provided a navy of ships, and sailed into Bohemia to
visit his old friend and companion, who hearing of his arrival, went himself
in person, and his wife Bellaria, accompanied with a great train of Lords and
Ladies, to meet Egistus: and espying him, alighted from his horse, embraced
him very lovingly, protesting that nothing in the world could have happened
more acceptable to him then his coming, wishing his wife to welcome his old
friend and acquaintance: who (to show how she liked him whom her husband
loved) intertayned him with such familiar courtesy, as Egistus perceived
himself to be very well welcome. After they had thus saluted and embraced
each other, they mounted again on horsbacke, and rode toward the City,
devising and recounting, how being children they had passed their youth in
friendely pastimes: where, by the means of the Citizens, Egistus was received
with triumphs and shows in such sort, that he marvelled how on so small a
warning they could make such preparation. Passing the streets thus with such
rare sightes, they rode on to the Palace, where Pandosto entertained Egistus
and his Sycilians with such banqueting and sumptuous cheer, so royally, as
they all had cause to commend his princely liberality, yea, the very basest
slave that was known to come from Sycilia was used with such courtesy, yt
Egistus might easily perceive how both he and his were honored for his
friends sake. Bellaria (who in her time was the flower of courtesy, willing to
show how unfeignedly she looued her husband by his friends intertaineme^t, used
him likewise so familiarly, that her countenance bewraied how her mind was
affected toward him: oftentimes coming her self into his bed chamber, to
see that nothing should be amiss to mislike him. This honest familiarity
increased daily more and more betwixt them: for Bellaria noting in Egistus a
princely and bountiful mind, adorned with sundry and excellent qualities,
and Egistus finding in her a virtuous and courteous disposition, there grew such
a secret uniting of their affections, that the one could not well be without
the company of the other: in so much that when Pandosto was busied with such
urgent affairs, that he could not be present with his friend Egistus,
Bellaria would walk with him into the Garden, where they two in private and
pleasant devises would pass away the time to both their contents. This custom
still continuing betwixt them, a certain melancholy passion entering the mind
of Pandosto, drove him into sundry and doubtful thoughts. First, he called to
mind the beauty of his wife Bellaria, the comelines and bravery of his friend
Egistus, thinking that Love was above all Laws, and therefore to be stayed
with no Law: that it was hard to put fire and flax together without burning:
that their open pleasures might breed his secret displeasures. He considered
with himself that Egistus was a man, and must needs love: that his wife was a
woman, and therefore subject unto love, and that where fancy forced, friendship
was of no force. These and such like doubtful thoughts a long time
smoothering in his stomach, began at last to kindle in his mind a secret
mistrust, which increased by suspicion, grew at last to a flaming Jealousy,
that so tormented him as he could take no rest. He then began to measure all
their actions, and to miscenstrue of their too private familiarity, judging
that it was not for honest affection, but for disordinate fancy, so that he
began to watch them more narrowely, to see if he could get any true or
certain proof to confirm his doubtful suspicion. While thus he noted their
looks and gestures, and suspected their thoughts and meaninges, they two
seely souls who doubted nothing of this his treacherous intent, freque^ted
daily each others company, which drove him into such a frantic passion,
that he began to bear a secret hate to Egistus, and a lowering countenance
to Bellaria, who marueiling at such unaccustomed frowns, began to cast beeyond
the Moon, and to enter into a thousand sundry thoughts, which way she should
offend her husband: but finding in her self a clear conscience, ceased to
muse, until such time as she might find fit opportunity to demand the cause
of his dumps. In the mean time Pandostoes mind was so far charged with
Iealousy, that he did no longer doubt, but was assu^^ed (as he thought) that
his Friend Egistus had entered a wrong point in his tables, and so had played
him false play: whereupon desirous to revenge so great an injury, he thought
best to dissemble the grudge with a fair and friendly countenance: and so
under the shape of a friend, to show him the trick of a foe. Devising with
himself a long time how he might best put away Egistus without suspicion of
treacherous murder, he concluded at last to poison him: which opinion pleasing
his humor, he became resolute in his determination, and the better to bring
the matter to pass he called unto him his cupbearer, with whom in secret he
brake the matter: promising to him for the performance thereof, to give him a
thowsande crowns of yearly revenues: his cupbearer either being of a good
conscience, or willing for fashion sake, to deny such a bloody request, began
with great reasons to persuade Pandosto from his determinate mischief: showing
him what an offense murder was to the Gods: how such unnatural actions did
more displease the heavens, than deuoide of pity, commanded that without delay
it should be put in the boat, having neither sail nor other to guide it, and
so to be carried into the midst of the sea, and there left to the wind and
wave as the destinies please to appoint. The very shipmen seeing the sweet
countenance of the young babe, began to accuse the King of rigor, and to pity
the child's hard fortune: but fear constrained them to that which their nature
did abhor: so that they placed it in one of the ends of the boat, and with a
few green bows made a homely cabben to shroud it as they could from wind and
weather: having thus trimmed the boat they tied it to a ship, and so haled it
into the main Sea, and then cut in sunder the coarde, which they had no sooner
done, but there arose a mighty tempest, which tossed the little Boat so
vehemently in the waves, that the shipmen thought it could not continue long
without sincking, yea the storm grew so great, that with much labor and
peril they got to the shore. But leaving the Child to her fortunes. Again
to Pandosto, who not yet glutted with sufficient revenge, devised which way he
should best increase his Wives calamity. But first assembling his Nobles and
Counselors, he called her for the more reproach into open Court, where it was
objected against her, that she had committed adultery with Egistus, and
conspired with Franion to poison Pondosto her husband, but their pretense being
partly spyed, she counseled them to fly away by night for their better
safety. Bellaria, who standing like a prisoner at the Bar, feeling in her
self a clear Conscience to withstand her false accusers: seeing that no less
then death could pacify her husbands wrath, waxed bold, and desired that she
might have Law and Justice, for mercy she neither craved nor hoped for, and
that those perjured wretches, which had falsely accused her to the King, might
be brought before her face, to give in evidence. But Pandosto, whose rage and
Jealousy was such, as no reason, nor equity could appease: told her, that
for her accusers they were of such credit, as their words were sufficient
witness, and that the sudden and secret flight of Egistus, and Franion
confirmed that which they had confessed: and as for her, it was her part to
deny such a monstrus crime, and to be impudent in forswearing the fact, since
she had past all shame in committing the fault: but her stale countenance
should stand for no coin, for as the Bastard which she bare was served, so she
should with some cruel death be requited. Bellaria no whit dismayed with this
rough reply ^ told her Husband Pandosto, that he spoke upon choller^, and not
con^^^^ence: for her virtuous life had been ever such, as no spot of suspicion
could ever stain. And if she had borne a friendly countedaunce to Egistus, it
was in respect he was his friend, and not for any lusting affection: therefore
if she were condemned without a^y further proof, it was rigor, and not Law.
The noble men which sat in judgment, said that Bellaria spoke reason, and
entreated the king that the accusers might be openly examined, and sworn, and
if then the evidence were such, as the Jury might find her guilty (for seeing
she was a Prince) she ought to be ^ryed by her peers, then let her have such
punishment as the extremity of the Law will assign to such malefactors. The
king presently made answer, that in this case he might, and would dispense
with the Law, and that the Jury being once panneld, they should take his word
for sufficient evidence, otherwise he would make the proudest of them repent
it. The noble men seeing the king in choler, were all whist, but Bellaria,
whose life then hung in the ballaunce, fearing more perpetual in famie, then
momentarie death, told the king^ if his fury might stand for a Law, that it
were vain to have the Jury yield their verdit, and therefore she fell down
upon her knees, and desired the king that for the love he hare to his young
son Garinter, whom she brought into the world, that he would grant her a
request, which was this, that it would please his majesty to send six of his
noble men whom he best trusted, to the Isle of Delphos, there to enquire of
the Oracle of Apollo, whether she had committed adultery with Egistus, or
conspired to poison him with Franion: and if the God Apollo, who by his divine
essence knew al secrets, gave answer that she was guilty, she were content to
suffer any torment, were it never so terrible. The request was so reasonable,
that Pandosto could not for shame deny it, unless he would d^e counted of all
his subjects more wilful then wise, he therefore agreed, that with as much
speed as might be there should be certain Embassadores dispat^^ed to the I Will
of Delphost ^^d in the mean season be commanded that his wife should be kept
in close prison. Bellaria having obtained this grant, was now more careful
for her little babe that floated ^^ the Seas, then ^^^^^ full for her own
mishap. For of that she doubted: of her self she was assured, knowing if
Apollo should give Oracle according to the thoughts of the heart, yet the
sentence should go one her sid^, such was the clearenes of her mind in this
case. But Pandosto (whose suspicious head still remained in one song) chose out
six of his Nobility, whom he knew were scarce indifferent men in the Queens
behalf, and providing all things fit for their journey, sent them to Delphos:
they willing to fulfill the Kings command, and desirous to see the situation
and custom of the Island, dispatched their affairs with as much speed as
might be, and embarked themselves to this voyage, which ( the wind and weather
serving fit for their purpose) was soon ended. For within three weeks they
arrived at Delphos, where they were no sooner set on land, but with great
devotion they went to the Temple of Apollo, and there offering sacrifice to the
GOD, and gifts to the Priest, as the custom was, they humbly craved an
answer of their demand: they had not long kneeled at the Altar, but Apollo
with a loud voice said: Bohemians, what you find behind the Alter take, and
depart. They forthwith obeying the Oracle found a scroule of parchment,
wherein was written these words in letters of Gold.

The Oracle.
SVspition is no proof: Jealousy is an unequal Judge: Bellaria is chaste:
Egistus blameless: Franion a true subject: Pandosto treacherous: his Babe an
innocent, and the King shall live without an heir: if that which is lost be not
found.

AS soon as they had taken out this scroule, the Priest of the God commanded
them that they should not presume to read it, before they came in the presence
of Pandosto: unless they would incur the displeasure of Apollo. The Bohemian
Lords carefully obeying his command, taking their leave of the Priest, with
great reverence departed out of the Temple, and went ^^ their ships, and
as soon as wind would permit them sailed toward Bohemia, whither in short time
they safely arrived, and with great triumph issuing out of their Ships, went to
the Kings pall^^e, whom they found in his chamber accompanied with other Noble
men: Pandosto no sooner saw them, but with a merry countenance he welcomed
them home, as king what news: they told his Majesty that they had received
an answer of the God written in a scroule, b^t with this charge, yt they
should not read the contents before they came in the presence of the King, and
with that they delivered him the parchment: but his Noble men entreated him
that since therein was contained either the safety of his Wives life, and
honestly, or her death, and perpetual infamy, that he would have his Nobles
and Commons assembled in the judgment Hall, where the Queen brought in as
prisoner, should hear the contents: if she were found guilty by the Oracle of
the God, then all should have cause to think his rigor proceeded of due
desert: if her Grace were found faultlesse, then she should be cleared before
all, since she had been accused openly. This pleased the King so, that he
appointed the day, and assembled al his Lords and Commons, and caused the
Queen to be brought in before the Judgment seat, commanding that the
indictment should be read, wherein she was accused of adultery with Egistus,
and of conspiracy with Franion: Bellaria hearing the contents, was no whit
astonished, but made this cheerful answer.

IF the divine powers be privy to humane actions (as no doubt they are) I hope
my patience shall make fortune blushe, and my unspotted life shall stain
spightfully discredit. For although lying Report has sought to appeach mine
honor, and Suspicion has intended to soil my credit with infamy: yet where
Virtue keeps the Forte, Report and suspicion may assail, but never sack: how
I have led my life before Egistus coming, I appeal Pandosto to the Gods, and
to thy conscience. What has passed betwixt him and me, the Gods only know,
and I hope will presently reveal: that I loved Egistus I can not deny, that I
honored him I shame not to confess: to the one I was forced by his virtues: to
the other for his dignities. But as touching lasci^^^^s lust, I say Egistus is
honest, and hope my self to be found without spot: for Franion. I can neither
accuse him, nor excuse him: for I was not privy to his departure, and that
this is true which I have here rehearsed, I refer my self to the divine
Oracle.

BEllaria had no sooner said, but the King commanded that one of his Dukes
should read the contents of the scroule: which after the commons had heard,
they gave a great showt, rejoicing and clapping their hands that the Queen was
clear of that false accusation: but the King whose conscience was a witness
against him of his witless fury, and false suspected Iealousle, was so
ashamed of his rash folly, that he entreated his nobles to persuade Bellaria
to forgive, and forget these injuries: promising not only to show himself a
loyal and loving husband, but also to reconcile himself to Egistus, and
Franion: revealing then before them all the cause of their secret flighte, and
how treacherously he thought to have practiced his death, if the good mind of
his Cupbearer had not prevented his purpose. As thus he was relating the whole
matter, there was word brought him that his young son Garinter was suddenly
dead, which news so soon as Bellaria heard, surcharged before which extreme
joy, and now suppressed with heavy sorrow, her vital spirits were so
stopped, that she fell down presently dead, and could be never revived. This
sudden sight so appalled the Kings Senses, that he sanck from his seat in a
sound so as he was feign to be carried by his nobles to his Palace, where he
lay by the space of three days without speech: his commons were as men in
despair, so diversely ^^^sed: there was nothing but mourning and lamentation to
be heard throughout al Bohemia: their young Prince dead, their virtuous Queen
bereaved of her life, and their King and Sovereign in great hazard: this
tragical discourse of fortune so daunted them, as they went like shadows, not
men: yet somewhat to comfort their heavy hearts, they heard that Pandosto was
come to himself, and had recovered his speech, who as in a fury brayed out
these bitter speeches.

O Miserable Pandosto, what surer witness then conscience? What thoughts more
sower then suspicion? What plague more bad then Jealousy? Unnatural actions
offend the Gods, more than men, and causeless cruelty, never scapes without
revenge: (...) recall I cannot (...) the conscience, suppressing reason, and
inciting rage: a worse passion then frenzy, a greater plague than madness.
Are the Gods just: Then let them revenge such brutishe cruelty: my innocent
Babe I have drowned in the Seas: my loving wife I have slain with slanderous
suspicion: my trusty friend I have sought to betray, and yet the Gods are
slack to plague such offenses. Oh unjust Apollo, Pandosto is the man that has
committed the fault: why should Garinter, seely child, abide the pain: Well
since the Gods mean to prolong my days, to increase my dolor, I will offer my
guilty blood a sacrifice to those sackles souls, whose lives are lost by my
rigorous folly. And with that he reached at a Rapier, to have murdered
himself, but his Peers being present, stayed him from such a bloody act:
persuading him to think, that the Commonwealth consisted on his safety, and
that those sheep could not but perish, that wanted a shepherd: wishing, that
if he would not live for himself, yet he should have care of his subjects,
and to put such fancies out of his mind, since in sores past h^lp, salues do
not heal, but hurt^nd in things past c^re, care is a ^^ra^siue: with these
and such like persuasions the King was overcome, and began somewhat to quiet
his mind: so that assoo^e as h^^ could go abroad, he caused his wife to be
embalmed, and wrapped in lead with her young son Garinter: erecting a rich an^
famous Sepulcher, wherein he intombed them both, making such sollenme
obsequies at her funeral, as al Bohemia might perceive he did greatly repent
him of his forepassed folly: causing this Epitaph to be engraven on her Tomb
in letters of Gold:

The Epitaph.
Here lies entombde Bellaria fair,
Falsely accused to be unchaste:
Cleared by Apollos sacred doom,
Yet slain by Jealousy at last.
What ere thou be, that passest by,
Curse him that causde this Q^eene to die
THis Epitaph being ingr^uen, Pandosto would once a day repair to the Tomb,
and there with watery plaintes bewail his misfortune: coveting no other
companion but sorrow, nor no other harmony, but re^entance. But leaving him
to his dolorous passions, at last let us come to show the tragical discourse
of the young infant.

WHo being tossed with Wind, and Wave, floated two whole days without
succor, ready at every puff to be drowned in the Sea, till at last the
Tempest ceased, and the little boat was driven with the tide into the Coast
of Sycilia, where sticking upon the sands, it rested. Fortune minding to be
wanton, willing to show that as she has wrinckles on her ^^owes: so she has
dimples in her cheeks: thought after so many sower looks, to lend a feigned
smile, and after a puffing storm, to bring a pretty calm: she began thus to
dally. It fortuned a poor mercenary Shepherd, that dwelled in Sycilia, who
got his living by other men's flocks, missed one of his sheep, and thinking it
had stra^ed into the cou^rt, that was hard by, sought very diligently to ^ind
that which he could not see, fearing either that the Wolves, or Eagles had
undone him (for he was so poor, as a sheep was half his substance)
wandered down toward the Sea cliffes, to see if pl^chaunce the sheep was
browsing on the sea Iu^, whereon the^ ^reatly do feed, but not finding her
there, as he was ready to return to his flock, he heard a child cry: but
knowing there was no house nere, he thought he had mistake^ ye sound, and yt it
was the ble^^yng of his Sheep. Wherefore looking more narrowely, as he cast
his eye to the Sea, he spyed a little boat, from whence as he attentively
listened, he might hear the cry to come: standing a good while in a maze, at
last he went to the shore, and wading to the boat, as he looked in, he saw
the little babe lying al alone, many to die for hunger and cold, wrapped in a
Mantle of Scarlet, richely imbrodered with Gold, and having a chain about the
neck. The Sheepeheard, who before had never seen so fair a Babe, not so
rich Jewels, thought assuredly, that it was some little God, and began with
great devotion to knock on his breast. The Babe, who wrythed with ye head, to
seek for the pay, began again to cry afresh, whereby the poor man knew that
it was a Child, which by some sinister means was driven thither by distress
of weather: maruailing how such a seely infant, which by the Mantle, and the
Chain, could not be but borne of Noble Parentage, should be so hardly crossed
with deadly mishap. The poor shepherd perplexed thus with diverse thoughts,
took pity of the child, and determined with himself to carry it to the
King, that there it might be brought up, according to the worthiness of birth:
for his ability could not afforde to foster it, though his good mind was
willing to further it. Taking therefore the Child in his arms, as he foulded
the mantle together, the better to defend if from cold, there fell down at
his foot a very fair and rich purse, wherein he found a great sum of
gold: which sight so revived the shepherds spirits, as he was greatly
ravished with joy, and daunted with fear: Joyful to see such a sum in his
power, and fearful if it should be known, that it might breed his further
danger. Necessity wished him at the least, to retain the Gold, though he
would not keep the child: the simplicity if his conscience feared him from
such deceiptfull briberie. Thus was the poor manne perplexed with a doubtful
Dilemma, until at last the covetousness of the coin overcame him: for what
will not the greedy desire of Gold cause a man to do? So that he was resolved
in himself to foster the child, and with the sum to relieve his want:
resting thus resolute in this point, he left seeking of his sheep, and as
covertly, and secretly as he could, went by a by-way to his house, least any
of his neighbors should perceive his carriage: as soon as he was got home,
entering in at the door, the child began to cry, which his wife hearing, and
seeing her husband with a young babe in his arms, began to be somewhat
ielousse, yet marueiling that her husband should be so wanton abroad, since he
was so quiet at home: but as women are naturally given to believe the worste,
so his wife thinking it was some bastard: began to crow against her goodman,
and taking up a c^^gel (for the most master went breethles) swear solenmly
that she would make clubs trumps, if he brought any bastard brat within her
doors. The goodman seeing his wife in her majesty with her mate in her hand,
thought it was time to bow for ^eare of blows, and desired her to be quiet,
for there was non such matter: but if she could hold her peace, they were made
for even and with that he told her the whole matter, how he had found the
child in a little boat, without any succ^^r, wrapped in that costly mantle,
and having that rich chain^ about the neck: but at last when he showed her the
purse full of gold, she began to simper something sweetly, and taking her
husband about the neck, kissed him after her homely fashion: saying that she
hoped God had seen their want, and now meant to relieeue their poverty, and
seeing they could get no children, had sent them this little babe to be their
heir. Take heed in any case (quoth the shepherd) that you be secret, and
blabbe it not out when you meet with your gossippes, for if you do, we are
like not only to loose the Gold and Jewels, but our other goods and lives.
Tush (quoth his wife) profit is a good hatch before the door: fear not, I
have other things to talk of then of this: but I pray you let us lay up the
money surely, and the Jewels, least by any mishap it be spied. After that they
had set all things in order, the shepherd went to his sheep with a merry
note, and the good wife learned to sing lull^by at home with her young babe,
wrapping it in a homely blanket in sted of a rich mantle: nourishing in so
clenly and carefully as it began to be a jolly girl, in so much that they
began both of them to be very fond of it, seeing, as it waxed in age, so it
increased in beauty. The shepherd every night at his coming home, would sing
and dance it on his knee, and prattle, that in a short time it began to speak
and call him Dad, and her Mam: at last when it grew to ripe years, that it was
about seven years old, the shepherd lest keeping of other men's sheep, and
with the money he found in the purse, he bought him the lease of a pretty
farm, and got a small flock of sheep, which when Fawnia (for so they named
the child) came to the age of ten years, he set her to keep, and she with
such diligence performed her charge as the sheep prospered marueilously under
her hand. Fawnia thought Porrus had been her father, and Mopsa her mother, (for
so was the shepherd and his wife called (honored and obeyed them with such
reverence, that all the neighbors praised the du^tifully obedience of the
child. Porrus grew in short time to be a man of some wealth, and cre^ite: for
fortune so favored him in having no charge but Fawnia, that he began to
purchase land, intending after(...) give it to his daughter: so that diverse
rich farmer^ sonne^ came as wo^rs to his house^ for Fawnia was something ^^^ly
attired, being of such singular beauty and excellent ^^te, that whosoever saw
her, would ^ thought, she had been some heavenly nymph, and not a mortal
creature: in so much, that when she came to the age of six^ years, she so
increased with exquisite perfe^tion both of body and mind, as her natural
disposition did bewray that she was borne of some high parentage: but the
people thinking she was daughter to the shephard Porrus; tested only amazed at
her beauty and ^e: yea she won such favor and commendations in every man's eye,
as her beauty was not only praised in the country, but also spoken of in the
Court: yet such was her submisse modesty, that although her praise daily
increased, her mind was no whit puffed up with pride, but humbled her self as
became a country maid and the daughter of a poor shepherd. E^^ry day she
went forth with her sheep to the field, keeping them with such care and
diligence, as al men thought she was very painful, defending her face from
the heat of the sun with^^^ other vale, but with a garland made of bows and
flowers: which atire became her so gallantly, as she seemed to be the
Goddess Flora her self for beauty ^ Fortune, wh^ all this while had showed a
friendly face, began now to turn her back, and to show a lowering countenance,
intending as she had given Fawnia a flenderchecke, so she would g^^^ her a
harder mate: to bring which to pass, she laid her trains on this wise. Egistus
had but one only son called Dorastus, above ye age of twenty years: a Prince
so decked and adorned with the gifts of nature: so fraught with beauty and
virtuous qualities, as not only his father ioyed to have so good a son, ^
al his commons rejoiced that God had lent them such a noble Prince to succeed
in the Kingdom. Egistus placing all his joy in the perfection of his son:
seeing that he was now mariage-able, sent Ambassadors to the King of Denmark,
to entreat a mari^ge between him and his daughter, who willingly consenting,
made answer, that the (...) please Egistus with his son to come into
Denmark, he doubted not, but they should agree upon reasonable conditions.
Egistus resting satisfied with this friendly answer, thought convenient in the
mean time to break with his son: finding therefore on a day fit opportunity
he spoke to him in these fatherly terms.

DOrastus, thy youth warns me to prevent the worst, and mine age to provide
the best. Oportunities neglected, are signs of folly: actions measured by
time, are seldom bitten with repentance: thou art young, and I old: age has
taught me that, which thy youth cannot yet conceive.

I therefore will counsel thee as a father, hoping thou will obey as a child.
Thou see my white hayres are blossoms for the grave, and thy fresh color
fruit for time and fortune, so that it behooves me to think how to dye, and
for thee to care how to live. My crown I must leave by death, and thou enjoy
my Kingdom by succession, wherein I hope thy virtue and prowess shall be
such, as though my subjects want my person, yet they shall see in thee my
perfection. That nothing either may fail to satisfy thy mind, or increase
thy dignities: the only care I have, is to see thee well married before I die,
and thou become old.

Dorastus who from his infancy, delighted rather to die with Mars in the
Field, then to dally with Venus in the Chamber: fearing to displease his
father, and yet not willing to be wed, made him this reverent answer.

SIr, there is no greater bond then duty, nor no straiter law then nature:
disobedience in youth is often galled with despite in age. The command of the
father ought to be a constraint to the child: so parents wills are laws, so
they pass not all laws: may it please your Grace therefore to appoint whom I
shall love, rather then by denial I should be appeached of (...)re:I rest
content to love, though it be the only thing I hate.

Egistus hearing his son to (...) from the (...), began to be somewhat
chollericke, another (...).

WHat Dorastus can thou not (...) cynicall passion of pr^ne de^^res, or
p^^uish ^^^wardnesse. What dorst thou think thy self to good for all, or none
good enough for thee: I tell thee, Dorastus, there is nothing sweeter then
youth, nor swifter decreasing, while it is increasing. Time past with folly may
be repented, but not recalled. If thou marry in age, thy w^^^es fresh
couloures will breed in thee dead thoughts and suspicion, and thy white
hayres her loathe somnesse and sorrow. For Venus affections are not fed with
Kingdoms, or treasures, but with youthful conceits and sweet amors. Vulcan
was allotted to shake the tree, but Mars allowed to reap the fruit. Yield
Dorastus to thy Fathers persuasions, which may prevent thy perils. I have
chosen thee a Wife, fair by nature, royal by birth, by virtues famous,
learned by education, and rich by possessions, so that it is hard to judge
whether her bounty, or fortune, her beauty, or virtue, be of greater force: I
mean^ Dorastus, Euphania Daughter and h^ire to the King of Denmark.

EGistus pausing here a while, looking when his son should make him answer,
and seeing that he stood still as one in a trance, he shook him up thus
sharply.

WEll Dorastus take he^de, the tree Alpya wastes not with fire, but withers
with the dew: that which love nourishes not, perishes with hate: if thou
like Euphania, thou breedest my content, and in loving her thou shall have my
loue^ otherwise; and with that he flung from his son in a race leaving him a
sorrowfullman, in that he had by denial displeased his Father, and half
angry with him self that he could not yield to that passion, whereto both
reason and his Father persuaded him: but see how fortune is plumed with times
feathers, and ^ow she can minister st^^^^ge causes to breed strange effects.

It happened not long after this that (...)ng of all the farmers D^^^hters
(...) whither F^^^^^ was also bidden as the mistres of the feast, who (...) her
self, in her best garments, went among the rest of her companions to the merry
meeting^ there spending the day in such homely pastimes as shephea^^s use. As
the evening grew on, and their sportes ceased, each taking their leave at other,
Fawnia desiring one of her companions to bear her company, went home by the
flock, ^o see if they were well folded, and as they returned, it fortuned that
Dorastus (who all that day had been hawking, and ^^^de store of game)
incountred by the way these two mayds, and casting his eye suddenly on Fawnia he
was half afraid, fearing that with Acteon he had seen Diana, for he thought
such ^^uisite perfection could not be found many mortal creature. As thus he
stood in ^ maze, one of his Pages told him, that the maid with the garland on
her head was Fawnia the fair shepherd, whose beauty was so much talked of in
the Court. Dorastus desirous to see if nature had adorned her mind with any
inward qualities, as she had decked her body with outward shape began to
question with her whose daughter she was of what age and how she had but
trained up, who answered him with such madess reverence and sharpness of
wit, that Dorastus thought her outward beauty was but a counterfeit to
darken her inward qualities, wondering how so courtly behavior could be found
in so simple a cottage, and cursing fortune that had shadowed wit and beauty
with such hard fortune. As thus he held her a long whise with that. Beauty
seeing him at discouer^ thaught not to lose the ^^tage, but struck him in
deeply with an inuenomed shafte, as he wholly lost his liberty, and became a
slave to Love, which before containned Love, glad now to gaze on a p^ore
shephea^d, who before refused the offer of a rich Princess: for the
perfection of Fawnia had so fi^ed his fancy as he felt his mind greatly
changed, and his affections altered, cursing Love that had wrought such a
chaun^e, and blaming the baseness of his mind that would make such a choice^
but thinking these were but passion^ that might be thrust out at pleasure to
avoid the Siren that inchaunted him (...) his horse and had this f(...)

Fawnia (who all this while had marked the (...) of Dorastus) seeing his face
(...) and each time so perfectly frame^, began greatly to praise his
perfection, commending him so long, till she found her self faulty, and
perceived that if she waded but a little further, she might slip over her
shoes: she therefore seeking to quench that fire which never was put out,
went home, and ^^^n^ing her self not well at ease, got her to bed^ where
casting a ^^sand thoughts in her head, she could take no rest: for if she
wake^, she began to call to mind his beauty, and thinking to beguile such
thoughts with ^^eepe, ^he ^^en dreamed of his perfection: pestred thus with
these unacquainted passions, she passed the night as she could in short
^^umbers.

Dorastus (who all this while rode with a flea in his ear) could not by any
means forget the sweet favor of Fawnia, but rested ^o bewitched with her wit
and beauty, as he could take no rest. He felt fancy to give the a^^ault, and
his wounded mind reap^^te to yield as vanquished: yet he began with diverse
^on^^^^rations to suppress this frantic affecti^^ ca^^ing to mind, that
Fawnia was a ^heph^ard, one not worthy to be (...) at of a Prince, much less
to be loved of such a potentate thinking what a discredit it were to
himself, and what a grief it would be to his father, blaming fortune and
acc^^^^ng his own (...) that should be so fond as but once to ^ast a
gla(...). As thus he was raging against ^^mselfe, Love fearing if she dallied
long, to (...)ept more nigh, and gave him such a fresh wound as it pra^^t him
at the heart, that he was feign to yield, maugre his ^a^ e, and to forsake the
company and get him to his chamber: where being solemnly set, he burst into
these passionate ^^armes.

"Ah Dorastus, art tho^ alone? No not alone, wosste t^o^ art tired with these
unacquainted passions. Yield to fancy, thou can^^ not by thy fathers coun^^^^e,
but in a frenzy t^o^ art by (...). THy father were content (...)^^^ by reason
without Lawe^ and therefore above all Law.

How now Dorastus, why ^^^ thou blaze that with maises, which thou have cause
to blaspheme with curses. Yet why should they curse Love that are in Love:

Blush Dorastus at thy fortune, thy choice, thy love: thy thou^ ^^s cannot be
uttered without shame, nor thy affections without discredit. Ah Fawnia, sweet
Fawnia, thy beauty Fawnia.

Shamest not thou Dorastus to name, one unfit for thy birth, thy dignities,
thy Kingdoms? Dye Dorastus, Dorastus die, better had thou perish with high
desires, then live in base thoughts. Yea but, beauty must be obeyed because it
is beauty, yet framed of the Gods to feed the eye, not to fatter the heart.

Ah but he that strives against Love, shoots with them of Scyrum against the
wind, and with the Cockeatrice pecketh against the steel. I will therefore
obey, becaue I must obey. Fawnia, yea Fawnia shall be my fortune, in spite of
fortune. The Gods above disdain not to love women beneath. Pho^bus liked
Sibilla, Jupiter Io, and why not I then Fawnia, one something inferior to
these in birth, but far superior to them in beauty, horn to be a
Shepherd, but worthy to be a Goddess.

Ah Dorastus, will thou so forget thy self as to suffer affection to suppress
wisdom, and Love to violate thine hononour? How sower will thy choice be to
thy Father, for^^^full to thy Subjects, to thy friends a grief, most gladsome
to thy foes? Subdue then thy affections, and seaseto love her whom thou
could not love, unless blinded with too much love. Tushe I talk to the
wind, and in seeking to prevent the causes. I further the effects. I will yet
praise Fawnia, honor, yea and love Fawnia, and at this day follow content,
not counsel. D^^ Dorastus, thou can but repent: and with that his Page came
into the chamber, whereupon he ceased from his complaints houing that time
would wear out that, which fo^^une had wrought. As thus he was pained, so
poor Fawnia (...) diversely perplexed: for the next morning gett^^^ (...) very
early, she went to her sheep, thinking with hard (...) to pass (...) her
(...) (poor soul) she was more tried with (...) began to assault her, in so
much (...) as she (...) upon the side of a hill, she began to accuse her o^^e
folly in these (...).

Unfortunate Fawnia, and therefore unfortunate because Fawnia, thy shepherds
hook shows thy poor (...), thy proud desires an aspiring mind: the one
declares thy (...), the other thy pride. No bastard hawk must so^re so hie as
the Hobbie, ^o Foul gaze against the Sun but the Eagle, (...) wrought
against nature reap despite, and (...) above Fortune disdain.

Fawnia, thou art a shepherd, daughter to poor Porrus: if thou rest content
with this, thou art like to stand, if thou climb thou art sure to fall. The
Herb Anita growing higher (...) weed. Nylus flodding more then twelve cubits
procures a dearth. Daring affect^^^ that pass measure, ar^ cut short by time
or fortune: suppress then Fawnia those thoughes which thou (...) to express.
But ^^ Fawnia, love is a Lord, who will comm^^^ by power, and constrain by
force.

Dorastus, a^ Dorastus is the man I love, the woor^e is thy (...) the less
(...) have thou to hope. Will Eagles catch (...); will Cedars stoop to be
brambles, or mighty Princes ^^^^^ at such homely tru^^es. No, no, think this,
Dorastus (...), he is a Prince respecting his (...), thou a beggars brat
forgetting thy calling. Cease then not only to say, but to think to love
Dorastus, and dissemble thy love Fawnia, for better it were to dye with grief,
then to live with shame: yet in despite of love I will sigh, to see if I can
sigh out love. Fawnia somewhat appea^^ her griefs with these pithie
perswa^^^s, began after her (...) manner to walk about her sheep, and to
(...) the very ve^^inies did deny herto ^^erine.

But Dorastus was more impatient in his passions: for love so fiercely assailed
him, that neither company, nor music could mittigate his martyrdom, but did
rather far the more increase his malady: shame would not let him crave
counsel in this case, nor fear of his Fathers displeasure reueyle it to any
secret friend: but he was saine to make a Secretary of himself, and to
participate his thoughts with his own troubled mind. Lingering thus awhile in
doubtful suspense, at last stealing secretly from the court without either
men or Page, he went to see if he could epsy Fawnia walking abroad in the
field: but as one having a great deal more skill to retriue the partridge with
his spaniels, then to hunt after such a strange pray, he sought, but was
little the better: which cross luck drove him into a great choler, that he
began both to accuse love and fortune. But as he was ready to retire, he saw
Fawnia sitting all alone under the side of a hill, making a garland of such
homely flowers as the fields did afoord. This sight so revived his spirits
that he drew nigh, with more judgment to take a view of her singular
perfection, which he found to be such, as in that country attire she
stained all the courtly Dames of Sicilia. While thus he stood gazing with
pearcing looks on her surpassing beauty, Fawnia cast her eye aside, and spyed
Dorastus, with sudden fight made the poor girl to blush, and to die her
crystal cheeks with a vermilion red: which gave her such a grace, as she
seemed far more beautiful. And with that she rose up, saluting the Prince
with such modest courtesies, as he wondered how a country maid could afoord such
courtly behavior. Dorastus, repaying her courtesy with a smiling countenance,
began to parlie with her on this manner.

Fair maid (quoth he) either your want is great, or a shepherds life very
sweet, that your delight is in such country labors. I can not conceive what
pleasure you should take, unless you mean to imitate the nymph^^, being you,
self so like a Nymph. To put me out of thy(...) me what is to be commended in
a shepherdes l^^e, (...) pleasures you have to counter^^aile these drudgi^g
labors. Fawnia with blushing face made him this ready answer.

SIr, what richer state then content, or what sweeter life then quiet, we
shepherds are not borne to honor, nor beholding unto beauty, the less care
we have to fear fame or fortune: we co^^t our attire brave enough if warm
enough, and our food dainty, if to suffice nature: our greatest enemy is the
wolf: out only care in safe keeping our flock: in stead of courtly ditties we
spend the days with cuntry songs: our amorous conceits are homely thoughts:
delighting as much to talk of Pan and his country prankes, as Ladies to tell
of Venus and her want on toys. Our toil is in shifting the fouldes, and
looking to the Lambs easy labors: often singing and telling tales, homely
pleasures: our greatest wealth not to ^^ouer, out honor not to climb, our quiet
not to care. Envy looks not so low as shepherds: Shepherds gaze not so
high as ambition: we are rich in that we are poor with content, and proud
only in this that we have no cause to be proud.

THis witty answer of Fawnia so inflamed Dorastus fancy, as he commended him
self for making so good a choice, thinking, if her birth were aunswerable to
her wit and beauty, that she were a fit mate for the most famous Prince in
the world. He therefore began to sifte her more narrowely on this manner.

FAwnia, I see thou art content with Country labors, because thou know not
Courtly pleasures: I commend thy wit, and pity thy want: but will thou leave
thy Fathers Cottage, and serve a Courtlip Mistress.

Sir (quoth she) beggars ought not to strive against fortune, nor to gaze after
honor, least either their fall be greater, or they become blind. I am borne
to toil for the Court, not in the Court, my nature unfit for their nurture,
better live th^^ in mean degree, than in high disdain.

^^ll (...), Fawnia (quoth Dorastus) I guess at thy (...), thou art in love
with some Country Shephearde.

No sir (quoth she) shepherds cannot love, that are so simple, and maids may
not love that are so young.

Nay therefore (quoth Dorastus) maids must love, because they are young, for
Cupid is a child, and Venus, though old, is painted with fresh colors.

I grant (quoth she) age may be painted with new shadows, and youth may have
imperfect affections: but what art concealeth in one, ignorance reuealeth in
the other. Dorastus seeing Fawnia held him so hard, thought it was vain so
long to beat about the bush: therefore he thought to have given her a fresh
charge: but he was so prevented by certain of his men, who missing their
master, came possing to seek him: seeing that he was gone forth all alone,
yet before they drew so ^ie that they might hear their talk, he used these
speeches.

Why Fawnia, perhaps I love thee, and then thou must needs yield, for thou
know I can command and constrain. Truth sir (quoth she) but not to love:
for constrained love is force, not love: and know this sir, mine honesty is
such, as I had rather dye then be a Concubine even to a King, and my birth is
so base as I am unfit to be a wife to a poor farmer. Why then (quoth he)
thou can not love Dorastus? Yes said Fawnia, when Dorastus becomes a
shepherd, and with that the presence of his men broke off their parle, so that
he went with them to the palace, and left Fawnia sitting still on the hill
side, who seeing that the night drew on, shifted her fouldes, and busied her
self about other work to drive away such fond fancies as began to trouble her
brain. But all this could not prevail, for the beauty of Dorastus had made
such a deep impression in her heart, as it could not be worn out without
cracking, so that she was forced to blame her own folly in this wise.

AH Fawnia, why do thou gaze against the Sun, or catch at ye Wind:
stars are to be looked at with the eye, not reached at with the hand:
thoughts are to be measured by Fortunes not by desires^ falls come not by
sitting low, but by climing too hie: what then shall al fear to fall, because
some hap to fall? No luck comes by lot, and fortune (...) those threedes
which the destinies spin. Thou art fau^^^^ Fawnia of a prince, and yet thou art
so fond to reject desired favors: thou have denial at thy tongues end, and
desire at thy hearts bottom: a woman's fault, to spurn at that with her foot,
which she greedily catches at with her hand. Thou love Dorastus, Fawnia, and
yet seem to lower. Take h^^de, if he retire, thou will repent: for unless
he love, thou can but dye. Dye then Fawnia: for Dorastus does but jest: the
Lion never prays on the mouse, nor Faultons stoop not to dead stales. Sit
down then in sorrow, cease to love, and content thy self, that Dorastus will
vouchsafe to flatter Fawnia, though not to fancy Fawnia. Heigh ho: Ah fool, it
were seemelier for thee to whistle as a Shepherd, then to sigh as a lover, and
with that she ceased from these perplexed passions, folding her sheep, and
^ying home to her poor Cottage. But such was the incessant sorrow of Dorastus
to think on the wit and beauty of Fawnia, and to see how fond he was being
a Prince: and how froward she was being a beggar, then he began to loose his
wonted appetite, to look pale and ^an: in stead of mirth to feed on
melancholy: for courtly ^aunces to use cold dumpes: in so much that not only
his own men, but his father and all the court began to marvel at his sudden
change, thinking that some lingering sickness had brought him into this state:
wherefore he caused Physicians to come, but Dorastus neither would let them
minister, nor so much as suffer them to see his urine: but remained still so
oppressed with these passions, as he feared in him self a farther
inconvenience. His honor wished him to cease from such folly, but Love forced
him to follow fancy^ yea and in despite of honor, love won the conquest, so
that his hot desires caused him to find new devises, for he presently made
himself a shepherds coat, that he might go unknown, and with the less
suspicion to prattle with Fawnia, and conveyed it secretly into a thick grove
hard joining to the Palace, whether finding fit time, and opportunity, he went
all alone, and putting off his princely apparel, got on those shepherds
roabes, and t^^^^g a great hook in his hand (which he had also gotten) he w^^^
very ^^ciently to stood out the mistres of his affection: but as he went by the
way, seeing himself clad in such unseemly rags, he began to smile at his
own folly, and to reprove his fondness, in these terms.

WEll said Dorastus, thou keep a right decorum, base desires and homely
attires: thy thoughts are fit for none but a shepherd, and thy apparel such
as only become a shepherd. A strange change from a Prince to a pesant? What is
it? thy wretched fortune or thy wilful folly? Is it thy cursed destinies? Or
thy crooked desires, that appoints thee this penance? Ah Dorastus thou can
but love, and unless thou love, thou art like to perish for love. Yet fond
fool, choose flowers, not weeds: Diamondes, not peables: Ladies which may
honor thee, not shepherds which may disgrace thee. Venus is painted in
silks, not in rags: and Cupid treads on disdame, when he reaches at
dignity. And yet Dorastus shame not at thy shepherds weed: the heavenly
Gods have sometime earthly thoughts: Neptune became a Ram, Jupiter a Bull,
Apollo a shepherd: they Gods, and yet in love: and thou a man appointed to
love.

Devising thus with himself, he drew nigh to the place where Fawnia was
keeping her sheep, who casting her eye aside, and seeing such a manerly
shepherd, perfectly limmed, and coming with so good a pace, she began half
to forget Dorastus, and to favor this pretty shepherd, whom she thought she
might both love and obtain: but as she was in these thoughts, she perceived
then, it was the young prince Dorastus, wherefore she rose up, and reverently
saluted him. Dorastus taking her by the hand, repaied her courtesy with a
sweet kiss, and praying her to sit down by him, he began thus to lay the
battery.

IF thou marvel Fawnia at my strange attire, thou would more muse at my
unaccustomed thoughts: the one disgraceth but my outward shape, the other
disturbeth my inward senses. I love Fawnia, and therefore what love likes I
cannot mislike. Fawnia thou have promised to love, and I hope thou will
perform no less: I have fulfilled thy request, and now thou can but grant
my desire. Thou were content to love Dorastus when he ceast to be a Prince; and
to become a shepherd, and see I have made the change, and therefore not to
miss of my choice.

Truth, quoth Fawnia, but all that wear Cooles are not Monks: painted Eagles
are pictures, not Eagles, Zeusis Grapes were like Grapes, yet shadows: rich
clothing make not princes: nor homely attire beggars: shepherds are not called
shepheardes, because they were hooks and bags: but that they are borne
poor, and live to keep sheep, so this attire has not made Dorastus a
shepherd, but to steme like a shephherd.

WEll Fawnia, answered Dorastus: were I a shepherd, I could not but like thee,
and being a prince I am forced to love thee. Take heed Fawnia, be not proud of
beauties painting, for it is a flower that fades in the blossom. Those which
disdain in youth are despised in age: Beauties shadows are trickt up with
times colors, which being set to dry in the sun are stained with the sun,
scarce pleasing the sight ere they begin not to be worth the sight, not much
unlike the herb Ephemeron, which flourishes in the morning and is withered
before the sun setting: if my desire were against law, thou might justly
deny me by reason, but I love thee Fawnia, not to misuse thee as a Concubine,
but to use thee as my wife: I can promise no more, and mean to perform no
less.

Fawnia hearing this solemn protestation of Dorastus, could no longer
withstand the assault, but yielded up the forte in these friendly terms.

AH Dorastus, I shame to express that thou forcest me with thy sugared speech
to confess: my base birth causes the one, and thy high dignities the other.
Beggars thoughts ought not to reach so far as Kings, and yet my de^^es reach as
high as Princes, I dare not say Dorastus, I (...) thee, because I am a
shepherd, but the Gods know I have honored Dorastus (pardon if I say amiss)
yea and loved Dorastus with such dutiful affection as Fawnia can perform, or
Dorastus desire: I yield, not overcome with prayers, but with love, resting
Dorastus handmaid ready to obey his will, if no prejudice at all to his honor,
nor to my credit.

DOrastus hearing this freendly conclusion of Fawnia embraced her in his arms,
swearing that neither distance, time, nor adverse fortune should diminish his
affection: but that in despite of the destinies he would remain loyal unto
death. Having thus plight their troath each to other, seeing they could not
have the full fruition of their love in Sycilia for that Egistus consent would
never be granted to so mean a match, Dorastus determined as soon as time and
opportunity would give them leave, to provide a great mass of money, and many
rich and costly jewels, for the easier carriage, and then to transporte them
selves and their treasure into Italy, where they should lead a contented life,
until, such time as either he could be reconciled to his Father, or else by
sucession come to the Kingdom. This devise was greatly praised of Fawnia, for
she feared if the King his father should but hear of the contract, that his
fury would be such as no less then death would stand for payment: she
therefore told him, that delay bred danger: that many mishaps did fall out
between the cup and the lip, and that to avoid danger, it were best with
as much speed as might be, to pass out of Sycilia, least fortune might prevent
their pretense with some new despite: Dorastus, whom love pricked forward
with desire, promised to dispatch his affairs with as great have, as either
time or opportunity would give him leave: an so resting upon this point, after
many imbracings and sweet kisses they departed. Dorastus having taken his
leave of his best beloved Fawnia, went to the Grove where he had his rich
apparel, and there vncasting himself as secretly as might be, hiding up his
shepherds attire, till occasion should serve again to use it: he went to the
palace, showing by his merry countenance, yt either the state of his body
was amended, or the case of his mind greatly redressed: Fawnia poor soul was
no less joyful, that being a shepherd, fortune had favored her so, as to
reward her with the love of a Prince, hoping in time to be advanced from the
daughter of a poor farmer, to be the wife of a rich King: so that she thought
every hour a year, till by their departure they might prevent danger, not
ceasing still to go every day to her sheep, not so much for the care of her
flock, as for the desire she had to see her love and Lord Dorastus: who
oftentimes, when opportunity would serve, repaired thither to feed his fancy
with the sweet content of Fawnias, presence: and although he never went to
visit her, but in his shepherds rags, yet his often repair made him not
only suspected, but known to diverse of their neighbors: who for the good
will they bare to old Porrus, told him secretly of the matter, wishing him to
keep his daughter at home, least she went so often to the field that she
brought him home a young son: for they feared that Fawnia being so beautiful,
the young Prince would allure her to folly. Porrus was stricken into a dump at
these news, so that thanking his neighbors for their good will: he hyed him
home to his wife, and calling her aside, wringing his hands, and shedding
forth tears, he brake the matter to her in these terms.

I Am afraid wife, that my daughter Fawnia has made her self so fine, that
she will buy repentance too dear. I hear news, which if they be true, some
will wish they had not proved true. It is told me by my neighbors, that
Dorastus the Kings son begins to look at our daughter Fawnia: which if it
be so, I will not give her a halfepenp for her honestiect the years end. I
tell thee wife, now adays beauty is a great stale to trap young men, and fair
words and sweet promises are two great enemies to a maidens honesty: and
thou know where poor men entreat, and cannot obtain, there Princes may
command, and will obtain. Though Kings sons dance in nets, they may not
be seen: but poor men's faults are spied at a little hole: Well^ it is a hard
case where Kings lusts are laws, and that they should bind poor men to
that, which they themselves wilfully break.

Peace husband (quoth his wife) take heed what you say: speak no more then
you should, least you hear what you would not, great streams are to be
stopped by sleight, not by force: and princes to be persuaded by submission,
not by rigor: do what you can, but no more then you may, least in saving
Fawnias mayde^-head, you loose your own head. Take heed I say, it is ill
jesting with edged tools, and had sporting with Kings. The Wolf had his
skin pulled over his ears for but looking into the Lions den. Tush wife (quoth
he) thou speak like a fool, if the King should know that Dorastus had
begotten our daughter with child (as I fear it will fall out little better)
the Kings fury would be such as no doubt we should both loose our goods and
lives: necessity therefore has no law, and I will prevent this mischief
with a new devise that is come in my head, which shall neither offend the
King, nor displease Dorastus. I mean to take the chain and the jewels that I
found with Fawnia, and carry them to the King, letting him then to understand
how she is none of my daughter, but that I found her beaten up with the water
alone in a little boat wrapped in a rich Mantle, wherein was enclosed this
treasure. By this means I hope the King will take Fawnia into his service, and
we whatsoever chances shall be blameless. This device pleased the good wife
very well, so that they determined as soon as they might know the King at
leisure, to make him privy to this case. In the mean time Dorastus was not
slack in his affairs, but applied his matters with such diligence, that he
provided all things fit for their journey. Treasure and Jewels he had gotten
great store, thincking there was no better friend then money in a strange
country: rich attire he had provided for Fawnia, and because he could not
bring the matter to pass with out the help and advise of some one, he made an
old servant of his called Capnio, who had served him from his childhood, privy
to his affairs: who seeing no persuasions could prevail to divert him from
his settled determination, gave his consent and dealt so secretly in the cause,
that within short space he had gotten a ship ready for their passage: the
Mariners seeing a fit gale of wind for their purpose, wished Capnio to make no
delays, least if they pretermitted this good weather, they might stay long ere
they had such a fair wind. Capnio fearing that his negligence should hinder
the journey, in the night time conveyed the trunckes full of treasure into the
ship, and by secrette means let Fawnia understand, that the next morning
they meant to depart: she upon this news slept very little that night, but
got up very early, and went to her sheep, looking every minute when she
should see Dorastus, who carried not long, for fear delay might breed danger,
but came as fast as he could gallop, and without any great circumstance took
Fawnia up behind him and rode to the haven, where the ship lay, which was
not three quarters of a mile distant from that place. He no sooner came there,
but the Mariners were ready with their Cockboate to set them aboard, where
being coucht together in a Cabben they past away the time in recounting their
old loves, til their man Capnio should come. Porrus who had heard that this
morning the King would go abroad to take the air, called in haste to his wife
to bring him his holyday hose and his best Iacket, that he might go like an
honest substantial man to tell his tale. His Wife a good cleanly wenche,
brought him all things fit, and spungd him up very handsomely, giving him the
chains and Jewels in a little box, which Porrus for the more safety put in
his bosom. Having thus all his trinkets in a readiness, taking his staff in his
hand he had his wife kiss him for good luck, and so he went toward the
Palace. But as he was going, fortune (who meant to show him a little false
play) prevented his purpose in this wise.

He met by chance in his way Capnio, who trudging as fast as he could with a
little coffer under his arm to the ship, and spying Porrus whom he knew to
be Fawnias Father, going toward the Palace, being a wily fellow, began to
doubt the worst, and therefore crossed him the way, and asked him whither he was
going so early this morning.

Porrus (who knew by his face that he was one of ye Court) meaning simply, told
him that the Kings son Dorastus dealt hardly with him: for he had but one
Daughter who was a little Beautiful, and that his neighbors told him the
young Prince had allured her to folly, he went therefore now to complain to
the King how greatly he was abused.

Capnio (who straight way smelt the whole matter) began to soth him in his
talk, and said, that Dorastus dealt not like a Prince to spoil and poor
manes daughter in that sort: he therefore would do the best for him he could,
because he knew he was an honest man. But (quoth Capnio) you lose your labor
in going to the Palace, for the King means this day to take the air of the
Sea, and to go aboard of a ship that lies in the haven, I am going before,
you see, to provide all things in a readiness, and if you will follow my
counsel, turn back with me to the haven, where I will set you in such a
fit place as you may speak to the King at your pleasure. Porrus giving
credit to Capnios smooth tale, gave him a thousand thanks for his friendly
advise, and went with him to the haven, making all the way his complaints of
Dorastus, yet concealing secretly the chain and the Jewels. As Soon as they
were come to the Sea side, the mariners seeing Capnio, came a land with their
cock-boate, who still dissembling the matter, demanded of Porrus if he would
go see the ship, who unwilling and fearing the worst, because he was not well
acquainted with Capnio, made his excuse that he could not brook the Sea,
therefore would not trouble him.

Capnio, seeing that by fair means he could not get him aboard, commanded
the mariners that by violence they should carry him into the ship, who like
sturdy knaves hoisted the poor shepherd on their backs, and bearing him to
the boat, lanched from the land.

Porrus seeing himself so cunningly betrayed durst not cry out, for he saw
it would not prevail, but began to entreat Capnio and the mariners to be good
to him, and to pity his estate, he was but a poor man that lived by his
labor: they laughing to see the shepherd so afraid, made as much haste as
they could, and set him aboorde. Porrus was no sooner in the ship, but he
saw Dorastus walking with Fawnia, yet he scarf knew her: for she had attired
her self in rich apparel, which, so increased her beauty, that she
resembled rather an Angel then a mortal creature.

Dorastus and Fawnia, were half astonished to see the old shepherd,
maruailing greatly what wind had brought him thither, til Capino told them all the whole discourse: how Porrus was going to make his complaint to the King, if
by policy ^he had not prevented him, and therefore now since he was aboard,
for the avoiding of further danger, it were best to carry him into Italy.

Dorastus praised greatly his man's devise, and allowed of his counsel: but
Fawnia, (who still feared Porrus, as her father) began to blush for shame, that
by her means he should either incure danger or displeasure.

The old shephard hearing this hard sentence, that he should on such a sudden
be carried from his Wife, his country and kinsfolk, into a foreign Land
amongst strangers, began with bitter tears to make his complaint, and on his
knees to entreat Dorastus, that pardoning his unadvised folly he would give
him leave to go home: swearing that he would keep all things as secret as
they could wish. But these protestations could not prevail, although Fawnia
entreated Dorastus very earnestly, but the mariners hoisting their maine sails
waied ankers, and hailed into the deep, where we leave them to the favor of
the wind and seas, and return to Egistus.

WHo having appointed this day to hunt in one of his Forests, called for his
son Dorastus to go sport himself, because he saw that of late he began to
loure: but his men made answer that he was gone abroad none knew whither,
except he were gone to the grove to walk all alone, as his custom was to do
every day.

The King willing to waken him out of his dumpes, sent one of his men to go
seek him, but in vain, for at last he returned, but find him he could not,
so that the King went himself to go see the sport: where passing away the
day, returning at night from hunting, he asked for his son, but he could
not be heard of, which drove ye King into a great choler: where upon most of
his Noblemen and other Courtiers, poasted abroad to seek him, but they could
not hear of him through all Sicilia, only they missed Capnio his man which
again made the King suspect that he was not gone far.

Two or three days being passed, and no news heard of Dorastus, Egistus began
to fear that he was devoured with some wild beasts, and upon that made out a
great troop of men to go seek him: who coasted through all the Country and
searched in every dangerous and secret place, until at last they met with
a Fisherman that was sitting in a little covert hard by the sea side mending
his nets, when Dorastus and Fawnia took shipping: who being examined if he
either knew or heard where the Kings Son was, without any secrecy at all
revealed the whole matter, how he was sailed two days past, and had in his
company his man Capnio, Porrus, and his fair Daughter Fawnia. This heavy
news was presently carried to the King, who half dead for sorrow, commanded
Porrus wife to be sent for: she being come to the Palace, after due
examination, confessed that her neighbors had often told her that the Kings
Son was too familier with Fawnia her Daughter: whereupon, her husband
fearing the worst, about two days past (hearing the King should go an
hunting) rose early in the morning and went to make his complaint, but since
she neither heard of him, nor saw him. Egistus perceiving the woman's unfeigned
simplicity, let her depart without incurring further displeasure, conceiling
such secret grief for his Sons recklesse folly, that he had so forgotten
his honor and parentage, by so base a choice to dishonor his Father, and
discredit himself, that with very care and thought he fell into a quartan
fever, which was so unfit for his aged years and complexion, that he became so
weak, as the Physicians would grant him no life.

But his son Dorastus little regarded either father, country: or Kingdom,
in respect of his Lady Fawnia, for fortune smyling on this young nouice, lent
him so lucky a gale of wind, for the space of a day and a night, that the
maryners lay and slept upon the hatches: but on the next morning about the
break of the day, the air began to ouercast, the winds to rise, the seas to
swel, yea presently there arose such a fearful tempest, as the ship was in
danger to be swallowed up with every sea, the maine ^^ast with the violence of
the wind was thrown over board, the sails were torn, the tacklings went in
sunder, the storm raging still so furiously that poor Fawnia was almost dead
for fear, but that she was greatly comforted with the presence of Dorastus.
The tempest continued three days, al which time the Mariners every minute
looked for death, and the air was so darkened with clouds that the Master
could not tell by his compass in what Coast they were. But upon the fourth day
about ten of the clock, the wind began to cease: the sea to wax calm, and the
sky to be clear, and the Mariners descryed the coast of Bohemia, shooting of
their ordnance for joy that they had escaped such a fearful tempest.

Dorastus hearing that they were arrived at some harbor, sweetly kissed
Fawnia, and bad her be of good cheer: when they told him that the port
belonged unto the chief City of Bohemia where Pandosto kept his Court,
Dorastus began to be sad: knowing that his Father hated no man so much as
Pandosto, and that the King himself had sought secretly to betray Egistus: this
considered, he was half afraid to go on land, but that Capnio counseled him
to change his name and his country, until such time as they could get some
other Bark to transport them into Italy. Dorastus liking this devise made his
case privy to the Mariners, rewarding them bountifully for their pains, and
charging them to say that he was a Gentleman of Trapalonia called Meleagrus.
The shipmen willing to show what friendship they could to Dorastus, promised to
be as secret as they could, or he might wish, and upon this they landed in a
little village a mile distant from the City, where after they had rested a
day, thinking to make provision for their marriage: the fame of Fawnias beauty
was spread throughout all the City, so that it came to the ears of Pandosto:
who then being about the age of fifty, had notwithstanding young and fresh
affections: so that he desired greatly to see Fawnia, and to bring this matter
the better to pass, hearing they had but one man, and how they rested at a
very homely house: he caused them to be apprehended as spies, and sent a dozen
of his guard to take them: who being come to their lodging, told them the
Kings message: Dorastus no whit dismayed, accompanied with Fawnia and Capnio,
went to the court (for they left Porrus to keep the stuff) who being admitted
to the Kings presence. Dorastus and Fawnia with humble obeisance saluted his
majesty.

Pandosto amassed at the singular perfection of Fawnia, stood half astonished,
viewing her beauty, so that he had almost forgot himself what he had to do:
at last with stearne countenance he demanded their names, and of what country
they were, and what caused them to land in Bohemia. Sir (quoth Dorastus) know
that my name Meleagrus is a Knight borne and brought up in Trapalonia, and this
Gentlewoman, whom I mean to take to my wife is an Italian borne in Padua, from
whence I have now brought her. The Cause I have so small a train with me, is
for that her friends unwilling to consent, I intended secretly to convey her
into Trapalonia: whither as I was sailing, by distress of weather I was driven
into these coasts: thus have you heard my name, my country, and the cause of my
voyage. Pandosto starting from his seat as one in choler, made this rough
reply.

Meleagrus, I fear this smooth tale has but small truth, and that thou
couerest a foul skin with fair paintings. No doubt this Lady by her grace
and beauty is of her degree more meet for a mighty Prince, then for a simple
knight, and thou like a perjured traitor have bereft her of her parents, to
their present grief, and her ensuing sorrow. Till therefore I hear more of
her parentage and of thy calling, I will stay you both here in Bohemia.

Dorastus, in whom rested nothing but Kingly valor, was not able to suffer the
reproaches of Pandosto, but that he made him this answer.

IT is not meet for a King, without due proof to appeach any man of ill
behavior, nor upon suspicion to infer belief: strangers ought to be
entertained with courtesy, not to be entreated with cruelty, least being
forced by want to put up injuries: the Gods revenge their cause with rigor.

Pandosto hearing Dorastus utter these words, commanded that he should
straight be committed to prison, until such time as they heard further of his
pleasure, but as for Fawnia, he charged that she should be entertained in the
Court, with such courtesy as belonged to a stranger and her calling. The rest
of the shipmen he put into the Dungeon.

Having thus hardly handled the supposed Trapalonians: Pandosto contrary to
his aged yeaxes began to be somewhat tickled with the beauty of Fawnia, in so
much that he could take no rest, but cast in his old head a thousand new
devises: at last he fell into these thoughts.

HOw art thou pestred Pandosto with fresh affections, and unfit fancies,
wishing to possess with an unwilling mind, and a hot desire troubled with a
could disdain: Shall thy mind yield in age to that thou have resisted in
youth? Peace Pandosto, blabbe not out that which thou may be ashamed to
reveal to thy self. Ah Fawnia is beautiful, and it is not for thine honor
(fond fool) to name her that is thy Captive, and an other man's Concubine.
Alas, I reach at that with my hand which my heart would feign refuse: playing
like the bird Ibys in Egypt, which hates Serpents, yet feeds on their eggs.

Tush, hot desires turn oftentimes to cold disdain: Love is brittle, where
appetite, not reason bears the sway: Kings thoughts ought not to climb so
high as the heavens, but to look no lower then honor: better it is to pecke
at the stars with the young Eagles, then to pray on dead carcasses with the
Uulture: it is more honorable for Pandosto to dye by concealing Love, their to
enjoy such unfit Love. Does Pandosto then love? Yea: whom? A maid
unknown, yea and perhapps, immodest, stragled out of her own country:
beautiful, but not therefore chaste: comely in body, but perhaps crooked in
mind. Cease then Pandosto to look at Fawnia, much less to love her: be not
overtaken with a woman's beauty, whose eyes are framed by art to inamour, whose
heart is framed by nature to inchaunt, whose false tears know their true
times^ and whose sweet words pearce deeper then sharp swords. Here Pandosto
ceased from his talk, but not from his love: for although he sought by reason,
and wisdom to suppress this frantic affection: yet he could take no rest,
y^ beauty of Fawnia had made such a deep impression in his heart. But on a
day walking abroad into a Park which was hard adjoining to his house, he sent
by one of his servants for Fawnia, unto whom he uttered these words.

FAwnia, I commend thy beauty and wit, and now pity thy distress and want:
but if thou will forsake Sir Meleagrus, whose poverty, though a Knight, is not
able to maintain an estate aunswerable to thy beauty, and yield thy consent to
Pandosto: I will both increase thee with dignities and riches. No sir, answered
Fawnia: Meleagrus is a knight that has won me by love, and none but he shall
wear me: his sinister mischance shall not diminishe my affection, but rather
increase my good will: think not though your Grace has imprisoned him without
cause, that fear shall make me yield my consent: I had rather be Meleagrus
wife, and a beggar, then live in plenty, and be Pandostos Concubine. Pandosto
hearing the assured answer of Fawnia, would, notwithstanding, prosecute his
suite to the uttermost: seeking with fair words and great promises in scale
the fort of her chastity, swearing that if she would grant to his desire,
Meleagrus should not only he fet at liberty, but honored in his course amongst
his Nobles: but these alluring baytes could not intise her mind from the love
of her ^^ we betrothed mate Meleagrus: which Pandosto seeing, he left her alone
for that time to consider more of the demand. Fawnia being alone by her self,
began to enter into these solitary meditations.

AH unfortunate Fawnia, thou ^eest to desire above fortune, is to strive
against the Gods, and Fortune^ Who gazeth at the su^^e we akeneth his sight:
they which stare at the sky, fall often into deep pi^s: had thou rested
content to have been a shepherd, thou neededst not to have feared mischaunce:
better had it been for thee, by sitting low, to have had quiet, then by
climing high to have fallen into misery. But alas I fear not mine own
danger, but Dorastus displeasure. Ah sweet Dorastus, thou art a Prince, but
now a prisoner, by too much love, procuring thine own loss: had thou not
loved Fawnia thou had been fortunate, shall I then be false to him that
has forsaken Kingdoms for my cause: no, would my death might deliver him, so
mine honor might be preserved. With that feching a deep sigh, she ceased from
her complaints, and went again to the Palace, inioying a liberty without
content, and proffered pleasure with small joy. But poor Dorastus ^^^ all this
while in olose prison, being pinch^d with a hard restraint, and pained with the
burden of cold, and heavy Irons, sorrowing sometimes that his fond affection
had pr^cured him this mishappe, that by the disobedience of his parents, he
had wrought his own despite: an other while cursing the Gods and fortune,
that they should cross him with such sinister chance: uttering at last his
passions in these words.

Ah unfortunate wretch borne to mishappe, now thy folly has his desert: art
thou not worthy for thy base mind to have bad fortune: could the destinies
favor thee, which have forgot thine honor and dignities: will not the Gods
plague him with despite that payneth his father with disobedi^nce. Oh Gods, if
any favor or justice b^^left, plague me, but favor poor Fawnia and shroud
her from the tirannies of wretched Pandosto, but let my death free her from
mishap^ and then welcome death: Dorastus payned with these heavy passions,
sorrowed and sighed, but in vain, for which he used the more patience. But
again to Pandosto, who broyling at the heat of unlawful lust could take no
rest but still felt his mind disquieted with his new love, so that his nobles
and subjects marueyled greatly at this sudaine alteration, not being able to
conjecture the cause of this his continued care: Pandosto thinking every hour
a year til he had talked once again with Fawnia, sent for her secretly into
his chamber, whither though Fawnia unwillingly coming, Pandosto entertained
her very courteously using these familiar speeches, which Fawnia answered as
shortly in this wise.

Pandosto. Fawnia are you become less^ wilful and more wise, to pre^erre the
love of a King before the liking of a poor Knight: I think ere this you
think it is better to be favored of a King then of a subject.


Fawnia. Pandosto, the body is subject to victories, but the mind not to be
subdued by conquest, honesty is to be preferred before honor, and a dram of
faith weighs down a tun of gold. I have promised Meleagrus to love, and
will perform no less.


Pandosto. Fawnia, I know thou art not so unwise in thy choice, as to refuse
the offer of a King, nor so ungrateful as to despise a good turn: thou art now
in that place where I may command, and yet thou see I entreat, my power is
such as I may compel by force; and yet I su^^y prayers: Yield Fawnia thy love
to him which burns in thy love, Meleagrus shall be set free, thy countrymen
discharged: and thou both loved and honored.


Fawnia. I see Pandosto, where lust rules it is a miserable thing to be a
virgin, but know this, that I will always prefer fame before life, and
rather choose death then dishonor.


Pandosto seeing that there was in Fawnia a determinate courage to love
Meleagrus, and a resolution without fear to hate him, flong away from her in a
rage: swearing if in short time she would not be won with reason: he would
forget all courtesy, and compel her to grant by rigor: but these threatening
words no whit dismayed Fawnia: but that she still both dispighted and despised
Pandosto. While thus these two lovers strove, the one to win love the other
to live in hate: Egistus heard certain news by Merchauntes of Bohemia, that
his son Dorastus was imprisoned by Pandosto, which ^^^ h^^^ fear greatly
that his son should be but hardly entreated: yet considering that Bellaria
and he was cleared by the Oracle of Apollo from that crime wherewith, Pandosto
had unjustly charged them, he thought best to send with all speed to Pandosto,
that he should set free his son Dorastus, and put to death Fawnia and her
father Porrus: finding this by the ad^^^e of Counsel the speediest remedy to
release his son, he ^aused presently two of his ships to be rigged and
thoroughly furnished with provision of men and victuals, and sa^ediuers of his
nobles, Embassadoures into Bohemia: who willing to obey their King, and receive
their young Prince: made no delays, for fear of danger, but with as much
speed as might be, sailed toward Bohemia: the wind and seas favored them
greatly, which made them hope of some good hap, for within three days they
were landed: which Pandosto no sooner heard of their arrival, but he in person
went to meet them, entreating the^ with such sumptuous and famili^^ courtesy,
that they might well perceive how sorry he was for the formet mi^ries he had
offered to their King, and how willing (if it might be) to make amends. As
Pa^dosto made report to them, how one Meleagrus a Knight of Trapolonia was
lately arrived with a Lady called Fawnia in his land, coming very suspitiously,
accompanied only with one servant, and an old shepherd. The Ambassadors
perceived by the half, what the whole tale meant, and began to conjecture, that
it was Dorastus, who for fear to be known, had changed his name: but
dissembling ye matter, they shortly arrived at the Court, where after they had
bin very solemnly and sumptuously feasted, the noble men of Sicilia being
gathered together, they made report of their Embassage ^ where they certified
Pandosto that Meleagtus was son and heir to the King Egistus, and that his
name was Dorastus: how contrary to the Kings mind he had privily conuaied
away that Fawnia, intending to marry her, being but daughter to that poor
shepherd Porrus: whereupon the Kings request was, that Capnio, Fawnia, and
Porrus might be murdered and put to death, and that his son Dorastus might
be sent home in safety. Pandosto having attentively and with great marvel
he^rd their Embassage, willing to reconcile himself to Egistus, and to show
him how greatly he esteemed his labor: although love and fancy forbad him to
hurt Fawnia, yet in despite of love he determined to execute Egistus will
without mercy, and therefore he presently sent for Dorastus out of prison, who
meruailing at this unlooked for courtesy, found at his coming to the Kings
presence, that which he least doubted of, his fathers Embassadours^ who no
sooner saw him, but with great reverence they honored him: and Pandosto
embracing Dorastus, set him by him very lovingly in a chair of estate.
Dorastus ashamed that his folly was be wraied, sat a long time as one in a
muse, til Pandosto told him the sum of his Fathers embassage, which he had no
sooner heard, but he was touched at the quick, for the cruel sentence that was
pronounced against Fawnia: but neither could his sorrow nor persuasions
prevail, for Pandosto commanded that Fawnia, Porrus, and Capnio, should be
brought to his presence: who were no sooner come, but Pandosto having his
former love turned to a disdainful hate, began to rage against Fawnia in these
terms.

THou disdainful vassal, thou currish kite, assigned by the destinies to base
fortune, and yet with an aspiring mind gazing after honor: how durst thou
presume, being a beggar, to match with a Prince: By thy alluring looks to
inchant the son of a King, to leave his own country to fulfill thy
disordinate lusts. O despightfull mind, a proud heart in a beggar is not
unlike to a great fire in a small cottage, which warmeth not the house, but
burns it: assure thy self thou shall die, and thou old doting fool, whose
folly has been such, as to suffer thy daughter to reach above thy fortune:
look for no other meede, but the like punishment. But Capnio, thou which have
betrayed the King, and have consented to the unlawful lust of thy Lord and
master, I know not how justly I may plague thee: death is too easy a
punishment for thy falsehood, and to live (if not in extreme misery) were not
to show thee equity. I therefore award that thou shall have thine eyes put
out, and continually while thou die, grind in a mil like a brute beast. The
fear of death ^rought a sorrowful silence upon Fawnia and Capnio, but Porrus
seeing no hope of life, burst forth into these speeches.

PAndosto, and ye noble Emabassadours of Sicili^^, seeing without cause I am
condemned to die: I am yet glad I have opportunity to disburde^ my conscience
before my death: I will tell you as much as I know, and yet no more than is
true: whereas I am accused that I have been a supporter of Fawnias pride, and
she disdained as a vilde beggar, so it is, that I am neither Father unto her,
nor she daughter unto me.

For so it happened that I being a poor shepherd in Sicilia, living by
keeping others men's flocks: one of my sheep straying down to the sea side,
as I went to seek her, I saw a little boat driven upon the shore, wherein I
found a babe of six days old, wrapped in a mantle of skarlet, having about
the neck this chain^: I pitying the child, and desirous of the treasure,
carried it home to my wife, who with great care nursed it up, and set it to
keep sheep. Here is the chain and the Jewels, and this Fawnia is the child
whom I found in the boat, what she is, or of what parentage I know not,
b^^t this I am assured that she is none of mine.

Pandosto would scarce suffer him to tell out his tale, but that he enquired
the time of the year, the manner of the boat, and other circumstaunces, which
when he found agreeing to his count, he suddenly leapt from his seat, and
kissed Fawnia, wetting her tender cheeks with his tears, and crying my
daughter Fawnia, ah swtete Fawnia, I am thy Father, Fawnia. This sudden
passion of the King drove them all into a maze, especially Fawnia and Dorastus.
But when the King had breathed himself a while in this new joy, he rehearsed
before the Ambassadors the whole matter, how he had entreated his wife
Bellaria for jealousy, and that this was the child whom he sent to floate
in the seas.

Fawnia was not more joyful that she had found such a Father, then Dorastus
was glad he should get such a wife. The Ambassadors rejoiced that their young
prince had made such a choice, that those Kingdoms which through enmity had
long time bin disseuered, should now through perpetual amity be united and
reconciled. The Citizens and subjects of Bohemia (hearing that the King had
found again his Daughter, which was supposed dead, joyful that there was an
heir aparant to his Kingdom) made Bonstres and shows throughout the City:
The Courtiers and Knights appointed Iusts and Turneis, to signify their
willing minds in gratifying the Kings hap.

Eighteen days being past in these princely sports, Pandosto willing to
recompense old Porrus, of a shepherd made him a Knight: which done, providing
a sufficient Navy to receive him and his retinue, accompanied with Dorastus,
Fawnia, and the Sicilian Ambassadors, he sailed toward Sicilia, where he was
most princely entertained by Egistus: who hearing this comicall event,
rejoiced greatly at his sons good hap, and without delay (to the perpetual
joy of the two young Lovers) celebrated the marriage: which was no sooner ended,
but Pandosto (calling to mind how first he betrayed his friend Egistus, how his
jealousy was the cause of Bellarias death, that contrary to the law of nature
he had lusted after his own Daughter) moved with these desperate thoughts, he
fell in a melancholy fit, and to close up the Comedy with a Tragical
stratageme, he slew himself, whose death being many days bewailed of
Fawnia, Dorastus, and his dear friend Egistus, Dorastus taking his leave of
his father, went with his wife and the dead corpse into Bohemia, wh^^ after they
were sumptuously ^^^^^^bed, Dorastus ended his days in contented quiet.

FINIS.

