THE IAYLERS IAYL-DELIVERY. Preached at Great Saint Mary's in CAMBRIDGE, the 6.
of February. 1619.

By HENRY GREENVVOOD, Master of Art, and Preacher of the Word of God.

1. PET. 5. 5. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

AT LONDON Printed by George Purslow, for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the sign of the Sun in Bethlem. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND WORSHIPFVLL Mrs JANE BVRGOYNE, Wife to the Right
Worshipful M. JOHN BVRGOYNE of Sutton in Bedford, and Daughter to the Right
Worshipful Mr. WILLIAM KEMPE, of Spainshall in Fiching-field Essex, Esquire,
all increase of grace from the Father of light and of life be most heartily
commended.(*)
RIght virtuous and much beloved and graced of God, J cannot but present this
trembling, (yet not all trembling) Tractate to you, partly knowing how welcome
holy subjects are unto your soul, and especially considering your importunity
for a written Copy of the same.

It is not fit that holy things be given to dogs, nor pearls be cast to
swine: but matters divine, to persons denoute most meet for presentment, both
for godly use, and strong defense against disgracers of them.

J have therefore made this Jayler your Prisoner, and committed him to your
safe watch and ward: look what pains you take, and time expend about him,
the Preacher of deliverance to all Captives, Luke 4. 18. will one day most
faithfully and richly reward.

I pray have an eye always unto him, see him sick, see him sound, see him
condemned, see him saved, see his passage through Hell to Heaven: Let his
example be your instruction, his fear your humbling, his faith your happying:
you must be touchd with Legal attrition, or else no taste of heavenly
remission.

Let not his Hell despair you, nor his Heaven presume you: but by the one,
hold awe of God and fear, and by the other, hope of happiness for ever.

Now the Lord add unto your glory by these and other holy helps and means,
and his best blessings be multiplied upon you, your learned, loving, and
religious Husband, and all your tender Oliuebranches, for his dear Christ's
sake.

Amen.
From Hempstead in Essex, this 3. of April. 1620. Your Worships faithful
welwiller, and ever to be commanded in the Lord, HENRY GREENVVOOD.

THE IAYLERS IAYL-DELIVERY.
ACTS 26. 30, 31. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, thou shall be saved, and thine household.
THE only course the Lord our God does take in the effectual calling and
converting of such, whose names are written in the book of Life, is this: he
humbles, before he exalts; he shows our daninable estate through sin by
the Law, before ever he signifies unto us, that he is our salvation.

A threefold reason may be rendered thereof:

First, because till men be thus humbled, they

Secondly, that our redemption might be more

Thirdly, that Gods mercy in our deliverance

This general truth is confirmed by a particular example, in the words of my
text: for this poor Iayler is most grievously tormented through the horror of
the Law, before ever he can find his soul recovered by the salvation of the
Gospel.

Sirs, what must I do to be saved? and they said, Believe in the Lord, etc.

In which words I commend to your religious considerations in general these
two.

First, an earnest inquisition for salvation, and Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?

Secondly, a comfortable resolution to this perplexed Paul and Syla's part:
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, thou shall be saved and thine household.

In this Iaylers earnest enquiry for salvation, I note these three.

First, his reverent carriage to the Ministers of the most high God, in the
first word, Sirs.

Secondly, the occasion of this his earnest inquisition, What must I do? I
that am the son of bitterness, indignation and eternal weeping; what must
poor, lamentable, damnable I do to be saved?

Thirdly, the inquisition it self, and that is for To be saved. Sirs, Sirs,
what must I do? Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

Sirs, It is nomen honoris, a name of honor, and Sirs.
title of dignity, elim tributum ijs qui sapientia abundarunt: in elder time
appropriated to wisdom and learning.

Here first I might take occasion to show with how great reverence Ministers
of the Gospel are to be respected: good Pastors are to be had in double
honor: yea their feet to be esteemed blessed, that bring glad tidings of peace
to our souls; but I forbear the prosecution of this point, and propound unto
you the marvelous change that is Note.
found in this Iayler: for in the precedent verses it is evident how doggedly
and despectiuely he used these holymen: he laid upon them hand and foot bolts
and fetters as many as they could bear, he thrust them into the inner dungeon
and prison: but now the Lord having taken him to do, and given him the true
and terrible fight and sense of his sins, he is of another mind: now he
brings them out, washes their wounds, refreshes their bodies, and reuerenceth
their persons; Sirs, Reverend Sirs, you Ministers of the most high God; what
must I do to be saved?

No reason can be rendered for this miraculous change, but this: The wind
blows where it luft^th: John 3. 8.
and God has mercy on whom he will have mercy: and Romans 9. 15.
Of this stone God can raise a child to Abraham. Math. 3. 9.


This change we must all be acquainted with, if ever we will prove our selves
truly converted.

The Greek word for repentance, (...) by name signifies a change, signifying
unto us, that he that will prove himself truly penitent for his sin, must
be truly changed from his sin.

This change we find in penitent Mary: those eyes which once enticed to sin,
and those hayres which once were employed to iniquity, were wondrously altered
and changed; for her eyes were conduits to distill whole buckets of tears to
wash our Saviors feet, and her hayres an acceptable towell John 11. 2.
to wipe them.

This change we find in penitent Paul: who of a Persecutor became a
Profossor, of a Lion a Lamb: Acts 9. 6.
and as he put to death others for the Gospel; so in the end himself put to
death for the same.

This change we find in Zacchee: who before his conversion was a notable
pick-purse and poller of the Commons: but when Christ came to the house and
home of his heart, proved bountiful and liberal, insomuch, that half of his
goods he Luke 19. 8.
gave to the poor, and if any man could prove that he had wronged him a
penny, he would make him quadruple restitution.

So this Iayler before his conversion, an insidell, profane, and hard-hearted
member: but the Lord having taken him to task, and trembling him by the spirit
of bondage, now he reuerenceth Gods Ministers, now he humbly sues unto them
for counsel and instruction, saying: Sirs, Renerend Sirs; what must I do to
be saved?

And thus must we all be changed, (beloved in the Lord) from darkness to
light, or el^ hell and damnation must be our portion to drink.

The Lord then work this excellent change in our hearts, the Lord create in us
all a new heart, and renew a right spirit within us; the Lord take away our
stony hearts and give us hearts of flesh; the Lord renew us in our minds and
judgments, wills and affections, words and actions: turn us (O Lord) and we
shall be turned, convert us thus (O God) and then, and never before then shall
we be converted.

Thus much for the first word, Sirs.

The second orderly to be considered, is the occasion of this his earnest
enquiry for salvation: and that was his humiliation by the Law in these words:
What must I do? I that am the child of wrath and What must I do?
son of perdition, I that am leprous, loathsome, and out of measure sinful, I
that have the wrath of God sensibly upon my soul for my sins, I that know no
way out of this my fear and misery; O what must poor lamentable, damnable I
do to be faued?

Whence we note the power, office, and property of Note.
the Law: that it is (as we read Galathians 3. 24.) A Gal. 3. 24.
notable Schoolmaster to send us to Christ: it sends us to Christ, non
aliciendo, sed compellendo, not by alluring, but by compelling.

The Law is a killing letter: When the commandment came, I dyed, says Paul:
it kills by showing Romans 7. 10.
us and making us feel the damnability of our sins: some by the Law killed
to destruction, as Caine, Esau, Judas, and such as wholly despair: others
killed to salvation, as Paul and such as by their despair are driven unto
Christ.

The property of the Law is to humble and quake us for our sins: it shows
us our sin, and ministers wrath unto our souls.

This humiliation stands in two. Confession. Attrition.


The first brings shame, the second horror: shame from sins filthiness,
horror from sins fearfulness: This does the Law being known and applied,
as a Sentinel it bewrays the enemy, and makes us fly unto Christ.

Thus were they humbled that heard Peter in the Acts: they were wounded in
conscience and pricked in heart before they cried out, Men and brethren, Act.
2. 37.
what must we do?

Thus the Law wrought upon them that heard John, before they cried out, What
must we do Luke 3. 10.
then?

And so Nineueh being first humbled, sought unto Ion. 3. 5.
God, and Paul first trembled, then said, What shall I Act. 9 6.
do Lord? And here a poor Iayler in the sorrow of his soul, cries out for
salvation; Sirs, what must I do to be saved? so that the Law prepares us to
Christ.

It is most certain that salvation belongs to none but the humble: To whom
will I look (says Esaias 66. 2.
the Lord) even to him that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at my words:
yea the refreshing is promised to none but the laden: for we must go through
Math. 11. 28.
the hell of a wounded conscience, before we shall taste of the heavenly
refreshing: Merchants wax Similie.
must leach in a candle, before it can take a stamp or impression: the terror
of sin must languish our souls, before we can come to blessed remission.

The coming of God into the souls of his chosen, is notably resembled by his
appearance to Eliah: First, there came a mighty strong wind 1. Kin. 19. 11. 12.
that rent the mountains, and brake the rocks, but the Lord was not in the
wind: after the wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake: after the earthquake came fire, but the Lord was not in the fire:
at last came there a still and soft voice. So the Lord appears to his
redeemed ones, first by the wind of his wrath, breaking their hearts; then by
the earthquake of his anger, shaking their souls; then by the fire of his
displeasure, smoking their consciences: but in the end, by the still voice of
his mercy he refreshes their souls.

This poor Iayler had an earthquake in his conscience, as an earthquake in
his Castle, before ever he perceived his election and salvation.

There is an old saying, We must go by the gates of Hell to Heaven: but I say
more, We must after a sort be in Hell before ever we can be capable of Heaven:
that is, in the hell of an ashamed, affrighted, and confounded conscience,
before ever the Lord will say unto our souls that he is our redemption.

If humiliation by the Law precedes the salvation

Secondly, they that are troubled and amazed

Thirdly, let not humbled consciences rest here,

And this counsel I give all troubled souls for sin:

Let them come to the Temple.

Let them impart their grief to some friend or

Let them confer with them that have been in

Let them know that they must be thus sick, before

Let them build upon Gods mercy promised

Let them pray that God in his good time would

What must I do? Text.

Again here we may note the miserable Note.
mischief and cursed condition of sin: how burdensome and irksome it is to
the soul, it ministers nothing but horror and hell to our souls.

The service of sin is far worse then the slavery of Egypt.

The bondage of Egypt was of the body only:

In the bondage of Egypt they served men: in this,

In the first, they had a sense of their bondage and

In the first the misery was but temporal: in the

In outward bondage men may help themselves

A woeful thing it is to abide in the estate of sin: yea the damned
themselves confess that the way of sin is a wearisome way to be walked in:
We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness, Wisd. 5. 7.
and the light of righteousness has not shined upon our souls.

No marvel therefore if the bands of wickedness be called, heavy and
importable burdens. Esaias 58. 6.


Sin is onus Deo, a burden to God: Esaias 1. 14. Your sacrifices are a burden
unto me.

Sin is onus Angelis, a burden to the Angels: for it sunk them down from
heaven. Luke 10. 18.

Sin is onus creaturis, a burden to the creatures: for it makes them groan.
Romans 8. 22.

Sin is onus hominibus, a burden to men: Mine iniquities are gone ever my
head, and as a weighty burden too heavy for me to bear. Psalm. 38. 4.

Let us then beware of sin that made this Iayler roar and cry, O what must I
do to be saved? For though sin fawn upon thee now, yet it will in the end
pluck out the very throat of thy soul.

Let us then fly from sin as from a stinging serpent and biting Cockatrice;
for they that do such things, shall never see the salvation of God.

To be saved. Text.

THirdly, let us behold the substance and subject of his fute,

It is not with James, to sit by Christ in his Mat. 20. 21.
glory:

It is not to have an inheritance divided with that Luke 12. 13.
worldling in the Gospel:

It is not for any worldly pomp or honor, but it is for salvation: What must I
do to be saved?

The most principal thing that all men should Note.
strive for under Gods glory, is the salvation of their souls.

First, and above all things seek the Kingdom of Math. 6. 33.
God and the righteousness thereof, and in a subordinate manner the things of
this life: for what if we have all the world, and be damned when we dye,
what a miserable condition is this?

O how Moses begged to see the face of the Lord! Lord (says he) show me thy
glory. Exodus 33. 18.


O how David sued to God for his love: Some Psalm. 4. 6.
crave worldly goods, and riches do embrace; but Lord, grant me thy
countenance, thy favor and thy grace.

O how this Iayler cries out here for salvation! O what must I do to be saved?

This meets with careless and desperate people of the world, that work not
out this their salvation with fear and trembling, that make not sure their
election and calling: O better for these never to have been borne, than not to
be reborne.

O how careful were the Apostles, when Christ told them that one of them
should betray him! they could neither eat nor drink till they knew themselves
freed from that cursed fact: Numquid Math. 26. 22.
ego Domine? Is it l, Lord, is it l?

O we should resolve with David, not to suffer our Psalm. 132. 4.
eyes to sleep, nor eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of our head to take
any rest, till we have found the box of Election opened unto us, and the
sweet odor of Gods love shed abroad in our hearts.

To be saved. Text.

IN that this Iayler by the Judgments of God, is drawn nearer to God, we may
see the different Note.
working of Gods judgments upon the Elect and Reprobate: the one hardened by
them, the other humbled: the one desperate, the other seeking to God for
remission and salvation.

Even as the Sun in the Heavens melieth wax, Similie.
but hardens clay: as the same water saved Israel, but drowned Pharao: and as
the same trumpe in battle incourageth the one side, but discourageth the
other: So the same word and judgments of God draw nearer to the Lord the
elect, but harden the hearts of the wicked: Cain hardened, Manasses humbled:
Judas desperate, but Paul by Gods judgments converted.

It makes against such as with Pharac harden their hearts against God by his
judgments, utterly despairing of his mercy for remission: Mayor est Deipictas,
quam quaeuis iniquitas.

Gods mercy is greater then man's misery: God is more merciful then man can be
sinful, if man will be truly and heartily sorrowful.

All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: God Psalm. 25. 10.
has two feet whereby he walks in his ways, the foot of mercy and the foot
of justice: If we look upon his mercy only, ten to one we shall perish by
presumption; if we look upon his justice only, ten to one we shall perish
by desperation: therefore let us humbly fall down and kiss both of his feet,
that in respect of his mercy we may keep hope, and in respect of his justice
we may keep awe, reverence and fear.

If therefore the Devil tempts thee to presumption, look what thou art in thy
self, vile, wretched, miserable, and thou shall never presume: if he tempts
thee to desparation, look what thou art or may be in Christ Jesus,
spotless, holy, glorious, then thou shall never despair.

Thus the Church of Christ did: I am black, (O Cant. 1. 4.
ye daughters of Jerusalem) yet comely as the curteines of Solomon. How could
she be black and beautiful? black in her self, and beautiful in Christ
Jesus.

Thus plainly have I unfolded the first part of my text, the Iaylers misery:
the second part is ministered mercy by Paul and Sylas, and as plainly by Gods
assistance I purpose to pass through that: for I had rather pleasure your
hearts then please your heads, worthy is your science, but (I fear me) far
short comes your conscience: give me leave then to bestow my labor where there
is most need, and I pray God as mean an instrument as I am, I may be a mean
to further you all in the way of Gods Kingdom.

And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Text.
Christ, thou shall be saved and thy house.
BEfore I come to the particulars of their answer, I must needs commend the
wisdom and discretion of these Preachers: they minister a fit salve to this
poor man's sore: they put oil to vinegar, mercy to judgment, Gospel to Law:
an excellent temper for health everlasting.

Had they preached the Law, and denounced Gods curses against him, they had
sunk him down to hell by despair: but perceiving him ready to be swallowed
up of damnation, by the casting-net of the Gospel they save his soul from
sinking.

A good president for all Gods ministers, that they be careful wisely,
discreetly, and rightly to break the Bread of life to the people.

We must preach the Gospel to languishing souls, and the Law to
presumptuous: otherwise we shall sooner damn then save by our preaching.

To this poor Iayler in the very jaws of Hell and mouth of damnation, Paul
and Sylas tender Christ Jesus for his recovery and salvation.

And thy house. Text.

I Must here resolve a doubt, before I come to this heavenly resolution.

Some may object and say, What, shall the Iaylers Ob.
faith redeem his family? if the master believes, shall the household be
saved? It may seem so by the words of the text: Beleene thou, and thy house
shall be saved.

To answer this: here is something employed Ans.
that is not expressed: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, thou shall be saved
and thy household: that is, they believing with thee

As if they had said: Poor Iayler, be no disparaged, but look upon Christ
Jesus, there is mercy enough in store, not only for thy self, but for thy
whole household if they can but believe, yea abundant salvation for all humbled
believers.

That the faith of one saves not another, (at least in adultis) look into
Ezekiel. That soul that Ezekiel. 18. 20.
sins, that soul shall dye: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself also.

In the old Law, it was Fac hoc and viues, Do this, and thou shall live. God
gave us leave to do it by another Jesus Christ the righteous: but in the new
Law it is Creed and viues; believe and thou shall live. God gave us leave to
do this by no other.

Can a man see with another man's eye? No more can a man go to heaven by
another man's faith; Every man must believe for himself, if he will be saved
himself.

This is notably apparent in the Parable of the Virgins: The foolish would have
borrowed oil of the Math. 25. 9.
wise, but they answered, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you: they
had (it seems) grace little enough to save themselves, they could save none
for their sistren.

I know, for the godly man's sake, God many times spares the wicked: as if
there had been found ten righteous in Sodom, for their sakes the Genesis 18. 32.
City had been spared, but this was in a temporary salvation: but in the point
of justification to eternal happiness, every man must have faith in himself:
therefore quod dixit Christus, dico vobis, Habete salem in vobis: what Christ
said in his Gospel, that I say unto you al, Have the salt of faith in your
selves: for Iustus exsua fide viuet: the just shall live Hab. 2.
by his faith.

Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou Text.
shall be saved.
IN this heavenly resolution I note three.

1. First, the act: Believe. Secondly, the object: on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, the event: And thou shall be saved.
Believe: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and thou shall be saved.

Believe. Text.

FIdes, faith, in the Hebrew is called Amnah, of Aman, which signifies firmum
esse, to be firm or strong, or well resolved.

In the Greek it signifies a persuasion: in the Latin, fides, quasi fiat quod
dicitur, of the two sillables, fi-factum, des, dictum: that shall be done,
that is spoken. It Is Augustines descant upon them.

Thus therefore I describe faith: It is firmus ac Faith.
constans animi assensus Verbo Dei, Spiritus Sancti afflatu ad credentium
salutem: Faith is a steadfast and resolute assent or consent of the heart to
Gods Word, by the breathing of the holy Ghost to the salvation, of believers.
The material cause of faith, is the Word of God. The formal cause, is the act
of consent. The efficient cause, is the holy Ghost, the final cause, is the
salvation of our souls.

Now lest we should imagine every believer to be blessed, we are to know
that there is a fourefold faith, yet but one salutiferous.

The first, Historical: when a man assents to the Iam. 2. 19.
faith, and tremble.

The second momentany: when a man with some howerly delight imbraceth the Word,
merely for knowledge sake and no further, and suffers not the power of it to
be lodged and seated in his soul, in prosperity to make a great flourish in
Religion, but in the time of trial to fall away, as in that of Saint Luke,
They depart from Luke 8. 13.
God in time of tribulation.

The third, Miraculous: spoken of in the Corinths, What if I had all faith,
that I could remove mountains, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
and have not Charity, such a faith profits me nothing.

The fourth, Justifying: whereby a man possessing a lively faith, showing that
it may be as easily perceived in the womb of the conscience, as a child
after quickening in the womb of the mother. Bid makes a triple distinction of
faith.

Credere
Deum: Deo: In Deum.
To believe there is a God: to believe that he is faithful and just in his
mercies and judgments: to believe that he is reconciled to us in the blood of
his Son, into whom we are inserted as an ympe or sciens into a stock or
tree, and so live by the sap and juice of his derived merits and graces: this
is the faith that instrumentally is said to save all our poor souls
everlastingly alive: And I may well say instrumentally: for faith, as it is a
bare and mere quality, saves no man, but as it has reference to the object
Jesus: As a Diamond Ring is said to be rich Simile.
and precious: but take out the Diamond and it is worth little: Faith is this
Ring, Christ is this Diamond which enricheth us all with heavenly salvation.

Now lest we should build upon the sands of presumption, and think we are in
this faith, being yet far wide: Let us examine this faith by his fruits; for
as fire is not without heat, and the Sun without shine; so this faith is
never known without works of amendment: He that rubbleth musk, cannot but
smell thereof; so he that has put on Christ, cannot but be a new creature,
cannot but smell of Psalm. 45. 8.
Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, out of Christ's Iuory Palaces, whereby his heart is
made exceedingly glad.

There are five especial evidences and fruits of this faith.

It brings peace of conscience, and joy in Being justified by faith, we are at
peace with Romans 5. 1.
God etc.

It causes a man, boldly and openly to by the heart Romans 10. 10.
a man believes to righteousness, and by the tongue, a man confesses to
salvation: Where there is a believing heart, there will be a confessing tongue
and professing life to Gods glory.

It teaches a man to rest upon Gods promise The just shall live by faith: that
is, they by faith Hab. 2. 4.
shall rest upon God in their streights, and God will preserve them.

It stirs us up to often and earnest prayer: Lord, I believe: there is his
faith: Help mine unbelief: Mark. 9. 24.
there is his prayer: therefore no prayer, no faith; cold prayer, dead faith;
vehement prayer, strong faith.

It behaueth it self as a Preacher in the Pulpit of Believe thus on the Lord
Jesus Christ, thou shall be saved and thy household.

Now by these examine your selves, prove your selves whether you are in the
faith: know ye not that Jesus Christ is thus in you, except you be
reprobates? ye are reprobates, if these things more or less be not in you.

The Lord then work in our hearts this faith, and increase it toward
perfection, that so our selves with our household, everlastingly may be saved.

On the Lord Jesus Christ. Text.

THe object of our faith, is the Lord Jesus Christ.

There is not a name under Heaven, wherein salvation Note.
can be expected and had, but in the name, merit, and power of Jesus.

He is our Jacobs Ladder, on whom we must climb to life everlasting.

Let us not go to Rome for a Pardon, nor to Mahomet for a blessing, nor to the
Sorcerer for skill, nor to the Magician for counsel; but let us come unto
Christ, and he will refresh us. Quo ibimus? Whither shall we go? Thou (O
Christ) and none but thou, have the words of eternal life.

Lord Jesus Christ. Text.

ALl the names of our blessed Redeemer are happily met together.

Lord: his name of power.

Jesus: his name of propriety.

Christ: his name of Office.

Lord: a name of power, attributing to God his Essence and being, showing that
he received his being from none but himself alone, as all things else have
their being from him: For in him we Act. 7. 28.
li^e, we move, and have our being.

Christ is a Lord By power, coequall with his Father. By purchase, redeeming us
by his blood.


And therefore called, Dominus Dens, Dominus Electorum, the Lord of the Elect.

Herein his Deity is apparent: He must be thus a Lord, or else he could never
have been a Jesus. First, a Lord, to support, deliver, and make conquer his
humanity: Again, a Lord, to dignifie and make meritorious every act done in
his humanity for the salvation of his Elect.

That this glorious title is duly given unto our Savior, witness that of the
Psalms, The Lord Psalm. 110. 1.
said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
footstool.

And Thomas thus confesses him, Thou art my Ioh. 20. 28.
Lord and my God.

This then is no small comfort to the faithful, that they have so powerful
and glorious a Messiah; And it makes also much against those base Heretics,
that mock us for our dependence on Christ for salvation.

Again, in the last place, it should teach us what manner of persons we
should be to our Redeemer. A son honors his father, and a servant his
Mal. 1. 6.
master; if I then be your Lord and master, where is then my fear? Many would
have Christ their Jesus, but few can brook him their Lord; We must be
conformed to this our Lord in two, in grace, in cross, if ever we will be
glorified with him.

There are five properties of a faithful servant, which we must labor to
have, if ever we will make account of Christ for our Lord.

The first is Obedience; such were the Centurions He said to one, Come, and he
comes: to Luke 7. 8.
another, Go, and he goes: to another, Do this, and he does it. O that we
were such obedients to our Lord!

The second is Diligence; He toyleth and labors

The third is Reverence; if his master does but Noah) Heb. 11. 7.
be moved with reverence.

The fourth is Patience; if his master corrects

The fifth is Love; if his master be wronged or reviled, he will not bear it
with patience, but stand up to revenge it: so if we hear or see our Lord
Christ blasphemed, and his most holy Profession derided, it should be a Simeons
sword to pierce our souls.

Jesus. Text.

THis name was given him by an Angel, before he was conceived in the womb,
and a reason thereof rendered, Because he should save his people Math. 1. 21.
from their sins. He saues us from sins Guilt. Punishment. Regiment.


From sins guilt and punishment, by his imputative passions; from sins
regiment, by his merits and graces applied and derived upon us: and by his
active obedience imputed, he does entitle us to the glory of heaven.

Old Simeon acknowledged Christ such a salvation: Mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, yea and my salvation; thine for sending, mine for saving; thine Luke
2. 30.
for love, mine for life: Mine eyes have seen this salvation.

And the spirit of Mary also exulted in this her Son Savior. Luke 1. 47.


And all you that would find him a Jesus from Hell, be careful ye find him
a Jesus from sin.

Christ. Text.

CHrist signifies Anointed: In the Old Law they anointed three:

Kings, Priests, Prophets.
And for the work of our Redemption, Christ was necessarily anointed to a
triple Office, with the oil of holiness above his fellows.

He was anointed to be a
King, Prophet, Priest.
To be a King, a type whereof was Solomon; to be a Prophet, a type whereof was
David; to be a Priest, a type whereof was Melchisedech; Melchisedech, not
Aaron: Aaron a Priest, but not a King; David a King, but not a Priest;
Melchisedech both King and Priest, King of Salem, and Priest of the most high
God; and therefore a notable type of Jesus.

He was anointed to be a King, to rule his Elect and protect them; he was
anoyuted to be a Prophet, to teach his Elect and direct them; he was anointed
to be a Priest, to ransom his Elect and redeem them.

If Christ be thy Christ as King, then the Devil reigns not in thee but
Christ; if Christ be thy Christ as Prophet, then his word, not thy will, is
the rule and square of all thine actions; if Christ be thy Christ as Priest,
then thy affections are slain concerning sin, and thy whole man sacrificed
to God.

And thou shall be saved. Text.

THe reward of our faith is the salvation of our Note.
souls: Blessed is the estate of Christianity, for it is rewarded with
inexpressible felicity.

The benefit of believing is multiple.

First, hereby we are adopted the children Ye are all the sons of God by
faith in Christ Gal. 3. 26.
Jesus.

Secondly, hereby our sins are forgiven us, as Confide, fills, and remittuntur
tibi peccata: Believe, my son, and thy sins are for given thee.

Thirdly, hereby we have right and interest in all Godliness has the promises
1. Tim. 4. 8.
of this life, as well as of that which is to come.

Fourthly, hereby we are freed from the damnation Now then there is no
condemnation to Romans 8. 1.
those that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.

Lastly, hereby we shall be possessed with the salvation

Neither, eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor 1. Cor. 2. 9.
heart of man has ever imagined, the thousand part of this heavenly felicity.

Beleene on the Lord Jesus Christ: thus thou shall be saved and thine
household.

If then to be members of Christ Jesus be so blessed a condition; O let us
beg of God the heavenly Husbandman, to rend us off by true humbling from the
stock of corruption, and to plant us into Christ Jesus, by effectual
believing, that at that terrible Judgment, we all with our poor households
everlastingly may be saved: And that for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord
and everlasting Redeemer.

Amen.
FINIS.
A GODLY AND Zealous Prayer.
O Most glorious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our
Father, the Fountain of all our welfare, and the giver of all grace: we thy
poor children (according to our bounden duty) are at this present assembled
together before thee in Prayer, to offer up even from the ground of our hearts,
the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, for all thy loving mercies and tender kindnesses
whatsoever bestowed upon us. We highly bless thy Majesty for electing us in
thy Christ to life eternal, before all worlds, for creating us after thine
own most glorious Image in purity and perfection of holiness, for justifying
us by the perfect obedience of thy Son, for sanctifying us by thy holy
Spirit; and for the hope that thou have given us of our future glorification
with thee hereafter in Heaven. We also return unto thee all due and possible
praise, for preserving us hitherto of thine especial goodness and mercy;
supplying abundantly all our necessities both in soul and in body; and for
thy blessing upon us and ours, keeping us from diverse dangers, that might
justly for our sins have come upon us, both spiritual and corporal. O what
shall we render unto thee for all these thy mercies done unto us? what are we,
that thou should thus respect us? or what are our deseruings, that thou
should thus esteem us? To us, O Lord, to us most miserable sinners, there
nothing belongs but shame and confusion. If thou (Lord) markest strictly what
is done amiss, who is able to abide it? O how far does thy mercy exceed thy
justice! O the deepnesse of thy favors toward us! So unsearchable are they,
as no man can express them, so vn-vtterable, as no man can declare them.

And (most merciful Father) we humbly entreat for thy Christ's sake the
continuance of these mercies toward us: Bless us this day and ever with thy
heavenly protection and benediction, guide us by thine own Spirit into all
godliness, that we may profitably and conscionably walk before thee in our
vocations, both general and particular: bless us in the house, and bless us
in the field: bless us in the basket, and bless us in the store: bless us in
our outgoings, and in our commings in; compass us on every side with thy
mercies; guard thine Angels round about us; keep us from the evil of this
world, and every work of darkness; and sanctify both our souls and bodies
with thy fear to thy service, that as heretofore we have served the Devil and
the world by profaneness; so ever hereafter (redeeming the time) we may
apply our selves unto holiness.

To which end we most earnestly crave (O heavenly Father) the presence of thy
Spirit always to direct us, the powerful preaching of thy Gospel, always to
instruct us, the holy use of thy Sacraments always to confirm us, that (all
heresy and ungodliness removed far from us) by these means sanctified unto
us, we may glorify thy holy name, by our holy conuersations in this life, and
be glorified of thee everlastingly in the life to come.

And because (by reason of our sins) in stead of thy mercies we have deserved
thy furious indignation against us: we therefore seriously beg at the throne
of thy mercy, in the meritorious mediation of Jesus Christ, that thou would
remove far from us and our Land, all thy fearful and heavy judgments
whatsoever, as famine, pestilence, sword, and the like; and give us all grace
from the King to the beast, that we may be truly humbled for all our
iniquities, that we repenting us of our evil which is sin, thou may be
pleased to repent thee of thy evil which is punishment for sin.

Hear us (Oblessed Lord God) in these our Petitions, pardoning our sins, and
granting to us all our requests, with all other thy graces that we stand in
need of, that may make for thy glory, and the saving of our poor souls, at
the dismal Day of Judgment, and that for Christ Jesus his sake: To whom with
thee and thy blessed Spirit, three glorious persons, but one immortal God, we
desire to return all possible praise, power, dominion, and thanksgiving, this
day and everlasting.

Amen.
FINIS.

