A MAIDENS DREAM. UPON THE DEATH OF THE right Honorable Sir Christopher Hatton
Knight, late Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND. By Robert Green Master of Arts.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Scarlet for Thomas Nelson. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, BOVNtifull and virtuous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth
Hatton, Wife to the right Worshipful Sir William Hatton Knight, increase of
all honorable virtues.
MOurning as well as many (right Worshipful Lady) for the late loss of the
right Honorable your deceased Uncle, whose death being the common prejudice of
a present age, was lamented of most (if not all) and I among the rest sorrowing
that my Country was deprived of him that lived not for himself, but for his
Country, I began to call to mind what a subject was ministered to the excellent
wits of both Universities to work upon, when so worthy a knight, and so
virtuous a Iusticiarie, had by his death left many memorable actions performed
in his life, deserving highly by some rare men to be registered. Passing over
many days in this muse, at last I perceived men's humors slept, that love of
many friends followed no farther then their graves, that Art was grown idle,
and either choice scholars feared to write of so high a subject as his
virtues, or else they dated their devotions no further then his life. While
thus I debated with my self, I might see (to the great disgrace of the Poets
of our time) some Mycanicall wits blow up mountains, and bring forth mise, who
with their follies did rather disparage his Honors, than decypher his virtues:
beside, as Virtutis comes est inuidia, so base report who has her tongue
blistered by slanderous envy, began as far as she durst, now after his
death, to murmr, who in his life time durst not once mutter: whereupon touched
with a Zealous jealousy over his wonderful virtues, I could not, whatsoever
discredit I reapt by my presumption, although I did Tenui Auena meditari, but
discover the honorable qualities of so worthy a Counselor, not for any
private benefit I ever had of him, which should induce me favorably to flatter
his worthy parts, but only that I shame to let slip with silence, the
virtues and honors of so worthy a knight, whose deserts had bin so many and so
great toward al. Therefore (right worshipful Lady) I drew a fictio^ called A
Maidens Dream, which as it is Enigmaticall, so it is not without some special
and considerate reasons. Whose slender Muse I present unto your Ladyship,
induced thereunto, first, that I know you are partaker of your husbands
sorrows, for the death of his honorable Uncle, and desire to hear his honors
put in memory after his death, as you wished his advancement in virtues to be
great in his life: as also that I am your Ladyships poor Countrima^, and have
long time desired to gratify your right worshipful father with some thing
worthy himself. Which because I could not to my content perform, I have now
taken opportunity to show my duty to him in his daughter, although the gift
be far too mean for so worshipful and virtuous a Lady. Yet hoping your
Ladishippe will with courtesy favor my presuming follies, and in gracious
acceptance vouch of my well meant labors, I humbly take my leave.

Your Ladyships humbly at command R. Green. Nordouicensis.

A Maidens Dream.
ME thought in slumber as I lay and dreamt,
I saw a silent spring raild in with Ieat,
From sunnie shade or murmur quite exempt
The glide whereof against weeping flints did beat,
And round about were leauelesse beeches set,
So dark it seemed, nights mantle for to borrow,
And well to be the gloomie den of sorrow.
About this spring in mourning roabes of black,
Were sundry Nymphs or Goddesses me thought,
That seemly sat in ranks just back to back,
On Mossie benches: Nature there had wrought
And cause the wind and spring no murmr brought
They filled the air with such laments and groans,
That Echo sighed out their heartbreaking mones,
Elbow on knee, and head upon their hand,
As mourners sit, so sat these Ladies all,
Garlands of Eben-bowes whereon did stand,
A golden crown, their mantles were of pall,
And from their waterie eyes warm tears did fall,
With wringing hands they sat and sighed like those,
That had more grief then well they could disclose
I looked about and by the fount I spied,
A Knight lie dead, yet all in armor clad,
Booted and spurd, a fa^^ci^on by his side,
A Crown of O^^^^^ on his helm he had,
^
^
^
She seemed wounded by her panting breath,
Her beating breast with sighs did fall and rise,
Wounds was there none, it was her masters death,
That drew Electrum from her weeping eyes,
Like scalding smoke her braying throbs outflies,
As Dear do mourn when arrow has them galled
So was this Hind with Hart-sicke pains inthralled.
Just at his head there sat a sumptuous Queen,
I gest her so, for why, she wore a crown,
Yet were her garments parted white and green,
Tierd like unto the picture of renown,
Upon her lap she laid his head a down,
Unlike to all she smiled on his face,
Which made me long to know this dead man's case.
As thus I looked, began Justice to arise,
I knew the Gods by her equal beam,
And dewing on his face balm, from her eyes
She wet his visage with a yearnfull stream,
Sad mournful looks did from her arches gleame,
And like to one, whom sorrow deep attaints,
With heaued hands she pours forth these plaints.
The Complaint of Justice.
Untoward Twins that tempers humane fate,
who from your distaffe draws the life of man
Parce impartial to the highest state,
Too soon you cut what Clotho erst began,
Your fatal doomes this present age may ban,
For you have robbed the world of such a knight,
As best could skill to balance Justice right.
His eyes were seats for mercy and for law,
Favor in one, and Justice in the other:
The poor he smoth'd, the proud he kept in aw,
As just to strangers as unto his brother.
Bribes could not make him any wrong to smother.
For to a Lord, or to the lowest groom:
Still conscience and the cawes set down the doom.
Delaying law that picks the clients purse
Ne could this Knight abide to hear debated
From day to day (that claims the poor man's curse)
Nor might the pleas be ouer-long dilated.
Much shifts of law there was by him abated.
With conscience carefully he heard the cause:
Then gave his doom with short dispatch of laws.
The poor man's cry he thought a holy knell,
No sooner began their suites to pearce his ears,
But faire-eyed pity in his heart did dwell.
And like a father that affection bears
So tendered he the poor with inward tears.
And did redress their wrongs when they did call:
But poor or rich he still was just to all.
Oh woe is me (says Justice) he is dead,
The knight is dead that was so just a man:
And in Asteras lap low lies his head,
Who whilom wonders in the world did scan.
Justice has lost her chiefest lim, what than.
At this her sighs and sorrows were so sore:
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
The complaint of Prudence.
A Wreath of Serpents bout her lilly wrist,
Did seemly Prudence wear: she then arose
A silver Dove, satt mourning on her fist
Tears on her cheeks like dew upon a rose,
And thus began the Goddess greeful gloss.
Let England mourn, for why? his days are don
Whom Prudence nurced like her dearest son.
(Hatton) at that I started in my dream,
But not awooke: Hatton is dead quoth she,
Oh, could I pour out tears like to a stream,
A sea of them would not sufficient be,
For why our age had few more wise then he.
Like oracles, as were Apollos sawes:
So were his words accordant to the laws.
Wisdom sat watching in his wary eyes,
His insight subtle, if unto a foe,
He could with counsels Commonwelths comprise,
No foreign wit could Hattons ouergoe
Yet to a friend, wise, simple, and no mo.
His civil policy unto the state
Scarce left behind him now a second mate.
For Countries weal his council did exceed,
And Eagle-eyed he was to spy a fault:
For wars or peace right wisely could he reed:
It Was hard for trechors fore his looks to hault.
The smooth-faced traitor could not him assault.
As by his Countries love his grees did rise:
So to his Country was he simple-wise.
This grave aduiser of the Commonweal,
This prudent Counceller unto his Prince
Whose wit was busied with his Mistres heal,
Secret conspiracies could well convince,
Whose insight perced the sharp-eyed Linx.
He is dead, at this her sorrows were so sore:
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
The complaint of Fortitude.
NExt Fortitude arose unto this Knight,
And by his side sat down with steadfast eye:
A broken Columb twixt her arms was pight
She could not weep nor pour out yernful cries,
From Fortitude such base affects nil rise.
Brass-renting Goddess, she cannot lament,
Yet thus her plaints with breathing sighs were spent
Within the Maidens Court, place of all places,
I did advance a man of high degree:
Whom Nature had made proud with all her graces
Inserting courage in his noble heart,
No perils drad could ever make him start.
But like to Scaeuola, for countries good,
He did not value for to spend his blood.
His looks were stern, though in a life of peace
Though not in wars, yet war hung in his brows:
His honor did by martial thoughts increase,
To martial men living this Knight allows,
And by his sword he solemnly auowed
Though not in war, yet if that war were here,
As warriors do to value honor dear.
Captens he kept and fostered them with fee,
Soldiers were servants to this martial Knight,
Men might his stable full of Coursers see,
Trotters, whose managed looks would some afright.
His armorie was rich and warlike dight.
And he himself if any need had craved,
Would as stout Hector have himself behaved.
I lost a friend when as I lost his life,
Thus playned Fortitude, and frownd withal,
Cursed be Atrapos, and cursed her knife,
That made the Capten of my guard to fall,
Whose virtues did his honors high install.
At this she stormed, and wrong outsighes so sore:
That what for grief her tongue could speak no more
The complaint of Temperance.
THen Temperance with bridle in her hand,
Did mildly look upon this liuelesse Cord,
And like to weeping Niobe did stand,
Her sorrows and her tears did well accord,
Their Diapason was in selfsame Lord
Here lies the man (quoth she) that breathed out this
To shun fond pleasures is the sweetest bliss.
No choice delight could draw his eyes awry,
He was not bent to pleasures fond conceits,
Inueigling pride, nor worlds sweet vanity,
Loves luring follies with their strange deceits,
Could wrap this Lord within their baleful sleights
But he despising all, said man was grass:
His date a span, and omnia vanitas.
Temperate he was, and tempered al his deeds
He brideled those affects that might offend,
He gave his will no more the raines then needs,
He measured pleasures ever by the end:
His thoughts on virtues censures did depend.
What booteth pleasures that so quickly pass:
When such delights are fickle like to glass.
First pride of life, that subtle branch of sin,
And then the lusting humor of the eyes
And base concupiscence which plies her gin,
These Sirens that do worldlings still intise,
Could not allure his mind to think of vice.
For he said still, pleasures delight it is:
That holds man from heavens deliteful bliss.
Temperat he was in every deep extreme,
And could well bridle his affects with reason:
What I have lost in loosing him then deem
Base death, that took away a man so geason.
That measured every thought by time and season.
At this her sighs and sorrows were so sore:
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
The complaint of Bounty.
With open hands, and mourning looks dependant,
Bounty stepped forth to wail the dead man's loss
On her was love and plenty both attendant,
Tears in her eyes, arms folded quite acrosse:
Sitting by him upon a turfe of moss.
She sighed and said, here lies the knight deceased,
Whose bounty, Bounties glory much increased.
His looks were liberal, and in his face
Sat frank Magnificence with arms displaid:
His open hands discourst his inward grace:
The poor were never at their need denaid:
His careless scorn of gold his deeds bewraid.
And this he craved, no longer for to live:
Then he had power, and mind, and will to give.
No man went empty from his frank dispose,
He was a purse-bearer unto the poor:
He well observed the meaning of this gloss,
None lose reward that gives of their store:
To all his bounty past. Ay me therefore
That he should die, with that she sighed so sore
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
The complaint of Hospitality.
LAme of a leg, as she had lost a lim
Start up kind Hospitality and wept,
She silent sat awhile and sighed by him
As one half maimed to this knight she crept,
At last about his neck this Nymph she lept,
And with her Cornucopia in her fist:
For very love his chilly lips she kissed.
Ay me, quoth she, my love is lorn by death,
My chiefest stay is cracked, and I am lame:
He that his alms franckly did bequeath,
And fed the poor with store of food: the same
Even he is dead, and vanished is his name.
Whose gates were open, and whose alms deed
Supplied the fatherless and widows need.
He kept no Christmas house for once a year,
Each day his boards were filled with Lordly fare:
He fed a rout of yeomen with his cheer,
Nor was his bread and beef kept in with care,
His wine and beer to strangers were not spare.
And yet beside to all that hunger grieved,
His gates were open, and they were there relieved.
Well could the poor tell where to fetch their bread,
As Bausis and Philemon were iblest:
For feasting Jupiter in strangers stead,
So happy be his high immortal rest,
That was to hospitality addressed.
For few such live, and then she sighed so sore,
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
Then Courtesy whose face was full of smiles
And friendship with her hand upon her heart
And tender Charity that loves no wiles,
And Clemency her passions did impart
A thousand virtues there did straight up start,
And with their tears and sighs they did disclose:
For Hattons death their hearts were full of woes.
The complaint of Religion.
NExt from the farthest nooke of all the place,
Weping full sore, there rose a nymph in black
Seemly and sober with an Angels face,
And sighd as if her heart strings straight should crak
Her outward woes bewraid her inward wrack.
A golden book she carried in her hand,
It was religion that thus meek did stand.
God wot her garments were full looslie tucked
As one that careless was in some despair,
To tatters were her roabes and vestures plucked
Her naked lims were open to the air,
Yet for all this her looks were blithe and fair,
And wondering how religion grew forlorn,
I spied her roabes by Heresy was torn.
This holy creature sat her by this knight,
And sighed out this, Oh here he lies (quoth she)
Liuelesse, that did religions lamp still light,
Devout without dissembling, meek and free
To such whose words and livings did agree,
Lip-holines in Clergy men he could not brook,
Ne such as counted gold above their book.
Upright he lived, as holy writ him lead,
His faith was not in ceremonies old,
Nor had he new found toies within his head,
Ne was he lukewarm, neither hot nor cold,
But in religion he was constant bold,
And still a sworn professed fo to all,
Whose looks were smooth, hearts pharesaicall.
The brainsicke and illiterate surmisers,
That like to Saints would holy be in looks,
Of fond religions fabulous deuisers
Who scornd the Academies and their books,
And yet could sin as others in close nookes.
To such wild-headed mates he was a foe:
That rent her robes, and wronged Religion so.
Ne was his faith in men's traditions,
He hated Antichrist and all his trash
He was not led away with superstitions,
Nor was he in religion over rash,
His hands from heresy he loved to wash.
Then base report, ware what thy tongue does spread
It Is sin and shame for to belly the dead.
Hart-holy men he still kept at his table,
Doctors that well could doom of holy writ,
By them he knew to sever faith from fable,
And how the text with judgment for to hit:
For Pharisees in Moses chair did sit
At this Religion sighed and greeu' so sore:
And so she wept that she could speak no more.
Primate.
Next might I see a rowt of Noblemen,
Earls, Barons, Lords, in mourning weeds attired:
I cannot paint their passions with my pen,
Nor write so queintly as their woes required.
Their tears and sighs some Homers quil desired.
But this I know their grief was for his death:
That there had yielded nature, life and breath:
Milites.
Then came by Soldiers trailing of their pikes,
Like men dismayed their beuers were adown
Their warlike hearts his death with sorrow strikes,
Yea war himself was in a sable gown:
For grief you might perceive his visage frown
And Scholars came by, with lamenting cries:
Wetting their books with tears fell from their eyes
Plebs.
The common people they did throng in flocks,
Dewing their bosoms with their yernfull tears,
Their sighs were such as would have rent the rocks
Their faces full of grief, dismay and fears,
Their cries stroke pity in my listening ears.
For why? the groans are less at hels black gate,
Then Echo there did then reuerberate.
Some came with scrolles and papers in their hand,
I ghest them suitors that did rue his loss:
Some with their children in their hand did stand,
Some poor and hungry with their hands acrosse:
A thousand there sat wayling on the moss.
O pater Patriae still they cried thus:
Hatton is dead, what shall become of us?
At all these cries my heart was sore amoued,
Which made me long to see the dead man's face:
What he should be that was so dear beloved.
Whose worth so deep had won the peoples grace,
As I came pressing near unto the place,
I looked, and though his face were pale and wan,
Yet by his visage I did know the man.
No sooner did I cast mine eye on him
But in his face there flasht a ruddie hue,
And though before his looks by death were grim,
Yet seemd he smiling to my gazing view
(As if though dead, my presence still he knew:)
Seeing this change within a dead man's face,
I could not stop my tears, but wept a pace.
I called to mind how that it was a knight,
That whilome lived in Englands happy soil,
I thought upon his care and deep insight,
For Countries weal, his labor and his toil
He took, least that the English state might foil,
And how his watchful thought from first had be
Vowed to the honor of the maiden Queen.
I called to mind again he was my friend,
And held my quiet as his hearts content,
What was so dear, for me he would not spend,
Then thought I straight, such friends are seldom hent
Thus still from love to love my humor went,
That pondering of his loayltie so free,
I wept him dead, that living honored me.
At this Astraea seeing me so sad,
Began blithly comfort me with this reply,
Virgin (quoth she) no boot by tears is had,
Nor does laments ought pleasure them that die,
Souls must have change from this mortality,
For living long sin has the larger space,
And dying well they find the greater grace.
And since thy tears bewraies thy love (quoth she)
His soul with me shall wend unto the skies,
His liuelesse body I will leave to thee,
Let that be earthde and tombde in gorgeous wise,
I Will place his ghost amongst the Hierarchies:
For as one star another far exceeds,
So souls in heaven are placed by their deeds
With that me thought within her golden lap,
(This Sun-bright Goddess smiling with her eye,)
The soul of Hatton curiously did wrap,
And in a cloud was taken up on hie.
Vain Dreams are fond, but thus as then dreamt I,
And more me thought I heard the Angels sing
An Alleluia for to welcome him.
As thus attendant fair Astrea flew,
The Nobles, Commons, yea and every wight,
That living in his life time Hatton knew,
Did deep lament the loss of that good Knight:
But when Astrea was quite out of sight,
For grief the people shouted such a screame:
That I awooke and start out of my dream.
FINIS.

