MENAPHON Camillas alarm to slumbering Euphues, in his melancholy Cell at
Silexedra.

Wherein are deciphered the variable effects of Fortune, the wonders of Love,
the triumphs of inconstant Time.

Displaying in sundry conceipted passions (figured in a continuate History)
the Trophies that Virtue carries triumphant, maugre the wrath of Envy, or the
resolution of Fortune.

A work worthy the youngest ears for pleasure, or the grauest censures for
principles.

Robertus Green in Artibus magister.

Omne tulit punctum.

LONDON Printed by T. O. for Sampson Clarke, and are to be sold behind the
Royal Exchange. 1589.

To the right Worshipful and virtuous Lady, the Lady Hales, wife to the late
deceased Sir James Hales; Robert Green wishes increase of Worship and virtue.
WHen Alexander (right worshipful) was troubled with hottest fevers, Phillip
the physician brought him the coldest potions; extremes have there Antidotes, and
the driest melancholy has a moistest sanguin; wise Hortenzia midst her
greatest dumpes, either played with her Children, or read some pleasant verses:
such as sorrow has pinched mirth must cure. This considered; hearing (madam)
of the passions your Ladyship has uttered a late for the loss of your
husband, a Knight in life worshipful, virtuous, and full of honorable
thoughts; discovering by such passionate sorrows the pattern of a loving and
virtuous wife, whose joys lived in her husbands weal, and ended with his
life, I thought it my duty to write this pastoral history, containing the
manifold injuries of fortune, that both your Ladyship might see her inconstant
follies, and bear her frowns with more patience, and when your dumpes were
most deep, then to look on this little treatise for recreation: wherein there
be as well humors to delight, as discourses to advise. Which if your Ladyship
shall vouch to accept, covering my presumption and faults which your wonted
courtesy; I have the wished end of my labors. In which hope resting, I commit
your Ladyship to the Almighty.

Yours in all humble service, Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers, health.
IT fares with me Gentlemen, as with Batillus the over bold poet of Rome,
that at every wink of Caesar would deliver up an hundred verses, though never
a one plausible, thinking the Emperors smile a privilege for his ignorance:
so I having your favor in letting pass my Pamphlets, fear not to trouble your
patience with many works, and such as if Batillus had lived, he might well
have subscribed his name to. But resting upon your favors I have thus far
adventured to let you see Camillas alarm to Euphues, who thought it necessary
not to let Euphues censure to Philautus, pass without requital. If Gentlemen
you find my style either magis humile in some place, or more sublime in
another, if you find dark Aenigmaes or strange conceits as if Sphinx on the
one side, and Roscius on the other were playing the wagges; think the
metaphors are well meant, and that I did it for your pleasures, whereunto I ever
aimed my thoughts: and desire you to take a little pains to pry into my
imagination. Wherein if you shall rest inine, I shall ever as I have done rest
yours; and so I bid you farewell.

In laudem Authoris, Distichon amoris.
DElicious words, the life of want on wit,
That do enspire our souls with sweet content;
Why have your father Hermes thought it fit
My eyes should surfeit by my hearts consent?
Full twenty Summers have I fading seen,
And twenty Floras in their golden guise:
Yet never viewd I such a pleasant Green
As this, whose garnisht gleades, compare denies.
Of all the flowers a Lilly once I loved,
Whose laboring beauty brancht it self abroad;
But now old age his glory has remoud,
And Greener obiectes are my eyes aboade.
No country to the downs of Arcadie,
Where Aganippes ever springing wells
Do moist the meades with bubling melody;
And makes me muse, what more in Delos dwelles;
There feeds our Menaphons celestial Mus^,
There makes his pipe his pastoral report;
Which strained now a note above his use,
Foretells, he will nere more chaunt of Choas sport.
Read all that list, and read till you mislike;
Condemn who can, so envy be no judge:
Noreede can swell more higher, less it shrike.
Robin thou have done well, care not who grudge.
HENRY V^CHEAR Gentleman.
Thomas Brabine Gent. in praise of the Author.
COme forth you wits that vaunt the pomp of speech,
And strive to thunder from a Stage-mans throat:
Uiew Menaphon a note beyond your reach;
Whose sight will make your drumming descant doat:
Players auant, you know not to delight;
Welcome sweet Shepherd, worth a Scholars sight.
Smirna is dry, and Helicon exhaled,
Caballian founts have left their springing sourse,
Parnassus with his Laurel stands appal'd;
And yet His Muse keeps on her wonted course:
Wonted said I? I wrong his pains too much,
Since that his pen before brought forth none such.
One writes of love, and wanders in the air;
Another stands on terms of trees and stones:
When heavens compare yeeldes but the praise of fair,
And christ all can describe but flesh and bones:
Yet country swaynes, whose thoughts are faith and troth,
Will shape sweet words of wool and russet cloth.
Among whom if I my Tityrus should choose,
Whose warbling tunes might wanton out my woes;
To none more oftener would my solace use,
Than to his Pastoralls their mortal foes.
Sweet verse, sweet prose, how have you pleased my vain?
Be thou still Green, whiles others glory waine.
Finis.
To the Gentlemen Students of both Uniuersities.
CVrteous and wise, whose judgments (not entangled with envy) enlarge the
deserts of the Learned by your liberal censures; vouchsafe to welcome your
scholler-like Shepherd with such University entertainment, as either the
nature of your bounty, or the custom of your common civility may afford. To
you he appeals that knew him ab extrema pueritia, whose placet he accounts the
plaudite of his pains; thinking his day labor was not altogether lauisht
sine linea, if there be any thing of all in it, that does olere atticum in
your estimate. I am not ignorant how eloquent our gowned age is grown of late;
so that every moechanicall mate abhorres the english he was borne too, and
plucks with a solemn periphrasis, his vt vales from the inkhorne: which I
impute not so much to the perfection of arts, as to the servile imitation of
vainglorious tragoedians, who contend not so seriously to excel in action, as
to embowell the clouds in a speech of comparison; thinking themselves more
than initiated in poets immortality, if they but once get Boreas by the beard,
and the heavenly bull by the deaw-lap. But herein I cannot so fully bequeath
them to folly, as their idiote art-masters, that intrude themselves to our
ears as the alcumists of eloquence; who (mounted on the stage of arrogance)
think to outbraue better pens with the swelling bumbast of a bragging blanke
verse. Indeed it may be the ingrafted ouerflow of some kilcow conceit, that
ouercloieth their imagination with a more than drunken resolution, being not
extemporall in the invention of any other means to vent their manhood,
commits the disgestion of their choleric encumbrances, to the spacious
volubilitie of a drumming decasillabon. Among this kind of men that repose
eternity in the mouth of a player, I can but ingrosse some deep read
Grammarians, who having no more learning in their scull, than will serve to
take up a commodity; nor Art in their brain, than was nourished in a serving
man's idleness, will take upon them to be the ironicall censors of all, when
God and Poetry does know, they are the simplest of all. To leave these to the
mercy of their mother tongue, that feed on naught but the crummes that fall
from the translators tr^ncher, I come (sweet friend) to thy Arcadian Menaphon;
whose attire though not so stately, yet comely, does entitle thee above all
other, to that temperatum dicendi genus, which Tullie in his Orator terms
true eloquence. Let other men (as they please) praise the mountain that in
seven years brings forth a mouse, or the Italionate pen, that of a packet of
pilfries, affoordeth the press a pamphlet or two in an age, and then in
disguised arraie, vaunts Ouids and Plutarchs plumes as their o^ne; but give me
the man, whose extemporall vain in any humor, will excel our greatest
Art-masters deliberate thoughts; whose invention quicker than his eye, will
challenge the proudest Rethoritian, to the contention of like p^rfection, with
like expedition. What is he amongst Students so simple, that cannot bring forth
( tandem aliquando) some or other thing singular, sleeping betwixt every
sentence? Was it not Maros xij. years toil, that so famed his xij. Aeneidos?
Or Peter Ramus xvj. years pains, that so praised his p^ttie Logique? How is
it then, out drowping wits should so wonder at an exquisite line, that was his
masters day labor? Indeed I must needs say, the descending years from the
Philosophers Athens, have not been supplied with such present Orators, as were
able in any English vain to be eloquent of their own, but either they must
borow invention of Ariosto, and his Countrymen, take up choice of words by
exchange in Tullies Tusculane, and the Latin Historiographers storehouses;
similitudes, nay whole sheets and tractacts verbatim, from the plenty of
Plutarch and Pliny; and to conclude, their whole method of writing, from the
liberty of Comical fictions, that have succeeded to our Rethoritians, by a
second imitation: so that, well may the Adage, Nil dictum quod non dictum
prius, be the most judicial estimate, of our latter Writers. But the hunger
of our unsatiate humorists, being such as it is, ready to swallowe all draffe
without indi^erence, that insinuates it self to their senses under the name of
delight, imployes often times many thread bare wits, to empty their invention
of their Apish devices, and talk most superficially of Policy, as those
that never ware gown in the University; wherein they revive the old said
Adage, Su^ Mineruam, and cause the wiser to quippe them with Asinus ad Lyram.
Would Gentlemen and riper judgments admit my motion of moderation in a matter
of folly, I would persuade them to physic their faculties of seeing and
hearing, as the Sabaeans do their dulled senses with smelling; who (as Strabo
reports) ouer-cloyed with such odoriferous savors, as the natural increase
of their Country, (Balsamum, Amomum, with M^rrhe and Frankencense) sends
forth, refresh their nosthrills with the unsavory sent, of the pitchie slime,
that Euphrates casts up, and the contagious fumes of Goats beardes burnt; so
would I have them, being surfetted unawares with the sweet sacietie of
eloqu^nce, which the lavish of our copious Language may procure, to use the
remedy of contraries; and recreate their rebated wits, not as they did, with
the senting of slyme or Goats beardes burnt, but with the ouer-seeing of that
sublime dicendi genus, which walks abroad for wast paper in each serving man's
pocket, and the otherwhile perusing of our Gothamists barbarism; so should
the opposite comparison of Purity, expel the infection of absurdity; and
their ouer-rackte Rhethorique, be the Ironicall recreation of the Reader. But
so far discrepant is the idle usage of our vnexperienst punies from this
prescription, that a tale of Ihon a Brainfords will, and the unlucky
furmentie, will be as soon interteined into their libraries, as the best poem
that ever Tasso eternisht: which being the effect of an vnde^cerning judgment,
makes dross as valuable as gold, and loss as welcome as gain, the Glow-worme
mentioned in Aesops fables, namely the apes folly, to be mistaken for fire,
when as God wot poor souls, they have naught but their toil for their heat,
their pains for their sweat, and (to bring it to our english proverb) their
labor for their travail. Wherein I can but resemble them to the Panther, who
is so greedy of men's excrements; that if they be hanged vpin a vessel higher
than his reach, he sooner kills himself with the ouer-stretching of his
windlesse body, than he will cease from his intended enterprise. Often have I
observed what I now set down; a secular wit that has lived all days of his
life by what do you lack, to be more judicial in matters of conceit, than
our quadrant crepundios, that spit ergo in the mouth of every one they meet:
yet those and these are so affectionate to dogged detracting, as the most
poisonous Pasquil, any durtie mouthed Martin, or Momus eu^r composed, is
gathered up with greediness before it fall to the ground, and bought at the
dearest though they smell of the friplers lauander half a year afetr: ^or I
know not how the mind of the meanest is fed with this folly, that they
impute singularity, to him that slanders priuelie, and count it a great piece
of art in an inkhorne man, in any tapsterlie terms whatso^uer, to oppose
his superiors to envy. I will not deny but in scholler-like matters of
controversy, a quicker style may pass as commendable; and that a quippe to an
ass is as good as a goad to an ox: but when an irregular idiot, that was up
to the ears in divinity, before ever he met with probabile in the
University, shall leave pro and contra before he can scarcely pronounce it,
and come to correct Commonweals, that never heard of the name of Magistrate
before he came to Cambridge, it is no marvel if every alehouse vaunt the
table of the world turned vpside down; since the child beats his father, and
the ass whippes his master. But least I might seem with these night crows,
Nimis curiosus in aliena republica. I Will turn back to my first text, of
studies of delight; and talk a little in friendship with a few of our triuiall
translators. It is a common practice now a days amongst a sort of shifting
companions, that run through every art and thrive by none, to leave the
trade of Nouerint whereto they were borne, and busy themselves with the
endeavors of Art, that could scarcely latinize their necke-verse if they should
have need; yet English Seneca read by candle light yeeldes many good
sentences, as Blood is a beggar, and so forth: and if you entreat him fair
in a frostie morning, he will afford you whole Hamlets, I should say handfulls
of tragical speeches. But o grief! tempus edax rerum, what is that will last
always? The sea exhaled by drops will in continuance be dry, and Seneca let
blood line by line and page by page, at length must needs die to our stage:
which makes his famisht followers to imitate the Kidde in Aesop, who enamored
with the Foxes newsangles, forsook all hopes of life to leap into a new
occupation; and these men renowncing all possibilities of credit or estimation,
to intermeddle with Italian tran^lations: wherein how poorly they have
plodded, (as those that are neither prouenz all men, nor are able to
distinguish of Articles,) let all indifferent Gentlemen that have travailed in
that tongue, discern by their two penie pamphl^ts: and no marvel though
their home-born mediocritie be such in this matter; for what can be hoped of
those, that thrust Elisium into hell, and have not learned so long as they have
lived in the spheres, the just measure of the Horizon without an hexameter.
Suffices them to ^odge vpa blanke verse with ifs and ands, and other while for
recreation on after their candle stuff, having starched their beardes most
curiously, to make a peripateticall path into the inner parts of the City,
and spend two or three hours in turning over French Doudie, where they attract
more infection in one min^te, than they can do eloquence all days of their
life, by conuersing with any Authors of like argument. But least in this
declamatorie vain, I should condemn all and commend none, I will propound to
your learned imitation, those men of import, that have labored with credit in
this laudable kind of Translation; In the forefront of whom, I cannot but
place that aged Father Erasmus, that invested most of our Greek Writ^rs, in
the roabes of the ancient Romans; in whose traces, Philip Melancthon,
Sadolct, Plantine, and many other reverent Germans insisting, have reedified
the ruins of our decayed Libraries, and marvelously enriched the Latin
tongue with the expense of their toil. Not long after, their emulation being
transported into England, every private Scholl^er, William Turner, and who
not, began to vaunt their ^inattering of Latin, in English Impressions. But
amongst others in that Age, Sir Thomas Eliots elegance did sever it self from
all equals, although Sir Thomas Moore with his Comicall wit, at that instant
was not altogether idle: yet was not Knowledge fully confirmed in her
Monarchy amongst us, till that most famous and fortunate Nurse of all
learning, Saint John's in Cambridge, that at that time was as an University
within it self; shining so far above all other Houses, Halls, and Hospitalls
whatsoever, that no College in the Town, was able to compare with the tithe
of her Students; having (as I have heard grave men of credit report) more
candles light in it, every Winter Morning before four of the clock, than the
four of clock bell gave stroak^s; till She (I say) as a pitying Mother,
put too her helping hand, and sent from her fruitful womb, sufficient
Scholars, both to support her own weal, as also to supply all other
inferior foundations defects, and namely that royal ^rection of Trinity
College, which the University Orator, in an Epistle to the Duke of Somerset,
aptly termed Colona diducta, from the Suburbs of Saint John's. In which
extraordinary conception, vno partu in rempublicam prodiere, the Exchequer of
eloquence Sir Ihon Cheek, a man of men, supernaturally traded in altongues,
Sir Jhon Mason, Doctor Watson, Redman, Aschame, Grindall, Lever, Pilkington:
all which, have either by their private readings, or public works, repurged
the errors of Arts, expelde from their purity, and set before our eyes, a
more perfect Method of Study. But how ill their precepts have prospered
with our idle Age, that leave the fountains of sciences, to follow the rivers
of Knowledge, their ouer-fraught Studies, with trifling Compendiaries may
testify: for I know not how it comes to pass, by the doting practice of
our Divinity dunces, that strive to make their Pupills pulpet men, before they
are reconciled to Priscian: but those years, which should be employed in
Aristotle, are expired in Epitomes; and well too, they may have so much
Catechism vacation, to rake up a little refuse Philosophy. And here could I
enter into a large field of inuectiue, against our abject abbr^uiations of
Arts, were it not grown to a new fashion amongst our Nation, to vaunt the
pride of contraction in every manuarie action: in so much, that the Pater
noster, which was wont to fill a sheet of paper, is written in the compass
of a p^nnie: whereupon one merely affirmed, that proverb to be derived, No
ponnie, no pater noster; which their nice curtalling, puts me in mind of the
custom of the Scythians, who if they be at any time distressed with famine,
take in their girdles (...), and swaddle themselves streighter, to the intent
no (...) being left in their in^ayles, hunger should not so much tirannnize
over their stomachs; even so these men oppressed with a greater penury of Art,
do ^ound their capacity in barren Compendiums, and bound their base humors, in
the beggarly straites of a hungry Analysis, least longing after that infinitum
which the poverty of their conceit cannot compass, they sooner yield up their
youth to destiny, than their heart to understanding. How is it then, such
bungling practitioners in principles, ^uld ever profit the Common wealth by
their negligent pains, who have no more cunning in Logique or Dialogue Latin,
than appertains to the literal construction of either; nevertheless it is
daily apparent to our domestical eyes, that there is none so forward to publ^
their imperfections, either in the (...) of gloss or translations, as those
that are more unlearned than ignorance, and less conceiving than infants. Yet
dare I not impute absurdity to all of that society, though some of them have
set their names to their simplicity. Who ever my private opinion condemns as
faulty, Master Gascoigne is not to be abridged of his deserved esteem, who
first beat the path to that perfection which our best Poets have aspired too
since his departure; whereto he did ascend by comparing the Italian with the
English, as Tullie did Graecacum Latinis. Neither was Master Turbenile the
worst of his time, although in translating he attributed too much to the
necessity of rhyme. And in this page of praise, I cannot omit aged Arthur
Golding, for his industrious toil in Engli^ing Ouids Metamorphosis, besides
many other exquisite editions of Divinity, turned by him out of the French
tongue into our own. Master Phaer likewise is not to be forgot in regard of his
famous Uirgil, whose heavenly verse had it not bin blemished by his hautie
thoghts England might have long insulted in his wit, and corrigat qui potest
have been subscribed to his works. But fortune the Mistres of change with a
pitying compassion, respecting Master Stanihursts praise, would that Phaer
should fall that he might rise, whose heroical Poetry infired, I should say
inspired, with an hexameter fury, recalled to life, what ever hi^d barbarism,
has bin buried this hundred year; and revived by his ragged quill, such
carterlie variety, as no hodge plowman in a country, but would have held as
the extremity of clownerie; a pattern whereof, I will propounde to your
judgments, as near as I can, being part of one of his de^criptions of a
tempest, which is thus

Then did he make, heavens ^ault to rebounde, with rounce robble hobble Of
ruff ra^e roaring, with thwick thwack thurlery bouncing Which strange language
of the firmament never subject before to our common phrase, makes us that are
not used to terminate heavens (...), in the accents o^ any voice, est^eme of
their triobuiare (...) preter, as of ^me Thrasonical huffe snu^e, for so
terrible was his style, to all mild ears, as would have affrighted our
peaceable Poets, from intermedling (...), with that quarrelling kind of verse;
had not sweet Master France by his excellent translation of Master Thomas
Watsons sugared Amyntas, animated their dulled spirits, to such high witted
endeavors But I know not how, their over timorous cowardice, has stood in awe
of ^nuie, that no man since him, durst imitat^ any of the worste, of those
Roman wonders in english, which makes me think, that either the lovers of
m^diocritie, are very many, or that the number of good Poets, are very small:
and in truth, (Master Wa^son except, whom I mentioned before) I know not
almost any of late days that has showed himself singular in any special
Latin Poem, whose Amyntas, and translated Antigone may march in equipage of
honor, with any of our ancient Poets. I will not say but we had a Haddon
whose pen would have challenged the Laurel from Homer, together with Carre,
that came as nere him, as Virgil to Theocritus. But Tho. Newton with his (...),
and (...) Haruey, with two or three other, is (...) the store, that is left us
at this hour. Epitaph^, and position Poets have we more than a good many,
that swarm like Crows to a dead carcas, but fly like Swallows in the
VVinter, from any continuate subject of wit. The essicient whereof, I imagine
to issue, from the vpstart discipline, of our refor^atorie (...), who account
wit (...), and poetry (...); whose error, although the necessity of (...)
might consute, which lies couched most closely under dark fables profunditie,
yet I had rather refer it, as a (...) plea to divines, than set it down as a
(...) p^sition, in my vnexperienst opinion. But how eu^r (...) judgments,
should decree in their (...) sessions of an sit, the private truth, of my
discovered Creed in this controversy is this, that as that beast, was thought
scarce worthy to be sacrifised, to the Aegiptian (...), who had not some or
other black spotte on his skin: so I de^me him sarre unworthy of the name
of a (...), and so consequently, to sacrifice his endeavors to art, that is not
a Poet, either in whole or in a part and here peradventure, some desperate
quipper, will canuaze my proposed comparison plus vltra, reconciling the
allusion of the black spot, to the black pot; which makes our Poets
vndermeale Muses so mutinous, as every stanzo they pen after dinner, is full
poynted with a stabbe. Which their dagger drunkenness, although it might be
excused, with T am Marti quam Mercurio, yet will I cover it as well as I may,
with that prouerbiall foecundi calices, that might well have been door keeper,
to the kanne of Silenus, when nodding on his Ass trapt with iuie, he^ made his
moist nosecloth, the pausing intermedium, twixt ^uerie nappe. Let frugale
scholares, and fine fingerd nouices, take their drink by the ownce, and their
wine by the halpeworthes, but it is for a Poet, to examine the pottle pottes,
and gage the bottom of whole gallons; qui been vult (...), debet ante (...). A
pot of blew burning ale, with a fiery flaming tossed, is as good as Pallas with
the nine Muses on Pernassus top: without the which, in vain may they cry; o
thou my muse inspire me withsome pen, when they want certain liquid
sacrifice, to rouse her forth her den. Pardon me Gentlemen, though somewhat
merely I glaunce, at their imoderate folly, who affirm that no man can write
with conceit, except he take counsel of the cup: nor would I have you think,
that Theonino dente, I ^rme my style against all, since I do know the
moderation of many Gentlemen of that study, to be so far from infamy, as
their verse from equality: whose sufficiency, were it as well seen into, by
those of higher place, as it wanders abroad unrewarded, in the mouths of
ungrateful monsters, no doubt but the remembrance, of Moecenas liberality,
extended to Maro, and men of like quality, would have left no memory to that
proverb of poverty, Si nihil at tuleris, ibis Homere for as. Tut says our
English Italians, the finest wits our Climate sends forth, are but dry
braind doltes, in comparison of other countries: whom if you interrupt with
read rationem, they will tell you of Petrache, Tasso, Celiano. with an
infinite number of others; to whom if I should oppose Chaucer, Lidgate, Gower,
with such like, that lived under the tirranie of ignorance, I do think their
best lovers, would be much discontented, with the collation of contraries, if
I should write over al their heads, Hail fellow well met. One thing I am sure
of, that each of these three, have vaunted their meeters, with as much
admiration in English, as ever the proudest Ariosto, (...) his verse in
Italian. What should I come to our court, where the otherwhile vacations of our
grauer Nobility, are prodigal of more pompous wit, and choice of words, than
ever tragic Tasso could attain too: but as for pastoral Poemes, I will not
make the comparison, least our countrimens cred^t should be discountenanst by
the contention, who although they cannot fare, with such inferior facility,
yet I know woul^d carry the bucklers full easily, from all foreign brauers,
if (...) subiectum circa quod, should savor of any thing haught^e: and should
the challenge of deep conceit, be intruded by any forreiner, to bring our
english (...) the tutcsthone of Art, I would prefer, divine Master Spencer,
the miracle of wit to bandi^ line sor line for my life, in the honor of
England, against Spain, France, Italy, and all the world. Neither (...), the
only swallow of our summer, (although Apollo, if his Tripos were vpagain would
pronounce him his Socrates) but he being forborne, there are extant about
London, many most able men, to revive Poetry, though it were executed ten
thousand times, as in Platos, so in Puritanes common wealth; as for example
Matthew Roydon, Thomas Atchelow and George Peele, the first of whom, as he
has showed himself singular, in the immortal Epitaph of his beloved
Astroph^l, besides many other most absolute (...) inventions (made more
public by every man's praise, than they can be by my speech) so the second,
^ath more than once or twice manifested, his deep w^tted (...) in places of
credit; and for the last, though not the least of them all, I dare commend him
to all that know him, as the chi^fe supporter of pleasance now living, the
Atlas of Poetry, and primus verborum Artifex: whose first increase, the
Arraignement of Paris, might plead to your opinions, his pregnant dexterity of
wit, and manifold variety of (...); wherein ( me iudice) he goes a step
beyond all that write. Sundry other sweet Gentlemen I know, that have vaunted
their pens in private devices, and triekt up a company of taffata fool (...)
their feathers, whose beauty if our Poets had not peecte with the supply of
their periwigs, they might have anti^kt it until this time up and down^ the
country with the King of Fairies, and di^de ^uerie day at the pease porredge
ordina^ie with Delphrigus. But Tolossa has forgot that it was sometime sacked,
and beggars that ever they (...) their fardles on footback: and in truth no
marvel, when as the deserued' reputation of (...) (...), is of force to
enrich a rabble of counterfets; yet let subjects for all their insolence,
dedicate a De profundi^ (...) morning to the preservation of their Caesar,
least their (...) return them ere long to their mediocritie, and they bewail
in weeping blankes, the wane of their Monarchy.

As Poetry has been honored in those her forenamed professors, so it has
not been any whit dispa^aged by William Warners absolute Albions. And here
Auhtoritie has made a full point: in whose reverence insisting, I cease to
expose to your sport the picture of those Pamphleters, and Po^ts, that make a
patrimony of In speech, and more then a younger brothers inheritance of their
Abcie. Read favorably, to encourage me in the firstlings of my folly, and
persuade your selves, I will persecute those Idiots and their heirs unto the
third generation, that have made Art (...) of her ornaments, and sent Poetry a
begging up and down the Country. It may be, my Anatomy of Absurdities may
acquaint you ere long with my skill in Surgerie, wherein the diseases of Art
more merrily discovered, may make our maimed Poets put together their blankes
unto the building of an Hospital.

If you chance to meet it in Paul's, shaped in a new suit of similitudes, as if
like the eloquent Apprentice of Plutarch, it were propped at seven years end
in double apparel, think his Master has fulfilled covenants, and only
cancelled the Indentures of duty. If I please, I will think my ignorance
indebted unto you that applaud it: if not, what rests, but that I be excluded
from your courtesy, like Apocrypha from your Bibles?

How ever, yours ever: Thomas Nash.

Arcadia.
The reports of the Shepherds.
AFter that the wrath of mighty Jove, had wrapped Arcadia with noisome
pestilence, in so much that the air yielding prejudicial sauors, seemd to be
peremptory in some fatal resolution. Democles sovereign and King of that
famous Continent pitying the sinister accidents of his people, being a man as
just in his censures as royal in his possessions, as careful for the weal of
his country, as the continuance of his diadem, thinking that unpeopled Cities
were Corasiues to Princes consciences, that the strength of his subjects was
the sinnews of his dominious, and that every crown, must conteyne a care, not
only to win honor by fortayne conquests, but in (...) dignity with civil
and domestical insights: Democles grounding his arguments upon these premises,
coveting to be counted Pater Patriae, calling a Parliament together, whether
all his Nobility incited by summons made their repair, elected two of his
chief Lords to pass unto Delphos, at Apollos Oracle to hear the fatal
sentence, either of their future misery or present remedy. They having their
charge, posting from Arcadia to the Tripos where Pithia sat, the sacred Nymph
that delivered out Apollos Dylonimas, offering as their manner is their orizons
and presents, as well to entreat by devotion, as to persuade by (...), they had
returned from Apollo this doom.

When Neptune riding on the Southern seas
shall from the bosom of his Lemman yield
The arcadian wonder, men and Gods to please:
Plenty in pride shall march amidst the field,
Dead men shall war, and unborn babes shall frown,
And with their fawchens hew their foemen down.
When Lambs have Lions for their surest guide,
and Planets rest upon the arcadian hills:
When swelling seas have neither ebb nor tide,
When equal banks the Ocean margin fills.
Then look Arcadians for a happy time,
And sweet content within your troubled Clyme.
No sooner had Pithia delivered this scroll to the Lords of Arcadie, but they
departed and brought it to Democles, who causing the oracle to be read amongst
his distressed commons, found the Delphian censure more full of doubts to
amaze, than fraught with hope to comfort; thinking rather that the angry God
sent a peremptory presage of ruin, tha^ a probable ambiguitie to applaud any
hope of remedy: yet loath to have his careful subjects fall into the balefull
laborinth of despair, Democles began to discourse unto them, that the
interpreters of Apollos secrets, were not the conceits of humane reason, but
the success of long expected enents; that Comets did portend at the first
blaze, but took effect in the dated bosom of the destinies; that oracles were
foretold at the Delphian Cave, but were shapte out and finished in the Counsel
house. With such perswasiue arguments Democles appeased the distressed
thoughts of his doubtful countrymen, and commanded by proclamation that no man
should prit into the quiddities of Apollos answer, least sundry censures of
his divine secrecy, should trouble Arcadia with some sudden mutiny. The
King thus smoothing the heat of his cares, rested a melancholy man in his
Courts; hiding under his head the double faced figure of Ianus, as well to
clear (...) skies of other men's conceiptes with smiles, as to furnish out his
own (...) with thoughts. But as other beasts level their looks at the
countenance of the Lion, and birds make wing as the Eagle flies: so Regis ad
arbitrium totus componitur orbis: the people were measured by the mind of the
sovereign, and what storms soever they smoothed in private conceit, yet they
made hay, and cried holiday in out ward appearance: insomuch that every man
repaired to his own home, and fell either unto pleasures or labors, as their
living or content allowed them.

Whiles thus Arcadia rested in a silent quiet, Menaphon the Kings Shepherd, a
man of high account among the Swains of Arcadie, loved of the Nymphs, as the
paragon of all their country youngsters, walking solitary down to the shore,
to see if any of his ewes and lambs were straggled down to the strond to
brouse on sea iuie, wherefore they take special delight to feed; he found his
flocks grazing upon the Promontorie Mountains hardly: whereon resting
himself on a hill that ouer-peered the great Mediterraneum, noting how Phoebus
fetched his Laualtos on the purple Plains of Neptunus, as if he had meant to
have courted Thetis in the royalty of his roabes: the Dolphines (the sweet
conceipters of Music) fetched their carreers on the calmed waves, as if Arion
had touched the stringes of (...) silver sounding instrument: the Mermaides
thrusting their heads from the bosom of Amphitrite, sat on the mounting
banks of Neptune, drying their waterie tresses in the Sun beams. Aeolus
forbear to throw abroad his gustes on the slumbering brows of the Sea-God, as
giving Triton leave to pleasure his Queen with desired melody, and Proteus
liberty to follow his flocks without disquiet.

Menaphon looking over the champion of Arcadie to see if the Continent were as
full of smiles, as the seas were of fauouts, saw the shrubbes as in a dream
with delightful harmony, and the birds that chaunted on their branches not
disturbed with the least breath of a favorable Zephirus. Seeing thus the
accord of the Land and Sea, casting a fresh gaze on the water Nimphs, he began
to consider how Venus was feigned by the Poets to spring of the froathe of the
Seas; which drove him straight into a deep conjecture of the inconstancy of
Love: that as if Luna were his load-starre, had every minute ebbes and tides,
sometime ouerflowing the banks of Fortune with a gracious look lightened from
the eyes of a favorable lover, otherwhiles ebbing to the dangerous shelfe of
despair, with the piercing frown of a froward Mistress. Menaphon in this
brown study, calling to mind certain Aphorisms that Auarreon had penodowne
as principles of loves follies, being as deep an enemy to fancy, as
Narcissus was to affection, began thus to scosfe at Venus Deity.

Menaphon thy minds favors, are greater than thy wealths fortunes, thy
thoughts higher than thy birth, and thy private conceit better than thy
public esteem. Thou art a shepherd Menaphon, who in feeding of thy flocks
find out natures secrecy, and in preventing thy lambs prejudice
conceipt^st the Astronomicall motions of the heavens: holding thy sheep-walkes
to yield as great Philosophy, as the Ancients discourse in their learned
Academies. Thou countest labor as the Indians do their Chrisocolla wherewith
they try cuerie metal, and thou examine every action. Content sits in
thy mind as Neptune in his Seathrone, who with his trident mace appeaseth
every storm. When thou see^ the heavens ^rowne thou think on thy faults,
and a clcere sky puts thee in mind of grace: the summers glory tells thee
of youths vanity, the winters parched leaves of ages declining weakness. Thus
in a myrrour thou measur^st thy deeds with equal and considerate motions, and
by being a shepherd find that which Kings want in their royalties. Envy
ouerlooketh thee, renting with the winds the Pine trees of Ida, when the
Afric shrubs wau^ not a leaf with the temp^stes. Thine eyes are vaylde with
content that thou can not gaze so high as ambition: and for love, and with
that in naming of love, the shepherd fell into a great laughter. Love
Menaphon, why of all follies that ever Poets fained, or men ever faulted with,
this foolish imagination of love is the greatest: Venus forsooth for her wanton
escapes must be a Goddess, and her bastard a Deity: Cupide must be young and
ever a boy to prove that love is fond and witless, wings to make him
inconstant, and arrows whereby to show him fearful: blind (or all were not
worth a pin) to prove that Cupides level is both without aim and reason:
thus is the God, and such are his Uotaries. As soon as our shepherds of
Arcadie fettle themselves to fancy, and wear the characters of Venus stampte
in their forheads, straight their attire must be quaint, their looks full of
amors, as their Gods quiver is full of arrows; their eyes holding smiles and
tears, to leap out at their Mistres favors or her frowns: sighs must fly
as figures of their thoughts, and every wrinckle must be tempred with a
passion: thus suited in outward proportion, and made excellent in inward
constitution, they straight repair to take view of their Mistres beauty. She
as one obseruant unto Venus principles, first tieth love in her tresses, and
wraps affection in the tramels of her hair; s^aring our swains in her locks as
Mars in the net, holding in her forhead Fortunes Calender, either to assign
dismal ^fluence, or some favorable aspect. If a wrinckle appear in her brow,
then our shepherd must put on his working day face, and frame naught but
doleful Madrigalls of sorrow; if a dimple grace her cheek, the heavens
cannot prove fatal to our kind hearted lovers; if she seem coy, then poemes
of death mounted upon deep drawn sighs, fly from their master to sue for
some favor, alleging how death at the least may date his misery: to be
brief, as upon the shoares of Lapanthe the winds continue never one day in
one quarter, so the thoughts of a lover never continue scarce a minute in one
passion; but as Fortunes globe, so is fancies seat variable and inconstant. If
lovers sorrows then be like Sisiphus turmoyles, and their favors like honnie
bought with gall; let poor Menaphon then live at labor, and make esteem of
Venus as of Mars his concubine; and as the Cimbrians hold their idols in
account but in every tempest, so make Cupide a God, but when thou ar^
ouer-pained with passions, and that Menaphon will never love, for as long as
thou temperest thy hands with labors, thou can not fetter thy thoughts with
loves. And in this Satyricall humor smiling at his own conceits, he took
his pipe in his hand, and between every report of his instrument sung a
stanzo to this effect.

Menaphons Song.
Some say Love
Foolish Love
Does rule and govern all the Gods,
I say Love,
Inconstant Love
Sets men's senses far at ods.
Some swear Love
Smoothed face Love
Is sweetest sweet that men can have:
I say Love,
Sower Love
Makes virtue yield as beauties slave.
A bitter sweet, a folly worst of all
That forces wisdom to be follies thrall.
Love is sweet.
Wherein sweet?
In fading pleasures that do pain.
Beauty sweet.
Is that sweet
That yields sorrow for a gain?
If Loves sweet,
Herein sweet
That minutes joys are monthly woes.
It Is not sweet,
That is sweet
Nowhere, but where repentance grows.
Then love who list if beauty be so sower:
Labor for me, Love rest in Princes bower.
Menaphon having ended his roundelay, rising up, thinking to pass from the
mountain down to the valley, casting his eye to the sea side, espied certain
fragments of a broken ship floating upon the waves, and sundry persons driven
upon the shore with a calm, walking all wet and weary upon the sands, wondering
at this strange fight he stood amazed; yet desirous to see the event of this
accident, he shrouded himself to rest unespied til he might perceive what would
happen: at last he might descrie it was a woman holding a child in her arms,
and an old man directing her as it were her guide. These three (as distressed
wrackes) preserved by some further forepoynting fate, coueted to clime the
mo^taine, the better to use the favor of the Sun, to dry their drenched
ap^araile; at last crawled up where poor Menaphon lay close, and resting them
under a bush, the old man did nothing but send out sighs, and the woman
ceased not from streaming forth riuolets of tears, that hung on her cheeks
like the drops of pearled deaw upon the riches of Flora. The poor babe was
the touchstone of his mothers passions; for when he smiled and lay laughing in
her lap, were her heart never so deeply ouercharged with her present
sorrows; yet kissing the pretty infant, she lightened out smiles from those
cheeks, that were furrowed with continual sources of tears: but if he ^ried,
then sighs as smokes, and sobbes as thundercracks, foreranne those showers,
that with redoubled distress distilled from her eyes: thus with pretty
inconstant passions trimming up her babie, and at last to ^ull him a sleep,
she warbled out of her woeful breast thi^ dittie.

Sephestias song to her (...).
Weep not my want on, smile upon my kn^,
When thou art old there is grief enough for the^.
Mothers wagge, pretty boy,
Fathers sorrow, fathers joy
When thy father (...) did see
Such a boy by him and me,
He was glad, I was woe,
Fortune changde made him so,
When he left his pretty boy,
Last his sorrow, first his joy.
Weep not my want on smile upon my knee:
When thou art old there is grief enough for thee.
Streaming tears that never stint,
Like pearl drops from a flint
Fell by course from his eyes,
That one another place supplies:
Thus he grieud in every part,
Tears of blood fell from his heart,
When he left his pretty boy,
Fathers sorrow, fathers joy.
Weep not my wanton smile upon my knee:
When thou art old there is grief enough for thee.
The wanton smilde, father wept;
Mother cride, babie lept:
More he crowde, more we cride;
Nature could not sorrow hide.
He must go, he must kiss
Child and mother, babie bliss:
For he left his pretty boy,
Fathers sorrow, fathers joy.
Weep not my wanton, smile upon my knee:
When thou art old there is grief enough for the^.
With this lullaby the babie fell a sleep, and Sephestia laying it upon the
green grass covered it with a mantle, and then leaning her head on her hand,
and her elbow on her lap she fell a (...) to pour forth abundaunce of
plaintes, which Lamedon the old man espying, although in his face appeared the
map of discontent, and in every wrin^kle was a catalogue of woes; yet to
cheer up Sephestia, shrowding his inward sorrow with an outward smile, he
began to comfort her in this manner.

Sephestia, thou see no Physic preuailes against the gaze of the
Basilisckes, no charm against the sting of the Tarantula, no prevention to
divert the decree of the Fates, nor no means to recall back the balefull hurt
of Fortune: Incurable sores are without Auicens Aphorisms, and therefore no
salve for them but patience. Then my Sephestia since thy fall is high, and
fortune low; thy sorrows great, and thy hope little: seeing me partaker of thy
miseries, set all thy rest upon this, Solamen miseris, socios habuisse
doloris. Chance is like Ianus double faced, as well full of smiles to comfort,
as of frowns to dismay: the Ocean at his deadest ebb returns to a full tide;
when the Eagle means to soar highest, he raises his flight in the lowest
dales: so fares it with fortune who in her highest extremes is most
unconstant: when the tempest of her wrath is most fearful, then look for
(...); when she beats thee with nettle, then think she will strewe thee with
roses; when she is most familiar with furies, her intent is to be most
prodigal Sephestia. Thus are the arrows of Fortune feathered with the plumes
of the bird Halcione, that changes colors with the Moon, which howsoever she
shootes them pierce not so deep but they may be cured. But Sephestia thou art
daughter to a King, exiled by him from the hope of a crown, vanished from the
pleasures of the Court to the painful fortunes of the country, parted for
love from him thou caust not but love, from Maximus Sephestia, who for thee
has susfered so many dissauours, as either discontent or death can afford.
What of all this, is not hope the daughter of time? Have not stars their
favorable aspects, as they have froward opposition? Is there not a Jupiter as
there is a Saturn? Cannot the influence of smiling Venus, stretch as far as
the frowning constitution of Mars? I tell thee Sephestia, Juno foldeth in her
brows the volumes of the (...); whom melancholy Saturn deposes from a
Crown, she (...) aduanceth to a Diadem; then fear not, for if the mother live
in misery, yet has the ^ scepter for the son: let the unkindness of thy
father be buried in the cinders of obedience, and the want of Maximus be
supplied with the presence of his pretty babe, who being too young for
Fortune, lies smiling on thy knee and laughs at Fortune: learn by him
Sephestia to use patience, which is like the balm in the Uale of Iehosaphat,
that finds no wound so deep, but it cures: thou see already Fortune
begins to change her view, for after the great storm that rent our ship, we
found a calm that brought us safe to shore; the mercy of Neptune was more
than the envy of Aeolus, and the discurtesie of thy father is proportioned
with the favor of the Gods. Thus Sephestia being copartner of thy misery, yet
do I seek to allay thy martyrdom: being sick to my self, yet do I play the
Physician to thee, wishing thou may bear thy sorrows with as much content,
as I brook my misfortunes with patience. As he was ready to go forward
with his perswasiue argument, Sephestia fetching a deep sigh, filling her
tender eyes with tears, made this reply.

Sweet Lamedon, once partner of my royalties, now partaker of my wants, as
constant in his extreme distress, as faithful in higher fortunes: the Turtle
pearketh not on barren trees. Doves delight not in foul cottages, the Lion
frequents no putrified haunts, friends follow not after poverty, nor has
sinister chance any drugges from the Physicians, Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus
opes: and yet Lamedon the misfortune of Sephestia abridgeth not our old
contracted amity, thou temperest her exyle with thy banishment, and she
sailing to Styx, thou ferriest over to Phlegeton: then Lamedon, saying as
Andromache said to Hector Tu Dominus, tu vir, tu mihi frater eris. Thy aged
years shall be the calender of my fortunes, and thy gray hairs the Paralells of
mine actions. If Lamedon persuade Sephestia to content, Portia shall not
exceed Sephestia in patience; if he will her to keep a low sail, she will
veil al her sheet; if to forget her loves, she will quench them with
labors; if to accuse Venus as a foe, I will hate Cupide as an enemy; and
seeing the Destinies have driven thee from a ^^owne, I will rest satisfied with
the Country, placing all my delights in honoring thee, and nursing up my
pretty wanton. I will imagine a small cotage to a spacious pallaice, and think
as great quiet in a russet coat, as in royal habilliments: Sephestia Lamedon
will not scorn with Juno to turn her self into the shape of Semeles nurse,
but unknown rest careless of my fortunes: the hope of times return shall be
the end of my thoughts, the smiles of my son shall be the nourishment of my
heart, and the course of his youth shall be the comfort of my years; every
laughter that leapes from his looks, shall be the holiday of my conceiptes,
and every tear, shall furnish out my greeues, and his fathers funerals. I have
heard them say Lamedon, that the lowest shrubbes feel the least tempests, that
in the valleis of Africa is heard no thunder, that in country rooms is
greatest rest, and in little wealth the least disquiet: dignity treads upon
glass, and honor is like to the herb Synara, that when it bloometh most
gorgeous, then it blasteth: Aulica vita ^^^^ndida miseria, Courts have golden
dreams, but cotages sweet slumbres: then Lamedon will I disguise my self, with
my clothes I will change my thoughts; for being poorly attired I will be
meanly minded, and measure my actions by my present estate, not by former
fortunes. In saaying this the babe awakte and cride, and she fell to tears
mixed with a lullabie.

All this while Menaphon sat amongst the shrubs fixing his eyes on the
glorious object of her face, he noted her tresses, which he compared to the
colored Hyacinth of Arcadia, her brows to the mountain snowes that lie on
the hills, her eyes to the gray glister of Titans gorgeous mantle, her alabaster
neck to the whiteness of his flocks, her tears to pearl, her face to
^^rders of Lillies interseamed with Roses: to be breife our shepherd Menaphon
that heretofore (...) to love, and as the The (...) of (...), ^ he a (...) of
Venus, was now by the wily shaft of Cupid so entangled in the perfection and
(...) excellence of Sephestia; as now he swore no (...) but Venus, no God but
(...), no (...) but Love. Being thus (...) with the pliant (...) of fancy,
impatient (...) his new affections, as the horse that never before felt the
spur, he could not (...) his new (...) aued amors, but watching when they
should depart, perceiving by the (...) of the old man, and the tears of the
Gentle (...), that they were (...), thought to offer any help that (...) the
compass of his (...). As thus he mused in his new passions, Lamedon and
Sephestia rose up, and resolved to take their course which way the wind blew:
passing so (...) the mountain to go (...) out some (...), at last they (...),
Lamedon (...) Menaphon: (...) to know the course of the country, he (...) him
(...).

Shepherd, for so far thy attire warrants me; courteous, for so much thy
countenance imports: if di^tressed (...) has wronged, and the seas have (...),
((...) to live and want) may without (...) so (...) aid as to know some place
(...) to (...) and weather-beaten (...), our (...) shall (...), (...) you (...)
for (...) to their (...). (...) (...), but not (...) to his eye, stood staring
still on Sephestias face, which (...), (...) such a (...) the (...) of the
(...) ^ this (...) (...), at last (...).

(...), your (...) I know (...) I (...) title (...): Fortunes (...), and Kings
are (...) chance (...). (...) is to (...), (...) that are (...), are bound to
(...) are (...) ^ (...) follow me, and you shall have (...), as a (...) may
affcord. Lamedon and Sephestia were passing glad, and Menaphon led the way, not
(...) only to (...) his (...) with the beauty of his new (...), but thought
also to infer some occasion of parley, to (...) whether her voice were as
melodious, as her face (...), he therefore prosecuted his prattle thus.
Gentlewoman, when (...) I saw you sitting upon the Arcadian Promontorie with
your (...) on your lap, and this old father by; I thought I had (...) Venus
with Cupide on her knee courted by Anchises of Troy: the excellence of your
looks could discover no less than Mars his paramour, and the beauty of the
child as much as the dignity of her wanton: at last (...) by your (...) your
child's shrikes, that ye were passengers (...), I lent you (...) to partake your
forrowes, and luke warm drops to signify how I pity ouercharged persons, in
lieu whereof let me (...), country, and parentage. Sephestia seeing by the
shepherds passionate looks, that the swain was half in love, replied thus;
(...) shepherd, if my blubbered checkes did look like Venus at a blush, it was
when the woeful (...) for her fair Adonis, my (...) is no Cupide but the son
of care, Fortunes (...) in his youth, to be I hope her darling in his age: in
that your looks saw our grief, and your thoughts pitied our woes, our (...)
shall (...) thanks (the (...) of sorrows tenants) and our hearts pray that the
Gods may be as friendly to your (...), as you favorable to us. My (...) is
Samela, my country Cipres, my parentage mean, the (...) of a poor Gentleman
now (...): (...) we (...) by shipwreck, (...) inquire (...), (...) for thee to
hear it, and a (...) for (...) it. The shepherd not daring displease his
(...), as (...) threats hanging on her lips, (...) them home to his house:
as soon as they were (...) there, he began at the (...) to en^ertain them
thus. Fair Mistres the flower of all our Nymphs that live here in Arcadia,
this is my cotage wherein I live content, and your lodging, where (please it
you) ye may rest quiet. I have not rich clothes of Egypt to cover the walls,
nor store of plate to discover any wealth; for shepherds use neither to be
proud nor covetous: you shall find here (...) and milk for dainties, and
wool for clothing; in every corner of the house Content sitting smiling, and
tempering every homely thing with a welcome: this if ye can brook and accept
of, (as Gods allow the meanest hospitality) ye shall have such welcome and
fare as Philemon and Bancis gave to ^upiter. Sephestia thankt him (...), and
going into his house found what he promised: after that they had sat a little
by the fire and were well warmed, they went to supper, where Sephestia fed
well, as one whom the sea had made hungry, and Lamedon so plide his (...),
that all supper he spoke not one word: after they had taken their repast,
Menaphon seeing they were weary, and that sleep chimed on to rest, he let
them see their lodging, and so gave them the good night. Lamedon on his flock
bed, and Sephestia on her country couch were so weary, that they slept
well: but Menaphon, poor Menaphon neither asked his swaynes for his sheep,
nor took his mole-spade on his neck to see his pastures; but as a man pained
with a thousand passions, drenched in distress, and overwhelmed with a
multitude of uncouth cares, he sat like the pictures that Perseus turned with
his Gorgons head into stones. His sister Carmela kept his house, (for so was
the Country wench called) and she seeing her brother sit so malcontented,
stepped to her (...) and fetched a little beaten spice in an old bladder, she
sparde no evening (...), but went amongst the cream bowls, and made him a
posset. But alas, Love had so (...) up the shepherds stomach, that none would
down with Menaphon: Carmela seeing her brother refuse his spicte drink,
thought all was not well, and therefore sat down and wept; to be short, she
blubbered and he sightht, and his men that come in and saw their master with a
kercher on his head mournde; so that amongst these swains there was such
melody, that Menaphon took his bow and arrows and went to bed: where
casting himself, he thought to have beguiled his passions with some sweet
slumbers. But Love that smiled at his new interteined champion, sitting on his
beds head, pricked him forward with new desires; charging Morpheus, Phobetor,
and Icolon the Gods of sleep, to present (...) his closed eyes the singular
beauty and rare perfections of Samela: (for so will we now call her) in that
the Idea of her excellence, forced him to breath out scalding sighs smothered
within the furnace of his thoughts, which grew into this or the like passion.

I had thought Menaphon, that he which wears the bay leaf had been free from
lightening, and the Eagles (...) a preservative against thunder; that labor
had been enemy to love, and the eschewing of idleness an Antidote against
fancy: but I see by proof there is no adamant so hard, but the blood of a
(...) will make soft; no fort so well defenced, but strong battery will enter;
nor (...) heart so pliant to restless labors, but enchantments of love will
overcome. Unfortunate Menaphon, that a late thoughtst Venus a strumpet and her
son a bastard, now must thou offer incense at her shrine, and swear Cupide
no less than a God: thou have reason Menaphon; for he that lives without
love, lives without life; presuming as Narcissus to hate all, and being like
him at length despised of all. Can there be a sweeter bliss than beauty, a
greater heaven than her heavenly perfections that is mistres of thy thoughts?
If the sparkle of her eyes appear in the night, the stars blush at her
brightness: if her hair glister in the day, Phoebus puts off his wreath of
diamonds, as overcome with the shine of her tresses; if she walk in the (...),
Flora seeing her face, bids al her glorious flowers close themselves, as being
by her beauty disgraced; if her alabaster neck appear, then Hiems covers
his snow, as surpassed in whiteness. To be short Menaphon, if Samela had
appeared in Ida, Juno for majesty, Pallas for wisdom, and Venus for beauty
had let my Samela have the supremacy: why should thou not then love, and
think there is no life to love, seeing the end of love (...) the possefsion of
such a heavenly Paragon? But what of this Menaphon, have thou any hope to
enjoy her person, she is a widow, true, but too high for thy fortunes; she is
in distress, ah Menaphon, if thou have any spark of comfort, this must set
thy hope on fire. Want is the load stone of affection, distress forces deeper
than Fortunes frowns, and such as are poor will rather love than want
relief, fortunes frowns are whetstones to fancy: and as the horse starteth
at the spur, so love is (...) forward with distress. Samela is ship wrackt,
Menaphon relieues her; she wants, he supplies with wealth; he sues for love,
either must she grant, or buy denial with perpetual repentance. In this (...)
the poor shephearde, and with that Menaphon laid head down the pillow and
took a sounnd nappe, sleeping out fancy, with a good (...).

As soon as the sun appeared the shepherd got him up, and fed fat with this
hope, went merely with his men to the foldes, and there letting forth his
sh^eepe, after that he had appointed where they should graze, returned home,
and looking when his guests should rise, having (...) the last night went
roundly to his breakfast: by that time he (...) ended his desiune, Lamedon was
gotten up, and so was Samela. Against their rising Carmela had showen her
cookerie, and Menaphon tired in his russet iacket, his red (...) of chamlet,
his blew bonnet, and his round flop of country cloth, bestirred him, as every
(...) had been set to a sundry office. Samela no sooner came out of her
chamber, but Menaphon as one that claimed pity for his passions, bad her good
morrow with a firm lovers look: Samela knowing the foul by the feather, was
able to cast his disease without his water, (...) that Cupide had caught the
poor shepherd in his net, and unless he sought quickly to break out of the
snare would make him a tame fool: fair looks she gave him, and with a
smiling sorrow discovered how she grieved at his misfortune, and yet favored
him. Well, to breakfast they went Lamedon and Samela fed hard, but Menaphon
like the Argiue in the Date gardens of Arabia, lived with the contemplation of
his Mistres beautie^ the Salamander lives not without the fire, the Herring
from the water, the Mole from the earth, nor the Cameleon from the air, nor
could Menaphon live from the sight of his Samela; whose breath was perfumed
air, whose eyes were fire wherein he delighted to (...), whose heart the
earthly Paradise wherein he desired to (...) the essence of his love and
affection: thus did the poor shepherd bathe in a kind of bliss, whiles his
eye feeding on his mistres face, did surfeit with the excellency of her
perfection. So long he gazde, that at length breakfast was ended, (...) he
(...) to (...) her (...), first put her child to nurse, and then led her forth
to see his folds; thinking with the sight of his flocks to (...) her, whose
mindehad r^ather have chosen any misfortune, than have deined her eyes on the
face and feature of so low a peasant. Well, abroad they went, Menaphon with
his sheephooke fringed with cruel, to (...) he was (...) of the (...), Lamedon
and Samela after: plodding thus over the green fields, at last they came to
the mountains where Menapho^s flocks grazed, and there he (...) unto Samela
thus; I tell thee fair Nymph, these Plains that thou see stretching
Southward, are (...) belonging to Menaphon: there grows the ciutfoyle, and the
hyacinth, the (...), the primrose, and the (...), which my flocks shall spare
for flowers to make thee garlands, the milk of my ewes shall be meat for thy
pretty wanton, the wool of the fat weathers that seems as fine as the fleece
that Jason fet from Colchos, shall serve to make Samela webbes withal; the
mountain tops shall be thy mornings walk, and the shadie valleiee thy
euenings arbor: as much as Menaphon owes shall be at Samelas command, if she
like to live with Menaphon. This was spoken with such deep effects, that
Samela could scarce keep her from smiling, yet she covered her conceit with a
sorrowful countenance, which Menaphon espying, to make her merry, and rather
for his own advantage, seeing Lamedon was a sleep, took her by the hand and
sat down, and pulling forth his pipe, began after some melody to carroll
out this roundelay.

Menaphons roundelay.
When tender ewes brought ^ome with e^ening Sun
Wend to their foldes,
And to their (...)
The shepherds trugde when light of day is done.
(...)
The Eagle Jove's fair bird did perch,
There rests he.
A little fly his harbor then did search,
And did presume (though others laughed thereat)
To perch where as the princely Eagle sat.
The Eagle (...), and shook her royal wings,
And chargde the Fly
From thence to hie:
Afraid in have the little creature flings,
Yet seeks again
Fearful to pearke him by the Eagles side.
With moodie vain
The speedy post of Ganimede replide;
Vassaile auant or with my wings you die,
1st fit an Eagle seat him with a Fly?
The Fly (...) pity, still the Eagle (...),
The silly Fly
Ready to (...)
(...), displacte, fell groueling to the ground.
The Eagle saw
And with a royal mind said to the Fly,
Be not in awe,
I scorn by me the meanest creature die;
Then seat thee here: the joyful Fly up flings,
And sat safe shadowed with the Eagles wings.
As soon as Menaphon had ended this roundelay, turning to Samela, after a
country blush, he began to court her in this homely fashion; What think you
Samela of the Eagle for this royal d^eede? That he falsified the old Proverb
Aquila non capit muscas. But I mean Samela are you not in opinion, that the
Eagle gives instance of a princely resolution, in preferring the safety of a
Fly before the credit of her royal Majesty? I think Menaphon that high
minds; are the shelters of (...), and Kings seats are couerts for distressed
persons; that the Eagle in shrowding the Fly did well, but a little forgot her
honor. But how think you Samela, is not this proportion to be observed in
love: I guess no, for the Fly did it not for love, but for succor. Has love
then respect of circumstance: Else it is not love, but lust; for where the
parties have no simpathie of Estates, there can no firm love be (...); discord
is reputed the mother of division, and in nature this is an vuresuted
principle, that it falteth which fails in uniformity. He that (...) flowers
upon the Nettle marreth the smell; who (...) to tie the Lamb and the Lion in
one tedder makes a brawle; equal fortunes are loves favorites, and therefore
should fancy be always limited by Geometrical proportion; least if young
matching with old, (...) and frost fall at a combat: and if rich with poor
there hap many dangerous and brauing objections. Menaphon (...) nipte in
the pate with this (...), yet like a tall soldier stood to his tackling, and
made this answer; Suppose gentle Samela, that a man of mean estate, whom
disdainefull Fortune had (...), (...) to make her power prodigal in his
misfortunes, being feathered with Cupides bolt, were snared in the beauty of a
Queen, should he rather die than discover his amors? If Queens (quoth she)
were of my mind, I had rather die, tha^ perish in baser fortunes. Venus loved
Vulcan replied Menaphon: truth quoth Samela, but though he was polt-footed, yet
he was a God. Phaon enjoyed Sapho he a Ferriman that lived by his hands thrift,
she a Princess that (...) invested with a diadem. The more fortunate quoth
Samela was he in his honors, and she the less famous in her honesty. To
leave these instances replied Menaphon, (for love had made him hardy) I sweet
Samela infer these presupposed premises, to discover the baseness of my
mean birth, and yet the deepnesse of my affection, who ever since I saw the
(...) of your perfection shining upon the mou^tains of Arcadie, like the
glister of the Sun upon the toplesse Promontorie of Sicilia, was so snared
with your beauty, and so (...) with the excelle^ce of that perfection that
exceeds all excellency, that love entering my desire, has maintained
himself by force; that unless sweet Samela grant me favor of her love, and
play the princely Eagle, I shall (...) the poor Fly perish in my Fortunes:
he concluded this period with a deep sigh, and Samela grieuing at this folly
of the Shephearde, gave him mildly this answer.

Menaphon my distressed haps are the resolutions of the Destinies, and the
wrongs of my youth, are the forerunners of my woes in age; my native home is my
worst nurserie, and my friends d^nie that which strangers preiudiciallie grant:
I arrived in Arcady shipwrackt, and Menaphon favoring my sorrows has
affoorded me succors, for which Samela rests bound, and will prove thankful:
as for (...), know that Venus stands (...) the Tortoys, as (...) that Love
creeps on by (...); that (...) is like the Snayle, which steals to the top
of the lance by minutes: the (...) has his increase, yet never any sees it
augment, the Son (...), (...) the (...) is not (...) ^ (...) like those
should enter into the eye, and by long gradations pass into the heart; Cupid
has wings to fly, not that love should be swift, but that he may soar high
to avoid base thoughts. The Topace being thrown into the fire burns
straight, but no sooner out of the flame but it freezeth; straw is soon
kindled, but it is but a blaze; and love that is caught in a moment, is lost in
a minute: give me leave then Menaphon first to sorrow for my fortunes, then to
call to mind my husbands late funerals, then if the Fates have assigned I
shall fancy, I will account of thee before any shepherd in Arcadie. This
conclusion of Samela drove Menaphon into such an ecstasy for joy, that he stood
as a man metamorphozed; at last calling his senses together, he told her he
rested satisfied with her answer, and thereupon lent her a kiss, such as
blushing Thetis receaues from her choycest lemman. At this Lamedon awakte,
otherwise Menaphon no doubt had replied, but breaking off their talk they went
to view their pastures, and so passing down to the place where the sheep
grazed, they searched the shepherds bags, and so emptied their bottles as
Samela meruailed at such an (...) banquet: at last they returned home, Menaphon
glorying in the hope of his success, interteining Samela still with such
courtesy, that she finding such content in the cotage, began to despise the
honors of the Court. Resting thus in house with the shepherd, to avoid
tedious conceits she framed her self so to country labors, that she often
times would lead the flocks to the (...) her self, and being dressed in homely
attire, she seemd like Ocnone that was amorous of Paris. As she thus often
traced along the Plains, she was noted amongst the shepheardes of one Doron
next neighbor to Menaphon, who entered into the consideration of her beauty,
and made report of it to all his fellow swains, so that they chatted naught in
the (...) but of the new shepherdess. One day amongst the rest, it chanced
that Doron sitting in parley with another country companion of his, amidst
other tattle, they prattled of the beauty of Samela. (...) thou seen her
quoth Melicertus, (for so was his friend called) I quoth Doron and sight to see
her, not that I was in love, but that I (...) she should be in love with such a
one as Menaphon. What (...) of woman is she quoth Melicertus? As well as I can
answered Doron I will make description of her.

Dorons description of Samela.
Like to Diana in her Summer weed^
Girt with a crimson (...) of brightest die, goes fair Samela.
Whiter than be the flocks that straggling (...),
When washed by Arethusa faint they lie: is fair Samela.
As fair Aurora in her morning gray
Decked with the ruddie glister of her love, is fair Samela.
Like lovely Thetis on a calmed day,
When as her brightness Neptunes (...), shines fair Samela.
Her tresses gold, her eyes like glassie streams,
Her teeth are pearl, the breasts are (...) of fair Samela.
Her cheeks like rose and lilly yield forth gleames,
Her brows bright arches framde of ebonie: Thus fair Samela.
Passes fair Venus in her (...) hiew,
And Juno in the show of majesty, for she'is Samela.
Pallas in wit, all three if you well view,
For beauty, wit, and matchless dignity yield (...) Samela.
Thou (...) Melicertus made such a description, as if Priamus young boy should
paint out the perfection of his Greekish Paramour. Me thinks the Idea of her
(...) represents it self an object to my fantasy, and that I see in the (...)
excellence, the rare beauties of: and with that he broke off abruptly with
such a deep sigh, as it seemed (...) should have broken; sitting as the
Lapithes when they gazed on Medusa. Doron meruailing at this (...) event, was
half afraid, as if some appoplexie had astonished his senses, so that cheering
up his friend, he demanded what the cause was of this sudden conceit.
Melicertus no niggarde in discovery of his fortunes, began thus. I tell thee
Doron before I kept sheep in Arcadie, I was a (...) else where, so famous for
my flocks, as Menaphon for his foldes; beloved of the Nymphs, as (...) of the
Country Damzells; coveting in my loves to use Cupids wings, to soar high in
my desires, though my self were borne to base fortunes. The Hobbie catches no
pray, unless she mount beyond her mark, the Palm tree bears most bows
where it grows highest, and (...) most fortunate where his courage is
resolute, and thought beyond his compass. Grounding therefore onthese
principles, I (...) mine eye on a Nymph, whose parentage was great, but her
beauty far more excellent, her birth was by many degrees greater than mine,
and my worth by many discents less than hers: yet knowing Venus loved
Adonis, and Luna Endymion, that Cupide had boltes feathered with the plumes of
a Crow, as well as with the pens of an Eagle, I attempted and courted her, I
found her looks lightening disdain, and her forhead to (...) favors for
others, and frowns for me: when I alleged faith, she (...) me with Aeneas,
when loyalty, she told me of Jason; when I swore constancy, she questioned
me of Demophoon; when I craved a final resolution to my fatal passions, she
(...) her brows full of wrinckles, and her eyes full of fury, turned her
back, and shook me off with a Non placet. Thus in loves I lost loves, and for
her love had lost all, had not when I near despaired the clemency of some
(...) star, or rather the very excellence of my Mistres (...) salued my
half despairing malady: for she seeing that I held a supersticious opinion
of love, in honoring him for a Deity, not in counting him a vain conceit of
Poctrie, that I thought it sa^riledge to wrong my desires, and the basest
fortune to inhance my fortune by falsing my loves to a woman, she left from
being so rammage, and gently came to the fist, and granted me those favors
she might afford, or my thoughts desire: with this he ceast and fell again
to his sighs, which Doron noting, answered thus. If (my good Melicertus) thou
(...) enjoy they loves, what is the occasion thou beginnest with sighs, and
endest with passions. (...) Doron there ends my joys, for no sooner had I
triumphed in my favors, but the trophies of my fortunes fell like the herbs
in Syria, that flourish in the morn, and fade before night; or like unto the
fly Tyryma, that takes life and leaves it all in one day. So my Doron did it
fare with me, for I had no sooner enjoyed my love, but the heavens envious a
shepherd should have the fruition of such a heavenly Paragon, sent vnteuocable
Fates to deprive me of her life, and she is dead: dead Doron, to her, to my
self, to all, but not to my memory, for so deep were the (...) stamped in my
inward senses, that oblivion can never race out the form of her excellence.
And with that he start up, seeking to fall out of those dumpes with Music,
(for he played on his pipe certain sonets (...) contrived in praise of the
country wenches) but plain Doron as plain as a packstaffe, desired him to
sound a roundelay, and he would sing a song, which he (...) to this effect.

Dorons Iigge.
Through the shrubb^ as I can crack,
For my Lambs little ones,
Among many pretty ones,
Nymphs I mean, whose hair was black
As the (...):
Like the snow
Her fac^ and (...) shinde I ween:
I saw a little one,
A bonny pr^ty one,
As bright, buxsome and as sheene
As was she,
On her knee
That lulld the God, whose arrows warmes
Such merry little ones,
Such fair faced pretty ones,
As dally in Loves chiefest harms,
Such was (...):
Whose gray (...)
Made me love. I began to (...)
This sweet little one,
This bonny pretty one.
I (...) hard a day or two,
Till she bad;
Be not sad,
Woo no more I am thine own,
Thy dearest little one,
Thy truest pretty one:
Thus was faith and firm love shown,
As behoues
Shepherds (...).
(...) like you this Dittie of mine own (...), quoth Doron? As well as my
music replied Melicertus; for if Pan and I strive, Midas being Judge, and
should hap to give me the garland, I doubt not but his Asses ears should be
doubled: but Doron so long we dispute of love, and forget our labors, that
both our flocks shall be unfolded, and tomorrow our merry meeting hindered.
That's true quoth Doron, for there will be all the shepherds Daughters and
country Damzels, and amongst them fear not but Menaphon will bring his fair
Shepherdess, there Melicertus shall thou see her that will amate all our
moodes, and amaze thee, and therefore good Melicertus let us be going. With
this prattle away they went to their foldes, where we leave them, and return
to Menaphon, who trium phing in the hope of his new loves, caused Samela to
trick her up in her country attire, and make her self brave against the
meeting: she that thought, to be coye were to discover her thoughts, dressed her
self up in Carmelas russet cassocke, and that so quaintly, as if Venus in a
country peticoate had thought to wanton it with her lovely Adonis. The morrow
came, and away they went, but Lamedon was left behind to keep the house. At
the hour appointed, Menaphon, Carmela and Samela came, when all the rest were
readic making merry. As soon as word was brought, that Menaphon came with his
new Mistres, all the company began to murmur, and every man to prepare his
eye for so miraculous an (...): but Pesana a heardsmans daughter of the same
parish, that long had loved Menaphon, and he had filled her brows with
frowns, her eyes with fury, and her heart with grief; yet coveting in so
open an assemblic, as well as she could to hide a pad in the straw, she
expected as others did the arriwall of her new corriuall: who at that instant
came with Menaphon into the house. No sooner was she entered the Parlour, but
her eyes gave such a shine, and her face such a brightness, that they stood
gazing on this Goddess; and she unacquainted, seeing (...) self among so
many unknown swains, died her cheeks with such a vermilion blush, that the
country maids themselves fell in love with this (...) Nymph, and could not
blame Menaphon for being over the shoes with such a beautiful creature. Doron
iogde Melicertus on the elbowe, and so awakte him out of a dream, for he was
deeply drowned in the contemplation of her excellency; sending out (...) of
sighs in remembrance of his old love, as thus he sat meditating cn her
favor, how much she resembled her that death had deprived him off: well her
welcome was great of all the company, and for that she was a stranger they
graced her to make her the (...) of the Feast. Menaphon seeing Samela thus
honored, conceived no small content in the advancing of his Mistres, being
passing ioconde and pleasant with the rest of the company, insomuch that
every one perceived how the poor swayne fed upon the dignities of his
Mistres grates. Pesana noting this began to lowre, and Carmela winking upon her
fellows, answered her frowns with a smile, which doubled her grief; for
women's pains are more pinthing if they be girded with a frumpe, than if they
be galled with a mischief. Whiles thus there was banding of such looks, as
every one imported as much as an impreso, Samela willing to see the fashion of
these country young frowes, cast her eyes abroad, and in viewing every face,
at last her eyes glaunced on the looks of Melicertus; whose countenance
resembled so unto her dead Lord, that as a woman astonished she stood staring on
his face, but ashamed to gaze upon a stranger, she made restraint of her
looks, and so taking her eye from one particular object, she sent it abroad to
make general survey of their country demeanours. But (...) all this gazing,
he that had seen poor Menaphon, how infected with a jealous fury, he stared
each man in the face, fearing their eyes should feed or surfeit on his Mistres
beauty: if they glaunst, he thought straight they would be riualls in his
loves; if they flatly looked, then they were deeply (...) in affection; if
they once smiled on her, they had received some glance from Samela that made
them so malepart; if she laughed, she likte; and at that he began to frown:
thus sat poor Menaphon all dinner while pained with a thousand (...)
passions, keeping his teeth garders of his stomach, and his eyes watchmen of
his loves, but Melicertus half impatient of his new conceived thoughts,
determined to try how the Damzell was brought up, and whether she was as wise
as beautiful, he therefore began to break (...) thus.

The Orgies which the Bacchanals kept in Thessaly, the Feasts which the
melancholy Saturnists (...) in Danuby, were never so quatted with (...), but on
their festiual days they (...) frolic amongst themselves with many
pleasant parlies: were it no a shame then that we of Arcadie, famous for the
beauty of our Nymphs, and the amorous (...) of our (...), should disgrace
Pans holiday with such melancholy dumpes: courteous country Swains shake off
this sobriety, and seeing we have in our company Damzels both beautiful and
wise, let us interteine them with prattle, to try our wits, and tire our
time; to this they all agreed with a plandite. Then quoth Melicertus; by your
leave since I was first in motion, I will be first in question, and therefore
new come shepherdess first to you: at this Samela blushed, and he began thus.

Fair Damzel, when Naereus chatted with Juno, he had pardon, in that his
prattle came more to pleasure the Goddess than to ratify his own presumption:
if I Mistres be ouerhold, forgive me; I question not to offend, but to set time
free from tediousness. Then gentle shepherdess tell me, if you should be
transformed through the anger of the Gods, into some shape; what creature would
you reason to be in form? Samela blushing that she was the first that was
(...), yet ^gathered up her crumbs, and desirous to show her pregnaunt wit, (as
the wisest women be ever tickled with self love) made him this answer.

Gentle shepherd, it fits not strangers to be nice, nor maidens too coy; least
the one feel the weight of a scoff, the other the fall of a frumpe: pithie
questions are minds whetstones, and by discoursing in jest, many doubts are
deciphered in earnest: therefore you have forestalled me in crouing pardon,
when you have no need to feel any grant of pardon. Therefore thus to your
question; Daphne I remember was turned to a bay tree, Niobe to a flint,
Lampetia and her sisters to flowers, and sundry Uirgins to sundry shapes
according to their merits; but if my wish might serve for a (...), I would be
turned into a sheep. A sheep, and why so Mistres? I reason thus quoth Samela,
my supposition should be simple, my life quiet, my food the pleasant Plains of
Arcadie and the wealthy riches of Flora, my drink the cool streams that
flow from the concaue (...) of this Continent, my air should be clear, my
walks spacious, my thoughts at ease, and can there none shepherd be my better
premises to conclude my reply than these? But have you no other allegations
to confirm your resolution: Yes sir quoth she, and far greater. Then the law
of our first motion quoth he commands you to repeat them. Far be it
answered Samela that I should not do of free will any thing that this
pleasant company commands: therefore thus; Were I a shecpe, I should be
guarded from the foldes with iollie Swains, such as was Lunas Love on the hills
of Latmos; their pipes sounding like the melody of Mercury, when he lulld
asleep Argus: but more, when the Damzells tracing along the Plains, should
with their eyes like Sun bright beams, draw on looks to gaze on such
sparkling Planets: then weary with food, should I lie and look on their
beauties, as on the spotted wealth of the richest Firmament; I should listen
to their sweet lays, more sweet than the Sea-borne Sirens: thus feeding on
the delicacie of their features, I should like the Tyrian heyfer fall in love
with Agenors darling. I but quoth Melicertus, those fair facde Damzells often
draw forth the kindest sheep to the shambles. And what of that sir answered
Samela, would not a sheep so long (...) with beauty, die for love. If he die
(quoth Pesana) it is more kindness in beasts, than constancy in men: for they
die for love, when larkes die with leekes. If they be so wise quoth Menaphon,
they show but their mother wits; for what sparks they have of inconstancy,
they draw from their female fosterers, as the Sea does ebbes and tides from
the Moon. So be it sir answered Pesana, then no doubt your mother was made of
a (...) cock, that brought forth such a wavering companion: for you master
Menaphon measure your looks by minutes and your loves are like lightning, which
no sooner flash on the (...), but they vanish. It is then quoth Menaphon
because mine eye is a foolish Judge, and chooses too baselie: which when my
heart censures of, it (...) away as refuse. Twere best the^ said Pesana, to
discharge such unjust Judges of there seats, and to set your ears (...) of
your love pleas. I^ they fault quoth Melicertus, every market town has
aremedie, or else there is never a Baker near by seven miles. Stay courteous
Shepherds quoth Samela, these iestes are too broad before, they are cynicall
like Diogenes quippes, that had large feathers and sharp heads, it little fits
in this company to bandie taunts of love, seeing you are unwedded and these
all maidens addicted to (...). You speak well as a Patroness of our credit
quoth Pesana, for in (...) we be (...), and addicted to virginity. Now quoth
Menaphon that you have got a virgin in your mouth you will never leave chaunting
that word, till you prove your self either a Uestall or a Sybill. Suppose she
were a Uestall quoth Melicertus, I had almost said a virgin (but God forbid
I had made such a doubtful supposition) she might carry water with Amulia in
a sieve: for amongst all the rest of the virgins we read of none but her that
wrought such a miracle. Pesana hearing how pleasantly Melicertus played with her
nose, thought to give him as great a bone to gnaw upon, which she cast in his
teeth thus (...).

I remember sir that Epicurus measured every man's diet by his own principles;
Abradas the great Macedonian Pirate, thought every one had a letter of Mart,
that bare (...) in the Ocean; none came to knock at Diogenes tub but was
supposed a Cinick; and fancy a late has so tied you to his vanities, that you
will think Vesta a flat figured conceit of Poetry. Samela perceiving these
blows would grow to deep wounds, broke off their talk with this pretty
digression. Gentlemen, to end this strife, I pray you let us hear the opinion
of Doron, for all this while neither he (...) Carmela have uttered one word,
but sat as Censers of our pleas; twere necessary he told us how his heart
came thus on his halfepenie. Doron hearing Samela thus pleasant, made
presently this blunt reply; I was fair Mistres in a solemn doubt with my
self, whether in being a sheep, you would be a Ram or an Ewe: An Ewe no
doubt quoth Samela, for horns are the heauiest burden that the head can bear.
As Doron was ready to reply, came in suddenly (...) this parley four or five
old shepherds, who broke off their prattle, that from that they fell to
drinking: and so after some parley of their flocks, every one departed to
their own home where they talked of the exquisite perfection of Samela,
especially Melicertus, who gotten to his own cotage, and lain down in his
couch by himself, began to ruminate on Samelas shape.

Ah Melicertus, what an object fortune this day brought to thy eyes, presenting
a strange Idaea to thy sight, as appeared to Achilles of his dead friend
Patroclus, tresses of gold like the tramels of Sephestias locks, a face fairer
than Venus, such was Sephestia; her eye paints her out Sephestia, her voice
sounds her out Sephestia, she seems none but Sephestia: but seeing she is
dead, and there lives not such another Sephestia, sue to her and love her, for
that it is either a self same or another Sephestia. In this hope Melicertus
fell to his slumber, but Samela was not so content: for she began thus to muse
with her self; May this Melicertus be a shepherd: or can a country cotage
afford such perfection? does this coast bring forth such excellence? then
happy are the virgins shall have such suitors, and the wives such pleasing
husbands; but his face is not inchacte with any rusticke proportion, his
brows contain the characters of nobility, and his looks in shepherds weeds
are Lordly, his voice pleasing, his wit full of gentry: weigh all these
equally, and consider Samela is it not thy Maximus? Fond fool away with these
suppositions; could the dreaming of Andromache call Hector from his grave? or
can the vision of my husband raise him from the seas? Tush stoop not to such
vanities: he is dead, and therefore grieve not thy memory with the
imagination of his new revive, for there has been but one Hippolitus found to
be Virbius, twice a man, to salve Samela than this suppose; if they court thee
with hyacinth, (...) them with roses; if he send thee a lamb, present him an
eawe; if he woo, be wooed; and for no other reason, but, he is like Maximius.
Thus she rested, and thus she slept, all parties being equally content and
satisfied with hope except Pesana, who fettred with the feature of her best
beloved Menaphon sat cursing Cupide as a partial Deity, that would make more
day light in the Firmament than one Sun, more rainebowes in the heaven than
one Iris, and more loves in one heart than one settled passion: many prayers
she made to Venus for revenge, many vows to Cupide, many orizons to
Hymaeneus, if she might possess the type of her desires. Well poor soul,
howsoever she was paid, she smothered all with patience, and thought to brave
love with seeming not to love; and thus she daily drove out the time with
labor, and looking to her heard, hearing every day by Doron who was her
kiusman, what success Menaphon had in his loves. Thus Fates and Fortune
dallying a doleful Catastrophe, to make a more pleasing Epitazis, it fell out
amongst them thus. Melicertus going to the fields, as he was wont to do with
his flocks, drove to graze as near the swains of Menaphon as he might, to
have a view of his new enterteined Mistres; who, according to his expectation
came thither every day. Melicertus esteeming her to be some Farmers daughter
at the most, could not tell how to court her: yet at length calling to
rembrance her rare wit discovered in her last discourses, finding opportunity
to give her both bal and racket, se^ing the coast was clear, and that none but
Samela and he were in the flew, he left his flock in the valley, and stepped
unto her, and saluted her thus.

Mistres of al eyes that glance but at the excellence of your perfection,
sovereign of all such as Venus has allowed for lovers, Oenones ouermatch,
Arcadies comet, beauties second comfort; all hail: seeing you sit like Juno
when she first (...) her white heyfer on the Lincen downs, as bright as
silver Phoebe mounted on the high top of the ruddie (...), (...) attractiue
force drawn, as the adamant draws the iron, or the ieat the straw, to (...)
your sweet self in the shade, and afford you such company as a poor swain
may yield without offense; which if you shall vouch to deigne of, I shall be as
glad of such accepted service, as Paris first was of his best beloved Paramour.
Samela looking on the shepheardes face, and seeing his utterance full of broken
sighs, thought to be pleasant with her shepherd thus. Arcadies Apollo, whose
brightness draws every eye to turn as the Heliotropion (...) after her load;
fairest of the shepherds, the Nymphs sweetest object, women's wrong, in
wronging many with ones due; welcome, and so welcome, as we vouchsafe of your
service, admit of your company, as of him that is the grace of al companies;
and if we durst upon any light pardon, would venture to request you show us a
cast of your cunning. Samela made this reply, because she heard him so
superfine, as if Ephaebus had learnd him to refine his mother tongue, wherefore
thought he had done it of an inkhorne desire to be eloquent; and Melicertus
thinking that Samela had learnd with Lucilla in Athens to anotamize wit, and
speak none but Similes, imagined she smoothed her talk to be thought like
Sapho Phaos Paramour. Thus deceived either in others suppositions, Samela
followed her suit thus; I know that Priamus wanton could not be without flocks
of Nymphs to follow him in the Uale of Ida, beauty has legions to attend
her excellence if the shepherd be true; if like Narcissus you wrap not not
your face in the cloud of disdain, you cannot but have some rare Paragon to
your Mistres, whom I would have you in some sonnet describe. Jove's last love,
if Jove could get from Juno, my pipe shall presume and I adventure with my
voice to set out my Mistres favor for your excellence to censure of, and
therefore thus. Yet Melicertus for that (...) had a farther reach, would not
make any clownish description, chanted it thus cunningly.

Melicertus description of his Mistres.
Tune on my pipe the praises of my Love,
And midst thy eaten harmony recount
How fair she is that makes thy music mount,
And every string of thy hearts harp to move.
Shall I compare her form unto the sphere
Whence Sun-bright Venus (...) her silver shine?
Ah more than that by just compare is thine,
Whose Crystal looks the cloudie heavens (...) clear.
How often have I descending Titan seen
His burning locks couch in the Sea-queenes lap,
And beauteous Thetis his red body wrap
In watrie roabes, as he her Lord had been.
When as my Nymph impatient of the night
Bad bright Atraeus with his train give place,
Whiles she led forth the day with her fair face,
And lent each star a more than Delian light.
Not Jove or Nature should they both agree
To make a woman of the Firmament,
Of his mixed purity could not invent
A Sky borne form so beautiful as she.
When Melicertus had ended this roundelay in praise of his Mistres, Samela
perceived by his description, that either some better Poet than himself had
made it, or else that his former phrase was dissembled: wherefore to try him
thoroughly, and to see what snake lay hidden under the grass, she followed
the chase in this manner.

Melicertus, might not a stranger crave your Mistres name. At this the
shepherd blushed, and made no reply. How now quoth Samela, what is she mean
that you shame, or so high as you fear to bewray the souereign of your
thoughts? Stand not in doubt man, for be she base, I read that mighty
Tamberlaine after his wife Zenocrate (the worlds fair eye) past out of the
Theater of this mortal life, he chose stigmaticall trulls to please his
humorous fancy. Be she a princess, honor hangs in high desires, and it is
the token of a high mind to venture for a Queen: then gentle shepherd tell me
thy Mistres name. Melicertus hearing his goddess speak so favorably,
breathed out this sudden reply; Too high Samela, and therefore I fear with
the Syrian Wolves to bark against the Moon, or with them of Scyrum to shoot
against the stars; in the height of my thoughts soaring too high, to fall
with woeful repenting Icarus: no sooner did mine eye glance upon herbeautie,
but as if love and fate had sat to forge my fatal disquiet, they trapte me
within her looks, and haling her Idaea through the passage of my sight, placde
it so deeply in the center of my heart, as maugre al my studious endeavor it
still and ever will keep restless possession: noting her virtues, her
beauties, her perfections, her excellence, and fear of her too high born
parentage, although painfully fettered, yet have I still feared to dare so
haute (...) attempt to so brave a personage; least she offensive at my
presumption, I perish in the height of my thoughts. This conclusion broken with
an abrubt passion, could not so satisfy Samela but she would be further
inquisitiue. At last after many questions, he answered thus; seeing Samela I
consume my self, and displease you; to hazard for the salve that may cure my
malady, and satisfy your question, know it is the beauteous Samela. Be there
more of that name in Arcady beside my self quoth she. I know not quoth
Melicertus, but were there a million, only you are Melicertus Samela. But of a
million qu^th she, I cannot be Melicertus Samela, for love has but one arrowe
of desire in his quiver, but one string to his bow, and in choice but one aim
of affection. Have ye already quoth Melicertus set your rest upon some higher
personage? No quoth Samela, I mean by your self, for I have heart that your
fancy is linked already to a beautiful shepherdess in Arcadie. At this the
pore swain tainted his cheeks with a vermilion die, yet thinking to carry out
the matter with a (...), he ^tood to his tackling thus; Whosoever Samela
descanted of that love, told you a Canterbury tale; some prophetical full
mouth that as he were a Cobblers eldest son, would by the last tell where
another shoe wrings, but his sowterly aim was just level, in thinking
every look was love, or every fair word a pawn of loyalty. Then quoth
Samela taking him at a rebound, neither may I think your glaunces to be
fancies, nor your greatest protestation any assurance of deep affection:
therefore ceasing off to court any further at this time, think you have
proved your self a tall soldier to continue so long at battery, and that I
am a fau^rable foe that have continued so long a parley; but I charge you by
the love you owe your dearest Mistres, not to say any more as touching love for
this time. If Samela quoth he, thou had enjoined me as Juno did to Hercules,
most dangerous labors, I would have discovered my love by obedience, and my
a^fection by death: yet let me crave this, that as I begun with a Sonnet, so
I may end with a Madrigale. Content Melicertus quoth she, for none more than I
love Music. Upon this reply the shepherd proud followed this Dittie.

Melicertus Madrigal^.
What are my sheep without their wonted food?
What is my life except I gain my Love?
My sheep consume and faint for want of blood.
My life is lost unless I grace approve.
No flower that saplesse thriues:
No Turtle without pheare.
The day without the Sun does (...) for woe,
Then woe mine eyes unless they beauty se^:
My Sun Samelaes eyes, by whom I know
Wherein delight consists, where pleasures be.
Naught more the heart reuiues
Than to embrace his dear.
The stars from earthly humors gain their light,
Our humors by their light possess their power:
Samelaes eyes fidde by my weeping sight,
Insues my pain or joys by smile, or lower.
So wends the source of love.
It feeds, it fails, it ends.
Kind looks clear to your joy behold her eyes,
Admire her heart, desire to taste her kisses;
In them the heaven of joy and solace lies,
Without them evry hope his succor misses.
Oh how I love to prove
Wheretoo this solace tends.
Scarce had the shepherd ended this Madrigale, but Samela began to frown,
saying he had broken promise. Melicertus alleged if he had vttred any passion,
(...) sung, not said. Thus these Lovers in a humorous descant of their prattle
espied a far off old Lamedon and Menaphon coming toward them; whereupon
kissing in conceit, and parting with interchaunged glaunces, Melicertus stole
to his sheep, and Samela sat her down making of nets to catch birds. At
last Lamedon and her Love came, and after many gracious looks, and much good
parley, helpte her home with her sheep, and put them in the folds. But leaving
these amorous shepheardes busy in their loves, let us return at length to
the pretty babie Samelas child, whom Menapho^ had put to nurse in the
country. This infant being by Nature beautiful, and by birth noble, even in
his cradle expres^ to the eyes of the gazers such glorious presages of his
approaching fortunes, as if another Alcides (the arme-strong darling of the
doubled night) by wrestling with snakes in his swaddling cloutes, should
propherie to the world the approthing wonders of his prowess; so did his (...)
looks reflect terror to the weak beholders of his ingrafted nobility, as if
some God twice born like unto the Thracian Bacchus, forsaking his heaven borne
Deity, should delude our eyes with the alternate form of his infancy. Five
years had full run their monthly revolution, when as this beauteous boy began
to show himself among the shepherds children, with whom he had no sooner
co^tracted familiar acquaintance, but straight he was chosen Lord of the May
game, king of their sports, and ringleader of their reuils; insomuch that his
tender mother beholding him by chance mounted in his kingly majesty, and
imitating honorable justice in his game (...) exercise of discipline, with
tears of joy took up these prophetical terms; well do I see, where God and
Fate has vowed (...), no adverse fortune may expel prosperity. Pleusidippus
thou art young, thy looks high, and thy thoughts hautie; souereigntie is
seated in thy eyes, and honor in thy heart; I fear this fire will have his
flame, and then am I undone in thee my (...); my country life (sweet country
life) in thy proud soaring hopes, despoysed and disroabed of the disguised array
of his rest, must return (...) weeds to the foldes where I left my fears,
and have to the court my hell, there to inuest me in my wonted cares. How now
Samela, will thou be a Sybil of mishap to thy self: the angry heavens that
have eternisht thy exile, have established thy content in Arcadie. My content in
Arcadie, that may not be no longer than my Pleusidippus stays in Arcadie,
which I have cause to fear, for the whelps of the Lion are no longer harmless
than when they are whelps, and babes no longer to be awed, than while they are
babes. I but nature, and therewith she pawsed, being interrupted by a tumult of
boys, that by young Pleusidippus command fell upon one of their f^llowes, and
beat him most (...) for playing false play at nine holes: which she espying
through her lattise window, could not chose but smile about measure. But when
she saw him in his childish terms condemn one to death for despising the
authority bequeathed him by the rest of the boys, then she bethought her of
the Persian Cyrus that deposed his Grandfather Astyages, whose use it was at
like age to imitate majesty in like manner. In this distraction of thoughts
she had not long time staid, but Lamedon and Menaphon calde her away to
accompany them to the foldes, whiles Pleusidippus hasting to the execution of
justice, dismissed his boyish session till their next meeting: where how
imperiously he behaved himself in punishing misorders amongst his equals, in
using more than jesting justice toward his untamed copesmates, I refer it to
the Annuals of the Arcadians that dilate not a little of this ingenious
argument. In this sort did Pleusidippus draw forth his infancy, till on a
time walking to the shore, where he with his mother were wrackt, to gather
cockles and pebble stones, as children are wont: there arrived on the strond a
Thessalian Pirate named Eurilachus, who after he had forraged in the Arcadian
confines, driving before him a large booty of beasts to his ships espied this
pretty infant; when gazing on his face as wanton Jove gazed on Phrygian
Ganimede in the fields of Ida, he exhaled into his eyes such deep impression
of his perfection, as that his thought neuet thirsted so much after any pray,
as this pretty Pleusidippus possession: but determining first to assay him by
courtesy before he assailed him with rigor, he began to try his wit after
this manner. My little child, whence art thou, where were thou borne, what is
thy name, and wherefore wandrest thou thus all alone on the shore. I pray ye
what are you sir quoth Pleusidippus, that deal thus with me by
interrogatories, as if I were some run away. Will thou not tell me then who
was thy father: Said he, Good sir, if ye will needs know go ask that of my
mother. Has said well my Lord quoth Romanio who was one of his especial
associates, for wise are the children in these days that know their own
fathers, especially if they be begotten in Dog days, when their mothers are
frantic with love, and young men furious for lust. Besides, who knows not,
that these Arcadians are given to take the benefit of every ^odge, when they
will sacrifice their virginity to Venus, though they have but a bush of
nettles for their bed; and sure this boy is but some shepherds bastard at
the most, howsoever his wanton face imports more than appeerance.
Pseusidippus eyes at this speech resolved into fire, and his face into purple,
with a more than common courage in children of his years and stature, gave him
the lie roundly in this reply; Pesant, the bastard in thy face, for I am a
Gentleman: were thou a man in courage, as thou art a Kowe in proportion, thou
would never have so much empayred thy honesty, as to derogate from my honor.
Look not in my face but leuel at my heart by this that thou see, and
therewith let drive at him with such pebble stones as he had in his hat,
insomuch that Romanio was driven to his heels, to shun this sudden hail
shot, and Eurilochus resolved into a laughter, and in terms of admiration
most highly extolled so exceeding magnanimity in so little a body; which how
available it proved to the confirmation of his fancy, that was before
inflamed with his features, let them imagine, that have noted the imbecilitie
of that age, and the unresisted fury of men at arms. Suffices at this
instant to unfold (all other circumstance of praise laid apart) that
Eurilochus being far in love with his extraordinary lineaments, awaited no
farther parley, but willed his men perforce to hoyse him a shipboord, intending
as soon as ever he arrived in Thessaly, by sending him to the Court as a
present, to make his peace with his Lord and Master Agenor, who not long before
had proclaimed him as a notorious Pirate throughout all his dominions. Neither
swarued he one whit from his purpose, for no sooner had he cast auker in the
Port of Hadrionopolis, but he arraied him in choice silks and Tyrian purple,
and so sent him as a prize to the King of that Country, who walwalking as then
in his summer garden with his Queen the beauteous Eriphila, fell to discourse
(as one well seen in Philosophy) of herbs and flowers, as the savor or
color did occasion; and having spent some time in disputing their medicinable
properties, his Lady reaching him a Marigold, he began to moralize of it thus
merely. I marvel the Poets that were so prodig all in painting the amorous
affection of the Sun to his Hyacinth, did never observe the relation of love
twixt him and the Marigold: it should either seem they were loath to incur
the displeasure of women, by propounding it in the way of comparison any
servile imitation for head strong wives, that love no precepts less, than
those pertaining unto duty; or that that flower not so usual in their gardens
as ours, in her unacquainted name did obscure the honor of her amors to
Apollo; to whose motions reducing the method of her springing, she waketh and
sleeps, opens and shuts her golden leaves, as he rises and sets.
Well did you forestall my exception quoth Eriphila, in terming it a servile
imitation; for were the condition of a wife so slavish as your similitude would
infer, I had as leave be your page as your spouse, your dog as your
darling. Not so sweet wife answered Agenor, but the comparison holds in
this, that as the Marigold resembles the Sun both in color and form, so
each man's wife ought every way to be the image of her husband, framing her
countenance to smile, when she sees him disposed to mirth; and contrariwise her
eyes to tears, he being surcharged with melancholy: and as the Marigold
displaieth the orient ornaments of her beauty to the resplendant view of none
but her lover Hyperion, so ought not a woman of modesty lay open the
allurements of her face to any but her espoused pheere; in whose absence like
the Marigold in the absence of the Simne, she ought to shut up her doors, and
solemnize continual night, till her husband her sun making a happy return,
vnsealeth her silence with the joy of his sight. Believe me, but if all flowers
(quoth Eriphila) afford such influence of eloquence to our adverse orators, He
exempt them all from my smell, for fear they be all planted to poison. Often
have I heard (replied Agenor) our cunning Physicians conclude, that one poison
is harmless to another; which if it be so, there is no cause why a (...)
should fear to be stung of a nettle. I can tell you sir, you best were beware,
least in wading too far in comparisons of thistles and nettles, you exchange
not your rose for a nettle. If I do quoth Agenor, it is no more, but my
gardeners shall pluck it up by the roots, and throw it over the wall as a
weed. To end this jest that else would issue to (...). what purple flower is
this in form like a hyacinth (quoth Eriphila) so cunningly dropped with blood,
as if Nature had intermedled with the Peralds art to emblazon a bleeding
heart. It is the flower into the which Poets (...) saigne Venus dyiug Adonis to
be turned, a fair boy but passing unfortunate. Was it possible quoth Eriphila,
that ever Nature should be so bounteous to a boy, to give him a face in
despite of women so fair: feign would I (...) such an object, and then would I
best beauty, for imparting our excellency to any inferior abject. In saying
these words (as if Fortune meant to present her fancy with his desired
felicity) Romanio conducted by one of the Lords came with young Pleusidippus in
his hand into the pri^ garden: where discoursing unto the king the intent of
Eurilochus in presenting him with such an inestimable Jewel, the manner of his
taking in the Strond of Arcadie, with other circumstance of vowed allegiance;
all which being gratefully accepted of Agenor, he sealed their several
par^ons, and so gave them leave to depart. But when be had thoroughly obscrued
every perfection of young Pleusidippus, he burst into these terms of passion;
Pad sea-borne Pontia then an appliable ear in our idleness, that to testiste
her eteruall deity, she should send us a second Adonis to delude our senses:
What ever may deserve the name of fair have I (...) before, beauty have I
beheld in his brighest orb, but never set eye on immortality before this
hour. Eriphila likewise in no less ecstasy, seeing her eyes to dazzle with the
reflexe of his beauty, and her cheeks tainted with a blush of disgrace by too
too much gazing on his face, said; that either the Sun had left his bower to
beguile their eyes with a borrowed shape (which could not keep in his
brightness) or Cupide dismounted from his mothers lap, left his bow and
quiver at randon, to outbraue the Thessalian dames in their beauty, In this
contrariecie of thoughts, being all plunged (...) in (...) speachlesse
astonishment, the fair child Pleusidippus not used to such hyperbolical
spectators, broke off the silence by calling for his victuals, as one whose
empty stomach since his coming from sea, was not ouercloyed with delicates,
whereat Agenor revived from his trance, wherein the present wonder had inwrapt
him, demanded such questions of his name and parentage as the Pirates ignorance
could not unfold; but he being able to tell no more than this, that his mother
was a shepherdess, and his own name Pleusidippus, cut off all their further
interrogatories by calling after his childish manuer again for his dinner.
Whereupon Agenor commanding him to be had in, and used in every respect as the
child of a Prince, beganin his solitary walk by his countenance to calculate
his Nativity, and measure his birth by his beauty, contracting him in thought
heir to his kingdom of Thessaly, and husband to his daughter, before he
knew whence the child descended, or who was his father.

But leaving young Pleusidippus thus spending his youth in the Thessalian Court,
protected with the tender affection of such a courteous Foster-father as
Agenor; return we where we left back unto Arcadie, and meet his Mother the
fair Samela returning from the foldes: who having discoursed by the way as she
came home to Lamedon and Menaphon what she late saw and observed in her
son, they both conjoined their judgments to this conclusion, that he was
doubtless borne to some greater fortunes than the sheepcoates could contain,
and therefore it behooued her to further his Destinies with some good and
liberal education, and not to detain him any longer in that trade of life,
which his fortune withstood: but by the way to rebuke him for tyrannising so
Lorlolie over the boys, least the neighbor shepherds might happily intrude
the name of injury on them being strangers for his insulting over their
children. With this determination came she home, and calling for Pleusidippus
according to their former counsel, he would in no wise be found. Thereupon
inquiry was made amongst all the shepherds, diligent search in every
village, but still the most carefullest post returned with Non est inuentus.
Which Samela hearing, thinking she had utterly lost him whom Fortune had
saved, began in this manner to act her unrest; Dissembling heavens, where is
your happiness? unconstant times, what are your triumphs? have you therefore
hethertoo fed me with honey, that you might at last poison me with gall? Have
you fatted me so long with Sardenian smiles, that like the wrack of the
Sirens, I might perrish in your wiles? Cursed that I was to affie in your
courtesy, cursed that am to taste of your cruelty. O Pleusidippus, live thou,
or art thou dead? No thou art dead, dead to the world, dead to thy (...), dead
to Cipres, dead to Arcadie, dead to thy mother Samela; and with thee dies the
worlds wonder, thy kinsfolks comfort, Cipres soul, Arcadies hopes, thy
mothers honors. Was this the prophecy of thy souereigntie, to yield up thy
life to death so untimely? wretched was I of al women to bring thee forth to
this infancy. O cruel Themis that did reuolue such inevitable fate; hard
hearted death to prosecute me with such hate. (...) we therefore escapce the
fury of the seas, to perish on the land? was it not enough that we were exiled
from higher prosperity, but we must all of us thus suddenly be over whelmed
with the ouerflowe of a second adversity? my husband and thy father to be
swalowed in the fury of the surge, and now thou to be (and therewith her eyes
distilled such abundance of tears, as stoyt the passage of her plaints, and
made her seem a more than second Niobe, be wailing her seven fold sorrow
under the form of a weeping Flint.) Menaphon who had over heard her all this
while, as one that sought opportunity to plead his unrest, perceiving her in
that extremity of agony for her sous supposed loss, stepped to her presently,
and cheerde her up in these terms; Fair shepherdess, might the tears of
contrition raise the dead from destruction, then were it wisdom to be wail
what weeping might recall; but since such anguish is fruitelesse, and these
plainings bootlesse; comfort your self with the hope of the living, and omit
the tears for the dead. Why quoth Samela how is it possible a woman should
loose him without grief, whom she hathconceiued with sorrow: he was sweet
Menaphon; the divided half of my essence, soul to my joys, and life to my
delights; as beauteous in his b^irth, as is our bright bow-bearing God, that
played the shepherd awhile for love, amiddest our pleasant Arcadian Downs.
What ere he was in beauty quoth Menaphon, proceeded from your bounty; who
may by marriage make his like when you please: therefore there is no cause you
should so much grieve to see your first work defacde, that of a new molde can
form a far better than ever he was. Ah Menaphon, nere more may his like
proceed from my loins; I tell thee he made the chamber bright with his
beauty when he was born, and chacte the night with the golden rays that
gleamed from his looks: nere more may I be the mother of such a son. Yes
Samela (quoth the frolic shephearde) think not but if thou will list to my
loves, I will enrich thee with as fair increase as ever he was. Alas pore
swain said she, thou hopest in vain, since another must reap what thou have
sown, and gather into his barnes what thou have scattered in the furrowe.
Another reap what I have sown: therewith he scracht his head where it icht
not, and setting his cap he could not tell which way, in a hot sustian fumes
(...) vttred these words of fury; Strumpet of Greece, repaiest thou my love
with this lavish ingratitude? have I therefore with my plenty supplied thy
wants, that thou with thy pride should procure my woe? did I relieve thee in
distress, to wound me in thy welfare with disdain? deceitful woman (and
therewith he swore a holiday oath, by Pan the God of the Shepherds) either
return love for love, or I will turn thee forth of doors to scrape up thy
crummes where thou can; and make thee (...) for thy poverty, that erst
while were honored in tuerie man's eye. through the supportance of thy beauty.
Belike then quoth Samela, when you entertained me into your house, you did it
not in regard of the laws of hospitality, but only with this policy to
quench the flames of your faucie: then sir have I (...) your honesty, and am
less indebted to your courtesy. Nay I thought no less said Menaphon, when
your straggling eye at our last meeting would be gadding throughout every
corner of our company, that you would prove such a kind kistrell; but if you
will needs be starting, I Will serve ye thereafter I warrant you: then see
which of our beardlesse yongsters will take ye in, when I have cast you forth.
Those quoth she that countenance Menaphon and his pelf, and are better able
than your self: but howsoever I find their favor, I hence forth defy you
and your fellowship. And there with in great rage she (...) away into the next
chamber, where her uncle Lamedon lay a sleep; to whom complaining of
Menaphons (...), he straight invented this remedy; there was a shepherd
called Moron (brother to Doron) that not long before died of a surfeit, whose
house and flock being set to sale after his decease, be bought them both
forth with for Samela with certain remainder of money he had, and therein
(...) her maugre the fury of Menaphon; who when he saw she was able to
support her state without his purse, became sick for anger, and spent whole
Eclogues in anguish. Sometime lying comfortless on his bed he would
complain him to the winds of his woes, in these or such like words;
Forlorn, and forsook since Physic does loathe thee; despair be thy death,
Love is a God and despises thee a man; Fortune blind, and can not behold thy
deserts: die, die, fond Menaphon, that ungratefully have abandoned thy
Mistress. And therewith stretching himself (...) his bed, as thinking to
have slept, he was restrained by cares that exiled all rest from his eyes:
whereupon taking his pipe in his hand, (...) playing and singing he playned
him thus.

Menaphons Song in his bed.
(...) restless cares companions of the night,
That wrap my joys in folds of endless woes:
Tire on my heart, and wound it with your spite,
Since Lone and Fortune proves my equal foes.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days:
Welcome sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Mourn heavens, mourn earth, your shepherd is for lorne;
Mourn times and hours since bale inuades my bower:
Curse every tongue the place where I was borne,
Curse every thought the life which makes me (...).
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy (...),
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my (...).
Was I not free? was I not fancies aim?
Framde not desire my face to front disdain?
I was; she did: but now one silly maime
Makes me to droope as he whom love has (...).
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy (...),
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my lays.
Yet drooping, and yet living to this death,
I sigh, I sue for pity at her shrine,
Whose fiery eyes exhale my vital breath,
And make my flocks with parehing heat to pine.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief the subject of my lays.
Fade they, die I, long may she live to bliss
That (...) a wanton fire with fuel of her form,
And makes perpetual summer where she is;
Whiles I do cri^ (...) with enuies storm,
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days:
Welcome sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
No sooner had Menaphon ended this dittie, but Pesana hearing that he was
lately fallen sick, and that Samela and he were at mortal iarres; thinking
now to make hay while the Sun shinde, and take opportunity by his
forelockes, (...) into his chamber under pretense to visit him, fell into
these terms; Why how now Menaphon, has your new change driven you to a
night cap? Believe me this is the strangest effect of love that ever I saw, to
freeze so quicklye the heart it set on fire so lately. Why may it not be a
burning fever as well quoth Menaphon blushing? Nay that can not be said Pesana,
since you shake for cold, not swelt for heat. Why if it be so it is long of
cold interteinment. Why quoth Pesana, has your hot in^ertainment cooled your
courage? No, but (...) undeserved hate quite hindered my conquest. You know
quoth Pesana where you might have been let in long ere this, without either
assalt or any such battrie With this the shephearde was mute, and Pesana
ashamed: but at length regathering his spirits to be wray his martyrdom, and
make his old Mistress some new music, he strained forth this dittie.

Fair fields proud Floras vaunt, why is it you smile when as I languish?
You golden meads, why strive you to beguile my weeping anguish?
I live to sorrow, you to pleasure spring: why do you spring thus?
What will not Boreas tempests wrathful king take somepitie on us?
And send forth Winter in her rustie (...), to wait my (...);
Whiles I distressed do tune my country (...) unto my (...).
But heaven, and earth, time, place, and every power have with her conspired
To turn my blissful sweetes to balefull sower, since fond I (...)
The heaven whereto my thoughts may not (...): ay me unhappy.
It was my fault t'imbrace my (...) the fire that forces me die.
Mine be the (...), but (...) the cruel ca^se of this strange torment:
Wherefore no time my banning prayers shall pause, till proud she repent.
Well I (...) quoth Pesana, for all she has let you fly like a Hawke that
has lo^t her tire; yet you mean to follow suit and service, though you get
but a handful of smoke to the bargain. Not so quoth Menaphon, but perhaps I
seek to return an ill bargain as dear as I bought it. If you do so, you are
wiser than this kercher does show you quoth Pesana. Much idle prattle to this
purpose had Menapho^ with Pesana in his sickness, and long it was not, but
that with good diet and warm broths, (and especially by her careful
attendance) he began to gather up his crummes, and liften by little and little
to the love he late scorned. Leave we them to their equal desires, as
surfeiting either of others society; and let us look back to Thessaly, where
Samelaes stripling (now grown up to the age of sixteen years) flourisht in
honor and feats of arms above all the Knights of the Court, insomuch that
the echo of his Fame, was the only news talk on throughout every town in
Greece: but Olympia the Mistres of his prowess, (for so was the Kings daughter
named) was she that most of all exalted in the far renowned reports of his
martial perfections, to whose prasse he did (...) al his (...), to whose
exquisite form he did dedicate all his adventures. But hell-borne Fame, the
eldest daughter of Erinnis, envying the felicity of these two famous Lovers,
dismounted (...) from her brass sounding buildings, and (...) her self of her
secrets in the presence of young Pleusidippus, among whose catalogue she had not
forgot to discover, the incomparable beauty of the Arcadian shepherdess;
whereof the young Prince no sooner had received an inckling, but he stood upon
thorns til he had satisfied his desire with her sight. Therefore on a time
(...) with his Mistress at supper, when for table talk it was debated amongst
them, what Country bredde the most accomplished Dames for all things? After
strangers and others had delivered up their opinions without parcialitie, one
amongst them all who had been in Arcadie, gave up his verdit thus freely;
Gentle women (quoth he) be it no disgrac^ for the Moon to (...) to the
Sun, for the stars to give place when Titan appears; then I hope neither
the Thessalians will be moved, nor ^he Grecians (...), if I make Apollos
Arcadie beauties Meridian. Neither will I proceed herein as our Philosophical
Poets are wont, that musler every moouer in the Zodiac, every (...) star
in the firmament, (...) elementall word of art in an Almanacke, to prove
that Country for beauty most Canonical where their Mistress abides; when
as God (...), had they but learned of Appelles, Ne suitor vltra crepidam, they
would not have aspired above their birth, or talked beyond their sowterly
bringing up. Our Areadian Nimphs are fair and beautiful, though not (...) of
the Suns bright rays; whose eyes (...) loves armorie to the view, whose (...)
faces are to the obscure earth in steed of a Firmament: view but this
counterf^ice (and therewithal he showed the picture of Samela) and see is it
be not of force to draw the Sun from his sphere, or the Moon from her
circle to gaze as the one did on the beauty of Daphne, or al night contemplate
as the other (...) the form of (...). (...) who (...) while heard his (...)
with (...), (...) the radiant (...) of this (...), (...) a man already
installed (...) eternity, he exclaimed (...), O Arcadie, Arcadie storehouse of
Nimphs, and (...) of beauty. At which words Olympia starting up (...), as if
she a second Juno, had taken her Jove in (...) with (...): and ouercasting the
chamber with a (...) that was able to ma^tle the world with an (...) night, she
(...) passage to her choler in these terms of (...); (...) esse (...) of I
know not (...), have the favors of my bounty (not thy desert) entered thee so
(...) in over (...) presumption, that thou should be the foremost (...) of our
dignity; and (...) of my beautie^ I tell thee (...), I (...) thy clownish
Arcady with his inferior comparisons, as one that prizeth her perfection above
any created constitution. Pleusidippns upon this speech stood plunged in a
great perplexity whether he should excuse himself (...), or take her up
roundly: but the latter being more leuel (...) his (...) the former, he begun
(...) to rowze up his fury; (...) dame that vpbraidest me with my birth as it
were base, and my youth as it were boyish, know that although my parents and
progeny are envied by obscurity, yet the s^erkes of renowm that make my Eagle
minded thoughts to mount, the heavenly fire imprisoned in the pannicles of my
crest, inciting me to more deeds of honor, than stout Perseus effected with his
fauchon in the fields of Hesperia, assertaineth my soul I was the son of no
coward, but a Gentleman: but since my inequality of parentage, is such an eye
sore to thy envy, hold take thy favors, (and therewith he threw her her
glove) and immortalize whom thou will with thy toys; for I will to Arcadie in
despite of thee and thine affinity, there either to seek out mischance, or a
new Mistres. With this in a great rage he rose from the board, and would have
mounted himself to depart in that mood, had not the Lords and gentlemen there
present dissuaded him from such an unadvised enterprise. (...) was this
vnkindne^ kept (...) secret, (...) it came to the Kings care as he was new ri^
from (...); who for the (...) he bare to Pleusidippus whom he (...) with
Knighthood n^ long before, and for the to^ (...) he saw in (...), (...) pains
to go to the chamber where they were; (...) finding his daughter in strange
manner perple^ed with the though of Pleu^dippus departure, her eyes red, and
her cheeks all to be blubbered with her jealous ieal^us, he took her up in
this manner. Daughter, I thought I had chose such a one to be the object of
your ^ie, as you might have every way loved and honored as the Lord of your
life, and not have controlled as the slave of your lust. Did I therefore grace
him with my countenance, that you should dissaine him with your taunts; peevish
girl, I advise thee on my (...), either reconcile thy self betimes, and
reform thy vnreuerent terms, or I will disclaim the love of a Father, and
deal by thee no more as a daughter. Olympia who already had sufficiently
bitten on the bridle, took these words more ^indly than all her former
bitterness, which she disgested but sowerly; nevertheless making necessity
the present times best policy, she humbled her self as she might with
(...), and destred the best interpretation of what was past; Pleusidippus whose
courteous inclination could not withstand this submission, in ^gn of
reconcilement gave her a (...) des labies: yet was he not so reconciled, but he
kept on his purpose of going to Arcadie; whereat Olympia (although she grudged
inwardly, yet being loath to offend) ^lde her peace, and determined to bestow
upon him a remembrance, whereby he might be brought to think upon her in
his absence; which was the devise of a bleeding heart floting in the sea, waves
curiou^ie stamp in gold, with this Motto about it, P^rtum aut m^rtem;
alluding as it seemed to the devise in his shield, wherein (because he was
taken up by Eurilochus on the shore) was cunningly drawn in a field argent,
the sea waves with Venus sitting on the top, in token that his affection was
already (...). Here hold this (...) she my (...) Plensidippus, and hang it
about thy neck, that when thou art in Arcadie it may be ever in thine eye; so
shall these drops of ruth that paint out a painful truth, ^ithdraw thy
fancy from attracting strange beauty: which said, the tears gusht from her
eyes, and good Agenors likewise, who gave him nothing so much in charge, as to
make ha^ of his (...). Pleusidippus although he could have (...) content to
have done the like for comp^, yet he had such a mind on his journey, that he
broke off such ceremonies, and hasted a (...); and in a Bark bound for
Arcadie, ha^ing the wind favorable made a short cut, so that in a day and
nights sailing, he arrived on the shore adjoining to the (...) where he, his
mother, and his v^ckle Lamedon were first (...).

Leave we him wandering with some few of his train that came with him along
the sea side, to seek out some town or village where to refresh themselves;
and let us awhile to the Court of Democles where our History began: who having
committed his daughter with her tender (...), her husbands Maximius, and
Lamedon his uncle without o^re or marriuer to the fury of the merciles waves,
determined to leave the succession of his kingdom to vnce^aine chance: for his
Queen with Sephestiaes loss (who^ she deemed to be dead) took such thought,
that within short time after she died. Democles as car^lesse of all weathers,
spent his time Epicurelike in all kind of pleasures that either art or expense
might afford; so that for his dissolute life he seemed another Heliogabalus,
deriuing his security from that grounded tranquillity, which made it
prouerbiall to the world, No heaven but Arcadi^. Having spent many years in
this variety of vanity, Fame determining to apply her self to his fancy,
sounded in his ears the singular beauty of his daughter Samela; h^, although
he were an old colte, yet had not cast all his wanton teeth, which made him
under the brute of being ^icke of a grievous appoplexie, steal from his Court
secretly in the disguise of a shepherd, to come and seek out Samela; (...) not
(...) new flock, (...) more (...) it (...) been Queen of Arcadie; and M^cer
(...) not a little that she was part^ from M^phon, used every day to (...)
her without dread, and (...) her in such shepherds (...) as he had; which he
(...) ^sed her I lean^ to you to imagi^, when (...) not long after she vowed
marriage to him solemnly in presence of all the shepherds, but not to be
solemnized till the (...) was fulfilled, mentioned in the beginning of this
History. Although this penance exceeded the limits of his patience; yet hoping
that the Oracle was not ^ttered in vain, and might as well (albeit he knew not
which way) be accomplished in him as in any other, wa^ contented to make a
virtue of necessity, and await the ^emost of his destiny. But Pleusidippus,
who by this time had perfected his policies, exchaunging his garments with one
of the heardgroomes of Menaphon, tracing (...) the Plains in the habit of a
Shepherd, chanced to meet with Democles as he was new come into those
quarters; (...) mistaking for an old shepherd, he began many impertinent
questions belonging to the Sheepecoates, at last he as^ him if he knew Samelas
sheepfold; who answering doubtfully unto all alike, made him half angry: and
had not Samela past by at that instant to fill her bottle at a spring (...) the
foot of the Promontorie, he should like enough have had first h^sell of our
new Shepherds sheepehooke. But the wonder of her beauty so wrought with his
wounded fancy, that he thought report a partial spreader of her praises, and
fame too base to talk of such forms. Samela espying this fair shepherd so
far ouer-gone in his gazing, stepped to him, and asked him if he knew her that
he so^uerlookt her. Pardon me ^ire shepherdess (quoth Pleusidippus) if it be
a fault, for I cannot choose being Eagle sighted but gaze on the Su^e the first
time I see it. And truly I cannot choose but compare you to one of Aesops Apes,
that finding a Glowor me in the night, ^ke it for fire; and you seeing a face
full of deformities, mistake it for the Sun. Indeed it may be mine eyes
made opposite to such an object may fail in their office, having their lights
rebated by such brightness. Nay not unlike quoth Samela, for else out of doubt
you would see your way better. Why quoth Pleusidippus I cannot go out of the
way, when I meet such glistering Goddesses in my way. How now si^ Paris, are
you (...) of your Arithmeticke, I think you have lost your wits with your
eyes, that mistake Arcadie for Ida, and a Shepherdess for a Gods. How ever
it please you (quoth Pleusidippus) to derogate from my prowess by the title of
Paris, know that I am not so far out of my Arithmetic, but that by
Multiplication I can make two of one, in an hours warning, or be as good as a
cipher to fill up a place at the worst hand; for my wit suffices be it never
so simple to prove both re and voce that there can be no vacuum in rerum
natura, and mine eyes (or else they deceive me) will enter so far in art, as
niger est contrarius albo, and teach me how to discern twixt black and
white. Much other circumstaunce of prattle passed between them, which the
Arcadian Records (...) not show, nor I remember; suffices be pleaded love, and
was repulst: which drout him into such a cholar, that meeting his supposed
shepherd, (who lying under a bush, had all (...) while ^uer heard them) he
entered into such terms of indignation, as Jove shaking his earthquaking hair,
when he (...) in consultation of Licaon. Wherefor^ Democles (...) Pleus^dippus
repulst, who was every way gracd^ with the ornaments of Nature, began to cast
his bad peniworths, in whose face age had furrowed her wrinckles; except he
should lay his cro^ at her feet, and ^ell her he was King of Aread^; which in
Common wealths respects, seeming not co^dious, he thought to turn a new
leaf, and make this ^ng shepherd the means to perfect his purpose. He had
not far from that place a strong Castle, which was inhabited as then by none
but (...) and heardgroomes: thither did he persw^ Pleusidippus to carry he^
persorce, and effect that by (...), that he could not (...) by entreaty; who
li^ning not a little to this counsel, that was (...) for his advantage,
preseutly put in practice what he of late gave in precepts, and waiting till
the evening that Samel^ should fold her sheep, having given his men the watch
word, maugre all the shepherds adjoining he mounted her behind him; and being
by Democles directed to the Castle, he made such havoc among the stubborn
heardsmen, that will they nill they, he was Lord of the Castle. Yet might not
all this prevail with Samela, who constant to her old shephearde, would not
interteine any new love; which made Pleusidippus think all his harvest lost
in the reaping, and blemished al his delights with a mournful drooping. But
Democles that looked for a mountain of gold in a Mole hill, finding her all
alone, began to discourse his love in more ample mauner tha^ ever Pleusidippus,
telling her how he was a King, what his revenues were, what power he had to
advance her; with many other proud vaunts of his wealth, and prodigal terms of
his treasure. Samela hearing the name of a King, and perceiving him to be her
Father, stood amazed like Medusaes Metamorphosis, and blushing often with
intermingled sighs, began to think how injurious fortune was to her showen in
such an incestuous father. But he hot spurred in his purpose, gave her no time
to deliberate, but required either a quick consent, or a present denial. She
told him, that the Shepherd Melicertus was already entitled in the interest
of her beauty, wherefore it was in vain what he or any other could plead in
the way of persuasion. He thereupon entering into a large field of the baseness
of Shepherds, and royalties of Kings, with many other assembled arguments of
(...), that would have fetched Venus from her sphere to disport: but Samela
whose mouth could digest no other meat save only her sweet Melicertus,
ashamed so long to (...) p^ley with her father about such a matter, flung a way
to her withdrawing chamber in a dissembled rage, and there after her (...)
manner be wailed her mi^ortunes.

Democles plunged thus in a Laborinth of restles passions, seeing Melicertus
figure was so deeply printed in the center of her thoughts, as neither the
resolution of his fancy, his Metamorphosis from a King to a traueler, Crowns,
Kingdoms, preferments, (battries that soon overthrow the fortress of women's
(...)) when Democles I say, saw that none of these cold remove Samela;
hearing that the Arcadian shepheardes were in an uproar for the loss of their
beautiful shepherdess, his hot love changing to a bird of coye disdain; he
intended by some revenge, either to obtain his love, or satisfy his hate:
whereupon thoroughly resolved, he stole away secretly in his shepherds
apparaile, and got him down to the Plains; where he found all the swains in a
mutiny about the recovery of their beautiful Paragon. Democles stepping
amongst the route, demanded the cause of their controversy. Marie sir quoth
Doron bluntly, the flower of all our garland is gone. How mean you that sir,
quoth he: We had answered Doron, an Eaw amongst ou^ Ramms, whose fleece was as
white as the hairs that grow on father Boreas thin, or as the dangling
deawlap of the silver Bull, her front curled like to the Erimanthian Boar, and
spangled like the woosted stockings of Saturn, her face like Mars treading
upon the milk white clouds: believe me shepherd, her eyes were like the
fiery torches tilting against the Moon: this paragon, this none such, this
Eaw, this Mistres of our flocks, was by a wily Fox stolen from our foldes;
for which these shepherds assemble themselves, to recover so wealthy a prize.
What is he quoth Menapho^ that Doron is in such debate with? Fellow can thou
tell us any news of the fair shepherdess, that the Knight of Thessaly has
carried away from her fellow Nymphs. Democles thinking to take opportunity by
the forhead: and seeing Time had feathred his bolte, willing to assaye as he
might to hit the mark, began thus.

Shepheardes, you see my profession is your trade, and although my wandering
fortunes be not like your home borne favors; yet were I in the groves of
Thessalian Tempe, as I am in the plains of Arcadie, the swains would give me
as many due honors, as they present you here with submisse reverence. Beauty
that drew Apollo from heaven to play the shepherd, that fetched Jove from
heaven to bear the shape of a Bull for Agenors daughter, the excellence of such
a Metaphusicall virtue, I mean shepherd the fame of your fair^ Samela,
bouering in the ears of every man as a miracle of nature, brought me from
Thessaly to feed mine eyes with Arcadies wonder: stepping along the shore
to come to same sheepcoate where my weary limbs might have rest, Love that
for my labors thought to lead me to fancies pauilion, was my conduct to a
castle, where a Thessalian knight lies in hold, the Portcullis was let down,
the bridge drawn, the Court of guard kept, thither I went; and for by my
tongue I was known to be a Thessalian, I was enterteined and lodged: the Knight
whose years are young, and valor matchless, holding in his arms a Lady
more beautiful tha^ Loves Queen, all blubbered with tears, asked me many
questions, which as I might I replide unto: but while he talked, mine eye
surfeiting with such excellence, was detained upon the glorious show of such a
wonderful object; I demanded what she was of the standers by, and they said
she was the fair shepherdess whom the Knight had taken from the swains of
Arcadie, and would carry with the first wind that served into Thessaly: This
shepherds I know, and grieve that thus your Jove's should be ouermatcht with
Fortune, and your affections pulde back by contrariety of Destiny.
Melicertus hearing this, the fire sparkling out of his eyes began thus; I tell
thee shephearde, if Fates with their forepointing pencels did pen down, or
Fortune with her deepest variety resolve, or Love with his greatest power
determine to deprive Arcadie of the beautiful Samela, we would with our blood
sign down such spells on the Plains, that either our Gods should summon her
to Elysium, or she (...) wi^h us quiet and fortunate: thou see the
shepheardes are up in arms to revenge, only it rests who shall have the
honor and principality of the field. What needs that question quoth Menaphon,
am not I the Kings shepherd, and chief of all the bordering swains of
Arcadie. I grant quoth Melicertus, but am not I a Gentleman, though tirde in
shepheardes skincoate; superior to thee in birth, though equal now in
profession. Well from words they had fallen to blows, had not the shepherds
parted them; and for the avoiding of farther troubles, it was agreed that they
should in two Eclogs make description of their love, and Democles, for he was a
stranger, to sit Censor, and who best could decipher his Mistres perfection,
should be made General of the rest. Menaphon and Melicertus condes^uded to
this motion, and Democles sitting as Judge, the rest of the shepherds standing
as witnesses of this combat Menaphon began thus.

Menaphons Eclogue.
Too weak the wit, too slender is the brain
That means to mark the power and worth of love;
Not one that lives (except he hap to prove)
Can tell the sweet, or tell the secret pain.
Yet I that have been prentice to the grief,
Like to the cunning seaman from a far,
By guess will talk the beauty of that star,
Whose influence must yield me chief relief.
You Censors of the glory of my dear,
With reverence and lowly bent of knee,
Attend and mark what her perfections be:
For in my words my fancies shall appear.
Her locks are pleighted like the fleece of wool
That Jason with his Gretian mates atchi^,
As pure as gold, yet not from gold deriude;
As full of sweetes, as sweet of sweetes is full.
Her brows are pretty (...) of (...),
Where Love his records of delight does (...),
On them her dallying locks (...)
As Love full often does (...) upon the (...).
Her eyes, fair eyes, like to the purest lights
That animate the (...), or cheer the day,
In whom the shining Sunbeams brightly play
Whiles (...) does on them divine delights.
Her cheeks like (...) in wine,
Or fair (...) kernels washed in milk,
Or snow white threads in nets of crimson silk,
Or (...) upon the (...) decline.
Her lips are roses ^uerwasht with dew,
Or like the purple of Narcissus flower:
No frost their (...), no wind does wast their power,
But by her breath her beauties (...) renew.
Her crystal chin like to the (...),
Enchac'de with (...) daysies soft and white,
Where fancies fair (...) once is pight,
Where as (...) his beauties be does hold.
Her neck like to an (...) shining (...)
Where through with azure veins sweet Nectar runs,
Or like the down of (...) where Senesse (...),
Or like delight that does it self (...).
Her pappes are like fair apples in the (...),
As round as orient pearls, as soft as down:
They never (...) their fair through (...) frown,
But from their sweetes (...).
Her body beauties best (...),
Delicious, comely, (...), without (...)
The thought whereof (not touch) has (...).
Whose fair, all fair and beauties does (...).
Her maiden mount, the dwelling house of pleasure;
Not like, for why no like surpasses w^nder:
O blessed is he may bring such beauties under,
Or search by suit the secrets of that treasure.
Deuourd in thought, how wanders my deuic^,
What rests behind I must (...) upon?
Who talks the best, can say but fairer none:
Few words well (...) most content the wise.
All you that hear; let not my sillis style
Condemn my zeal: for what my tongue should (...)
Serves to enforce my thoughts to seek the way
Whereby my woes and cares I do beguils.
Selde speaks Love, but sighs his secr^t (...);
Tears are his truce-men, words do make him (...).
How sweet is love to them that can dissemble
In thoughts and looks, till they have reapt the gains,
Alonely I am plain, and what I say
I think, (...) what I think tongue (...)
Sweet Censors take my silly worst for (...)
My faith is (...), though (...) be my lay.
After the haples (...) (...) discourse shadowed his heavenly delight, (...)
(...) after some pause began in (...).

Melice^ Eclogue.
What (...) exceedes comp^re?
Who draws his (...),
Their pomp and greatest glories does (...),
And mounts Loves heaven with over leaden wings.
Stones, (...) and flowers, the foolish (...) of earth,
Floods, mettalls, colors, (...) of the eye:
These show conceit is staind with too much dearth:
Such abstract fond compares make cunning die.
But he that has the feeling taste of Love
Deri^es his essence from no (...) toy;
A weak conceit his power cannot (...),
For earthly thoughts are subject to (...).
Be whist, be still, be silent Censers now;
My fellow swain has told a pretty tale
Which modern^ Poets may perhaps allow,
Yet I condemn the (...); for they are stale.
Apollo when my Mistres first was borne
Cut off his locks, and left them on her head,
And said; I plant these wires in Nature^ scorn,
Whose beauties shall appear when Time is dead.
From forth the Christ all heaven when she was made,
The puritis thereof did taint her brow:
On which the glistering Sun that sought the shade
Began set, and there his glories does (...).
Those eyes, fair eyes, too fair to be describ (...),
Were those that (...) the (...) did ref^rme:
To whom the (...) their beauti^s (...),
That fashion life in man, in beast, in (...).
When first her fair delicious cheeks were wrought,
Aurora brought her blush, the Moon her white:
Both so combinds as passed Natures thought,
Compilde those pretty or (...) of sweet delight.
When Love and Nature once were proud with play,
From both their lips her lips the Coral drew:
On them does fancy sleep, and (...) day
Does swallow joy such sweet delights to view.
(...) while Venus Son did seek a (...)
To sport with Psiches his desired (...),
He chose her chinne; and from that happi^ (...)
He never stints in glory to appear.
Desires and Joys that long had served Love,
Besought a Hold where pretty eyes ^ight (...) them:
^Loue made her neck, and for their ^est (...)
Has shut them there, whence no man can (...) the^.
Once Venus dreamt upon two pretty things,
Her thoughts they were affections (...):
She (...) and (...), and (...) her in the (...),
And when she wakt they were my Mistres breasts.
Once Cupide sought a hold to (...) his kisses,
And found the body of my best beloude.
Wherein he (...) the beauty of his blisses.
And from that (...) can never be (...).
The Graces erst, when Alcidelian springs
Were (...), perhaps did finds her fountain
Within the vale of bliss, where Cupides wings
(...) shield the Nectar fleeting from the mountain.
No more fond man: things infinite I see
Brook no dimension: Hell a foolish speech;
For (...) things may never talked be.
Then let me live to honor and beseech.
Sweet Natures pomp, if my deficient phraze
Has staind thy glories by too little skill,
Yield pardon though mine eye that long didgaze,
Has left no better pattern to my quill.
I will no more, no more will I detain
Your listening ears with dallyance of my tongue:
I speak my joys, but yet canceale my pain;
My pain too old, although my years be young.
As soon as Melice^ had ended this Eclogue, they expected the doom of
Democles, who hearing the sweet description, wherein Melicertus described his
Mistres, wondered that such rare conceits could be harbored under a she
pheards gray clothing, at last he made this answer.

Arcadian Swains, whose wealth is content, whose labors are tempred with
sweet loves, whose minds aspyre not, whose thoughts brook no envy; only as
r^ualls in affection, you are friendly emulators in (...): since fortune (as
enemy to your quiet) has rest you of your fair shepherdess, (the worlds
wonder, and Arcadies miracle) and one of you as champion must lead the rest to
revenge, both desirous to show your val^ur as your forwardness in affections,
and yet (as I said) (...) to be sole chiestaine of the train, I award to
Mclicert us that honor (as to him that has most curiously portrayed out his
Mistres excellency) to bente the sole rule and supremacy. At this Menaphon
grudged, and Melicertus was in an ecstasy for joy; so that gathering all his
forces together of stone headstrong clownes, amounting to the number of some
two hundred, he apparailed himself in armor, color sables, as mourning for
his Mistres, in his shield he had figured the waves of the sea, Venus sitting
on them in the height of all her pride. Thus marched Melicertus forward with
old Democles the supposed shepherd till they came to the castle, where
Pleusidippus and his fair Samela were resident. As soon as they came there,
Melicertus begirt the Castle with such a siege, as so many sheeyish Caualiers
could furnish: which when he had done, summoning them in the Castle to parley,
the young Knight stepped upon the walls, and seeing such a crew of base
companions, with Jackets and rustie bills on their backs, fell into agreat
laughter, and began to taunt them thus.

Why, what strange Metamorphosis is this? Are the Plains of Arcadie, whilome
filled with laborers, now ouerlaide with lances? Are sheep transformed into
men, swains into soldiers, and a wandering company of poor shepherds, into
a worthy troop of resolute champions: No doubt, either Pan means to play
the God of war, or else these be but such men as rose of the teeth of Cadmus.
Now I see the beginning of your wars, and the pretended end of your
stratagems: the shepherds have a m^dding humor like the Greeks to seek for
the recovery of Helena; so you for the regaining of your fair Samela. Here
she is Shepherds, and I a Priam to defend hit with resistance of a ten years
siege; yet for I were loath to have my Castle sack^ (...) Troy, I pray you tell
me which is Agamemnon?

Melicertus hearing the youth speak thus proudly, ha^ the sparks of honor
fresh under the cinders of pouer^, (...) with love and valor (two things to
animate the most (...) Thersites to enter combat against Hcrcules) answered
thus.

Unknowen yongster of Thessaly, if the fear of thy hardy deeds, were like
the Diapason of thy threats, we would think the Castle of longer stege,
than either our ages would permit, or out valor adventure: but where the
shelfe is most shallowe, there the water breaks most high; empty vessels have
the highest sounds, bollowe rocks the loudest echoes, and prat^ing
gloriosers, the smallest performaunce of courage; for proof whereof, seeing
thou have made a rape of fair Samela, one of her vowed Shepherds is come for
the safety of her sweet self to challenge thee (...) single combat; if thou
overcome me, thou shall freely pass with the shepherdess to Thessaly; if I
vanquish thee, thou shall feel the vurthen of thy rashness, and Samela the
sweetuesse of her liberty. Pleusidippus meruailed at the resolution of the
shepherd; but when Democles heard how if he won, she should be transported
into Thessaly, a world of sorrows tombled in his discontented brain, that he
hammered in his head many means to stay the fair Samela; for when
Pleusidippus in a great choler was ready to throw down his gantlet, and to
accept of the combat. Damocles stepped up and spoke thus: Worthy mirrors of
resolved magnanimity, whose thoughts are above your fortunes, and whose valor
more than your revenues, know that Bitches that puppie in have bring forth
blind whelps; that there is no herb sooner sprung up than the Spattarmia, nor
sooner fades; that fruits too soon riye are quickly rotten; that dee^es done
in have are repented at leisure: then brave men in so weighty a cause, and for
the conquest of so excellent a Paragon, let not one minute begin and end the
quarrel, but like Fabius of Rome use delay in such dangerous exploytes, when
honor fits on wreaths of Laurel to give the vistor his garland: defer it
some three days, and then in solemn manner end the combat. To this good
motion not only Pleusidippus and Melicertus agreed, but all the companis were
consenting, and upon pledges of truce being given, they rested. But Democles
seeing in couerte be could not conquer, and that in despairing loves, secrecy
was no (...), he dispatched letters to the Nobility of his court, with
straight charge that they should be in that place within thr^ days with ten
thousand strong. This news no soouer came to the General of his Forces, but
leuying so many approved soldiers, he marched secretly by night to the place
Democles in his letters had prescribed; and there (...) interteined by the
King, they were placde in ambush ready when the signal should be giuento
issue out of the place, and perform their Souereignes command. Well, the third
day being come, no sooner did Titan arise from the watrie Couche of his Lemman,
but these two champions were ready in the listes, accompanied with the route
of all the Arcadian shepherds, and old Democles whom they had appointed for
one of the Judges. Pleusidippus seeing Melicertus abua^ce on his shield the
waves of the sea with a Venus sitting upon them, (...) what the shepherd
should be that gave his arms, and Melicertus was as much amazed to see a
strange Thessalian Knight vant his arms without difference; yet being so
fraught with direful revenge, as they scorned to salute each other so much as
with threats, they fell toughly to blows. Samela standing on top of the
turret, and viewing the combat; the poor Lady grieuing that for her cause
such a stratageme should arise in Arcadie, her countenance full of sorrow, and
flonds of tears falling from her eyes, she began to breath out this passion.

Unfortunate Samela born to mishaps, and forepointed to (...) fortunes, whose
bloomes were ripened by mischance, and whose fruit is like to wither with
despair; in thy youth sat discoutent pruning her self on thy forhead, now in
thine age sorrow hides her self amongst the wrinckles of thy face: thus art
thou unfortunate in thy Prime, and crossed with contrary accidents in thy
Autwnne; as hapless as Helena to have the burden of wartes laid on the wings
of thy beauty. And who must be the champion? whose sword must pearce the helm
of thine enemy? whose blood must purchase the freedom of Samela, but
Melicertus? If he conquer, then Samela triumphs, as if she had been chief
victor in the Olympiades; if he loose, every drop falling from his wounds into
the center of my thoughts, as his death to him, so shall it be co me the end
of my loves. my life, and my liberty. As still she was about to go forward
in her passion, the trumpet sounded and they fell to fight in such furious
sort, as the Arcadians and Democles himself wondered to see the courage of
the Shepherd, that tied the Knight to such a sore task. Pleusidippus likewise
feeling an extraordinary kind of force, and seeing with what courage the
Knight of the shepherds fought, began to conjecture diversely of the (...),
and to fear the event of the combat. On the contrary part, Melicertus half
wearied with the heavy blows of Pleusidippus, stood in a maze how so young a
wagge should be so expert in his weapon. Thus debating diversely in their
several thoughts, at length being both weary, they stepte back, and leaning
on their swords took breath, gazing each upon other. At last Pleusidippus
burst into these speeches.

Shepherd in life, though now a Gentleman in armor, if thy degree be better,
I glory I am not disgracde with the combat: tell me, how dare thou so far
wrong me, as to wea^ mine Arms upon thy shield:

Princockes (quoth Melicertus) thou lie, they be mine own, and thou
contrary to the Law of Arms bear my Creast without difference, in which
quarrel, seeing it concerns mine honor, I will revenge it as far as my
loves; and with that he gave such a charging blow at Pleusidippus healme, that
he had almost ouerturned him: Pleusidippus (...) not the blow vnrequitted,
but doubled his force; insomuch that the hazard of the battle was doubtful,
and both of them were feign to take breath again. Democles seeing his time,
that both of them were sore weakened, gave the watchword, and the ambush leapt
out, slaughtered many of the shepherds, put the rest to flight, took the two
champions prisoners, and sacking the Castle, carried them and the fair Samela
to his Court: letting the Shepherdess have her liberty, but putting
Melicertus and Pleusidippus into a deep and dark dungeon.

Where leaving these passionate Lovers in this Catastrophe, again to Doron the
homely blunt Shephearde; who having been long enamoured of Carmela, much good
wooing past betwixt them, and yet little speeding; at last, both of them met
hard by the Promontorie of Arcadie, she leading forth her Sheep, and he
going to see his new yeand Lambs. As soon as they met, breaking a few
quarter blows with such country glaunces as they could, they geerde one at
another lovingly. At last Doron manfully begun thus.

Carmela by my troth God morrow, it is as dainty to see you abroad, as to eat a
mess of sweet milk in July: you are proud such a house dove of late, or
rather so good a Huswife, that no man may see you under a couple of Capons; the
Church-yeard may stand long enough ^re you will come to look on it, and the
Piper may beg for every penny he gets out of your pursse: but it is no
matter, you are in love with some stout Ruffler, and yet poor folks, such a I
am, must be content with porredge: and with that, turning his back, he smiled
in his sleeue to see how kindly he had given her the bobbe: which Carmela
seeing, she thought to be even with him thus.

Indeed Doron you say well, it is long since we met, and our house is a
Grange house with you: but we have tied up the great Dog, and when you come
you shall have green rushes you are such a stranger: but it is no matter; soon
hot soon cold, he that mingles himself with draffe, the ^ogges will eat
him: and she that lays her love on an unkind man, shall find sorrow enough
to eat her soppes withal. And with that Carmela was so full stomackt that she
wept.

Doron to show himself a natural young man, gave her a few kind kisses to
comfort her, and swear that she was the woman he loved best in the whole
world, and for proof quoth he, thou shall hear what I will praise: and you
quoth she, what I will perform. and so taking hand in hand, they kindly sat
them down, and began to discourse their loves in these Eclogues.

Dorons Eclogue joined with Carmelas.
Sit down Carmela here are cubbs for kings,
Slowes black as (...), or like my Christmas shoes,
Sweet Sidar which my leathren bottle brings:
Sit down Carmela let me kiss thy toes.

Carmela. Ah Doron, ah my heart, thou art as white,
As is my mothers Calfe or brinded Cow,
Thine eyes are like the slow worms in the night,
Thine hairs resemble thickest of the snow.
The lines within thy face are deep and clear
Like to the furrows of my fathers waine,
Thy sweat upon thy face do^th often appear
Like to my mothers (...) and Kitchen gain.
Ah leave my toe and kiss my lips my love,
My lips and thine, for I have given it thee:
Within thy cap it is thou shall wear my glove,
At foot ball sport thou shall my champion be.

Doron. Carmela dear, even at the golden (...)
That Venus got, such are thy goodly eyes,
When cherries (...) is (...) withal,
Thy breath is like the steeme of (...) pies.
Thy lips resemble two Cowcumbers fair,
Thy teeth like to the tuskes of fattest swine,
Thy speech is like the thunder in the air:
Would God thy toes, thy lips and all were mine.

Carmela. Doron what thing does moon this wishing grief.


Doron. It Is Love Carmela ah it is cruel Love.
That like a slave, and caitiffe villain thief,
Has cut my throat of joy for thy behoue.

Carmela. Where was he borne?


Doron. In faith I know not where.
But I have had much talking of his dart.
Ay me poor man, with many a trampling tear,
I feel him wound the (...) of my heart,
What (...) I love? O (...), I (...) but (...).
What shall I die for love? O no, not so.
What am I dead? O no my tongue does walk^.
Come kiss Carmela, and confound my (...).

Carmela. Even with this kiss, as once my father did.
I seal the sweet in^tures of delight:
Before I break my vow the Gods forbid,
No not by day, nor yet by (...) some (...).

Doron. Even with this garland made of Holly-hocks
I cross thy brows from every shepherds kiss.
Heigh hoe how glad am I to touch thy locks,
My frolic heart even now a free man is,

Carmela. I thank you Doron, and will think^ on you,
I love you Doron, and will wink on you.
I (...) your charter pattent with my thummes,
Com^ kiss and part for fear my mother comes.

Thus ended this merry Eclogue betwixt Doron and Carmela: which Gentlemen if
it be stufft with pretty Similes and far fetched (...); think the poor
Country Lovers knew no further comparisons, than came within compass of
their Country (...). Well, (...) a good world when such simplicity was used,
says the old women of our time, when a ring of a rush would tie as much Love
together as a (...) of gold: but Gentlemen since we have talkte of Love so
long, you shall give me leave to show my opinion of that (...) fancy thus.

Sonetto.
What thing is Love! It is a (...)
That raines in us: or else a (...) law
That doomes our minds to beauty to incline:
It is a star whose influence does draw
Our hearts to Love dissembling of his might,
Till he be master of our hearts and sight.
Love is a discord and a strange divorce
Betwixt our sense and reason, by whose power
As mad with reason we admit that force,
Which wit or labor never may devour,
It is a will that brooketh no consent:
It would refuse, yet never may repent.
Love's a desire, which for to wait a time,
Does loose an age of (...), and so does pass
As does the shadow seuerd from his prime,
Seeming as though it were, yet never was.
Leaving hehinde naught but repentant thoughts
Of days ill spent, for that which profits noughts.
Its now a peace, and then a sudden war,
A hope consumde before it is conceiude,
At hand it fears, and menaceth a far,
And he that gains is most of all deceiude:
It is a secret hidden and not known,
Which one may better feel than write upon.
Thus Gentlemen have you heard my verdite in this Sonetto, now will I return
to Doron and Carmela, who not seeing her mother come, fell again to a few
homely kisses, and thus it was.

After they had thus amorously ended their Eclogues, they plighted faith and
troth; and Carmela very brisklye wiping her mouth with a white apron sealed it
with a kiss, which Doron taking merueilous kindly, after a little playing
loath to depart, they both went about their business. Leaving them therefore
to their business, again to Democles; who seeing no entreaties would serve to
persuade Samela to love, neither the hope of the Arcadian Crown, nor the title
of a Queen, lastly assayed with frowns and threats, but all in vain: for
Samela first restrained by nature in that he was her Father, and secondly by
love in that Melicertus lay imprisoned only for her sake, stood still so
stiff to her tackling, that Democles changing love into hate, resolved to
revenge that with death, which no means else might satisfy: so that to color
his frauds withal, he gave Samela free license to visit Melicertus: which she
had not long done, but that by the instigation of the old King, the gailor
confederate to his treachery, accuses her of adultetie: whereupon without
further witness they both were contemned to dye. These two lovers knowing
themselves guiltless in this surmised faction, were joyful to end their
loves with their lives, and so to conclude all in a fatal and final content
of minds and passions. But Democles set free Pleusidippus, as afraid the King
of Thessaly would revenge the wrong of his Knight, intertaining him with
sumptuous banquets, as befitted so brave and worthy a Gentleman. The day came
prefixed wherein these parties should die; Samela was so desirous to end her
life with her friend, that she would not reveal either unto Democles or
Melicertus what she was; and Melicertus rather chose to die with his Samela,
than once to name himself Maximius. Both thus resolved, were brought to the
place of execution; and^ Pleusidippus sitting on a scaffolde with Democles,
seeing Samela come forth like the blush of the morning, felt an uncouth passion
in his mind, and nature began to enter combat with his thoughts; not love but
reverence, not fancy but fear began to assail him, that he turned to the
King, and said: Is it not pity Democles, such divine beauty should be wrapped
in cinders: No quoth Democles, where the anger of a King must be satisfied. At
this answer Pleusidippus wrapped his face in his cloak and wept, and all the
assistants grieved to see so fair a creature subject to the violent rage of
fortune. Well Democles commanded the deathsman to do his deuoyre; who
kneeling down and craving pardon, ready to give Melicertus the fatal
stroke, there slept out an old woman attired like a Prophetess, who cried
out; Uillaine hold thy hand, thou wrongest the daughter of a King. Democles
hearing the outcrie, and seeing that at that word the people begun to mutiny
and murmur, demanded the old woman what she meant: Now quoth she, Democles is
the Delphian (...) performed; Neptune has yielded (...) the worlds wonder, and
that is young Pleusidippus nephew to thee, and son to fair Sephestia, who
here stands under the name of Samela, cast upon the Promontorie of Arcadie
with her young son, where she as a shepherdess has liude in labors
tempred with loves; her (...) playing on the shore, was conveyed by certain
Pirates into Thessaly, where (when as he was supposed every way to be dead)
doing deeds of chivalry, he fulfilled the prophecy: your highness giving
the Lion, were guide unto the lambs in dissembling your self a shepherd:
planets resting upon the hills, was the picture of Venus upon their crests: and
the seas that had neither ebb nor tide, was the combat twixte the father and
the son, that gave the waves of the seas in their shields, not able to
vanquish one another, but parting with equal victory. For know Democles this
Melicertus is Maximius, twice (...) to Sephestia, and Father to young
Pleusidippus: now therefore the Oracle fulfilled, is the happy time wherein
Arcadie shall rest in peace. At this, the people gave a great shout, and the
old woman vanished. Democles as a man ravished with an ecstasy of sudden joy,
sat still, and stared on the face of Sephestia: Pleusidippus in all duty
leapt from his seat, and went and covered his mother with his (...), craving
pardon for the fondness of his incestuous affection: and kneeling at his
fathers feet submisse in that he had drawn his sword, and sought his life
that first in this world gave him life. Maximius first looked on his wife, and
seeing by the line aments of her face that it was Sephestia, fell about her
neck, and both of them weping in the bosom of their son shed tears for
joy to see him so brave a Gentleman. Democles all this while sitting in a
trance, at last calling his senses together, seeing his daughter revived, whom
so cruelly for the love of Maximius he had (...) out his confines, Maximius in
(...), and the child a matchles paragon of approved chivalry, he leapt from
his seat, and embraced them all with tears, craving pardon of Maximius and
Sephestia: and to show that the outward object of his watrie eyes, had a
sympathy with the inward passion of his heart, he impald the head of his young
neuew Pleusidippus with the crown and diadem of Arcadie: and for that his
brother Lamedon had in all distress not left his daughter Sephestia, he took
the matter so kindly, that he reconciled himself unto him, and made him Duke
in Arcady. The success of this forerehearsed Catastrophe growing so comicall,
they all concluded after the Festival solemnizing of the Coronation (which was
made famous with the excellent deeds of many worthy Caualiers) to pass into
Thessaly, to contract the marriage twixt Pleusidippus, and the daughter of the
Thessalian King. Which news spread thorough Arcadie as a wonder, that at last
it came to Menaphons ears; who hearing the high parentage of his supposed
Samela, seeing his passions were too aspiring, and that with the Syrian wolves
he barkt against the Moon, he left such lettice as were too fine for his
lips, and courted his old love Pesana, to whom shortly after he was married.
And le^t there should be left any thing imperfect in this pastoral accident,
Doron smudgde himself up, and iumpde a marriage with his old friend Carmela.

FINIS.

