MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS UPON The first Psalm of DAVID.

Blessed is the Man.

By Sr. RICHARD BAKER, Knight.



LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin, for Anne Bowler, and are to be sold at the
Marigold, in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

TO THE Right Honorable THOMAS Lord COVENTRY Baron of Ailesborough, and Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND.
My Honored Lord: He may truly be said, a happy man; Cui omnes been volunt:
But more truly he, Cui omnes been velle debent: and in both these Rights, I
may justly pronounce your Lordship, happy: yet there is a better Title, for
asserting Happiness to you, than both these: That your Delight is in the Law
of the Lord; and in his Law will exercise your self, both Day and Night: For
now, it is not the World; it is not I; it is David himself, that pronounces
you happy: and give me leave, my Lord, to show you the Picture of a happy man,
drawn here by David; and let all the World judge, if it resemble not you: and
that so near, that not any in our Age; and I may say, nor yet in many Ages,
has been more like it. And having showed you this; my part remains, only to
Pray; that you may long enjoy this happiness as a fruit of your virtue here;
and come at last, to be like the Tree it self; which will yield you a fruit
of happiness, that shall never fade; nor so much as the leafes of it, ever
wither: for how should they wither, when In memoria aeterna erit Iustus? Thus
he prays that is

Your Lordships humble and devoted servant,

RICHARD BAKER.

Recensui Tractatum hunc in Psalmum primum, a Domino Bakero scriptum; eumque
typis mandari permitto; modo intra 3. Menses proxime sequentes imprimatur.

SA. BAKER.
October. 25. 1637. Ex Aedib. Londini.
MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS upon the 1. Psalm of DAVID.
IT may be thought, but an idle speculation to observe, that the first word of
this Psalm, in the Hebrew, begins with Aleph, the first letter of the
Alphabet; and the last word of it begins with Tau; the last letter of the
Alphabet; as though this Psalm should contain whatsoever may be expressed by
all the letters of the Alphabet. And it may be little better to observe; that
this first Psalm, has a kind of correspondence, to our first parents: for the
first word of it, is Blessed; and the last words, is perishing: and such was
their condition; they began in blessedness, but they ended in perishing: They
began in blessedness, being placed in Paradise, where they had the Tree of
Life; but they ended in perishing, being cast out of Paradise, where they died
the death. But although the Prophet perhaps had none of these conceits; yet he
had great reason; for so placing his words: for blessedness is the mark, we
all aim at: if that be once named, there needs no other Rhetoric to make us
attentive; most properly therefore it is placed the first word; seeing the
first words are the proper place to peswade attention. And as fitly is
perishing, placed the last words; that if the hope of blessedness, cannot allure
us to godliness; yet the fear of perishing, may keep us from wickedness:
seeing nothing so much deterres from evil doing, as the fear of evil
suffering; and the word is justly placed the last, that it may last the longer
in our memories; seeing the last words ever, are best remembered.

But to leave these general aims; and to come to particulars and certainties:
we may perceive, that this whole Psalm, offers it self to be drawn, into these
two opposite propositions: a godly man is blessed: a wicked man is miserable:
which seem to stand, as two challenges, made by the Prophet: One, that he
will maintain a godly man, against all comers, to be the only Jason, for
winning the golden Fleece of blessedness: The other, that he will make it
good, upon the heads of all the wicked; that howsoever they make a show in the
world, of being happy; yet they of all men are most miserable. But lest there
should grow litigiousnesse about the words; he will have it agreed upon first,
what a godly man is; and what it is must qualify this happy Jason. It seems,
the Prophet had heard, of an old description of a godly man; Declina a Malo,
and fac bonum: Eschew evil, and do good: but finding this too general, and
too much foulded up; he thinks it necessary, to open the first part of it,
into three Negative marks: and the last part of it, into two Affirmatives. But
are not these strange marks, to begin withal? as though, we could know a
godly man by Negatives? or that godliness consisted in Negation? as if virtue
were only Vitium fugere? Indeed the first godliness that ever was, that is
the first Commandment of God, was delivered to our first parents, in a
Negative: Of the Tree of Good and Evil, ye shall not eat: and if they had
well observed this Negative; they should never have sinned in any Affirmative:
as long as it could be said of Adam; there goes a man, that never eat of the
forbidden Tree; so long it might as well be said of him; There goes a perfect
righteous man. And even the first written Law of Commandments, was delivered
likewise in a manner all in Negatives; Thou shall not kill; Thou shall not
steal, and the rest; in which, so much godliness is contained, as might have
brought usall to Heaven; as Christ told the young man; Sivis ad vitam Ingredi,
serva Mandate. Justly therefore the Prophet, begins his godliness here, with
Negatives; seeing negatives at first, began all godliness.

But as the evil spirit in the Gospel, answered the Jewish Conjurers, who in
their adjuration, used the names of Jesus and Paul: Jesus I know; and Paul I
know; but who are you? so here, perhaps, some curious spirit, may object and
say; the Negative Commandments of the first Table I know: and the Negatives of
the second Table I know; but what are these? They are not indeed, the very
mark we aim at; but they are the means, that guide us to the mark; and if
by observing those, we arrive at the haven; by observing these, we avoid the
rocks, that hinder us from the haven.

But why would the Prophet, use any Negatives at all; and not rather rely
wholly upon Affirmatives? as to say; That has walked, in the counsel of the
godly; that has stood in the way of the righteous; that has sat in the
chair of the humble: and thus, he might have made his argument in Barbara; and
never needed to have troubled Negatives at all? But Negatives in this case
could not be denied: for if he had left out Negatives; he had left out, a
great part of the worth and praise of godliness: For a godly man, cannot
always run in smoothe ground; he shall sometime meet with rubs; he cannot
always breathe in sweet aires; he shall sometime meet with ill savours; he
cannot always sail in safe seas; he shall sometime meet with rocks; and then
it is his praise; that he can pass over those rubs; can pass through these
savors; can pass by those rocks; and yet, keep himself upright and
untainted; and untouched of them all. Besides, Negative precepts, are in some
cases, more absolute and peremptory, than Affirmatives: for to say, that has
walked in the counsel of the godly, might not be sufficient; for, he might
walk in the counsel of the godly; and yet walk in the counsel of the
ungodly too; not both indeed at once; but both at several times; where now,
this Negative cleares him at all times. And may it not also, be a cause of
using Negatives: because it seems an easier way, of showing what a thing is;
by showing what it is not; than by using only Affirmative marks; especially
where a perfect induction may be made: and herein, David not unfitly may be
thought to reflect upon himself; and the case not unlike, to Samuels seeking
to find out a King, amongst the sons of Iesse. For, when Eliab was brought
forth; Samuel verily thought, that he had been the man; and afterward;
Abinadab, that it hadbeene he; and then that Shammai, without all doubt was he,
for these were all goodly personages; likely men in show, to make Kings of: but
when God refused these, and all the rest; and that there was none left, but
only David: then was Samuel forced at last, to fall upon him: so, in our case
here; the world is verily persuaded, that the likeliest men to be blessed, are
those that walk in the counsel of the ungodly; or those, that stand in the
way of sinners: or such as sit in the chair of scorners; for, these are all,
great gallants, and make a goodly show in the world: but when the Prophet has
rejected all these; and none is left but the godly man; then we are forced of
necessity at last, to fall upon him: and as David, was the unlikeliest of all
his brothers to be a King; yet he was the man: so a godly man seems the
unlikeliest of all others to be blessed; yet he is the man. In the World, ye
shall have trouble, says Christ; this makes him unlikely; but be of good
cheer; I have overcome the World; this makes him the man. And thus, as God
directed Samuel, to elect by rejecting; so David directs us here, to choose by
refusing; and this is a cause also, that makes Negatives, in many cases, so
much in request.

But though some Negatives, in some cases, may be fitly used; yet it follows
not, that these in this: and therefore it will be fit, to examine these
Negatives, and to see what they are: that has not walked in the counsel of
the ungodly; that has not stood, in the way of sinners; that has not sat in
the chair of scorners: and are not these, in this case, strange marks? as
though we should know a godly man, by the postures of his body? Or, as if a
goodly man, should neither walk, nor stand, nor sit? And what remains then,
but that he should do nothing else, but lie? and yet this he must not do
neither: For, lying is the posture of a wicked man; as it is said; He lies in
wait, to do mischief. Indeed, walking has been often branded with notes of
miscarrying: Dyna went a walking in the flowery fields; and returned home,
deflowred: Coin went a walking with Abel, into the field, a brother; and
returned home a murderer: and it seems to have been an old exercise, of the
Diveli himself; who answered God, that he came from walking, and compassing
the earth: and Christ warned his Apostles, not to walk into the way of the
Gentiles; which seems not much different, from this caveat here.

But, though walking may be a hinderance to godliness; yet standing, perhaps,
may be a furtherance; for Christ says: When ye stand praying; and so, it is
the posture of Piety; and it is said of Moses; that he stood in the gap; and
so, it was the posture of Charity; and the Angels are said, to stand before
God; and so, it is the posture of Reverence; and yet for all this; if standing
be not joined with understanding; as if we stand where we should kneel; as
when David says, Let us fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker: Or
if we stand in places, where we should not; as in the way of sinners; Or if
we stand, amongst persons that we ought not; as in sinners way; in all such
cases, standing may be as great a hinderance to godliness, as ever walking was.

Yet surely, sitting is an Innocent posture; sitting never committed Adultetry;
never stole; never did any murder; and not only an Innocent, but a reverent
posture; it is the posture of a Judge; as it is said: Ye shall sit, and judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel. It is the posture of a King; as it is said; to the
King, that sits upon his Throne: It is the posture of Angels; as of the
four and twenty Elders in the Revelation: and yet as innocent and reverent as
it is; it may be abused: for, if we sit in the way of lasciviousness; as
Thamar did: Or, if we sit, in the chair of injustice, as Pilate did: or, if
we sit, in the seat of pestilence; as it is said here; sitting may prove as
great a bane to godliness, as either standing, or walking was.

But they are not the postures, that are here blamed; but the Impostures; that
we be not drawn abroad a walking, as to take the fresh air; and then, be
poisoned, with infectious savours; that we be not kept standing in a pleasant
way; and then, the enemy, who lies in wait continually, come suddenly and
surprise us: that we sit not idly, and take our ease; and in the mean time;
the Bridegroom pass by; and we be shut out of doors. For, if there be
nothing else in it, but walking; a godly man may walk, as much as he will:
seeing there is not only a godly walking; as it is said of Noah; that he
walked with God; which was a walking in godliness: but there is a blessed
walking; as it is said of Enoch; that he walked with God; that is, God took
him from walking in this vale of misery, to walk with him eternally in
Paradise.

The mark therefore to know a godly man, consists not, in the not walking; but
we must walk further to find it; and the next word, we come too, is
counsel; and the Negative cannot consist in this word neither: for, counsel
is one of the most excellent gifts, that is given to man; that it is even one
of the Names of God himself, to be called Counselor: the Negative therefore
not found here neither; we must yet go further; and the next word we come to,
is ungodly: and now certainly, we shall have a full Negative; for ungodliness
is the herb that marreth all the broth; it poisons all the company that it
comes in; not only walking, a thing in it self indifferent; but even
counsel, a thing in its own nature, most sovereign; they are both marred by
this one ingredient of ungodliness. The like may be said, of the other two,
that follow; for, neither standing; nor standing in the way, does any hurt,
till we come at sinners,; neither sitting; nor sitting in a Chair, does any
hurt, till we come at scorners; all the hurt, like the sting in the tail of a
Serpent, comes in the last. Walking in counsel, had been a safe proceeding;
if the ungodly, had not given it; standing in the way had been a lawful
calling; if sinners had not made it; sitting in a Chair had been an easy
posture; if scorners had not framed it; but if the ungodly; or sinners, or
scorners have any hand at all in our actions; have any thing to do in our
doings; both safety and lawfulness, and ease, and all are utterly overthrown.

Or, may we not take a way, which crosses the great highway of the World: and
conceive it thus: To walk in the counsel of the ungodly, is a pleasant walk;
and if pleasure would make us blessed; were likely to do it; to stand in the
way of sinners, is a profitable way; and if profit will make us blessed; were
the way to do it; to sit in the Chair of scorners, is an honorable seat;
and if honor would make us blessed; would serve to do it; but all these
courses, the Prophet rejects: they are so far from making us blessed; that
he gives us warning of them, as the only impediments, that hinder us from
blessedness. And therefore, the voluptuous man is deceived, in placing
blessedness in pleasures: for howsoever he fare deliciously every day in this
life; yet he may hear, of a terrible after-reckoning, brought in, by Saint
John, How much thou receivest in pleasures here; so much shall be added to thy
torments hereafter. The covetous man is deceived, in placing blessedness in
riches; for howsoever, they make him welcome in all companies, where he comes,
in this world; yet he may hear of a grievous repulse, to be given him by
Abraham; Son, thou have received thy portion in this life; and therefore have
no right, of ever coming into my bosom. The ambitious man is deceived, in
placing blessedness in honor; for howsoever he sit aloft in his Chair, and
play Rex here; yet he may hear of a cruel downfall, foretold him by Esaias;
Thou have said in thy heart, I will climb up above the clouds, and will be
equal to the Highest; but thou shall be cast down, to the pit of Hell, and to
the nethermost Lake.

But have then ungodly men counsel? One would think, it were want of
counsel, that makes them ungodly: for who would be ungodly, if he had
counsel to direct him? Certainly, counsel they have; and wise counsel too;
that is, wise in the eye of the world; and wise for the works of the world;
but wise in the sight of God; and wise for the works of godliness, they have
not: and in that kind of wisdom, ungodly men are your greatest counselors:
Greatest, in the ability of counsel; and greatest in the busying themselves
with counselling. For their wisdom in counsel; we have a precident in
Achitophel; who was in his time, a most wicked man; and yet for counsel, was
the Oracle of his time. And for their forwardness in counselling; it is a
quality they have, as it were Extraduce, from their Father, the Devil; who, no
sooner creatures were made, that were capable of counsel, but he fell a
counselling: and such indeed, are all the ungodly; as it is in the Psalm; The
poison of Aspes is under their lips: it serves not their turns, to do
wickedly in their own persons; but they must be drawing others into
wickedness, by poisoning and infecting them with wicked counsel. So then, the
not walking in the counsel of the ungodly; is, not to hearken to the hissing
of the Serpent; not to make wicked men our counselors; nor in the course and
actions of our life, to be directed by them.

But, if this be all; what great matter is it? or what needed, so great a
caveat, to be given of it? Certainly, both the danger, and the difficulty,
deserve a principal caveat; and in the caveat it self, we may see them both:
for there are but three words in it; and every word is as a cord, to draw us
into sin. If Pleasure will entice us, here is walking to do it: If Reasons
will persuade us; here is counsel to do it: If number will overrule us; here
is the plural against the singular, to do it: that the air is not more
pestilent, to be taken in; then hard to be kept out; the rock, is not more
dangerous, to be run upon, then difficult to be avoided.

We would now proceed, to the second mark; but that we know not, how to set
our feet; For we begin to see, or seem to see, a gradation before us; and as
I may say; a pair of stairs: but whether we go up or down the stairs, in
this gradation; is made a question. But is it not strange, we should not know
the ground we go upon; whether it rise or fall; whether it be ascending or
descending? yet such is the Prophets contrivance here; that Doctors doubt it,
and are divided. Many grave Authors there are on both sides; many great reasons
on both sides, to maintain their opinions. They which think it an ascent,
conceive it thus; that he which walks in the counsel of the ungodly; is yet
but wavering, as misled by opinion; and makes but an error: he that stands in
the way of sinners; stands out with obstinacy; and makes an Heresy: but he
that sits in the chair of scorners: is at defiance with God; and makes an
Apostacy. They who think it, a descent do thus conceive it; he which walks
in the counsel, of the ungodly; delights and takes a pleasure in his sin:
He which stands in the way of sinners; stands in doubt, and is unresolved in
his sin: but he who sits, in the seat of the scornful; sits down, and
sins but for his ease; as being unable to suffer persecution. They who think
it, an ascent; conceive; that the ungodly, are but beginners in ill; that
sinners, are Proficients in ill: but that scorners, are Graduates and Doctors
of the Chair in ill. They who think it, a descent; conceive that the ungodly
are apposite to the godly, and offend generally; that sinners offend, though
actually, yet but in particulers; that scorners might be sound at heart; if
they did not set themselves to sale, and sin for promotion. The ascent, may
be briefly thus: that walking expresses less resolution than standing; and
standing, then sitting; but in sin, the more resolute, the more dissolute;
therefore sitting, is the worst. The descent thus: that walking expresses more
strength, than standing; and standing, than sitting: for a child can sit, when
he cannot stand; and stand, when he cannot walk; but the stronger in sin,
the worse; therefore walking is the worst. Many such ways there are, of
conceiving diversity, either in ascending, or descending; but it needs be no
question, which is the worse; because, without question, they are all stark
naught; they are three rocks, whereof the least is enough to make a
shipwreck; they are three pestilenciall aires, whereof the best is enough to
poison the heart. This only may be observed, that howsoever the case alter,
with walkers and sitters; yet standers in the way of sinners, keep their
standing still; and which soever is first or last; yet they are sure to be the
second.

But is it not, that we mistake the Prophet; and make his words a gradation;
when, perhaps, he meant them for level ground? and forsuch indeed, we may
take them; and do as well; and then, there will not be, either ascent, or
descent, in the sins themselves: but only a diversity, in their causes: as
that the first is a sin, caused by ill counsel: the second, a sin caused by
ill example: the third, a sin caused by the innate corruption of our own
hearts. And so, we shall have the three principal heads or springs, from
which, all sins do flow; and may probably be exemplified, by the three first
first persons, that were in the world: the first, committed by Eve, in
following the counsel, of that ungodly one, the Sepent: the second, committed
by Adam, in following the example, of the sinful Eve: the third, committed by
Cain, who sinned not, either by any ill counsel, or by any ill example; but
only by the inbred corruption of his own heart. And in this, we may observe,
the wonderful pronenesse of our Nature to sin; seeing the three first
persons, in the world; had every one of them, a several springhead of sin,
of their own opening; as if they thought, there were no honor, but in being
the first founder of sin: and if there had been in Nature, a fourth
springhead of sin to be found; the fourth man, most likely, would have found
it out; but these, it seems, were all; and so, the fourth man Abel, in his
turn, found out a springhead of another making; the true fountain of life:
but the other spring-heads, have ever since been so frequented; that Abels
fountain has been wholly almost neglected: that the Prophet had great
reason, to give us caveats, for drinking at those poisoned springs; and to have
recourse, to the true fountain of life, which is the Law of God.

Or, is it, that the Prophet alludes here, to the three principal ages of our
life; which have every one of them, their proper vices, as it were, retainers
to them: and therefore the vices of youth; which is the vigor of life, and
delights most in motion and society; he expresses by walking in the counsel
of the ungodly: the vices of the middle age, which is, stataaetas; he
expresses by standing in the way of sinner; the vices of old age, which being
weak and feeble, is scarce able to go; he expresses by sitting, in the
Chair of scorners; and it is, as if he had said; Blessed is the man that has
passed through all the ages of his life; and has kept himself untainted, of
the vices that are incident unto them: that has passed the days of his youth,
as it were the morning of his life; and is not tainted with the stirring vices,
of voluptuousness and prodigality: that has passed his middle age, as it
were, the noone of his life; and is not tainted with the more elevated vices,
of ambition and vainglory: that has passed his old age, as it were, the
Evening of his life; and is not tainted, with the sluggish vices of
coverousnesse and avarice.

Or, is it, there being five degrees of sin; concupiscence; consent; act;
custom; and pride in sinning: the two first, as incident oftentimes to the
godliest men; he forbeares to speak of; and intimates only, the three last;
for, to walk in the counsel of the ungodly; what is it, but the act of sin?
and to stand in the way of sinners; what is it, but the custom of sin? and to
sit in the Chair of scorners; what is it, but to take a pride in sin?

Or, is it finally, that by this distinction of postures; the Prophet intends
an absolute restraint, from all manner of conversation, with the wicked; so
absolute, that it may be said, in a Proverbiall manner, we neither walk, nor
stand, nor sit amongst them: For if, but the least liberty be taken, in
conversing with them; It may well be said, the passing of a Camel through a
needels eye: exceeding hard, if not altogether impossible, to escape untainted.

We may now consider the second mark, as it is in it self, without
gradation: and is not this also a strange mark of a godly man, that he should
not dare to stand in the way of sinners? For, what hurt can he take, by
standing in their way? Is it not a broad and a large way, that sinners may go
by, and no hurt to him at all? But a godly man is wiser than so; though he know
that the way is large and broad; yet he knows also, that the Prease is great;
a man cannot stand here; but he shall be shouldred and thrust forward in
spite of his teeth: It is not here, as in the way of the righteous; where a
man may stand long enough, before he shall meet with company to thrust him
forward; but here is crouding and thronging, that we can neither go here, nor
do here, as we would; but must of necessity go, as the crowd drives us; must
perforce do, as the company will have us; that he may justly be counted, a
happy man, that can avoid this rock; which has been the cause of more
shipwrackes, than either Scilla, or Charibdis.

If the way of sinners, were a blind, obscure way; or a man were blind, and
could not see his way; there might be ways of excuse, for standing in it: but
seeing, all men's eyes are open to this way; and this way lies open to all men's
eyes; to stand in it now; is not to stand in the way of sinners, but to sin
in the way of understanding; and such sin shall be punished with many stripes.

A man may be in the way of sinners, and be excused: but to stand in the way,
is unexcusable: For, his being there, may be by accident; but his standing
there must needs be voluntary: and seeing neerenesse to a place; and
continuance in a place, are great engrossers of the qualities of a place; how
fully must he needs engrosse the way of sinners to himself, that stands in
it, which contains them both? For, whilst neernesse works by addition; and
continuance, by multiplication; the standing in the the way of sinners, as
gathering heat by both; must needs break forth at last, into violent flames of
sinning.

It is therefore, no doubt, a good mark of a godly man, that he will not stand
in the way of sinners: but why should he not sit, in the chair of scorners?
for he may sit there, and take his ease; and neither do hurt to others; nor
take hurt himself. He will do both: He will take hurt, by brazening his own
face; and he will do hurt, by poisoning others hearts. For when a man comes
once to sit in the Chair of scorners; it hardens him in his sin; it makes
him to make a profession of it; he grows to take it in scorn, that any man
should be wickeder, than himself; he sits, as it were, a brooding of sin; what
at first, he was ashamed of, that now he glories in; and what before, he was
glad to do, standing; he is confident now, to do sitting in his Chair. And
as he takes this hurt, himself; so does he yet, more hurt to others. For,
when a man in authority, gives ill examples; it spreads far, and prevails
much; it is a pestilent thing, to be wicked, ex Cathedra: their Chair stands
high; and is seen and heard of many: One Pharisee may do more hurt, than a
hundred Sadduces: and where the poison of ungodly counsel; and the poison of
sinful company, reaches but to men near hand, the poison of this Cathedral
wickedness, reaches far and near; that he may justly be accounted, a happy
man, that can avoid this rock; which has been, the immediate ruin of many;
and the cause of ruin, to many more.

There are diverse sorts of chaires; and all, worth the sitting in, but only
this of scorners. There is a Chair of Majesty; and this is made, by God
himself; and makes them all as Gods, that sit in it: For, to this Chair,
there is a blessing annexed, which makes it sacred; Touch not mine anointed.
There is a chair of Doctrine; and this was first set up by Moses; and makes
them all reverend, that sit in it: For, it has a a privilege belonging to it;
Do my Prophets no harm. Only this chair of scorners, has none that will
avow the making it; it seems to have been broken with the fall of Lucifer;
and ever since, has been dangerous to sit in; yet it stands in opposition
with both the other; for it scorns to obey the Chair of Majesty; and makes a
mock of hearkening, to the chair of Doctrine: and therefore this chair, is
so far, from having any blessing belonging to it; that all the curses of
Mount Ebal, are too little for it.

And as there are diverse sorts of chaires; so there are diverse sorts of
scorners: some scorn their inferiors; and forget, that in scorning them, they
reproach their maker: some scorn their betters; and seem scholars of the
Pharisee; to think, none so good as themselves, though none so bad: some
scorn to be reproved, as being wise in their own conceit; of whom (says
Solomon) there is less hope than of a fool. Some scorn to hear it said, the
world shall ever have end; and are herein, themselves a sign that it is
drawing to an end: seeing, Such Mockers, says St. Peter shall come in the last
days. Some scorn the Ministers of Gods Word; and if at any time they hear
them; it is but as the Athenians would hear Paul; to hear what this babbler
would say. Some scorn God himself; and are ready to answer, as Pharaoh
answered Moses; What is God? and who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice:
yet all these scorners, have their chair to sit in; set indeed on high: but
set in slippery places: and giving them falls, as certain as dangerous; or
rather most certain, and yet more dangerous; that he may justly be counted a
happy man, that can avoid this chair; which gives a worse fall, than Elies
chair did: in which, he fell down backward, and brake his neck.

But why should the Prophet speak so scornfully of scorners; and give them so
base a place amongst sinners; seeing not only godly men; but (if with
reverence we may say it) even God himself seems to stand in the number, of
being scorners? For, was not Mordec ai the good Jew, a scorner? who scorned so
much, as to make a leg; or so much as to put off his hat to Haman? Himself a
poor snake Jew, to Haman a Prince, and prime Favorite of great King
Ahashuerosh? May not God himself be said a scorner; of whom it is said; that
he laughes the wicked to scorn; and has them in derision? And how then can
scorning be so great a sin; being found in him, in whom is nothing but
transcendent goodness? Or how at least, may we distinguish the vicious
scorning, from that which is the virtue? It is not, that we may distinguish
them by their chair? For wicked scorners, are set alost in their chair; they
think, they cannot be noble, unless they be proud: but the good scorners,
sit not in a chair when they scorn; they keep state indeed, but it is with
humility. God may be said to scorn; as he is said to be Angry; but as he bids
us to be angry, and sin not; so he is angry, but sins not; because his
anger, is never but for sin; he scorns but sins not; because he scorns
none but sinners: and as such anger, so such scorn, may possibly be and is: is
and lawfully may be, in godly men; and to speak, (...): in God himself.

But why would the Prophet say, Blessed is the man; as though blessedness were
entailed to heirs males; or as though the Law of God, were like the law
Salique of France, excluding women, from the Kingdom of heaven? for else, he
should rather have said; Blessed is every man or woman; and not say only,
Blessed is the man. But is it not, that David knew better the extent of his
words, than to be so superfluous: For ever since the time, of which Moses
says? God made man: Male and female created he them: women have had as good
right to the word, as men; though it pass in their name: and if we say more
right, we shall say, perhaps, but right: for how else could Christ be called
the son of Man; who we all know, was the son of but only woman? and if we
look upon examples, of blessedness; we shall find as well women, as men,
recorded for blessed: and if any advantage be, it seems rather on the woman's
side: seeing we find one woman, to have attained a greater degree of
blessedness, than ever any man did; except only her only son, the man
Christ Jesus.

If a man have not walked in the counsel of the ungodly; it may probably be
thought, he has gone the fairer way; and then he has a title to
blessedness, by this rule: Blessed are they, that walk in the law of the
Lord. If he have not stood in the way of sinners: it may charitably be
thought, he is sorry, that ever he came there: and then he may lay claim to
blessedness, by this rule; Blessed are they that mourn, and are penitent for
their sins. And if he have not sat in the chair of scorners, it may with
good reason be thought, he has done it in humility: and then he has a right
to blessedness by this rule; Blessed are the poor in spirit: for, God
resists the proud; but gives grace to the humble. But for all this, and
nevertheless it may be said; that these are yet but Negative marks; and can
make at most but a godliness by negation: which can no more properly be said
a godliness; than Indolentia may be said to be Voluptas: The true godliness
is a positive thing; and cannot be affirmed out of Negatives; it is a habit,
and cannot be concluded from privations. The Prophet therefore stays not here;
but proceeds and hastens to the Affirmative marks: for they indeed, are the
proper characters, of a godly man; they are never found but in him; and in him,
they are ever found. And of these there is but a pair; as they came into Noah's
Arc: and yet enough, to make a breed: enough to bring godliness to its full
propagation. And he seems to frame his process, in this manner; A man is
known what he is by his delight; for such as a man's delight is; such a man
himself is: and therefore a godly man, delights not to walk in the counsel
of the ungodly; nor to stand in the way of sinners; nor to sit in the chair of
scorners: for, these are all lawless delights: at least, delights of that law;
of which St. Paul says: I find another law in my members; they agree not with
a godly man's nature; and though a delight there must be; there is not living
without it; yet a godly man will rather want it, than take it up in such
commodities: But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and now the Prophet
begins to enter upon his Affirmative marks: and the godly man begins to
appear in his likeness: for this delighting in the Law of God, is so
essential to godliness, that it even constitutes a godly man; and gives him
his being. For, what is godliness, but the love of God? and what is love,
without delight? that we may see, what a sovereign thing godliness is; which
not only brings us to delight, when we come to blessedness; but brings us to
blessedness by a way of delighting. For, the Prophet requires not a
godliness, that bars us of delight; he requires only a godliness, that
rectifies our delight; for, as the wrong placing our delight, is the cause of
all our miseries: so the right placing it, is the cause of all our happiness:
and what righter placing it, than to place it, in the right; and what is the
right, but only the Law?

But is there delight then, in the Law of God? Is it not a thing rather that
will make us melancholy? and does it not mortify in us, the life of all joy?
It mortifies indeed the life of carnal delights; but it quickens in us,
another delight, as much better than those, as heaven is above the earth. For
there is no true delight, which delights not as much to be remembered, as to be
felt; which pleases not as well the memory, as the sense; and takes not as
much joy to think of it being done, as when it was a doing. For, is it not a
miserable delight when it may be threatened with this: Oli^^ haec meminisse
pigebit? You will one day remember this. Is it not a doleful delight, when
Extrema gaudii l^ctus occupat; when sorrow follows it at the heels? Is it not
a fearful delight, when like a Magicians rod, it is instantly turned into a
Serpent? And such, are all worldly delights; either like that of Amnon, in
loving Thamar: first enjoyed, and presently loathed; or like that of Cain in
killing Abel; mad to do it; and then stark mad for having done it; or
like that of Esau, in eating Iaacobs pottage; give at first a blessing for it;
and afterward give it, a thousand curses: or like that of Gehezi, in taking
gifts of Naaman; leap for joy, till we come to Elisha; and loathsome Lepers
all our lives after. This delight which the Prophet here speaks of; is the
only delight, that neither blushes, nor looks pale; the only delight, that
gives a repast, without an after reckoning; the only delight, that stands in
construction with all Tenses: and like Aeneas Anchyses, carries his parents
upon his back. And why should not even worldly men, be sensible of this
delight? They delight in gold and silver; and behold, The Law is more precious
than gold; yea, than much fine gold. They delight in beauty: and behold, How
amiable the Tabernacles of the Lord are. They delight in light: and behold, The
Law is a lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths. They delight in
knowledge: and behold: Through the Law, we have more understanding, than our
teachers. They delight in joy: and behold, The Law is right, and rejoices the
heart. They delight in long life: and behold, The Law of the Lord increases
the length of days; and the years of life. And where are they now, that are
afraid of melancholy, in the midst of such delights? Certainly if there be, as
Physicians affirm, an Ellebore or a Sena, to purge away the melancholy and sad
humors of the body; this study in the Law of God; is the true Ellebore, and
Sena of the soul; or rather it is the juice of the Grape, which David in
another place speaks off, that exhilerates and makes glad the heart of man.

And as in this study of the Law of God; there is no fear of melancholy; so in
the delight that is taken in it, there is no fear of fatiety: all other
delights must have change, or else they cloy us: must have cossation, or else
they tire us: must have moderation, or else they waste us; this only delight
is that, of which we can never take enough; we can never be so full, but we
shall leave with an appetite; or rather never leave, because ever in an
appetite; it is but one, yet is still fresh: it is always enjoyed, yet always
desired; or rather the more it is enjoyed, the more it is desired: All other
delights may be barred from us; may be hindered to us: this only delight, is
free in prison, is at ease, in terments; is alive, in death; and indeed there
is no delight, that keeps us company in our deathbeds, but only this: All
other delights, are then ashamed of us, and we of them; this only sits by us
in all extremities, and gives us a Cordial, when Physic and friends forsake
us.

The Prophet has taught us marks, how to know a godly man; but he has not
taught us, how to know these marks: and this is a special matter; for we may
as well mis-take the marks, as mis-take the man; and therefore, though we let
pass the Negative marks, and leave them to be taken at all adventure; yet
this Affirmative mark, of delighting in the Law of God; would by any means be
better marked: For, this is an essenciall mark; and this mistaken, might mar
all; and lead us, perhaps, to Cain, instead of Abel. For, many delight in the
Law; because, they which preach the Gospel, should live by the Gospel: But
these are covetous men; and delight not in the Law; but in profit. Many delight
in the Law, because they desire to sit in Moses chair; but these are ambitious
men; and delight not in the Law, but in honor. Many delight in the Law;
because it teaches many hidden and secret mysteries; but these are vain men;
and delight not in the Law, but in superfluous knowledge. Many delight in the
Law, but only to pass away the time: as thinking it better, otiosum esse,
quam nihil agere: but these are scandalous men; and delight not, in the Law;
but in idle fancies. Many delight in the Law, as Neoptolemus in Philosophy;
Philosophandum sed (...) a little serves their turn; and if the other sorts,
were all of them, defective in substance; this sort surely is defective in
quantity: those had not the right stuff: this has not the just measure; and
so we are little the nearer yet, for finding out any marks of true delighting
in the Law of God. And how then, shall we come to know, the delighting which is
true and perfect, from that which is counterfeit and defective? shall we say,
it must be a delighting, only; or but only, chiefly? Not only; for so, we
should delight in nothing else; and, who doubts, but there are many other
delights, which both Nature requires and God himself allows: therefore not
only; but chiefly; yet so chiefly, as in a manner only; for chiefly, is
properly where there may be comparison; but this is so chiefly, as admits of
no comparison: In presence of this, all other delights do lose their light: In
balance with this, all other delights, are found to be light. And this is even
intimated in the word it self, used by the Prophet here, which is Kephets: and
signifies a delight, that takes up the whole will; and leaves no plus ultra in
our desires: which, as it only is, and only can be; so it only must, and
only ought to be true, of our delighting in the Law of God. Other delights may
have their fits; but no Kephets but only this. We may take delight, in a care
of our estates; which is a provident, and therefore a commendable delight: For,
he that provides not for his family, is worse than an Infidel, yet it must not
be our Kephets: for corpus aggravat animam multa cogitantem; much caring for
the world, makes the soul, heavy; and presses it down, from ascending
toward heaven. We may take delight in wife and children; which is a natural,
and therefore a commendable delight; for no man ever hated his own flesh: yet
it must not be our Kephets: For he that loves father, or mother, wife, or
children, better than Christ, is not worthy or Christ. We may take delight in
bodily exercises; which is a healthful, and therefore a commendable delight;
for he that neglects the care of his health; is within compass of being Felo
dese: a murderer of himself; yet it must not be our Kephets; for Nimia cura
corporis est incuria animi: too much care taken of the body; shows there is
but little care taken of the mind. But why stand we angling for marks, of
true delighting in the Law of God; when the Prophet himself gives us a mark
here, that may be Instar omnium; a mark that never fails: that he, who
delights in the Law of God, will be exercising himself in it, day and night.
For, it seems to be here, as between Faith and Works; that as Saint James
says; Show me thy Faith, by thy works; so we may say, show me thy
delighting, by thy exercising; For, as it is but a dead Faith, that brings not
forth the finit of good works: so it is but a fained delight, that brings not
forth the work of exercising: and as it is but an unsound Faith, that works
but intermittingly, and by fits; so it is but an aguish delighting, that has
its heat but at turns and seasons: but where we see a constancy of good
works; as we may be bold to say, there is a lively and sound faith; so where
we see, a continual exercising, we may be confident to say, there is a true
delighting. The working shows a life of Faith; the constancy of working, a
true temper of that life: The exercising shows a delighting; the continuance
of exercising, a sincerity of that delighting.

But will not this continual exercising in the Law of God; get men the name of
common Barrettours; and make them accounted troublesome fellows amongst their
neighbors; as of whom it may be said; they are never well, but when they are
going to Law? Indeed the Law of man where summum Ius is summa injury; and
where might oftentimes overcomes right; may be subjest, perhaps, to such
obloquie: but not the Law of God: For this is not a Law; where the weakest goes
to the wall; but this Law is a wall to the weakest; the delighting in this Law,
is not a going to Law; but a Law to our going; as it is said; Thy Law is a
light to our feet: a light, not only to our eyes, to make us see the right
way; but to our feet also, to make us walk the right way: and it is so far,
from making us to become enemies to our neighbors; that it makes us to become
neighbors, to our enemies; for of this Law, it is said; it suffers all things;
it endures all things; it seeks not her own; but if any man will take our
Coat from us; it makes us contented, to let him have our Cloak also.

The delighting in the Law of God; is that divine contemplation; by which, we
see God, as in a Glass: and is the only true way, to our only true felicity:
though there be men, that think they can tell of better contemplations, and
better ways to happiness, than David seems to know; or will at least
acknowledge: For, if they should but name the contemplation, which is
contemplari nummos in arca: or the meditation, which is Meditari inauia; or the
pleasure, of which it said: Trahit sua quemque voluptas; the worst of these;
would be a better delight; and a better way of happiness, than this of David's.
But these men's blindness, must not lead us into the ditch: For, these
delights they speak of, are the very blocks, that lie in our way, and hinder
us from happiness: they are the very weights, that hang heavy upon the soul;
and keep it from rising, to the true height, of divine contemplation; and if
a man, whose mind were once raised up to this height; should afterward
descend, and take a view of the world; he would even be astonished: to see men
that pretend to reason, and would be thought wise; be so simple, as to take
delight in their weights; and to take a pleasure in their clogs; and so sillily
to leave the delight of heavenly meditation; to follow these vain and foolish
things, which the world admires. And indeed, what but this, made our Prophet
here, in another place, break out into his passionate exclamation: O ye
sons of men, how long will ye love vanity; and seek after leasings? For,
look into the world; and to all things, that are in the world; and see if
there be any thing in it, (as to the purpose, of making us happy) but only
lies and leasings? Pleasure bears thee in hand, it can make the happy; but it
lies: For do not all pleasures hasten to their end; and that end, either in
sorrow, or satiety? Honor vaunts; it can make thee happy; but it lies: For
has honor anybeing, but in others not being; where it is part of our
happiness, that others be happy. Riches make thee believe, they can make thee
happy; but they lie: for they cannot so much as ease, the least pain of thy
body; or the least anguish of thy mind. Learning persuades thee, it can make
thee happy; but it lies: for in much wisdom is much grief; and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. The flesh tells thee, it can make thee
happy; but it lies; for the worms stand waiting continually for it; and are
sure ore long, to have it to eat. O that men would consider this; and not put
the Prophet, to his exclamation: O ye sons of men, how long will ye be in
love with vanity, and seek after leasings? For, this indeed, would be a good
preparative; and but a preparative, to divine contemplation: It might serve to
strew branches in the way; but not to cry Hosanna: For, to raise the soul up,
to this height of contemplation: it is not enough, to put off these weights,
that draw it down; but there must be a pulley also, to draw it up: as Christ
says; No man can come unto me, except the Father draw him; and therefore many
heathen Philosophers, could cast off, these clogs; could put off, these
weights: For, they despised riches; they scorned honors; they hated pleasures;
they contemned the world; and yet, for all this, they could never but flutter a
little in the low Region of the air; they could never rise up to the Firmament
of contemplation; and all, because they wanted this pulley; which, they that
delight in the Law of God, shall never want: For, Honorantes me honorabo, says
God: They which honor me, I will honor them: and if they delight in my Law; I
will delight in their study: and then, if by delighting in the Law of God, we
can bring God to delight in us; oh! what joy; what excessive joy; what
happiness, what transcendent happiness, will this be unto us?

But why would the Prophet speak of delighting in the Law of God; and not
speak rather, of delighting in God himself? For this no doubt, is a better
delight; and this delight, would be a greater blessedness. Is not the answer
to this question, made by Christ himself? If you love not your brother, whom
you see; how can you love God, whom you do not see? If we delight not, in the
Law of God, which we know; how can we delight in God, whom we do not know? Not
know, but as the Law teaches him unto us; and shows him unto us. This life,
is but the means to a better life; and the chief delight of this life, is but
to delight in the means to a better life; we see God now, but as in a Glass;
and though there be many Glasses to see God; yet the brightest of these
Glasses is the Law: and how then, can we delight in the seeing of God; if we
delight not in the Glass, in which we may best see him? To see him, as he is,
and in himself; is reserved, till we shall have better eyes; these eyes we
have are carnal, and corruptible; and cannot see God till they have put on
incorruption: but when those eyes come, and that we shall see God, face to
face: then the means will give place to the substance; and then the delighting
in the Law of God; will be turned into the delighting in God himself: till
then, the Prophet, though with his Prophets eyes, he might see more himself;
yet could not enform us, to make us see more; but he has truly told us, the
height of our delight in this life: if the delight of our life, be in the Law
of God.

But let the delight be what it will; it is but only contemplation: and
contemplation sets but only the eyes a work; it leaves all the rest of the
body idle; but godliness is an exercise for the whole man; both body and soul;
and therefore; not only David says My soul praise thou the Lord: but St. Paul
says; Make your bodies a living sacrifice: for our godliness must be
perfect; that our blessedness, may be perfect; and and even in heaven (if
they could be separated) we should not be blessed, in beholding the blessed
face of God; if we did not as well glorify him in beholding him; as behold his
glory. Contemplation brings us, but to Video meliora Proboque: and if Deteriora
sequor, do follow; then godliness is stopped in her race, at the very Goal:
the building is left unperfect, when it is come to the roof: we cannot make a
demonstration of true godliness, out of all the premises; unless that be
added, which follows; And in his Law, he will exercise himself, day and
night: but if this be added; then the roof of the house is set on; and then,
the Goal of godliness is won. And though it may seem, a wearisome thing,
summer and winter; day and night; all a man's life long; to do nothing else,
but always one thing; yet this is the godly man's task; he must do so; or he
cannot be the man we take him for. For to be godly, but sometimes, is to be
ungodly always: and no man is so wicked, but he may sometimes have good
thoughts; and do good works; but, this serves not our godly man's turn; his
Sun must never set; for if he ever be in darkness, he shall ever be in
darkness: at least, he shall find it more work, to kindle his fire a new,
than to have kept it, still burning. For, if a man should water his bed with
tears all night; and go next day to the house of laughter; that man's
godliness, would be but as the morning dew; rise to a cloud, and so vanish. Or
if he should bestow the whole day, in the exercise of godliness; and yet at
night, return to his vomit: that man would be but as a half Moon; bright, on
one side; and horrid blackness, on the other. For, godliness is a thing
entire, it cannot be had in pieces; we must have it together, or not at all;
and by this, a godly man, is made Totus terres atque rotundus; all the former,
make but lines; this only consummates godliness, and brings it to a circle.

It seems here as if the Prophet went about, to make men think, that the
readiest way to be a happy man, were to be a Lawyer: If we may call him a
Lawyer, that studieth and practices the Law. For, after his Negative marks of
a godly man, he comes next to this; that his delight is in the Law of the Lord;
which is his studying of the Law; and because a Student in the Law, can make no
benefit by it; till he come to be a practiser: he therefore, by these next
words, And in his Law, he will exercise himself; seems to call him to the
Bar; and enables him to practice: that having learned the Law himself, he
may now teach it to others; or at leastwise, practice it toward others. But is
not this a Paradox in David: seeing it is against our own experience; for, we
have known many, that by the Law, have grown rich; many, that by the Law,
have gotten honor; many, that by the Law, have grown famous; but we never
yet knew any, that by the Law, grew happy: for, not withstanding their honor,
their riches, their fame; yet they ever had something, whereof to complain. We
must therefore remember, what Law this is: It is not our Common Law; nor our
Canon Law: it is not the Civill-law; nor the Law of the twelve Tables; It is
not the Law of the Medes and Persians; nor the Law of Nations: It is the Law of
the Lord; a Law pure and undefiled; a Law that was given by Angels, in the hand
of a Mediator; a Law, by which we shall Judge; and by which we shall be
judged: It is Imperatorialex: Not the Emperors Law; but an Imperial Law; Lex
Architectonice; a Law, that gives rules to all other; and is it self ruled by
none. And here now, there opens it self, as it were, a Novus Orbis; for if we
should enter into the maine, to speak of Laws: we should never make an end;
our best is therefore, to keep close to David; and to go no further, than he
goes: and yet so, we shall have Law enough to make us happy. Only we may
consider, what these exercises are, in which this godly Lawyer, is so diligent
all day; and so vigilant all night, to exercise himself; and as the marks
before, so the exercises here, may be distinguished into Negatives, and
Affirmatives; but seeing the godly man mingles them together in his course; we
may as well mingle them together in our discourse. A godly Lawyer will not
boast himself to know that, of which he is ignorant; nor feign himself to be
ignorant, of that he knows. He will not discourage a man in a good cause; nor
encourage him in a bad. He will not overreach a man that is shorter than
himself; nor undermine a man that is shallower than himself; nor supplant a
man, that is weaker than himself. He will not rise, by other men's falls; nor
make a gain, of other men's losses. He will give counsel to a poor man,
without a fee; as reckoning a poor man's cause his own; and a good conscience
the best fee; if he have taken any other fee, he has morgaged his time; and
will not sell it again, till he have first redeemed it. He gives fees
himself, to get him Clyents; and grows richer by giving, than others do by
taking. He is ready to end suites, but not to begin them; and he had rather
want work, than make it. He is glad when he can use the Law; but would be
more glad there were no use of it. It is a booty to him when he can find
opportunity to do a good deed: If there want counsel, to set forward a good
cause, he gives it; If pains or care, he takes it. He keeps his terms
duly, as preferring the Sabbath day, before all other days; and yet as his
Piety makes every day, to him a Sabbath; so his Practice, makes it Term to
him, all tha year long. He turns over Books and searches Records; not so
much to look out dead Precedents; as to find out the reasons, that gave life
to the Precedents, for he makes it not, a reason of his action, that others
have done so; but he makes it his action, if he find there was reason, for the
doing so. He inquires, and hearkens out, the poor, and relieves them; the
naked, and clothes them; captives and redeemes them; men oppressed, and
succors them; men that mounre, and comforts them; men a dying, and revives
them. The Law is both his study, and his recreation; and one cannot tell,
whether it be more his work; or more his pastime: For, as the Prophet says
here, It is his Exercise; so he said before; It is his Delight; and it is
well, it is so: For, without this delight, it were impossible he should ever
go through, with such incessant labors, as are imposed upon him; or rather he
imposes upon himself, Day and Night. But delight makes burdens light; makes
labors easy; which perhaps, made Christ say; that his burden was light, and
his yoke easy: and in this manner, indeed, if a man, be a student, and a
practiser, in the Law; it will be no Paradoxe to say; it will be no violencc to
the Text; to make David say; that the best and readiest way, to be a happy man,
is to be a Lawyer.

When it is said, His delight is in the Law of the Lord; and in his Law, he
will exercise himself, Day and Night; is it not a kind of solaecisme; to
double the word, Law; without any lawful occasion? It may, perhaps, be a
solaecisme in Grammar; but it is none in affection: for therefore he doubles
the word (the Law) to express the wonderful delight, he takes in the Law;
and this is more fully expressed in the 119. Psalm; where he seems so fond of
the word, and so loath to leave it; that he cannot endure it should be out of
his mouth; and therefore at every third or fourth word, is up with it again.
Or is it, that he therefore doubles the word (the Law) because, indeed, there
is a double Law; which, though as a man, he could not see; yet as a Prophet he
might foresee: and the words, Day and Night, are here joined, to the latter
Law; because, although there were in the old Law a Judge sacrificium, in
representation; yet there never was any Judge sacrificium in reality, and
execution; but only in this later Law: and therefore, where David speaks it,
as a great matter to pray his seven times a day; we in this Law, are put to
our semper orate; and sine intermissione orate; continual prayer is expected
from us, day and night.

But why should the Prophet require day and night, to be spent in the doing of
Gods Law? seeing, for the day; God himself allows us six days, to do our
own work; and for the night; this is no opus tenebrarum; no fit work, to be
done in darkness? Yet a godly man will do, as the Prophet requires him; He
will do it in the day; that men seeing his good works, may glorify his
Father which is in Heaven; and he will do it in the night; that he may not
be seen of men; and that his left hand may not know what his right hand does.
He will do it, in the day; to show, he is none of those, Qui fugiunt lucem:
and he will do it, in the night; to show, he is one of those, Qui cum in
tenebris mices. He will do it in the day time, because the day is the time of
doing; as Saint Peter says, Work whilst it is day; and he will do it in
the night; lest his Master should come as a thief in the night, and find him
idle. Indeed, this day and night of David's; amounts but to Saint Paul's
continually; Watch continually, Pray continually; for though the Sun in the
Firmament set; and make it night to our eyes; yet the Sun of Righteousness
must never set, to make it night in our hearts; but it must be here, as it was
in the beginning; The Evening and the Morning must make but one Day.

The Prophet has used much circumstance, to tell us of the man, that should be
blessed: and when he has said all he can; it is all but a godly man; and why
could he not do this at first; and have saved himself, and us, a labor? we
cannot, perhaps, tell, for what reason the Prophet did it; but we may easily
tell, for what reason, he might do it; for many reasons may be given of it. If
he had only said; A godly man is blessed; it would have made but a new
business: for, we should presently have asked him: And what is a godly man?
and then, he must have come to this, which he delivers now; so the Prophet
went the nearest way, though we may think he went about. And if he had said,
A godly man is blessed; and had not told, what a godly man is; it would have
bred a world of controversy; for then, every man would have come, and put in,
his claim to blessedness, under pretense of godliness; and there would never
have been quiet. Cain would have come, and pretended devotion; for making
oblations, and offering sacrifices to God; Korah and Dathan would have come,
and pretended zeal, for opposing Governors, as taking too much upon them. The
Pharise would have come, and pretended pureness; for only fasting twice a
weak; and giving tithes, of all he possessed. Judas himself, would have come,
and pretended charity; for taking care of the poor; and finding fault, with
the cost, bestowed upon Christ; and there would have been so many pretenders
to godliness; and thereupon such snatching and catching at blessedness; that
if this had been suffered, both godliness would have been in danger, to be
adulterated: and blessedness it self, to suffer violence. To stop therefore
the mouths of these pretenders, and utterly to damn all such false claims;
the Prophet proclaims here the true Title; and sets down, as it were, In
terminis terminantibus; how the man must be qualified, that will lay claim to
blessedness; for if any of the conditions here expressed, be wanting; it will
be in vain, to have a thought of blessedness: For, this the Prophet delivers
for Law; and of this we may be sure, there will not be any thing be abated.

But if the Prophet be so punctual; and require such precise performance of
such precise points; he might as well have held his peace, and said nothing;
for what is this, but to build castles in the air; to tell us of a man, that
should be blessed; when there never was in the world, nor ever shall be, any
such man: and so by the course he takes; blessedness must either fall to the
King, by escheate, for want of a right heir: or at least, Cedere primo
occupanti, for want of a lawful claimer. But the Prophet had more knowledge;
than these men are aware of: he had read the Chronicles; and found there, many
such men, upon record: Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Samuel; many others. And
since his time, we our selves find many recorded for such men; Hezekiah and
Josias, Kings of Judah; Zachary and Elisabeth of later time: It is therefore,
but a mere scandal; bessednesse can never want an heir; for in all ages
past, there have been such men; and by Gods grace, are many such at this day;
and shall be many such, in the ages to come, as long, as the world shall last:
for the Devil must not have all; God will have his Congregation; and that must
consist of such, as are here described; A Congregation of the Righteous.

And now we may say, the Prophet has played, as it were, his prize; he has
set a spell to all posterity, for a perfect description: For, though some may
think, that Xenophon, in his instruction of Cyrus; and Cicero in his
description of an Orator, have been his equals; yet let the matter be
examined fairly; and we shall find, that the Prophet here, in a few plain
words, has made a perfecter godly man; than either Xenophon a Prince, or
Cicero an Orator; with all their long elaborate discourses.

The Prophet set blessed, as it were, a sign, at the entrance of his Psalm:
and where blessed, is hung out for a sign; we might be sure, to find a godly
man within: and so, he has well quitted himself, of the first part of his
Proposition, in showing us, what a godly man is: and now, if he can quit
himself as well, of the second part, in showing us, that he is blessed: we
shall then say, he has truly played his prize indeed; and worthily deserves
to be called, the godly man's champion: For, in so doing, he shall set a more
glorious crown upon a godly man's head; than that which Samuel set upon his.
He is blessed; and he shall be like a tree.

But here by the way, we may observe a Grammatical difference, which the
Prophet intimates, between blessedness, and godliness. For, to blessedness
he assigns but only two Tenses or Times; a present Tense; He is blessed;
and a future; he shall be like a tree. Preterperfect Tense; he assigns none:
for indeed, Fuisse faelicem miserrimum est: and to say, Fuimus Troes; is as
much as to say, we are not so now. That which is past; is dead in Time; and in
the body of true happiness; there must be; there can be, no dead flesh. But to
godliness, he assigns three Tenses or Times: A Praeterperfect tense; That
has walked, in the counsel of the ungodly: a Present tense; his delight is in
the Law of the Lord: and a Future; In his Law he will exercise himself; for,
godliness is a habit; and cannot be had, but by often repetition and
reiteration of actions; that if the time past, do not prompt and give example
to the present; and the present to the future; we may have flashes of
godliness; but a true habit of godliness, we can never have.

And here now the Prophet begins to show himself a Prophet; and to speak like
a Prophet: all he had said before; he might have spoken, as a Doctor of the
Law; for they were but caveats, and informations to godliness: This he
speaks now, he could not speak, but as a Prophet; for he comes to speak of
things to come; and what shall become of the godly, and of the wicked, in the
times hereafter. And this, neither Doctor of Law; nor yet Astrologer, nor any
humane Artist could do, but only a Prophet of God. And we may not the less
believe him because he speaks of future things, which to man's understanding
are always uncertain: seeing he speaks it not, as of himself: or as having
learned it of men; but he speaks it, as taught by God: with whom, all future
things are present; all things to come, as come already. For, these Prophets of
God, had as I may say, perspective-glasses, given them by God: in which they
could see things a far off; and far off, both in place and time: and we
may be allowed, to call them Glasses; seeing themselves were called videntes,
seers; as seeing the things they were to speak; and then Prophets,
Foretellers; as communicating that to others, which in their Glasses, they saw
themselves. And as themselves were called Videntes, seers; so their work or
faculty, was called, Visio, or seeing: and yet in this there was distinction:
For, not every prediction of a Prophet, was called visio, a vision; but such
only, as came with joyful tidings: for when they came with heavy news, it
was not properly called visio, a vision; but Onus, a burden; and our Prophet
here sings both tunes; he has visionem, a vision, for the godly; and Onus, a
burden presently after; for the wicked: but he tells his vision: his good news
first; and this it is; A godly man shall be like a tree.

But is this such good news for a godly man? must this be the height of a
godly man's expectation, to be like a Tree? will the Prophet serve us thus; make
us take such pains for godliness; and bear us all this while in hand; that
by being godly, we shall be happy; and now bring us to no better, a
happiness, than to be like a Tree? if he would needs use a similitude, could
he by his glass, make no better choice; or is a godly man's happiness no
better worth, than to liken him to a Tree? a Tree, which grows out of the
earth; and creepes into the Earth? a Tree, that is exposed to wind and weather?
a Tree, that is subject to worms and cankers? a Tree, that for all its being
planted by the water, is sure at last, to come to the fire? But we must not
with our ignorance, lay aspertion upon the Prophets knowledge: (for, it is not
the worthiness of the subject in a similitude, that dignifies the thing, that
is compared to it; For, what honor was it to Nabuchadonizer; that he was
likened to Lucifer, the morning star? Or, what more did Christ express of
the Kingdom of heaven, by comparing it to a pearl; then by comparing it, to a
grain of Mustard seed?) but it is the good qualities, in which they
simpathize: and of such good qualities, we shall find so many in a Tree; that
happiness may think it self happy, to be compared to it. For, was it not a
tree, that bore the Fruit of life, in the Garden of Eden? was it not a Tree,
that bore the Lord of life, in the field of Golgotha? O happy Tree; well worthy
to be made the similitude of our happiness, which was the instrument to
procure our happiness, But we need not go so far, to show the worth of the
comparison; there are circumstances enough, in a Tree it self; that may
sufficiently justify the Prophets choice. For, though a Tree, be but dust in
substance; and have the lower part fixed in the earth; yet it rises above the
earth; and has boughs and branches aspiring toward heaven; transformed into
a substance, as though they were no earth; expressing plainly the condition of
the godly; who though they be of earthy mould, and dwell in houses of clay;
yet their aspiring is to heaven, and their confidence is, to be transformed
into the Image of Christ; and to have their bodies made like, to his glorious
body.

But this is a common resemblance, that may be found in every Tree; the Prophet
here, sets his similitude closer upon a godly man, than that Ex quovis ligno
fiat Mercurius: every Tree will not serve to do it; but as before, he
delivered certain characters, to know what a godly man is; So here, he
delivers certain marks, to know what kind of Tree it is, that must make his
similitude. For, it is not a Tree, that grows up wildely of it self; as
having no other education but nature; but it is planted by an artificial hand;
and as it were civilized by transplanting. And it is not planted, amongst rocky
cliffes; where it may be choked with drouth; and where it must eat stones; or
else be starved: but it is planted by the waters side; where it has drink to
its meat; and where the soil is made supple, to give the root readily, both
passage and nourishment. And it is not a barren vainglorious Tree, that
makes-onely a show; and is nothing but words, as bearing nothing but leafes:
but it is a just performing tree; that follows his leafes with fruit; as a
just man's deeds do follow his words. Neither is it, an unseasonable tree, that
brings forth abortive fruits; and sets our teeth on edge, with soreness; but
it goes the full time out; and nourishes the fruit up, till it has gotten
sweetness by maturity; and tastes most pleasantly: and that we may know it,
to be no ordinary tree; the very leafes continue still, and do not wither.

But what matter is it, when the fruit is gathered; whether the leafes continue
still, or no? For, the work the leafes come about; is but to defend the buds;
and to keep the young fruits, from the violence of the Sun and wind; and
when they have seen them brought up; and come to a ripe age, that they can
shift for themselves; the leafes then may take their leaves; as we see them
fall away, by one and one; as taking notice, that their work is done. There
are, perhaps, some barren trees, that bear no fruit; and these sometimes have
leafes continuing still; and hanging on, both Summer and Winter; as if they
stayed waiting for employment; and looking still, when fruits would bud forth;
but with as idle an expectation, as the Jews stand waiting for the coming of
their Messiah: but this is not the case of our leafes here, which therefore
continue still, because they are still in office: for our tree bears fruit
continually; and therefore has need of leafes continually; when one fruit is
ripe and gone; another is green and coming on; and therefore the leaves,
which are necessary attendants upon the fruits; as long as there are young
fruits, that need attendants, cannot be discharged, and therefore do not
wither. And yet, perhaps, the Prophet had a further reason, why he would give
the leaf, a place in the similitude of a godly man's happiness; seeing a leaf
was the first Angel of liberty, to the prisoners in the Arc; their day-breake
of comfort came from the light of a leaf; and if it had not been for a leaf;
the tyrannizing waters, would have more kept their minds in the dark, than
their bodies in the Arc; and have drowned them with despair, when they could
not, with their waves: and when the waters overcame all other creatures, both
men and beasts; yet the leaf continued constant to the tree, and overcame the
waters; and as it perished not, in the Inundation of the world; no more shall
it wither, in the conflagration of the world.

But what happiness can a godly man expect from this similitude of a tree?
for, he can have no more, than the similitude will afford? he can look for no
more, than the tree has it self; and where has the tree, any resemblance of
happiness, in any thing, that is here expressed? It has none, in being planted
by the watersside: for, happiness is Summum Bonum; and this at most, but
Inferium Bonum; therefore only good, because it serves to do the tree, good:
it has none, in bringing forch fruit; for, happiness is Bonum proprium; and
this, but Bonum alienum; for, what good is it to the tree, to bring forth
fruit, for others to gather? For so, the tree shall be no happier than a Be,
that makes Honey indeed; but for others to eat; a godly man shall be no
happier than a Sheep; that bears wool indeed, but for others to sheare; and
for any thing appears yet, a godly man, by this similitude, is like to lose
his happiness. But the Prophet cannot be so much mis-taken; the similitude
therefore, would be better looked into: For, there is faelicitas medii; and
faelicitas sinis; there is faelicitas viae; and faelicitas patriae; and this
tree indeed, enjoyes them all: It has in this life, faelicitatem medii; and
faelicitatem viae; in being planted by the waters side: for, this moistens,
cooles, cleanses; and gives an easy and a happy passage to the journies end.
It shall have in the life hereafter, faelicitatem sinis; and felicitatem
patriae; in bringing forth fruit; for this shall not be, as the Be makes Honey,
for others to eat; nor as the Sheep bears wool, for others to sheare; but
this fruit shall be, for its own use only; and only for it self to gather.
For this fruit is that, of which Christ says: Your joy shall be full, and none
shall be able to take it from you; Your joy shall be full; there is plena
faelicitas; and none shall be able to take it from you; there is secura
faelicitas: and now the Prophet, need not be ashamed of choosing his
similitude: the godly man, need not be afraid, of losing his happiness.

But is it not strange, to see how contrary the Prophet proceeds here, to our
expecting? for when he propounded his similitude of a tree: we looked, he
should have begun at the top boughs, which are the highest parts, and
commonly bear the ripest fruits, and he begins clean contrary, at the
lowest part; at the very root; for indeed, although the root be not seen of
men; and have no outward glory; yet it is the root, that gives the praise to
the tree: it is the root, the tree may thank, for all he is worth: For,
though the branches bring the fruits, yet they are but messengers: it is the
root that sends them: and indeed, if there be not a root of Humility; and that
root planted by Grace; the aspiring boughs, are but sprigs of pride; and will
never bring forth, the fruit of Glory.

We looked he should have set our tree, if not in Torrida Zona, in the very
fire; yet at least, in some sunny place, as it were by the fires side; and he
sets it, clean contrary, by the waters side: For indeed, a tree fears nothing
so much, as want of moisture: it can ill spare the radiancie of the Sun; but
it can worse spare, the moistning of the water; for death has a spite at
nothing so much in any thing, as at the humidum radicale; the natural
moisture: He kills more with the drowth of too little moisture; than with the
drowth of too much heat or cold: For, this is a dart, which death has from
nature; all his other darts are from violence; and though the water be
external to the Tree; yet when it enters and moystens the root; it becomes
radical. And it may not be the least reason, why the Prophet sets the Tree,
which is our symbol of eternal life, by the waters side; seeing the water,
seems the most productive element of life; as that, which produced the first
living creatures, that were in the world; although we may raise our thoughts
yet higher; and remember, there are waters as well above the Firmament; as
under the earth; and there indeed, must the Tree be planted, that shall bring
forth the fruit, of our expected happiness.

We looked, he should have set our Tree, like the Trees of Eden; with present
fruits, hanging upon them; and he talks of tarrying the time, till the Tree
bring them forth: for indeed our Eden is past; there was at first, no time
there; and therefore the fruits there, were not children of time: but as soon
borne, as their parents, the Tree: but we are in a world of time: our Tree will
bear no fruit, but by the help of time; and no help of time neither, till
the fullness of time come; and that is only in him, who came in the fullness
of time: For, Christ is our time; and our fullness of time will be, when we
shall meet Christ, full in the air; and be taken with him into the new Eden,
where time shall be no more; and where our Tree shall bring forth fruit in the
Present tense, which shall never fade into Preterperfect tense.

But seeing the Prophet meant afterward, to make chafe a similitude of the
wicked; why would he take a Tree, for his similitude of the godly; and not
rather take wheat, as in a plainer opposition? and as Christ, it seems upon
better advise did take it afterward? Christ indeed took wheat for a
similitude of the godly, but to another purpose; the purpose of the Prophet
here, is to show; the great distance that shall be of glory, between the
godly, and the wicked: and in the points of glory, we shall find the wheat,
to come far short, and to be far inferior to a Tree. For, the wheat,
though it rise flourishing up; yet it rises out of the ground, but the same it
was cast into the ground; but the Tree, of a little small seed, rises up to a
substance, that one could never have expected, such an issue, for such a
parent. The wheat, though it rise flourishing up; yet it rises but to a small
height as loath to leave the earth too much; and afraid to go too far from
the root; but the Tree rises up to an eminent height, as scarce acknowledging
the root, from which it springs: and far surmounts all growing things upon
the earth. The wheat, though it rise flourishing up, yet it rises but to a
slender small stalk; that quakes and trembles at the voice of the wind; but
the Tree rises up to a vaste and firm body, that scorns the threatenings of
the wind; and is not once moved for all the wind can do. The Wheat, though
it rise flourishing up, it is quickly down again: if it be not reaped in
summer, it dies in winter: but the Tree is a laster for many ages; and of all
things, that grow out of earth, comes nearest to everlastingnesse.

And now; if we cannot choose but think it a blessed thing, to be such a Tree:
we cannot as little choose but think it a blessed thing, to be a godly man;
for whatsoever is seen or said of this Tree; is true, and more true of a godly
man. He is more fixed and immovable than this Tree; for, where this Tree is
rooted but in the earth; a godly man is founded upon a Rock. He is planted by
a better Gardner, than this Tree; for where this Tree is planted but by Adam, a
natural man; a godly man is planted by Paul; or rather, as Christ says, by
God himself. He is moistened with better waters, than this tree; for where this
Tree is watered, but by springs from the earth; a godly man is watered with the
dew of heaven: he rises to a greater height, than this Tree: for where this
Tree is stinted in its rising, and stays in the air; a godly man rises up,
and never stays till he come at heaven. He bears more fruit, than this
Tree; for, where this Tree has many leaves besides fruits; the very leaves,
of a godly man, are themselves, fruits. He is longer in season than this Tree;
for, where this Tree is in season, but some part of the year; Godliness is in
season, all the year long: this Tree is in season but for a time: but
godliness is in season, to all eternity.

The similitude of a Tree, is sufficiently justified; but why would the Prophet
express happiness, by any similitude at all? and not deliver it rather in the
very substance? why would he not, rather tell us, what it is; than what it is
like? May we not be bold to say, because it was more, than he could do? For
seeing the happiness of a godly man is such, as neither eye has seen; nor
ear heard: certainly it is such also, as neither words can express, nor
tongue utter. And if we should heap up words upon words: laying Pelion upon
Ossa, and making mountains of volumes; yet we should never be able to
express the happiness, ordained by God for godly men. If the happiness
consisted of finite parts, and were a stinted thing, either in number, or
magnitude or continuance; we might by the help of Arithmeticke and Geometry,
express it perhaps in some proportion; but seeing it consists of parts, in
number, innumerable; in magnitude, infinite; in continuance, eternal; what man
of art; what art of man, can now come near it? Or if the happiness were to
continue, but so many thousand years as there be sands in the sea; though this
were a vast, incomprehensible extension of time, yet it were but a continuance,
that would not con tinue; there would one day be an end: but seeing it shall
be for ever, everlasting, eternal; in Aeternum and ultra; what stars of
heaven; what sands of the sea; can now be counters enough to sum it. And now
tell me, if the Prophet were not well advised, to make use of a similitude? but
tell me rather, if godly men be not well advised, to make use of godliness?
tell me if wicked men, be not ill advised, to make account of vanities? Oh!
tell me, if the Serpent be not a Devil: the flesh a traitor: the world, an
Impostour: that for pleasures of sin, not worth the speaking of; would make
us to forfeit this unspeakeable happiness.

But now to consider it in Allegory; what may we think, is meant by this
tree? Is it not the tree, figured by the tree of life, in the Garden of Eden?
And what by this planting? our ingraffing into Christ. And what by this waters
side? the water that was shed out of Christ's side. And what by this fruit? our
everlasting happiness. And what by these leafes? the leaf of a good
conscience; and the leaf of a good fame. For a good conscience never withers;
but accompanies a godly man, to another world: and a good fame never withers;
but in memoria aeterna erit justus. And what by the time? when time is no more.
For time is but the measure of motion and mutation; but happiness has nothing
to do with these; and therefore nothing to do with time; her time is eternity.

And indeed, is it not strange, that men who have out lived yesterday; should
think there can be happiness where there is time? For, let the day past, be
spent in all the pleasures of the world; yet what is yesterday to us to day?
and what will to day, be to us to morrow? and so, the days of happiness,
should come at last, to be all lost; and be no more to us, than if they never
had been ours. Wherein true happiness, to day is to us, as it was yesterday;
and to morrow will be as it is to day; and what we are now, we shall be for
ever. Time and happiness are things incompatible: For, happiness is
permanent; time always in mutation: for, what is time, but a very changeling;
or rather, makes very changelings of us? It is long of time, that we continue
not long in one state; it is always bringing some new thing; but ever carries
away more of the old; it runs over all things, but never tarries with any;
we cannot see it, till it be gone out of sight; and by this only, we find it
has been here, because we find not that here, which has been. The
happiness of this life, is like Iosepht coat, party colored, to express
variableness; a mixture of weal and woe; but turns at last, all to a stain;
and such happiness, wicked men may have: the true happiness, is in a long
white roabe; long, for durablenesse; and white, for joyfulnesse; and this
keeps the color still; and is only to be had in Heaven: For there this
changeling time, shall not be suffered, to come; to set diversity of colors
upon our roabe of happiness.

And now, if any man ask for happiness, here it is: it grows upon the tree
of godliness: but though it have its beginning, and, as it were, its blooming,
in this life: yet it comes not to its growth, till another life; this present
world, is too cold a climate, to bring it to ripeness; it must have the Sun
to shine more directly upon it; we have here Spem Rei; but shall not have Rem
spei; till we come to see the blessed face of God: For, this indeed, is the
true Sun, that only can bring the fruit of this tree, to its full maturity.

But is not this hard dealing in the Prophet; to make us promise, of a present
possession of blessedness; and now turn us off, with little more, than a bare
reversion? Will he be so a Prophet, as that he will be no more than a Prophet;
tell us only of things to come; and not keep his word, in things present? It
was his saying at the very first, that a godly man is blessed: and seeing he
thought good, to say it then; we look he should make it good, and show it
now: For, as yet, there appears but little, to make it appear, that the godly
are in this life, any more blessed, than the wicked: and if any advantage be;
it seems to most men, to be of the wickeds side. But is not this rather, to
deal hardly with the Prophet? to put him to his proofs, for every word he
speaks? as though the word of a Prophet, were not of it self, an authority
sufficient, to command our assent? but since we are so hard of belief; at
least, Propter durtiiem cordis; let it be considered; that there is great
difference, between having of blessings; and being blessed. A wicked man may
have many, perhaps, very many blessings; and yet, it shall never be truly said
of him, that he is blessed: For who doubts, but that strength and beauty;
riches and honors, are blessings and the good gifts of God: and all these, and
many more than these, a man may have; and yet walk in the counsel of the
ungodly; and stand in the way of sinners; and sit in the chair of scorners;
and he that does such things, the Prophet would have us know; though he be as
strong as Sampson; though as beautiful as Absalon; though as rich as Solomon;
though as full of blessings, as the world can make him; yet he cannot be
blessed. Such things may entitle men, Benedicti, perhaps; but not Beati; or if
Beati; it is but falso clamore; the true blessedness, is no where found
growing; nor can any where be made to grow, but only upon this tree of
godliness. And therefore, you shall never hear any such word to come from
David; as to say, blessed are the rich; or blessed are the honorable, and
great men of the world; but all his blessedness, is ever with some relation or
other, unto godliness. Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven: here
godliness is made legitimate. Blessed is he, whom the Lord chasteneth: here
godliness, is set to School. Blessed are they who walk in the Law of Lord:
here godliness, is at its exercise; Blessed is the man that considers the
poor: here godliness is making a purchase. Blessed is he, that puts his
trust in the Lord: here godliness, is taken sanctuary: and so godliness ever,
in one kind or other; or blessedness never, in any kind whatsoever: Not all
the smithes of Aegipt: not all the temporal blessings, of the world, will
serve the turn: Godliness must turn the key; or the door of blessedness; The
gate, for the King of glory to enter, will never be opened.

And as a man may have many blessings; and yet not be blessed: so, he may want
many blessings; and nevertheless, be perfectly blessed. He may want, the
riches of worldly pomp; and yet be blessed: For Blessed are the poor in
spirit; and this was David's case with Michol. He may want a quiet life; and yet
be blessed; for Blessed are they, that are persecuted for righteousness sake:
and this was David's case, with Saul: He may want good report; and yet be
blessed; For blessed are ye, when men rail upon you, and revile you; and this
was David's case with Shimei. But is not this strange, that a man should want,
and yet be perfect? should want blessings, and yet be perfectly blessed?
Indeed, no more strange, than that Adam should loose one of his ribs, and yet
continue a perfect body still. For these temporal blessings, are to a godly
man, as the ribbe was to Adam, of which Eve was made; not superfluous to him,
when he had it; nor making him defective, when he wanted it: and so are all
temporal blessings; not superfluous to a godly man, to have them, because he
can make good use of having them: Nor making him defective to want them;
because he can make good use of wanting them. And this, perhaps, might make St.
Paul to say, I can want; and I can abound; as much as to say, I can have a
ribbe more, or a rib less; and yet in both estates continue perfect still.

But is it not then, that we are all this while mistakenin blessedness? and
that, David has set a gloss upon it, to make us esteem more highly of it,
than there is cause? seeing Christ who knew blessedness better than David;
proclaims it openly, that they are blessed, that mourn: and surely; mourning
can make but an untoward blessedness. For what is mourning, but a deploring of
misery? That to say, they are blessed that mourn; is all one, as to say; They
are blessed, that are miserable: and so, blessedness, no such goodly thing, as
David goes about to make us think it. But it is not, that we mistake
blessedness; the mistaking is, in mistaking Christ's speaking of blessedness:
For Christ says not, They are blessed that mourn: because they mourn; but
because they shall be comforted. The blessedness consists in the comforting,
not in the mourning: and not all neither that mourn shall be comfortted; for
then, the damned in hell; and even the devil himself, then whom there is not
a greater mourner; should come at last; (as some have erred to think) to have
their shares in comfort. But their mourning, is in despair, and upon wrong
causes; They only shall be comforted, that mourn upon just cause, and that in
hope: and such are only the Saints on earth; who mourn for the Bride-groomes
departing from them; and cry with St. Paul: I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ. Indeed comforting, is to mourning, a plain relative; and
cannot be without it: for, where no mourning is; there can be no comforting:
for what is comforting, but a wiping away of tears from the eyes: and how can
tears be wiped away, if there be no tears to wipe away? and seeing, the holy
Ghost (the author of all blessedness) is the Comforter; and no comforting,
where no mourning: It follows, that where no mourning, no holy Ghost; and
where no holy Ghost, no blessedness. Therefore, Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted. And so, between Christ and David; there will be
found, but this difference: that David seems to consider godliness, as a
Iubilee; and therefore expresses it, by delighting in the Law of God; and
exercising in it: but Christ seems to consider it as a funeral; and therefore
expresses it by mourning; as by which, a godly man, is crucified to the world;
and the world to him. And indeed, this Iubilee, and this funeral; must both
meet, in a godly man; or there will not be a godliness, that can produce a
blessedness: but where these two meet, and kiss each other; there the
delighting in the Law of God; will cause a mourning for our sins; and the
mourning for our sins, will cause a joy in the holy Ghost; that we may be
confident to say, we have a comfortable blessedness; seeing we have the
blessing of the holy Ghost, the comforter. And now, if any man slight this joy,
as not deserving the name of blessedness; Is it not, because he feels it not
in himself? for without being felt; it is not possible, to be understood: but
he that feels it, and understands it; will find, this joy, to be that
Jewel, which the wise Merchant sold all that he had, to buy: For what availes
it a man, to enjoy the whole world, and to want this joy? For, this joy is not
an influence from the stars: which yet can do great wonders, for breeding
joy in the world: but it is an influence, from that spirit, which moved upon
the waters, before the stars were made; and is only able still, to move upon
the waters, and to remove the waters of a weeping soul. It is a joy, begotten
in our hearts, by motion of the holy Ghost; which moving upon the waters, of a
true repentance; works in us the joy of this assurance; that we have an
Advocate and Intercessour for us, with God the father. Which joy, was thought
so great, when time was; that no Messenger, was thought fit, to bring the news
of it; but an Angel from heaven. Behold I bring you tidings of great joy: and
great indeed it must needs be, which an Angel calls great: that scarcely would
call the whole earth, great: and seeing St. Paul exhorts us, to Rejoice
evermore: we may know the joy, to be exceeding great, that can make us able, to
hold out rejoicing, so long together; in all tempests and calmes; in all
actions and passions; joy enough to maintain a feast of rejoicing, all our
life long. And then, if this joy, can make a blessedness: (as certainly a
greater cannot be had on earth) and none partakers of it, but the godly; we
must needs confess, the Prophet had great reason to make it his challenge;
and that in the present Tense: A godly man is blessed.

And will not this blessedness appear yet plainer; if we consider the diverse
sorts of blessedness? For, there is a blessedness of the Law; and this was
delivered by Moses: who delivering the Law, but in litera; delivers a
blessedness, but in cortice: Blessed shall thou be in the field: and blessed
in the City: blessed shall be the fruit of thy body; and the fruit of thy
cattle etc. There is a blessedness of Grace; and this was delivered by Aaron;
who being the Minister of our atonement with God, delivers a blessedness, in
this atonement: The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; The Lord make his face to
shine upon thee, and be merciful unto thee: The Lord lift his countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace. And there is a blessedness of Glory; and this was
delivered by Christ; who being himself, the perfection of blessedness;
delivers a blessedness in perfection: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
a Kingdom prepared for you. And now, that we have these diverse sorts of
blessedness, laid out before us; which of them, may we think, was thought
upon by David; in saying, Blessed is the man? Not Moses his blessedness; for
that is too imperfect: nor yet Christ's blessedness; for that is too
consummate; Moses his blessedness is imperfect: For, Gold (one of the best, of
his blessings) has commonly proved, but aurum Tolos^^^m; ominous to the
owners; and apt to bring them, to utter ruin; at most to blessedness it has
never been but neutrall: only as a cipher in Arithmeticke; no value. but from
the placing it; for if it be placed in a godly hand; it serves in subsidium
virtutis; and may prove a means, for augmentation of blessedness: but if it
fall to be the lot of the wicked; it is but incontivum vitiorum; and serves but
in majorem d^^nationem; for an augmentation of misery. And as Moses his
blessedness, is too imperfect: so Christ's blessedness, is too consummate; for
the blessed face of God, (in which, that blessedness chiefly consists) is no
fit object for corruptible eyes: God must make himself capabilte, which now he
is not; and us, capaces, which now we are not; before we can arrive at the
haven of that blessedness. And so, Moses his blessedness being suspended; and
Christ's blessedness, not yet to be expected: what remains, but that we lay hold
on Aarons blessedness; and this, indeed, we shall find to sympathize, and
suite well, with this of David: For, Aarons blessedness, is a confidence in
Gods mercy, for remission of sins; and a peace of conscience, in being at
peace with God, in Christ. And it is no wrong to Aarons peace, to add, in
Christ; for though Aaron express it not, as speaking it, but in figure: yet
we may well think, he understands it, as meaning it in substance, seeing no
peace, without Christ, is safe unto us; all peace without him, is but dangerous
security: For, Christus est pax nostra: he only is our peace; and this peace,
he has ever used, as his proper good: It was the Present, he brought the
Apostles, at his coming from Hell; Peace be unto you; and it was the legacy,
he left the Apostles, at his going to Heaven: My peace I leave with you; this
peace made Job upon the dunghill, blessed; and the want of this peace, made
Saul upon his throne, miserable: this peace the world cannot give; and the
wicked cannot have here; for, there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord.
And now, if any man slight this peace; as not thinking it to deserve the title
of blessedness: Is it not, because he has no feeling of it, in himself? For,
not being felt, it can never be understood; but he that feels, and
understands it; will find this peace, to be that purchase, which Christ so
dearly bought for us, with his precious blood; and is that in substance, which
Aarons peace was but in figure; for, to this peace, it is not enough, to have a
Nil conscire sibi, a clear conscience in us: (seeing St. Paul knew nothing by
himself; yet was not thereby justified) but we are justified by faith in
Christ: and thus justified, we have peace with God; and being at peace with
God; we have peace of conscience within our selves. And then, if this peace can
make a blessedness: (as certainly a greater cannot be in earthly Tabernacles)
and none partakers of it, but the godly; we may speak it as well, from Paul,
as from David or Aaron; and so Priest and Prophet; Apostle and all, agree in
this, A godly man is blessed.

And if we take another way to go; will it not come to all one journies end?
only, as having now taken the Prophets words, in this manner: A godly man is
blessed: And he shall be like a tree. There have appeared, two distinct
blessednesses: one, present; and another, future; so, if we take the words in
this manner: (as some will have it) A godly man is blessed; For, he shall be
like a tree; there will then appear, but one maine blessedness; the present
being only a hope of the future; and yet thus, it shall still be justly said, A
godly man is blessed. For, this hope is not wavering, that may make ashamed;
seeing it has Faith to guard it; and Patience, to wait upon it: but it is the
ankor of the soul; that keeps it upright, in all tempests of temptations. And
if we pass from the hope it self; to that which is hoped for; Oh then, how
transcendent a blessedness will be found in hope? For, is it not an armor of
steel, against all blows of Fortune, and wrackes of time that I have hope
continually to stand prompting me with this? Durate, and vosmet rebus servate
seeundis: Be constant to the end; and be assured, it will not be long, ere thou
shall reign with Christ? Is it not a shield of Brass against all the terrors
of death and hell; that through hope, I can say with Job, I know that my
Redeemer lives; and though that worms destroy this body; yet I shall one day
see God in my flesh? but most of all, is it not a Rock of defense, against all
afflictions, in body or goods; against all disgraces, in fame or fortunes; that
with St. Paul, I can say in hope; There is a Crown of Righteousness laid up
for me, which the just Judge will give me at the last day? And now, if any
man slight this hope, as thinking it not worthy the name of a blessedness; is it
not, because he has no feeling of it in himself? for, not being felt, it
cannot be understood: but he that feels and understands it, shall find that
this hope is the true Cordial of a fainting soul; as David says I had
fainted, if I had not hoped to see the goodness of the Lord, in the Land of
the living. And then, if such a cordial it be; as such a cordial, most
certainly it is; and none, partakers of it, but the godly; we may justly
conclude, the Prophet had just cause to make it his conclusion: A godly man is
blessed.

And yet more expressly to show the dignity of a godly man's blessedness; we may
observe, that as Ratione personaram; God is said to be, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac. and the God of Jacob: so Ratione rerum: he is said by St.
Paul; to be the God of joy, the God of peace, the God of hope: that we cannot
think much, to have a blessedness, made us up of those things, of which St.
Paul thinks not much, to make up, God himself a Title.

The joy, which Abraham took, when his sacrificed son Isaac, was restored to
him alive; was no doubt a wonderful joy, yet but a type of ours; that Christ,
the true Isaac; is restored to us alive, by his rising again. The peace of
mind, which Simeon felt, when he bare the Babe Jesus, carnally in his arms;
was, no doubt, a blessed peace; yet but an inchoation of ours, who bear the
man Christ Jesus (our full reconcilement) spiritually in our hearts. The hope
which Jacob had, to enjoy the beautiful Rachel, was a comfortable hope; yet
but a shadow of ours; who hope to enjoy the transcendent beauty, of the
blessed face of God, in the Kingdom of heaven. And shall not the truth of joy,
make us more blessed, than the type made Abraham? shall not the consummation of
peace, make us more blessed, than the inchoation made Simeon? shall not the
substance hoped for, make us more blessed than the shadow made Jacob! Oh then
the happiness of a godly man; in whom these blessings are all united: which
singly enjoyed, made such mirrours of blessedness! A joy in the holy Ghost;
which no temptation of satan can dismay: A peace of conscience, which no
worldly tumult can disturb: A hope of heaven, which no delay of expectation
can discourage: and now let Solomon tell us, if this be not a wreath of three,
that far exceeds his threefold cord, and can never be broken? And if again;
to this wreath of three, we add a fourth; (as the Prophet is going about to
do) the blessedness of prosperity: will it not then, be a blessedness with
admiration; and a wreathe of four, that we can never say, O terque quaterque
beatus; so justly of any thing under heaven, as of a godly man! that not only
we may proclaim it in Gath, and publish it in Ascalon, A godly man is
blessed: but with the asseveration of Isaac, in blessing Jacob; even to Esaus
face; redouble it, in the ears of all the wicked; A godly man is blessed; yea,
and he shall be blessed.

And now, that we have found out a godly man, in Hypothesi: where may we look
to find him out in Thesi? not amongst the heathen Philosophers: for their
peace of conscience, was only Nil conscire sibi: They knew nothing of any
reconcilement with God, in Christ: not amongst the Turkish Musulmans; for they
believe no holy Ghost; and therefore can have no joy in the holy Ghost; not
amongst the Jewish Sadduces; for they deny the resurrection: and therefore can
have no hope of heaven. And where then? only amongst the Christian believers;
for in them only, is found this wreath of four: which though singly perhaps
they may; yet joined together, they can never be broken: that if a Philosopher
thought it cause enough, to cry out in exultation, (...): for finding out the
Quadrature of a circle in Geometry: we much more justly: may think it cause
enough, in exultation to cry out, (...): for finding out this Quadrature of
blessedness in Christianity.

The Prophet might well rest now in his similitude: as containing sufficiently,
a godly man's happiness: but he seems to be afraid, it is not capacious
enough; and therefore pieceth it out, with a blessedness, of another making:
And what soever he does, it shall prosper. A blessedness, much like the Manna
in the wilderness; that fits the relish of all tastes: for who, but will
easily admit, prosperity indeed, to be a blessedness? and he seems, to have
provided it, specially for the meaner capacities; such as are not well able to
apprehend the former, as being too spiritual; but this is a blessedness, so
visible to be seen; so palpable to be, felt; that even the veriest worldling
that is, cannot choose but acknowledge it: Yet we may perceave, the Prophet
brings it in; but as a fagge end of blessedness; as choosing rather to add a
course piece; then that it should be said, he had made it too little.

But does not the Prophets adding of this piece; make the Prophet himself
defective? Does he not by showing the blessedness to be the more: show his own
judgment to be the less? For if this were true; there should not be a godly
man to be found, in the whole world. For, are not all men generally subject to
crosses? some in body; some in goods: some by enemies; some by friends; some in
all; but all in some? all this is true; and yet the Prophet nevertheless says
true: for crosses, are our sufferings, not our doings: the adversity of a godly
man, in that he suffers; is no contradiction of prosperity, in that he does:
and yet even crosses and sufferings, and all; as St. Paul says; shall be made
useful and prosperous to the godly. For, though Martyrs, cannot well be said,
to prosper in their suffering; because it is grievous; yet they are truly said
to prosper, by their suffering; because it is glorious; though Lazarus did not
prosper in his suffering, because it brought him, but to Dives gate; yet he
truly prospered, by his suffering, because it brought him, into Abraham's
bosom.

But may not the Prophet preach this doctrine long enough, before he meet with
an auditory, that will believe him? Godliness to be a means of prospering? a
stranger Paradoxe was never held. It is a greater miracle, for men to draw
prospering out of godliness, than for Moses to draw water out of rocks.
Probitas laudatur and alget: godliness may have the worlds good word; but he
that uses it, shall die a beggar. Thus the wicked, through the Prophets sides,
stand goaring and galling the goodness of God; and never remember, or never
regard the saying of St. Peter, that godliness has the promise, both of this
life, and of the life to come. But most of all they insult upon the Prophet, as
thinking they can take him tripping in his words; and can prove him manifestly
in two tales: For, that which he says here of the godly, he affirms the
very same, in another place, of the wicked; Their ways always prosper: they
are not in trouble like other men; they have more than their hearts can wish.
And is it possible, the Prophet should ever be able, to answer this? Can these
words of his, be ever possibly reconciled? Indeed, with a word: For it is but
mistaking a word; (taking the present Tense, for the future) that makes all
this difference, it is but breaking time, that makes this discord: keep time
with the Prophet, and all will go well: for he says not, of a godly man, all
his ways do prosper; but they shall prosper; he meddles not, with the present
Tense; nor with the prosperity of the present Tense; he leaves that for the
wicked to make merry with: for it is a prosperity, not worth the envying: for,
who would envy Jonas his Gourd, that is gone in a night? The present Tense of
this life, cannot make a prosperity, that is worth the having: It is the future
Tense, must do it: for this is the lasting Tense; and though it show not all
his wares at first, as the present Tense does; you cannot see yet, what it will
prove; yet give it time; let things come to a ripeness; and you shall find it
true in the end; that Whatsoever a godly man does; it shall prosper. And in
this Tense, and in this sense it is, that the Prophet speaks of the prosperity
of the godly; but if he come to speak of the wicked in this Tense; he then
alters his Key; he speaks in another tune; Thou shall look after his place,
and it shall not be found.

Or may we not, perhaps, reconcile the Prophets words as well, if we only say,
that in speaking of the prosperity of the wicked, loquitur ut vulgus; and as it
is in appearance, because in the eye of the world, it seems to be so: but when
he speaks of the prosperity of the godly; loquitur ut veritas; because it is in
truth, and really so. The Prophet, we may perceive, makes this account; that
nothing can be truly said to prosper; which has not a prosperous ending; but
if it have a prosperous end, it may truly then be said to prosper. And it is
a very just account; for else we might say, that a cup of cold water, prospers
in a Feavour; because it cooles and eases for the present; though it infinitely
increase the burning afterward. And we could not say, that a sovereign
medicine prospers in a sore; because it aches and pains us for a while; though
afterward it work a perfect cure. And now bring the wicked, and the godly to
the try all of this account; and you shall find it true, that the wicked never
prosper; and that the godly prosper always. Did Ahab prosper in seeking
Naboths vineyard? he got indeed the vineyard; but the dogs licked up his
blood. Did Judas prossper, in betraying his Master? he got indeed the thirty
pieces of silver; but his bowels would not tarry in his belly after he had done
it. And so the most that can be said, of the prosperity of the wicked, is but
this; that they have a prosperity indeed; but it is a tragical one; begins
in jollity, and has some mirth for a while; but ends at last, in blood and
death. And such it seems the Prophet means, is the prosperity of the wicked;
if he mean not rather, that a prosperity it seems, but is not: For, the
wicked may have children, like Olive branches round about their Table; and in
this may seem to prosper; but yet they do not; and Job tells why; For their
children are to the sword; and shall be buried in death. They may heap up
treasure, and flow in wealth; and in this may seem to prosper: but yet they
do not; and Solomon gives the reason; For they know not who shall gather it;
themselves, they are sure, shall carry away nothing. They may rise in honors,
and be set aloft; and in this may seem to prosper; but yet they do not; and
David shows the cause; For they are set in slippery places; and their ending
commonly falls out in falling: And this is not only to be observed in single
persons; but even in whole Families: a generation or two may flourish and hold
their heads high; and in this may seem to prosper; but yet they do not; for
of this, is grown a Proverb; Non gaudet tertius baeres; The third generation
paies for all. So it is true here, which Abner said to Ioab, There is
bitterness in the end. But with the godly, it is clean otherwise: For many
are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. So
here is prosperity in the ending yet. They may sow in tears, but they shall
reap in joy; prosperity in the end still. They may go forth weeping, and
carrying precious seed with them; but they shall return rejoicing, and bring
their sheaves with them: still prosperity in the end. Daniel may be cast into
the Lions den; but he shall come forth untouched; his danger shall be his
glory. Jonas may be swallowed up of a Whale; but he shall be cast up safe on
shore; his destruction shall be his safety. Job may have his children slain;
his goods taken from him; and his body afflicted; but his children shall be
restored, his goods doubled, and his life trebled. And to make short, the
Prophet in another place, makes it a rule of infallibility: Mark the upright
man; and behold the perfect man; for the end of that man, is peace. And so it
is verified here, which is said by the Prophet; Sorrow may be over night, but
joy com meth in the morning. And this again, is another advantage of the
prosperity of the godly; that their sorrow comes but over night, when they may
sleep it out, and pass it over; but their joy comes in the morning; when
they come fresh unto it; and have the whole day before them to enjoy it.

And now, if we ask the Prophet, what reason he can give, of this prospering
of the godly; Do not his words themselves answer for him; and carry in them,
the very reason of it? For in saying, Whatsoever he does; he seems to intend a
godly man's service: and in saying, shall prosper: he seems to intimate Gods
wages: and if this be so: then is the prospering as sure as check: for as God
is a Lord, that looks his servants should do their work; so he is a master,
that never fails to pay his servants their wages. And then, if blessedness be
Gods wages; and godliness, the man's service; what is this, but (...): the very
thing the Prophet takes upon him to demonstrate; A godly man is blessed?

And here now, we may stand and admire the great bounty of God: and consider,
how good a service, it is to serve him: and what great wages he gives his
servants; for the meanest of them all, may reckon upon this: that All he does
shall prosper: The wages is not stinted by the Master, but by the servant; that
if he have not prosperity enough, he may think himself, that would be
idle; and do no more, for All he does shall prosper. But nothing, but what he
does; the Prophet promises no further: for if he do nothing, he must look
for no prospering. But what? have good thoughts then; and good words; no
promise of prospering? If they followed by doing; then are they Praeviae
actiones: and as part of the doing, shall have their reward: Otherwise, they
are but abortives, and come not to life, to give them capacity: for the life of
words, and thoughts, is actuated by the acting. And yet even thus; the service
is so small; the wages so great; that if it were told us by any, but by a
Prophet; or told us of any, but of God; we might justly doubt it; but hearing
it, from such a Reporter; and of such a Master; if we should doubt it now; it
might justly be said unto us; what doubt ye of; O ye of little faith? Yet it
must be observed here, though we call it, wages; that yet it is not, so much
earned, as given; being more of favor, than of Merit; and cannot be exacted,
though it may be expected: For, though the wages of sin be death; yet we
cannot properly say, the wages of godliness is life: the Antithesis has not
place; because our godliness has not weight; but eternal life, is the gift
of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And now, if we should ask the world, what it says to all this? whether it
think not these blessings, to be far more worth, than all their gilded
vanities? what do we think, would the world answer to such a question? We may
be sure, the world would answer thus: it likes the blessinge well, and thinks
them all good; but one circumstance in them, it does not like; that they are
all in the future; none in the present: all birds in the bush, none in the
hand: never a bird in the hand amongst them all: Blessed are they that mourn;
for they (are not, but) shall be comforted. The tree is planted by the waters
side; but bears no fruit yet; but will do. A godly man's actions (do not
prosper; but they) shall prosper. This delay the world does not like; it cannot
away with these future Tenses; so much talking of what shall be; and nothing of
what is: and therefore they have a question to ask too; the same which the
Disciples asked Christ: But when shall these things be? For, if the
blessedness be long a coming; it can then come but to this; that it may be
said; A godly man shall be blessed, but is miserable; and miserable too, for
God knows how long. Therefore give us the present, say they; and (as Christ
also seems to teach us) let Hereafter shift for it self. This indeed, is the
Hinge, the world still turns upon; and it is a hard matter, to take it off.
But may we not answer these men; as Christ answered his Disciples; Non est
vestrum; nosse tempora: It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which
God has kept in his own hand? It may suffice you to know, that these things
shall be; when they shall be; is more than the portion of your knowledge comes
to. It is indeed an earthly question; and moved only by such, of whom it is
said, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall return: For, when we move such
questions, we return to earth: for if we staid with God; we should know, that
as the darkness and the light, is all alike to him; so to him, the Future and
the Present is all one; that we may marvel, what Saint Peter meant to say; A
thousand years, with God are as a day; as though there were a proportion
between eternity and time: when Esaias speaks it out plainly; All Nations are to
God as nothing; and put in the balance, are less than nothing; and we may
say as well; All time, is to him as nothing; and put in the balance with
Eternity, is less than nothing. And therefore, when we meet with these words
(Will be, and Shall be) in relation to God; we may take them rather, as words
of order, than of time: as in order of Nature, the tree must first be planted,
before it can bring forth fruit: a deed must be done, before it can be
rewarded; and yet even this order also, is in Gods disposing; either to divert
it; or wholly to reverse it, at his own pleasure. As in the Garden of Eden;
there was bearing of fruit, as soon as planting of trees; this was a diverting
of order. But when God said; Esau have I hated; and loved Jacob; before they
had done either good or evil; here was a prospering before a doing; and we may
say, a bearing of fruit, before a planting the tree; and this was an absolute
reversing of order. The world therefore must take notice, that Will be, with
God, is as much, as with men, it is: and when he says, it Shall be; it is as
good, as if it were already. We all know, there is to be dies retributionis; a
day of account; and this day to be, God knows how soon; sooner, perhaps, than
the world thinks; but certainly sooner, than the world would have it; and we
are sure, that this Will be, and Shall be; shall not exceed that day: but how
much it shall be sooner (as oftentimes much sooner; and always to the godly;
in whose spirits, there is an influence of the future in the present; by the
presence of that spirit, with whom the future is present) we must leave to God;
in whoseonly hand it is, to dispose of all things, both for time and order.

But lest the godly should be slighted, as men only of expectation; and wholly
excluded from any part of blessedness in present; let it be remembered, what
Gods promise to the godly, is; I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; and
if never leave us, then always with us; and so indeed, does Christ expound
it; And lo, I am with you always to the end of the world. And least his
presence should be thought, to serve for directing only, and not as well for
comforting; hear him in this also: And I will send you another Comforter; but
Christ could not send another comforter, if he were not himself a Comforter
first. And may it not then be truly said of the godly; Nullum numen abest;
there is not a person in the whole Deity, but is present with them: And can
blessedness be absent, where the whole Deity is present? and yet more
mediately, to show Gods care over them; he gives his Angels charge over them,
to keep them in all their ways; where the wicked in the mean time, as things
forlorn, have neither part nor portion, in any of these promises. It was not
to the wicked, that God said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; it was
not to the wicked that Christ said; And lo, I am with you always to the worlds
end; it was not to the wicked, that Christ promised, to send another comforter:
It was not to the wicked, that God promised a guard of Angels; and may it not
then be truly said of the wicked: Nullum numen adest; there is not a person in
the whole Deity; there is not an Angel in the whole Quire of Heaven, that is
present with them? And what is then the present possession, they so much stand
upon; and so much boast of? Alas poor wretches! what is it, but as a dream;
as Esaias says; They dream they are full; and when they awake, Behold, their
soul is empty; What is it, but as a mist upon their souls, that makes them,
as Saint John speaks, to think they are rich and fair, and strong; when yet
they are poor, and naked, and miserable. For, what is their present
possession, but possession of the present? and what is the present, but a
transient thing; a thing next to nothing; no sooner begun, but ended; that
before you can say, it is; it is not; the future has taken its place, and put
it from being. And say, we allow them, to take the whole extent of their
present life, for the latitude of their present possession; yet what is all
this latitude, but a breadth made up, of narrow minutes, which being
impossible, they should be all, one like to another; makes it impossible, they
should make a blessedness, that can be certain. Where the blessedness of the
godly is more certain, than all the assurances of the world can make it. For
what are the greatest assurances of all worldly things? Do we not count our
selves sure, if we have a good man's word? and here we have the Word of God: so
sure a word, that heaven and earth shall fail; but his word shall never fail.
And if his Word will not be taken; have we not then, a sufficient man's bond,
the bond of the man Christ Jesus; and that in the highest kind of obligation,
bound body for body? And if bond be thought too little; have we not then a good
pawn besides? Arrham Spiritus Sancti; a pawn and pledge, of the holy Spirit?
and lest there should be defect, for want of witnesses; have we not a whole
army of Martyrs; and Confessors innumerable? that unless the Apostles and
Martyrs, should all prove false witnesses; unless the pawn of the Spirit,
should prove a counterfeit; unless the Obligee Christ Jesus, should prove non
solvent; unless God himself, should prove no man of his word: (all which are
far greater impossibilities, than that the sky should fall) it is
impossible, that the hope of the godly should be frustrate: or, that these
blessings should not be accomplished to them, in the fullest measure. And now,
let the world it self judge; if the Prophet had not all the reason of the
world, to make it his challenge against the world; that A godly man is blessed.

But now that the world may seem to be satisfied, for the security; Now comes
in the flesh, with her objection: these blessings indeed, are sensible to the
soul, but insensible to the body; and seeing a man is a compound thing,
consisting of a body and a soul; how can these blessings, which reach but
only to the soul, make more to be said, than this? A godly man, is blessed
in soul, but is miserable in body? and why then, should the Prophet shuffle
them together; and as if the body were no body, say Blessed is the man? But is
it not, that Animus cuiusque is est quisque? and when the Progeny of Jacob went
down into Egypt; is it not said, that so many souls went down, without
making reckoning of their bodies? and did not Christ say, to the Thief on the
Cross; This day, thou shall be with me in Paradise; which yet was meant, but
only of his soul? And why then, should not the Prophet, though but in respect
of these blessings, say Blessed is the man? The body indeed in this life, is
subject to corruption; and as long as it is so, it is not in it self; nor can
be, of it self, capeable of blessedness: all the blessedness it has, or
can have; it must have from the participation, it has with the soul; and from
the influence, it receives from the soul: which influence is so strong; which
participation, so powerful; that it even confounds the distinction, of body
and soul; and makes them considered but as one entire thing; that even heathen
capacities could apprehend, how the body being In equuleo; upon the rack;
might yet by the strength of this participation, be made able to say, Quam
suave est hoc? and therefore, the Prophet can never be justly blamed, for
saying; (as in this, and many other respects, he may and must say,) A godly man
is blessed.

Though this Psalm be most properly understood, of a godly man; yet there are
some, will needs have it, primarily to be meant of the man Christ Jesus; and
there may be reasons found, to make probable their opinion. For, it is most
true indeed of Christ, that he prospered in all he did. He prospered, in his
mothers womb: for at the salutation of the Virgin Mary; the babe sprang in the
womb of Elizabeth: He prospered at his birth; for he was presently adored, of
the wise men of the East: he prospered in his infancy; for he grew in favor,
with God and men: he prospered in his baptism: for There came a voice from
heaven; This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. He prospered
in his temptations, in the wilderness; for he triumphed over satan; and the
Angels ministered unto him. He prospered in his death; for he was manifested by
miracles, to be the Son of God. He prospered in the grave; for God suffered
not his holy One, to see corruption. He prospered in his rising; for He
ascended into heaven. He prospered in ascending: for; He sits at the right
hand of God, in the glory of his Father. And thus also shall a godly man, as
ingrafted into Christ; be carried with him, through the like passages: he shall
prosper in temptations: for God will give the issue, with the temptation. He
shall prosper in hunger; For he shall be fed with bread from heaven. He shall
prosper in mourning; for he shall receive comfort. He shall prosper in
sickness: for God himself will make his bed, and lay him at ease. He shall
prosper in death; for he shall rest from his labors, and his works shall
follow him. He shall prosper in the grave: for he shall sleep in quiet; till
God awake him, and give him light. He shall prosper in his Resurrection; For
he shall meet Christ in the air; and be carried with him, into his Kingdom
of Glory.

And now it may be time, both for the Prophet and us, to rest a while; and take
breath: for of us, it may be said; that we have now passed over the Mount
Gerizzim; and are come to the foot of the Mount Ebal; for we are entering upon
his second proposition; which is his Onus or burden for the wicked; and of the
Prophet it may be said; that he has now finished, his second prize; and has
put a godly man in quiet possession of his blessedness; and is now entering the
Lysts again, to make good his second challenge; The wicked are not so.

Where first, we may observe, that the Prophet observes here, a different
course, in handling of this proposition; from that he held in handling the
former: For there, he only described a godly man; but named him not: here, he
only names the wicked, but describes them not: and indeed, it needed not; For
Rectum est index sui and obliqui; by telling what a godly man is; he tells, by
virtue of the Law of contraries, what the wicked are; for if that be affirmed
of a wicked man, which was denied of a godly; and that denied, which was
affirmed; the description is made ready to your hand: and you have him
deciphered in his fullness. And yet we may take notice of a further reason; for
godliness is subject to many falsifications; it may suffer much allay, by
mixture of base metals; and then, there is need of a touchstone, to try
whether it be right, or no: many colors may be laid upon wickedness, to make
it seem godliness; as satan can transform himself, into an Angel of light;
and then there is need of marks, to know whether it be a good Angel; whether
it be true godliness or no: but in the case of wickedness, it is not so; there
is no need of any such marks; for there cannot a worse vizard be put upon
wickedness, than its own face; there is no baser metal to be mingled with
it, and though a wicked man will be counterfaiting, to be godly; yet it was
never known, that a godly man would counterfeit, to be wicked: and therefore
the Prophet, who is no waster of words in vain; would not give marks, where
there needed none; but left wickedness to be known, by its own ill face;
which is seen plain enough, by the Law of contraries.

And now, what means the Prophet by saying; The wicked are not so? means he
not, they are like a Tree? and what care the wicked, whether they be like a
Tree, or no: as long, as they may be like to something else, as well to be
liked as a Tree? as to be like a Flower; or to be like the Grass; or like a
stone: for they may be so, though they be not so; they may be like these;
though they be not like that; and any of these, will serve their turn, and
please them as well, as to be like a Tree. This indeed might be their hope, if
the Prophet should stay here; but he quickly takes them off, from this hope:
for he finds he cannot make use of the Law of contraries here, as he did
before; though the Negation of godliness, might well enough express the
nature of wickedness; yet the Negation of blessedness of the godly, is no
sufficient expressing of the misery of the wicked: but as their misery is a
positive thing; so it must have a positive expressing; It is not enough to say,
They are not like a Tree; but he must tell what they are like: and he cannot
say, They are like a flower, for a flower, when time serves, is the prime
beauty of the earth; where wickedness is never but deformity: Nor he cannot
say, they are like to grass, for the grass is thought a fit similitude, as
well for the godly, as the wicked; as it is said, All flesh is grass: Nor he
cannot say, They are like a stone: for a stone, is serviceable for many
excellent uses, and especially for building up; where wickedness can serve for
nothing, but destroying and pulling down; and to what then, can he say, they
are like? To speak it at once, (as Ioab struck Amasa) and not to speak
again; he may justly say, They are like to chafe; for chafe, as fully
expresses the misery of the wicked; as a tree expressed the blessedness of
the godly; for though the likening them, to so light a thing as chafe, may
seem to import but a light misery; yet being well weighed, it will appear,
that though he say not, in plain terms, A wicked man is miserable; yet by
saying, he is like to chafe, he intimates more misery, than the word
miserable is capeaable off.

But may we not make a stand here, and question the Prophet, about his
similitude? for look upon the wicked; do they look like chafe? One would
think them rather, in all appearance, to be clean wheat; and the best wheat
too; for they only are flourishing; they only carry the price in all markets.
But the Prophet speaks not, how they look; but what they are; he says not,
they look like chafe; but They are like chafe; and before he has done, for
all their appearance, he will make it appear, they are like chafe; and
chafe they are like to have for their similitude. Well, be it so; Let the
Prophet have his will; and let them be like chafe; what hurt take they by
this? For does not the chafe grow up; and is it not brought up with the wheat?
and when Harvest comes; are they not both reaped together; and both together,
laid up into the Barn? and what more misery in all this, to the chafe, then
to the wheat it self? all this is true; the Prophet sees it well enough; and
therefore stays not here neither; he ends not with saying, They are like to
chafe; but they are like to chafe, which the mind scatters. For this is that
which perfects the similitude; and now let any man except against it, if he
can. For, there was a time indeed, when the chafe was united to the wheat;
and made one body with it; and enjoyed then some privileges, for the wheates
sake, which were proper to the wheat, and nothing at all belonging to the
chafe; and all this while, it could not justly be said, the wicked are like to
chafe; but when it is divided from the wheat; and is no longer countenanced
by it; when it is not borne out by the greatness of the wheat, against the
power of the wind; but is wholly cast off, and left alone to it self; then it
becomes subject, to the scattering of the wind: and then, and not till then,
is it made sit, to be a similitude for the wicked: for then, it shows it
self what it is; the most contemptible, and abject thing; the most unquiet,
and restless thing, that is in the world; so contemptible and abject; that if
it fly in the air, all men shut their eyes against it: and if it lie on the
ground; all men tread their feet upon it: so unquiet, and restless; that even
Caine, the man that had the first taste of this similitude, makes this
complaint upon it; I am now a vagabond in the earth: for what is his being a
vagabond, but his being like chafe? For who knows not, that a vagabond is
properly one, that roames about from place to place, but is never in his proper
place? and how great a misery it is, to be Extra locum proprium; out of the
natural place; may appear, by the striving and struggling of all natural
bodies, to attain it; but if any such thing be, that has no locum proprium,
as it were, no home at all to go to; the unquietness of that thing must needs
be infinite; seeing it has not so much as capacity of quietness: and such a
thing is chafe; for, the air is not the natural place; it is too heavy for
that; nor the earth is not its natural place; it is too light for that; and so
as having no home at all to go to; it must of necessity remain a perpetual
vagabond still. And such was the state of Cain; and such is the state of all
the wicked: that the Prophet could never have met, with such another
similitude, to express the misery of the wicked: as to say, They are like to
chafe, which the wind scatters.

But here by the way, we may let the wicked know, they have a thanks to give,
they little think of; that they may thank the godly, for all the good days,
they live upon the earth: seeing it is for their sakes, and not for their own,
that they enjoy them. For as the chafe, whiles it is united, and keeps close
to the wheat; enjoyes some privileges for the wheates sake; and is laid up
carefully in the Barn; but as soon as it is divided, and parted from the
Wheat: It is cast out, and scattered by the wind: so the wicked, whilst the
godly are in company, and live amongst them; partake for their sake, of some
blessings promised to the godly; but if the godly forsake them, or be taken
from them; then either a deluge of water, comes suddenly upon them; as it did
upon the old world, when Noah left it, and went into the Arc; or a deluge of
fire; as it did upon Sodom, when Lot left it, and went out of the City. And
even one good man, is oftentimes enough to morallize the Fable of Atlas; and to
stay the wrath of Heaven, from falling down upon the world. For, though
Abraham in good manners, would not press God under the number often; yet the
Angel told Lot plainly, he could do nothing against Sodom, till he were
out of it, and far enough from it.

But though we cannot say, that a tree and chafe are such contraries, as
godliness and wickedness are, where denying the one, inferres affirming the
other; and affirming the one, denying the other, yet if they be laid together,
and well examined, there will be found so infinite odds between them; that
they may well pass for contraries, which come so near to being so. For, take
but a leaf, which seems, as it were, but the chafe of a tree; at least, the
meanest part of it; and see, how infinitely it exceedes this chafe, in any
thing that is of value: as in entitie; in use; in goodness. For every thing
has so much entitie in it, as it has influence from the Primum ens; and as it
is degrees removed from not being; but such degrees we may conceive in a leaf,
infinite; in chafe or dust, none at all: For, it is the very bottom and dregs
of all being; and if you would conceive less than dust or chafe; you must
conceive just nothing; and in this it resembles sin; at least, comes nearest
of any thing, to resemble it. For sin has no influence at all, from the
Primum ens; it is no creature of Gods making; but when the Devil would be
counterfeiting God; and take upon him, to be a maker; he brought forth sin;
other creatures he could make none: and therefore, so much as a man sins; so
much he recedes from the Primum ens; so much he approaches to annihilate
himself; so much he is made a creature of the Devil; and so much he becomes
chafe. In matter of use, the odds between a leaf and chafe, is yet more
evident: For, a leaf, besides the service it does the tree, is serviceable
also, for food, for medicine, for clothing. A leaf was the first clothing of
our first parents; and (as much as we scorn it now) it is our finest clothing
still; for what are all our silks, but Mulbery-leafes; at least, by
propagation? whereas of chafe or dust, there never was any use made, since the
world was made, but only, that by the curse of God; it was ordained to be the
Devils food. And in this also, it resembles sin; for ever since, God said to
man, for his sin; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; the Devil
has taken, as common dust, for his common food: so wicked men, as the finest
dust, for his escaedelicatae, his daintiest food; as Esaias calls them. And this,
perhaps, in contracts with Witches; makes the Devil so eager to be sucking
their blood; setting his mark upon them, as dainty morsells reserved for his
own tooth. Lastly, for goodness, do we not see, in the leaf, a kind of
gratefulness, and good nature; that when it can do the tree no more service
by hanging upon it; it then falls off, and lies as near to the root as it
can; warming and fatning all the ground about it; as it were, to pay the tree,
for the juice and nourishment it had received from it: where the chafe is so
ungrateful a thing; and of sovile a nature, that wheresoever it lights; it
makes the very ground barren that receives it; even the ground it self, that
bore it. And in this also, it resembles sin; which, though it be hurtful,
even to strangers; as appears by the deluge, which brought ruin upon all
creatures, for the only sin of man; yet it is most hurtful to them that
commit it, as it were, to its own parents; and this ungratefulness, is so
general a symptom to all vice; that it seems to have as large a latitude as
vice it self: Nam cum ingratum dicis; omnia vitia dicis.

Thus the wicked have for their similitude, the chafe; and the chafe has for
its persecutor the wind; and as the wind or air, tyrannizeth over the chafe:
so the prince, that rules in the air, tyrannizeth over the wicked. This
tyrannical wind, has not power over any thing so much, as over this chafe;
for it tumbles and tosses it from post to pillar; and we may even say, it
gives the chafe, as it were, a Strapadoe: for it whirleth it on high; and then
lets it fall at leisure, to give it the longer pain. It has no such power
over our Tree; when it comes to a tree; it does it more good than hurt; more
pleasure than annoyance: for, when the wind blows; we may justly say, The
trees are then at their exercise; for having no local motion in themselves,
they are agitated and stirred by the wind, which stirs up their vital vigor,
as exercise stirs up natural heat in the bodies of men. But the wind has no
such meaning toward the chafe; it comes not to exercise it, but to vex it;
it makes it not a traveller; but a vagabond: for if it but happen to light any
where; the least air that moves, removes it again: the Eastwind drives it
forward; the West-wind turns it backward; the North Wind crosses them both;
that the poor chafe, has no standing, but to stand amazed; it is held up,
but by contrary motions; it is of all hands, under the hand of violence; it
has no natural rest, but as it is natural to it, never to rest; it must be
somewhere, yet it can be no where; it has a place, but no mansion; a being,
but no abiding; no refreshing, but while the wind is weary: no resting, but
till the air be up and ready; that as long as the air is an Element; and has
to do in the world; there is no hope for the miserable chafe to be ever at
quiet. And such is the condition of the wicked; a gale of prosperity, hoisteth
them up; that they neither know themselves, nor where they are; a blast of
adversity blows them down; and makes them tear the heavens with murmuring;
and themselves with impatience. No state, no time, no place contents them: that
it may be truly said, There is no ungodly man, that is not a kind of a fool;
their being like chafe, makes them lightheaded: they are only witty, to
show they have no wit; only ingenious, to do themselves hurt; their brains
that should rest in their heads, are always a working to find out heads of
unrest; adversity does not please them; because they are in a storm;
prosperity does not please them, because they are becalmed: A mean degree does
not please them, because it leaves them in the dark: Honor does not please
them, because it sets them in too much light: Labor does not please them,
because it breaks their rest: Ease does not please them, because it gathers
rust: Life does not please them, because it is always going away: Death does
not please them, because it never suffers them to come again. That let come
what will come, the wicked make sure work, to be never contented. Where the
godly are as a cube; toss them and tumble them, how ye will; yet they have a
bottom still to light upon: and we may truly say, There is no godly man, that
is not truly wise, their wits are always employed to find out reasons of
contentment: Poverty pleases them, because they have nothing to lose: Riches
please them, because they have something to give: Adversity pleases them,
because they may show patience: Prosperity pleases them, because they may show
charity: A mean estate pleases them, because they may be quiet: Honor
pleases them, because they may be humble: Labor pleases them, because it is
a good exercise: Ease pleases them, because it is a good recreation: Life
pleases them, because they have something to do: Death pleases them, because
they rest from their labors. That let come, what can come; the godly make sure
work, to be ever contented: Let Fortune appear in what shape she will; yet a
godly man, is Faber fortunae suae: he can work her, and frame her, to his own
likeing; that the Prophet may well justify his similitudes: The godly are like
a tree, which stands fixed and immovable; The wicked are like to chafe, which
is scattered about.

It is a miserable thing to be in slavery; much more to be in slavery to a
tyrant; but to a malicious tyrant, a misery most intolerable. If the Prophet
had only said; The wicked are like to chafe, which is scattered about; though
this had been a slavery; yet there had been hope they might have lighted on a
gentle Master: but when he says, They are like the chafe which the wind
scatters; this makes them in a desperate case; they are now in slavery to a
malicious tyrant; and no possibility of any good for ever. We may observe,
there are diverse kinds of scatterings: it is said of a liberal man; that he
scatters abroad, when he gives to the poor; and it is said of a husbandman;
that he scatters abroad, when he sowes his seed: and these are good
scatterings; for they are ways to gathering; though they be scatterings, for a
time, yet they be gatherings in the end; and such scattering is a blessed
thing; but the scattering of the chafe by the wind; is not a way to gathering;
you may as soon gather the wind in your fist; as gather the chafe, when the
wind has once scattered it; it is a scattering first and last: and such
scattering is a miserable thing. And we may know the condition of the
scattering, by the conditions of the scatterer: For Alms are scattered, by a
merciful hand; and seed is scattered by a provident hand: but this chafe is
scattered by a malicious hand: the hand of Satan; that will never leave
scattering them, till he have scattered them for his own gathering; which is
the final; yet the endless scattering. And therefore it seems well observed
in Scripture; that when the godly die, it is said; They are gathered to their
Fathers; but when the wicked die, there is no gathering to their fathers spoken
of; but their scattering must be understood, to be first and last; a
scattering, both here, and in another World.

And now, if you cannot choose but think it, a miserable thing, to be this
chafe; you can as little choose but think it, a miserable thing, to be a
wicked man: For whatsoever is seen or said of this chafe; is true, and more
true of a wicked man. The chafe is light, and makes no weight in the balance;
but the wicked are lighter than vanity it self; they are not worth putting in
the balance. The chafe is not moved, but when the wind blows; but the wicked
are moved when there is no wind at all; they are afraid where no fear is. The
chafe has the wind without it, that disquiets it; but a wicked man has the
wind within him: (his own passions) that disquiet him. The chafe is an
absolute abject; and can never rise in value, but the wicked are more absolute
Reprobates; and shall never rise in judgment. The chafe is not suffered in
the heap of the Wheat; but the Wheat shall be less suffered, in the
congregation of the Righteous. The chafe is persecuted but by the wind of the
air; but the wicked are persecuted by the Prince that rules in the air: The
chafe is trodden under foot, but by men and beasts; but the wicked shall be
trampled upon by the Devil and his angels.

If that which is spoken of the godly man, may be applied to the man Christ
Jesus; then certainly, that which is spoken of the ungodly, may be applied to
the wicked Jews: For no chafe was ever more trodden under foot; no chafe
more scattered upon the face of the earth: that it seems verified of them,
which David speaks in another place; Let them be as chafe: and let the Angel
of the Lord persecute them.

The Prophet has now said fully as much, as need to be said, in proof of his
two positions; A godly man is blessed; A wicked man is miserable: and why then
will he use any more words? Is it, that as a good Mathematician, he will not
only make a demonstration; but add a corollary? Or is it, that considering it
is the office of a Prophet, chiefly to tell of things to come; he insists not
upon the present misery of the wicked: but as more properly belonging to his
office, he discovers the misery, they shall have hereafter; and indeed, who but
a Prophet, could have made this discovery? Or is it, that the present misery of
the wicked, as a thing, more obvious, and apparent; he leaves to be gathered,
from the similitude it self; but their future misery, as a thing less known,
and more concealed; he will not leave, to the venture of others construction;
but for more surety, will bring it in, himself: and therefore, as the
similitude consisted of two parts; They are like to chafe; and to chafe,
which the wind scatters; so he brings in, an inference, consisting of two
parts, to answer them; They are like to chafe: Therefore they shall not rise
in the judgment; and to chafe. which the wind scatters: Therefore they shall
not be of the Congregation of the Righteous.

But is not this a strange inference? Tho ungodly, are like unto chafe;
therefore they shall not rise in the judgment; for being as chafe, they
should rise the rather. For what is apter to rise, than that which is light?
and what is lighter than the chafe? And yet the inference, not so strange; as
the consequence, dangerous: for if the ungodly, shall not rise in the
judgment: what shall then become, of two Articles of our faith; the general
Resurrection; and the general Judgment? how will the Prophet avoid, the
imputation of a Sadduce? how will he hold fellowship with St. Paul, who makes
a solemn protestation, that He believes the resurrection shall be, both of
just and unjust? Yet let not this trouble us: for both the inference, will be
plainly enough justified; and the dangerous consequence, easily avoided. For
take the inference, as it is intended; and what can be plainer? the ungodly,
are like to chafe; therefore they shall not rise in the Judgment: for, the
Judgment is as a Balance; but to rise in the judgment, is not to rise in the
balance; which is a work of lightness, and makes rejected: but it is a
pressing down the balance; which is a rising in value; and makes accepted.
And as the inference, is thus justified: so the dangerous consequence, not
only is easily avoided, but the directly contrary consequence, necessarily
inferred: The ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment; therefore there shall be
a general Resurrection. For the Judgment indeed, is as a balance, to try the
weight of things; but how can the weight of any thing be tried, if it be not
put into the balance, and how can it be put into the balance, if it come not
where the balance is? when therefore the Prophet affirms, that the ungodly
shall not rise in the Judgment; is it not a necessary consequence, that they
shall rise to the Judgment? For how can it be tried, whether they shall rise
in the Judgment, or no; if they come not to the Judgment, where they are to
be tried? The general Resurrection, shall be before the Judgment; and
therefore this rising in Judgment; is a rising after the Resurrection; and so,
the not rising here, no hinderance to the rising there; but rather ensorcing
that general, that there may be this particular.

But what say we then, to that saying of Christ; He that believes not, is
judged already; for being judged already, he needs not come any more to
Judgment? seeing none shall be judged for one cause, twice. We say, this is
no consequence neither: For, what greater unbeleevers, than those in the
Gospel, who cast out devils in Christ's Name; yet did not so much as profess
Christ's Name? and yet even those shall come to Judgment: for Christ tells, what
answer shall be made them, when they come there. How then is it true that
they be judged already? Not by the sentence of the Judge, but by the prejudice,
of their cause: and this is no hinderance, for their coming to Judgment. If
the Prophet had said; The ungodly shall not rise, to the Judgment; the
Sadduces indeed might have taken hold of this; and justly claymed him to be of
their side: but when he only says, they shall not rise in the Judgment;
this is no more, then St. Paul would have said himself, if he had been in
the Prophets place: for who ever thought, the ungodly should rise, in the
Judgment; who are sure to fall in the judgment? seeing their Judge meant shall
be to condemnation; and not to deliverance. To rise to the Judgment, is to be
brought to public trial: and this is the general Resurrection, that we
believe; but to rise in the Judgment; is upon trial, to come off with credit;
and by the sentence of the Judge, not only to be justified, but advanced: and
who ever believed; this rising to belong to the wicked? It is therefore well
observed by One; that St. Paul calls the resurrection of the Just, (...): to
show, that every one shall have their (...): to be raised up; but none but the
Just, shall have (...): to be raised up, and be exalted.

And indeed, in this kind of rising; how can any of the ungodly rise; who have
so many standing ready to pull them down? Cain cannot rise here; and with him,
no murderer, nor malicious person; for if he but offer, to come in place; the
wounds of Abel, fall a bleeding afresh; and cry out for vengeance. Saul cannot
rise here; and with him, none that trust in the world; and distrust in God: for
though the witch of Endor, could raise up Samuel to Saul; yet she cannot here
raise up Saul to Samuel. Dives cannot rise here; and with him no glutton, nor
covetous person; for the blisters of Lazarus are rising upon them; and keep
them from rising. Simon Magus cannot rise here; and with him, none guilty of
simony or bribery: for Simon Peter, has stopped all their rising with this,
Thou and thy money perish together. The like may be said, of all other ungodly
ones, as many as the chafe, can challenge to be like it; that it is no hard
matter, to prove the Prophets saying, true: it is impossible it should be
false; The ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment.

But may we not draw the similitude; and will not the similitude draw the
wicked into a further degree, of not rising in Judgment; than this, now spoken
of? For, cast both wheat and chafe into the ground; and after a few days,
you shall see the wheat rise flourishing up; and rise up daily more and more;
till it come to a fit ripeness, to be brought into the Barn: but you shall
never see more of the chafe, then to lie dead in the place; sweltring and
mouldring in its own corruption. And this is even intimated, in the
similitudes themselves: For in the similitude of the godly; the Prophet first
expresses passion; and then, action: First, the Tree is planted; and then, it
brings forth fruit: but in the similitude of the wicked, he expresses nothing
but passion; They are like to chafe, which the wind scatters: and seeing, the
wicked are like to chafe, in which there is nothing, but passivenesse; how
should they rise in the Judgment, which is a work of activenesse? But will
not this bring us again, into a relaps, of denying the general Resurrection?
Not at all. For though the chafe cannot rise, by any principle of motion, it
has in it self, as the Tree does; yet it may be raised up, by the working of
the wind: so though the wicked cannot rise, by any seed of life, remaining in
themselves, as the godly shall; yet they may be raised up, by the help of
some outward operation. The godly, have Semen spiritus, sown in their hearts
by faith; They are Members of Christ's body; They have this promise made them by
Christ; that he will raise them up at the last day: and therefore their rising
shall be a rising to Judgment; and a rising in judgment; but the wicked have
no such semen in them; They are no partakers of Christ's body; They have no such
promise, made them by Christ; and therefore their rising shall be to Judgment;
but not in Judgment; Their rising shall be by a violent dragging by some
other; it shall not be a voluntary motion of their own; it shall be by
infirmity of passivenesse: it shall not be, by any strength of activenesse; it
shall be by the power of Christ's Resurrection; It shall not be by
participation of Christ's Ascension. And so, the Prophets denying, the rising of
the ungodly in judgment; is no Negation, of their rising to Judgment, and
therefore neither joins hands with the Sadduces; nor shakes hands with our
belief; nor yet opposes St. Paul's protestation.

And as there shall be a general Judgment; in which the ungodly shall not
rise; so after the Judgment; there shall be a particular congregation of the
righteous, in which sinners shall not stand. And indeed, what society can there
be, between a tree, and chafe? or who can think it fit, that trees and
chafe, should be made companions? and as there is no reason, that the
ungodly, having made others, by their counsel, to fall here; should rise
themselves, in judgment hereafter; so there is no reason, seeing the righteous
could not be suffered to stand here in the way of sinners; that sinners,
should be suffered to stand hereafter, in the congregation of the Righteous.
And here now a multitude of reasons, seem assembled, as it were to make it
good; that sinners neither can, nor ought to stand in this assembly. It is a
congregation; which none can make but the righteous: for sinners are all
rebels; and would make it a rout. It is a Court, where all must be neat and
clean; and so are none but the righteous; for sinners are all lepers; and
would make it a spittle. It is an assembly of such only as are chosen, and
come when they are called; and such are only the righteous: for sinners, are
all intruders; and scorn to come, at any ones call. It is a company that makes
a communion; and that can none do but Saints; for sinners seek every one
their own; and are all for themselves. They must be some, hands; some, feere;
some, head; yet all members of one body: and so are only the righteous; for
sinners are dismembered members; they would be all, head; yet cannot all, make a
body. They must be all Gods friends; at least, such as he knows; and such, are
only the righteous; for sinners are all mere strangers, and aliens from God.

Indeed before the Judgment, the wheat and the chafe, made both but one
heap: but after the Judgment, the wheat is received into the barn, and the
chafe is cast upon the dunghill, and scattered about. Before the Judgment,
the ungodly and the righteous, made both but one assembly; but after the
Judgment, the righteous make a City by themselves, which is the new Jerusalem;
into which, no sinners shall be suffered to enter; The righteous shall be
taken, with the Bridegroom, into glory: and the ungodly with shame, shall be
shut out of doors. For the Judge has a Fan in his hand, to winnow the chafe
from the wheat; and to separate the ungodly from the righteous: and this is
his fanning; when to the comfort of all comforts, he shall say to the godly,
Venite benedicti patris; Come ye blessed of my Father; and to the terror of
all terrors, shall say to the wicked; Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum. Go ye
cursed, into everlasting fire. And when Christ the Judge has once said the
word, there can be no tarrying; they shall presently be parted, they must
presently part; and so be parted, and so part; as never to stand together,
never to come together any more for ever.

But seeing the future misery of the wicked, shall consist in two maine points;
in poena Damni, and poena sensus: in pain of loss, and pain of sense: why
would the Prophet speak here, of only their poena damni, as their not rising
in Judgment; and their not standing in the Congregation of the Righteous; but
speak nothing at all, of their poena sensus? when yet to speak of their pain
of sense; would make us more sensible of their pain; and more readily assent
to the Prophets assertion, that wicked men are miserable? Is it, that he would
not go further, than the line of his similitude would lead him? and he saw,
that his similitude would not reach to Poena sensus? For, how can chafe, which
is a thing without life or sense, be able to express a misery, in which there
is life only, that there might be sense; and sense only, that there might be
pain? Or, is it, that indeed it needed not; seeing the pain of loss, is
misery enough to make a hell of it self; and able to bring upon the wicked, as
much as Christ affirmed; even weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. For,
if ever misery deserved weeping of eyes; if ever loss deserved gnashing of
teeth; this is the misery, that they shall not rise in the Judgment; by which,
they shall never come to see the blessed face of God; and this is the loss;
that they shall not be of the Congregation of the Righteous; by which they
shall for ever be excluded from all society with Saints and Angels. Ahasuerus
asked Haman, What should be done to the man, whom the King would honor? and
Haman supposing himself should be the man; made answer, Thus and thus shall be
done unto him; but when the King appointed Mordecai to be the man; and himself
the man to see it executed; Oh, what torment, what anguish and vexation, did
then surpize the soul of Haman; to be himself thus basely employed; and the
man he most scorned, so highly exalted? Such, and infinitely greater, shall be
the torment and anguish of mind to the wicked, when rising to the Judgment,
they shall not rise, in the Judgment; but they which sat before in the chair
of scorners; shall now be scorned themselves; and to disgrace them the more,
God himself shall turn scorner; as it is said, God shall laugh them to
scorn; and have them in derision.

And now let the great men of the world, please themselves; and think it a
happiness, that they can rise in honors; can rise in riches and estimation in
the world; yet alas, what is all this, if they fail of rising in the Judgment
to come? Let them please themselves; and think it a happiness; that they are
honored in all companies where they comel; and have the solace of all the good
fellowship the world can afford; yet alas, what is all this; if they fail to
be admitted into the Congregation of the Righteous?

This rising in Judgment, is that high glory, whereof Christ showed a
pattern, to St. Peter and John, in his transfiguration; so high, that they
were feign to be carried up into a mountain to see it; so glorious, that it
put them into ecstasies to behold it; and yet but the lower Region of this
rising neither: but when Saint Paul was taken up into the third heaven; where
he might see much more than Peter and John could see upon the mountain; he
then saw so much glory as made him afflicted to express it; and could not
express it, but by afflictions; the afflictions of this life, are not worthy
of the glory that shall be revealed, not all the afflictions of the Prophets;
of whom it is said, They were stoned; they were sawne asunder; were slain with
the sword; not all the afflictions of the Martyrs, of whom some were broyled
upon Gridirons; some roasted upon Spits; some broken in pieces upon Racks and
wheels; put all together; and confined upon one man, yet can never make him
worthy of the glory that is to come. And how then, O my soul, can thou avoid
the ecstasy of Peter and John, but to think of this? how can thou give David
cause to say: Why art thou cast down, O my soul; and why art thou so
disquieted within me? for this rising there, will make ample amends, for all
the fallings that can be here; for though it be a great fall, to be laid low in
the earth; where the worms shall eat this flesh of thine; yet it will be a
greater rising, to be raised up into the mount, where thy body shall be made
like to Christ's glorious Body; and though thou may say of thy self now, as
Saint Paul said: O wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? yet when the time of this rising comes; it shall be said of thee; even
of thee, O my body; as was said of Mordecai; Thus shall be done to the man whom
God will honor.

This Congregation of the Righteous; is that new Jerusalem, of which it is
said; Great and glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. Great and
glorious indeed; for if we conceive in our minds, the happiness of a City,
where there are millions of millions of Citizens; yet all, as loving mutually
together, as David and Jonathan; where there is Holiness, immaculate; Peace,
inviolate; Joy, ineffable; Pleasure, inexpressible: No time, but Eternity; no
Place, but immensity: no noise, but of Music with songs of Allelujah: no
sickness, but of love with the Spouse in the Canticles: no motions, but of
mildness, where the Lamb is the leader: no words, but of wonder, where the
Angels are silent; where God is All in All; and all and every one in God; this
Congregation, is that City: but because no tongue can so well express it, as
his, whose eyes did clearly behold it; hear St. John in his own words; God
shall wipe away all tears from all eyes; there shall be no more death; neither
sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain; there shall be no
need of the Sun, nor of the Moon; for the glory of God shall lighten it;
and the Lamb shall be the light thereof. Now therefore, O my soul, Why art
thou cast down; and why art thou so disquieted within me? What though thou
fly as a bird, to the mountains? what though thou dwell a while in the Tents
of Mesek? this Congregation will make amends for all; not only for John
Baptists desolatenesse in the wilderness; but even for Jobs despisednesse on
the dunghill. We may well be contented to serve a Prentiship here; so we may
come to be free of this City hereafter: here we sweep Kennells, there shall
wear Crowns: here we are militant, there shall be triumphant: For Christ the
crucified is our Captain; and God our glory. And now we may see, there was no
need at all, why the Prophet should aggravate the hell of the damned, by adding
their sense of pain; seeing no bottom of hell can be so deep as this, to be
barred for ever, from this rising in Judgment; and to be excluded for ever,
from this Congregation of the Righteous. And so all this goes on upon the score
still; to make up the full measures of the blessedness of the godly; and of
the misery of the wicked; that no Art can show Principles so irrefragable;
Positions so infallible, as these of the Prophet; A godly man is blessed; A
wicked man is miserable.

But how happens this sudden alteration in the Prophet? he was so reserved at
first, and made so dainty but only to name a Righteous man; that he would not
do it, though it were to bring him to inherit blessedness; and now on a
sudden, he brings them in by troops; a whole Congregation of the Righteous at
once? Is it not, that he durst not presume to use the name of Righteous; till
it were first determined of in the Judgment? and till they had their station
assigned them amongst the Saints? not only because it cannot till then be
known whether any such Title be due or no; (for who knew Judas for any other
than an holy Apostle; till Christ discovered him to be a Traitor? Or who knew
the seven thousand that bowed not their knees to Baal; to be no Idolaters; till
God, by his own mouth made them known to Elias?) but because indeed, the name
of Righteous, can by no right be given to any, till they be tried, and have
their approbation in the Judgment: to make us know, that righteousness stands
not so much in merit, as in acceptance; and though many may be so qualified, by
delighting in the Law of God, as to inherit blessedness; yet till by the
Judge, they be pronounced Righteous; they cannot rightly claim the Title: and
therefore David, who is no Herald to decide men's Titles; would not use a style,
that might not be due; and as little would detract from it, being once adjudged.

All the Prophet has hitherto said; seems to be but bare affirmations; only
words that we must take upon his word; but now comes in a word of authority;
this rational particle, (for, or because) a little word, but of great command;
which in all this Psalm, has not been seen till now, and now, that it is
come; we cannot well tell, why it is come: we know it brings a reason with it;
but cannot easily find, where this reason should lie. For, if we take the
reason, as it seems to lie; the ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment;
because God knows the way of the Righteous; is it not as unreasonable a
reason, as if one should say; a Malefactor shall be punished, because the Judge
knows another to be an honest man? and who would ever look for such a blind
reason from a Prophet? But is it not, that the Prophet has a good opinion of
our understanding; and therefore trusts us to supply that, which by the Law of
contraries, may plainly, or rather must necessarily be inferred? for having
said; therefore the ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment; nor be of the
Congregation of the Righteous; he leaves us to supply; therefore the godly
shall rise in the Judgment, and make a Congregation by themselves; and then
the reason stands ready, to tell wherefore; For the Lord knows the way of the
Righteous.

But if this be a reason, to make the godly rise in the Judgment; because God
knows their way; why is it not then, as well a reason, to make the ungodly to
rise in the Judgment, seeing we are sure, that God knows their way as well?
and if Gods knowing the way of the righteous, be a sufficient cause to exclude
the wicked; why is not his knowing the way of the wicked, as sufficient a cause
to exclude the Righteous? Here, perhaps, we must be feign to do, as
Astronomers feign to do; make use of certain Phenomenon; not that such
things be indeed; but that we may conceive them to be; for the better helping
of our capacities. As to conceive that there is in God; (as to the purpose
here) a twofold kind of knowledge: Scientia cognitionis, and scientia
dignationis; that, common to God with men; this, proper to God alone; that,
simple and without influence or operation; this operative, and bringing
blessings with it. In scientia Cognitionis, God knows the wicked so well; that
makes him say, In scientia dignationis, he knows them not; but his scientia
dignationis, is as a link, that draws with it the whole chain of Gods
goodness; for, whom he knows, he regards; whom he regards, he preserves;
whom he preserves, he blesses; and with this kind of knowing, God knows none
but the Righteous; and therefore none but the righteous can have these
blessings to rise in the Judgment; and to be made a member of the Congregation
of the Righteous. And now the Prophets reason is found where it lies; The godly
shall rise in the Judgment, because God knows their way, In scientia
dignationis; but the ungodly shall not rise in the Judgment; nor be of the
Congregation of the Righteous; because, although God know their way in his
scientia Cognitionis; yet in his scientia Dignationis, he knows it not.

But did not the Propher give a sufficient reason before, why the godly shall
rise in the Judgment, and make a congregation by themselves; when he said;
They are like a tree? seeing a tree has boughs and branches aspiring toward
heaven; united in one root, and making one body? but this perhaps, as being
but a reason drawn from the similitude; the Prophet counts but a similitude of
a reason, and takes it but upon a liking; the true reason, and which he insists
upon, is this, which he alleges here: For the Lord knows the way of the
righteous. For this indeed, is the true reason of all the blessings, that are
or ever shall be to the godly; all their praises that went before; Their
delighting in the Law of God; their exercising themselves in it; and whatsoever
else; they are good conditions necessarily required in them that must make this
congregation; but the true cause and reason of making it, is this which the
Prophet brings here; because the Lord knows the way of the righteous. For
though it were a good likely reason, to say, The godly shall rise in the
judgment; and make a congregation by themselves: because They are like a tree;
yet it may be asked, what makes them like a Tree? Godliness indeed procures
them to be made like a Tree; but what makes them? For that which makes a
thing, is a superior cause, to that which procures it, to be made: and this
superior cause, the Prophet alleges here; For the Lord knows the way of
the righteous. And though it were a likely reason to say; The ungodly shall not
be of the congregation of the righteous; because they are like to chafe, which
the wind scatters; yet it may be asked, what makes them like to chafe?
Wickedness indeed, procures them to be made like chafe; but what makes them?
Here the Prophet is silent, and says nothing; and by saying nothing, seems to
acknowledge, there is nothing to be said; wickedness both procures them to be
made like chafe; and makes them like chafe; they are both their own ruin;
and their own ruinousnesse; God in this kind, has no hand at all in it; it
is all their own doing; Perditio tua ex te O Israel.

And may not a reason also be conceived thus, why the ungodly can never come to
be of the congregation of the righteous; because the ungodly and the
righteous, go two contrary ways: the righteous go a way, that God knows;
and the wicked go a way that God destroys: and seeing these ways can never
meet: how should the men meet that go these ways? and to make sure work,
that they shall never meet indeed; the Prophet expresses the way of the
righteous, by the first link of the chain of Gods goodness, which is his
knowledge; but expresses the way of the wicked; by the last link of Gods
Justice, which is his destroying: and though Gods Justice and his mercy do
often meet; and are contiguous one to another; yet the first link of his
Mercy; and the last link of his Justice, can never meet: For it never comes
to destroying, till God be heard to say, Nescio vos: and Nescio vos, in God;
and Gods knowledge, can certainly never possibly meet together.

But why does the Prophet say; The Lord knows the way of the righteous; and
says not rather, The Lord knows the righteous? why says he; The way of the
ungodly shall perish; and says not rather, The ungodly shall perish? Is it
not, that he says not, The Lord knows the righteous; because in another
place it is said, There are none such for him to know; but he knows the way
of the righteous; and what is this way, but he which said, Ego sum via,
veritas, and vita; I am the way, the truth, and the life? and the Prophet might
well say, that God knows this way, seeing Christ says; that none knows it,
but he; None knows the Father, but the Son; and none knows the Son, but
the Father. But what is this to us? That if we be engrafted into Christ, who is
this way; then God in knowing this way, knows us that are engrafted in this
way; and this way indeed must God know us, or not know us at all; for if he
know us not in Christ; in our selves, we are sure he can never know us. Or is
it, that the Prophet says not, God knows the righteous; but the way of the
righteous, perhaps least men, for doing one or two good deeds, in all their
life, should claim to be righteous; and for such righteousness, claim
acquaintance with God; and so indeed, God might have acquaintance enough: seeing
no man is so wicked, but he may sometimes have good thoughts; and do good
deeds: but this will not serve: it must be a way of righteousness, before God
will know it. Abraham had forsaken his Country, and sacrificed his only
son, with his own hands; in obedience to God: before God came to say of him,
Nunc cognovi te: and therefore it is not a turn or two that will serve the
turn; it must be an exercising, day and night; a continual walking in the Law
of God, that must make it a way, for God to know. Indeed this way, is something
of a strange condition; for sometimes, much and long walking, will not make it
a way; and sometimes again, a turn or two will do it. Sometimes the giving
of all a man's goods to the poor; will do but poor good: and sometimes the
giving, but of a small mite, will have no small might in it: sometimes the
giving ones body to be burnt, will have but cold entertainment: and sometimes
the giving but a cup of cold water, shall be counted a hot service. Saul
seems to have walked long in a course of godliness; and yet with all he could
do; he could not make it a way, for God to know: where the Thief on the
Cross, fetched, as I may say, but a turn about; and he made such a way of
righteousness, that Christ presently knew it; and took notice of it. It
seems the matter is all, with what feet we walk: for if we walk, with the
feet of the body only: (if there be no other goodness in our good deed, but
only the outward act of doing it) we may walk long enough, before we make it
a way of righteousness for God to know; but if we walk with the feet of our
hearts; (in faith and love) then, perhaps, small walking may sometimes serve:
for the heart indeed, is a hard treadder; it leaves prints behind, that will
not easily be gotten out; and with these feet of the heart, the good Thief
walked; or else, he could never have made a way of righteousness, for Christ
to know, upon such a sudden, as he did. Howsoever, when it is once made a
way; whether with much walking, or with little, yet God presently knows it;
and knowing it, delights in it; and as in the garden of Eden, will walk in it
himself; and then indeed, it will be a full measure of blessedness; pressing
down; and running over: For if In the presence of God, there be fullness of
joy for evermore: how pressing down; how running over, must that joy he; where
we enjoy his presence, not only as walking by us; but as walking in us?

And if the Prophet had said, the ungodly shall perish; and not the way of the
ungodly; it would have made us all afraid; we could hardly have found eight
persons to put into Noah's Arc: for the best that are, have a spice of
ungodliness; enough to taint them, with the name of ungodly: but this is the
measure of Gods mercy; pressing down, and running over; that he will not
suffer it to be a way of perishing, unless it be a way of ungodliness first.
And here the godly may take this comfort by the way; that it is not, their
slippings, or treading awry; which may be by ignorance, or infirmity; that can
make with God, this shipwreck of perishing: it must be a way of ungodliness;
which is not usually made without much walking and exercising, without resolute
intentions and endeavors; without set purposes, and persistings; that if a man
be sure he is free from these; he may then be confident, he is safe from
perishing. And though this way of the ungodly, and the way of the righteous be
very unlike; yet they are like in this; that this way also, is not made
sometimes with much walking: and sometimes again, it is made with a turn or
two: for David walked in adultery, and murder, a whole year together: and yet
it made not a way of perishing; because he had the tears of repentance, to
wash away the prints of the steps; and charity to cover them. But Judas
walked but a turn or two; for any thing we know; and it made a way, that made
away himself; because he neither washed it with repentance, nor covered it
with charity. Howsoever the way be made with much walking, or with little; yet
if once it come to be a way of ungodliness; there is no way then but
perishing; all the world cannot save him; he shall never be forgiven in this
world, nor in the world to come. And here again is the measure of Gods
Justice; pressing down, and running over; pressing down, because it presses
down, to the bottom of the bottomless pit; and running over; because it
runs for ever. For then the way of the ungodly is said to perish; when there
is no way left to save them from perishing: for such and so desperate, is the
state of the ungodly, in the state of ungodliness; that no way is left them,
either for help, or hope: For wherein, should they hope for help? Compassion
will not help them; for The Lord will laugh them to scorn, in his high
displeasure. Mediation will not help them; for God has sworn; though Noah,
Daniel, and Job should speak for them, yet he will not hear them. Time will
not help them; for they shall perish everlastingly. Place will not help them;
for they shall fall into a bottomless pit. Death will not help them; for
they shall call for death, and it shall flee from them; that they may live to
be tormented, with the worm that never dies. And here now, for very pitties
sake, let me put all poor souls in mind; that they be careful to remember
that warning of Christ; Agree with thine adversary, while thou art in the way:
for whiles we are in the way; there are ways left, to keep us from perishing;
There is a way of compassion; For God delights not in the death of a sinner;
but that he should turn from his wickedness and live. There is a way of
Mediation; not of the men Daniel and Job: but of the Mediator between God and
Man, Christ Jesus. There is a way of repentance; for if a sinner repent him of
his sin; God will put away his sin out of his remembrance. But if it once
come to this, that the way of the ungodly do perish; alas then, there is
nothing left, but woe upon woe: no way left for help: no way left of hope;
nothing to be talked of; nothing to be thought of; but perishing; not only
whilst the world en dures; but not when the world it self shall perish.

The Prophet gave a good reason before, why there shall be a congregation of
the righteous; because God knows the way of the righteous; but why would he
give no reason here, why the way of the ungodly shall perish? For to draw a
reason from the law of contraries; as to say; Because God knows not the way
of the ungodly; will not serve: for Gods knowing, may well be a strong reason;
seeing it is a strong cause: a cause that is operative; and that to many
degrees: For whom God knows, he regards; whom he regards, he preserves;
whom he preserves, he blesses: but what cause can Gods not knowing be? for
what operation can be in a Negative? yet so it is; Gods not knowing, works by
not working: for whom he knows not, he regards not; whom he regards not, he
preserves not; and whom he preserves not, they presently fall, and perish of
themselves. And the Prophet had great reason to give a reason there, because it
was an Effect, that needed a cause; but he had no reason to give a reason
here; because it is an Effect, without a cause, without a cause Efficient,
though not Deficient: and why then should he give a reason, why the ungodly
shall perish; seeing God not knowing them; there can be no reason given, why
they should not perish.

When it is said, The way of the ungodly shall perish; the wicked take occasion
by these words, to conceive a hope, as wicked, as foolish; that if the way of
the ungodly shall perish; then the ungodly shall have no way to stand in; and
if they have no place to be in; then they shall be no where; and if they be no
where, then they shall not be at all; which is as much as they desire: for it
never troubles them, not to be at all; so they may be sure, not to be troubled
at all. But this is a conceit, not only vain, but wicked; for by perishing,
is not meant, an utter annihilating, and dissolving into nothing; but they are
then said to perish, when they are forsaken of God, and delivered over into the
hand of Satan. For when the Judgment is once past, and the chafe separated
from the Wheat; then there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth; but the old
Hell shall continue still; and there the ungodly, and their way shall lie; For
in the new earth, there shall be no way, for either the ungodly to walk in, or
for sinners to stand in; but all, shall be Holy ground; and no feet shall
walk, or stand there; but such only, as have put off the shoes of
corruption; or rather indeed, as have put on the shoes of incorruption.

The Prophet in the beginning of his Psalm; noted in the wicked, a triplicity
of sinning: Walking in the counsel of the ungodly; standing in the way of
sinners; and sitting in the chair of scorners; and here in the end of his
Psalm, he notes a triplicity of their punishments; They shall not rise in
Judgment; they shall not stand in the congregation of the Righteous; and their
way shall perish: and it may be thought, when the scorners heard; they should
not rise in the Judgment; this never troubled them; for they care not for
rising; they are well enough as they are; they have a chair to sit in; and
they scorn to rise. And when the sinners heard, they should not stand in the
Congregation of the Righteous; this did not much move them neither: for they
like better, to be by themselves, in the way of sinners; than be bound to keep
company with such precise fellows: but when the ungodly hear, that their way
shall perish, and that they shall not have that way to walk in; this strikes
them dead; their hearts are clean done; and now would they be begging of
Abraham, to send Lazarus to their fathers house, to warn their friends from
following their courses, for fear of their curses.

And may it not now be truly said, that the Prophet has performed both his
prizes, 'to the full? for as before, he did not leave a godly man, till he had
brought him to receive his portion in heaven: so now, he has not left a wicked
man, till he has brought him to receive his portion in hell. For, the wicked
have a portion too; though they were better be without it; a miserable portion,
to have misery for a portion; yet so the Prophet in another place calls it;
this is their portion; Fire and Brimstone; and a stormy Tempest. And now we may
indeed say, the Prophet has well ended his task; and we might say, happily;
but that he ends it miserably: for he has delivered his Psalm, as it were, in
a tragical form; making it to begin with blessedness; and to end with
perishing; but yet he has so framed it; that we may easily reduce it, by help
of the Law of contraries; into a more Comicall form (if I may so speak)
making it to begin with misery; and to end with blessedness: and this perhaps,
will be a form more capable of a Plaudite from our hands; and of an Io Paean,
from our toungs; and may thus be framed; Miserable and wretched are the men,
that have walked in the counsel of the ungodly; and have stood in the way of
sinners; and have sat in the chair of scorners; but have no delight in the
Law of the Lord; nor in his Law will exercise themselves, either day or night:
and they shall be like to chafe, which the wind scatters. The godly are not
so; but they are like a tree, planted by the waters side; which will give its
fruit in its time: the leafes also shall not wither; and whatsoever they do,
it shall prosper. Therefore the godly shall rise in the Judgment; and (parted
from the wicked) shall make a Congregation by themselves: For, the Lord knows
not the way of the wicked; and the way of the godly shall be established.

FINIS.

