GREENVVOODS WORKS: Contained IN Five SEVERAL TRACTATES. 1. Of the Day of
Judgment. 2. Of the Lords Prayer. 3. Of the Race to Salvation. 4. Of the
Torment of Tophet. 5. Of the Baptism of Christ.


The ninth Impression, corrected and amended.

printer's or publisher's device

London printed for Henry Bell, and are to be sold by John Clarke, at his Shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1620.

A TREATISE Of the GREAT and GENERAL Day of IVDGEMENT: Necessary for every
Christian, that wishes good success to his soul, at that Great and Terrible
day.

The ninth Impression, corrected and amended.

MATH. 12. 36. But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.

printer's or publisher's device

London printed for Henry Bell, and are to be sold by John Clarke, at his Shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND my very good friends, Sr. LESTRAVNGE MORDAVNT of
Massingham Hall, in the County of Norfolk, Knight Baronet: And to the Virtuous
LADY, the LADY FRAVNCIS MORDAVNT, his loving Bedfellow: Eternal welfare, and
everlasting happiness, in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior.
BEing earnestly requested, and often entreated (Right Worshipful) by many of
my good friends, to put in print this small Treatise of the General day of
Doom, which I lately preached, and in public place delivered: I have (being
overcome with their persuasions) condescended to their earnest demand,
although very unapt, and exceedingly unworthy, for the penning of so worthy a
matter.

Wherefore I have made choice (craving pardon for my presumption herein) of your
wel-disposed Worships at this time (being the Alpha of my tender and slender
endeavors) to sound in your sacred ears this last and general Trumpe, and to
Dedicate to your Worships the same, both in regard of the demonstration of my
true, unfeigned, and lasting thankfulness to your benign Worships (for, says
Seneca: Beneficium hominem gratum semper delectat, ingratum semel: id est; A
thankful man will always remember a benefit; but an unthankful person
will soon forget it) for your extraordinary kindness bestowed upon me,
Absque vllo commerito, without any desert in the World: as also in regard of
the great affection, good devotion, and thrice welcome entertainment you bear
to Divine and Spiritual Tractates, which appertain to the everlasting bliss
of the Soul, accounting them blessed, which bring glad tidings of salvation. I
desire therefore ( idque more humillimo, in most submissiue manner) this one
thing at your Worships hands, that you would (pardoning my boldness) vouchsafe
aequi bonique consulere, to take in good worth this simple and slender gift.
Which thing if your Worships shall vouch safe to do, it shall not only be an
encouragement to my future proceedings, but also it shall be Vinculum
indissolubile, an invincible bond to tie me in all duty, and in all love to
your Worships: Dum memor ipse mei, dum spiritus hos regit artus; so long as
life shall last.

Thus humbly taking my leave of your good Worships, (nothing doubting of the
goodness of your natures in the acceptance of these my first presented fruits)
I commit you with yours to the safe protection of the Almighty, always begging
before the Throne of his most Glorious Majesty, that he would in this life,
infuse his Holy Spirit, with all his Graces, into your hearts abundantly, and
in the World to come, crown you with the Crown of immortal Glory: And that
for CHRIST JESUS his sake, our LORD and only SAVIOVR Amen.

From Hempsted in Essex. Ian. 10. 1620. Your Worships in all duty, for

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, if in these following Tractates, the Quotations of Latin and
other tongues, do offend thee; let them be unto thee as Country Styles,
stepping over them, thou losest not thy way by them, for their Expositions
follow them.

A Treatise of the Great and General Day of Judgment, necessary for every
Christian, that wishes good success to his soul, at that Great and Terrible
day.
MATH. 12. 36. But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.
MAn, in regard of the corruption of his Nature, through the fall of his great
Grandfather Adam (who was the foil of Mankind, the Parent of sin, and the
author of death to all his posterity, for as much as we were all in ^umbi^
Adami, in his loins) as he is subject to all sins whatsoever, so is he
specially addicted to the sin of security and carelessness. Therefore as Adam
sleeping securely in his transgression, and hiding himself from the presence
of the Lord, behind the bush, had great need of that Watch-bel from God, (to
rouse him from the sleep of sin, and call him again unto God) Adam, vbies?
Adam, where art thou? So as Genesis 3. 9.
necessary for every sinful Adamite (to raise him from the sleep of sin
wherein he was borne) is this notable Memento, this worthy rehearsal of the
great and terrible day of Doom: But I say unto you, etc. Which words of our
Savior Christ spoken to the Scribes and Pharisees (who would not believe that
he wrought these miracles, by the powerful Spirit of God; but slanderously and
contumeliously Mat. 12. 24
told him to his face: that he did cast out devils through Beelzebubs name) are
as much in effect, as if he had said on this manner: If account must be
rendered at the day of Judgment, of every idle word that men shall speak, then
much more of blasphemous words: But I say unto you, that of every idle word,
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the general day of
Judgment: Ergo: much more of blasphemous words as yours are, in saying that I
cast out devils through the name of Beelzebub.

So that these words of our Savior are nothing else, but a true proposition and
sound argument drawn, a minore ad mai^s, whereby Christ does prove the
greatness of punishment that should befall the blasphemous Pharisees, in regard
of the greatness of their sin.

In which portion of Scripture, four things necessarily must be considered.

1. The persons that must give an account: who they be. 2. Of what things these
persons must give an account. 3. To whom this account must be given. 4. When
this account must be given.
1 The persons that must give an The first part.
account, they are expressed in this text in general, to be men: That men
shall speak. Men, yea all men must give an account, as we may read in the
Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians* We must all appear before the Tribunal
^. Cor. 5. 10.
seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to his works. All men,
none excepted, of every age, of every sex, and of every Nation, rich and
poor, Princes and common people, noble, and ignoble, all that have been from
the beginning of the world, and shall be to the end of the same, shall appear
before Christ's Judgment seat, and give an account every one for himself to
God: For, It is appointed Heb. 9. 27.
unto men once to dye, and after that comes Judgment. As it is therefore
most sure that all men must dye, so is it as sure that all men must come to
Judgment.

This is the seventh article of our Article 7.
faith to believe: that Christ shall come from heaven to judge the quick and
the dead: by the dead, all those are to be understood, that shall be found dead
at the second coming of Christ; by the quick, all those are to be
understood, that shall be found living at his second coming. Augustine in his
Augustine.
Enchiridion to Laurentius, Chap. 55 says; that, this Article may be
expounded two ways: either by the dean (says he) may be meant those that
shall be found corporally dead: and by the quick, those that shall be found
corporally living at Christ's coming: or (says he) by the dead may be meant,
those that be dead in sin. According to that in the Gospel of S. Matthew: Let
the dead bury their dead. Mat. 8. 22.
And by the quick, those that be dead to sin, and living to faith; according
to that of the Prophet Abac^k: Hab. ^* 4.
The Just shall live by faith. But this exposition is not agreeable to the
simplicity of the Creed. Yet notwithstanding true it is, that both the godly
and the wicked shall come to judgment: for by the power of Christ, all men
shall be raised up: The holy Angels with the great sound of a trumpet (...)
24. 31
shall be sent forth into all the world, and they shall gather together the
Elect, from the four quarters of the earth, from one end of the heaven to the
other. Then shall Christ separate the Mat. 13. 4^
Elect from the Reprobates, the Wheat from the Tares, the Corn from the Chaste
the Lambs from the Goats, the Just from the Unjust.

So that you see, that the godly and the wicked, yea all men whatsoever, shall
appear before Christ's tribunal (...) and give an account of themselves, and
for themselves, to the terrible Judge.

Ob. Some, notwithstanding, may object against this doctrine delivered, and say
as it is in John: That he that Ioh. ^ 18.
believe him Christ, shall not be judged, or shall not come into judgment:
and so by consequence, all men shall not be judged.

Answ. To which I answer, that An^
Judgment in that place of John, as in many other places of sacred Scriptures,
is taken for condemnation; in which sense true it is, that he that believes in
Christ Jesus, he that is ingranted into Christ by a true and lively faith, he
that is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, one with Christ, and Christ
with him by the spiritual conjunction of the Church with Christ, this party
shall not come into judgment; s^il. condemnationis, that is, of condemnation;
in judgment he shall not be confounded, condemned or overthrown* but he shall
come in iudicium absolutionis: that is, into the judgment of absolution: In
judgment he shall stand out, having on the white robe of Christ's
righteousness, and being covered with the wedding garment of Regeneration. The
truth of which doctrine, the preacher affirms, saying: God will judge Eccl.
^. 17.
he Just and the unjust; the Just unto salvation, and the unjust to damnation.
Seeing then that all must be brought to judgment, let no man think with
himself, that it may be possible for him to escape this dreadful day; whither
shall he ^lye from the presence of the Lord? If he ascends Psalm. 139. ^, 8, 9.
up to heaven, God is there, if he go down to hell, God is there also, if
he take the wings of the morning, and fly to the uttermost parts of the Sea,
God will find him out there also. For God is every where; he is in heaven by
his glory, he is upon the earth by his mercy, he is in hell by his justice: God
is (...) and nusquam; he is every where, by his power and wisdom, but no
where in respect of circumscription of place, being a Spirit. In earthly and
terrestrial Courts* a man may have his Proctor: but then we must ( volentes
nolentes, whether we will or no) personally appear and plead for our selves.

In terrestrial Courts, bribes, many times blind the eyes of the wise, and for
a little greasing the fist of the Magistrate, many times small faults, nay (by
your leave) great and scandalous crimes may be winked at: but at this great
Court of Heaven, the Judge will not be partial to any: For Rom ^* ^1.
God has no respect of persons: He will execute just judgment upon all men,
as the Psalmographer speaks: With righteousness will he judge the Psalm. 58.
9.
world, and the people with equity. Bribes, Friends, entreaties, howlings,
cries, lamentations, nothing will then prevail, but a pure heart, and a spirit
upright; yea, the damned in hell confess the same: Quid profu^^ nobis
superbia? quid di^it^arum coput* What has pride profited us? or what has the
pomp of riches done us good? Alas these cannot save our souls.

Let the Atheist therefore mock God never so blasphemously, let the Sadduce
brag of no Resurrection, no Angel, no Spirit, never so Schismatically* let
the Epicure sing that cursed Epitaph of Sardanapalus never so beastly, ^de,
bibe, ^ude, charum praesentibus exple, delicijs animum, post mortem nulla
voluptas: Eat, drink, play, be merry, live in all kind of pleasure, for after
death there is no pleasure.

Yet notwithstanding, let all these miserable wretches know, that there will
come a day, and that a dismal day, wherein they shall give an account of every
idle word.

Alas, lamentable world, that men should thus murder their dearest darlings, I
mean their Souls, which Christ has holden so dear: that men should with
Esau, sell their birth (...), and heritage of heaven, for a m^^^e of pot^age of
worldly pleasure: that men should delight in wallowing (with the 2. Pet. 2. 2^
Sow) in the mire of sin, and (with the dog) in swallowing the vo^i^ of
iniquity: and so purchase to their Souls and bodies everlasting torment, in
the lake unquenchable* whereas they should above all things seek the Kingdom
of God and the righteousness thereof, that they might have heavenly mansions,
at the great day of account.

Let every Christian therefore bewail the great wickedness of this world, and
lament the soul iniquity of these days, lest it be said of us, as of the
careless and graceless Christian: Cadit Asina, and est qui subleuet, per^^^
anima, and non est qui reco^it^t: If an Ass falls under his burden, there
be some that will diligently help it up again: but if a Soul perish, no man
regards it.

Men are like the Horse, Ass and Mule, that have no understanding, the more is
the good man's grief; David Psalm 11^. 1(...).
his eyes g^shed out into rivers of water, because men kept not Gods Law.

The Prophet Jeremy cries out ^et. 4. 19. ^^.
on this manner: Ah, my belly, my belly, Iam pained even at the heart, I cannot
be quiet, because my people is a foolish people, they are wise to do evil;
but to do well, they have no knowledge.

That godly Matron Monica, Saint Monica.
Augustines Mother, wept daily, and prayed for her sons conversion: for he
was before his conversion a Manichee.

So likewise it is the duty of every Christian to desire the conversion of
their brethren, and to bewail their wretched estates

Sin never more, then in these our days of the Gospel abounded, the
greatest part of the world are Satanists, devils in conversation, worshippers
of that ugly beast, That Apoc. 13. 14.
has seven heads, and ten horns, whose badge is, blasphemy: of the damned
serpent, The prince of the Ephesians. 2. 2.
Air, the grand enemy of Mankind, that goes up and down like a roaring 1.
Pet. 5. 8.
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Yea, Saint John says, That Whatsoever 1.
Ioh. 2* 16
is in the world, is either the concupiscence of the flesh, or the
concupiscence of the eye, or the pride of life: Haec tria, pro trino numine mu^
(...) habet: This is the trinity which the world does worship: In stead of God
the Father* God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; the world does worship the
devil, the world, and the flesh: the concupiscence of the flesh, that is,
carnal luxury; the concupiscence of the eye, that is, worldly covetousness,
and the pride of life, that is, hellish and devilish ambition.

The way to hell is a broad, and a wide way, and whole multitudes walk in the
same, but ^ew there be that can find out the narrow way of amendment of life.
The heathen man could say this: Plurima pessima, the Aristotle.
most are the worst: Pretiosa non sunt numerosa, good men are odd men. Wasps
and Hornets swarm, but few painful Bees are to be found, that treasure up
the Honey of good works, in the hiue of their hearts, and co^^ l^^en home with
the same; as Virgil writes of the Bees: At ^essae multa referunt se nocte
minores, crura, thymo plena.

No marvel therefore, if David cried out to the Lord for help in his days,
saying: Help Lord, help, Psalm. 12. 1.
for good and godly men decay. The world therefore may be compared to the
earth.

Ask the earth, and it will tell thee Compar.
that it does afford much matter for base pots, but very little stuff for
Gold; ask the Gardener and he will tell thee that he has more Nettles then
Roses, more Weeds then Flowers, more Brambles then Vines: Yea, ask thine own
conscience and Note.
it will tell thee that there is Magna plen^tu^o hominum, sed magna solitudo
honorum, id est, There is a great plenty of men, but there is a great scarsitie
of good men. A good man is a Phoenix, he is Rara auis ^^ terris, nigroque
si^ili^^ I^^en.
cygno: A rare Bird, a black Swanne* We have many covetous Churles that will
(with the fool in the Gospel, commend their Souls to Plutus, that was called
of the heathen, Deus d^^^tiarum: The god of riches: but more fitly he is Demon
d^^^tiarum, the devil of riches: and think themselves safe when they have
spoken peace to their souls on this manner: Soul take thy rest, for thou have
goods Luke 12. 19
laid up for many days. Making their chest their heaven, and their pictures
their god. We have many Achabs, Tyrannical extortioners, deuourers of their
brethren, eating them up like bread. Many adulterers, as appears by the great
number of Bastards in this Realm*

Many rebellious Traitors, and Antichristian conspirators; as did appear by
the Gun-powder-treason.

Many conceited Herod's, many proud Nebuchadnezzars, and many vainglorious
Iezabels, many swea^ers, forswearers, drunkards, mock^o^s: Many we have (in a
word) damned hel-hounds, cursed caytifes, and most miserable miscreants.

How little do these lamentable wretches think of the day of account? How
little do they imagine of that woeful sentence, Go from me ye cursed, etc?
The Lord grant to all men (one with another) his grace, that they may have this
Scripture always sounding in their ears: Of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.

The consideration of this last day made Jerome afraid to offend: Whether Ierom.
I eat, or drink (says he) or whatsoever I do else, me thinks I hear
this saying sounding in mine ears; Arise ye dead and come to judgment. The
which when I consider, it makes me quake and shake, and not dare to commit
sin, which otherwise I should have committed.

O that men would remember their end, then they should never offend: O that men
would always set before their eyes, the quatuor nouissima: The day of death,
the day of judgment, the joys of heaven, and the torments of hell: then would
not men live so loosely, but they would with all diligence work out their
salvation with fear and trembling: the which care of godliness the Lord grant
to all men.

Thus much shall suffice for this first part of this Scripture: namely, for the
parties that shall give an account, who they be: namely, all men whatsoever.
But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they, etc.

2 Of what things we must give an The second part*
account.

There must an account be made of many, yea, of things innumerable, but
especially of these four.

1 Of the thoughts of our hearts, according to that of Solomon: There Wisd. 1.
9.
shall inquisition be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, there shall not a
wicked thought pass in judgment.

If Adam had committed but one disobedient thought in heart against Almighty
God, with full consent of will to have performed the same, and though he had
not actually broken Gods Commandment: it was necessary that the second Adam
(who is the raiser of our ruins, the ransom of our offenses, and the restorer
of life) should come and suffer the tortures of hell (as he did) or else we
with Adam had gone the high way to eternal misery.

No marvel therefore if our Savior Christ accounted him an adulterer that
lusted after a woman, saying: Whosoever looks on a woman to Mat. 5. ^8.
lust after her, has committed adultery already in his heart. It is the
malicious nature of the Devil (as says Bernard) to entice men to mischief.
Daemonum est mala suggerere, nostrum est Bernard.
non consentire. ^^ is the prop(...) of the Devil to inti^^ and to suggest men
to evil, and it is our parts not to consent to his inticem^nts, but to resist
them manfully, according to that of P^^^^; 1. Pet. ^. ^.
Whom resist y(...) The devil outwardly by the world and inwardly by the
corruption of nature, does daily allure us to sin. Now i^ we consent to those
his wicked motions (whether we perform them outwardly in act, or no) before
God we have committed the sin: according to that of John: He that hates his
1. Ioh. ^. 1^
brother is a man slayer: because in will, in wish, and in desire, he has
already slain him, although he does not bring it into outward act, either for
fear of the law of man, in that case, or for want of just and fit opportunity
for the effecting thereof. Yea, the sin of thought, the sin conceived in
the heart of man is not only a sin, but it is the root and beginning Mat.
15. 1^
of all sins whatsoever: for it is not that which goes into man, that
defiles him, but that which comes out of him, that is: that which proceeds
from the heart of man.

The devil first suggesteth: after The Ladder of sin.
suggestion, comes cogitation: after cogitation follows affection: after
affection follows delectation: after delectation follows consent, (how is
the sin of thought fully committed:) after consent follows operation: after
operation follows ^^stome, after custom follows desperation: after
desperation follows defending of sins committed: after defending of sins
committed, follows vaunting, boasting, and glorying in sin, which is next
to damnation it self: Thus the heart is the fountain, from whence springs
all sin whatsoever.

Yet have we not many wicked ones in this world, that think the sin of heart
to be no sin at all, or else but a small sin, that shall never be brought in
question at the day of account? But let all these know, that, as of every idle
word, so of every wicked and sinful thought conceived and nourished within the
heart of man, has full consent to the performance of the same (for there is no
sin that can be committed without consent had) men, yea all men must give an
account.

I give all men therefore (to the good of their souls) this good counsel of
Solomon, Keep thine heart Prou. 4. 23
with all diligence, for there* out comes life: If thou keep it not
diligently and wa^^ly, thereout will proceed death: I mean, sin, whose Romans
6. ^3
wages is death* The heart is a Mill always grinding either good corn or bad,
either good thoughts or bad, therefore keep it diligently for thy souls sake:
let it meditate in the Law of God day and night, abandon all wicked motions,
that at the day of judgment thou may be pure bread* and fine manchet for the
Bread of Life, Christ Jesus his Table in heaven. The Lord grant this to me the
Writer, thee the Reader, and to every Hearer of it.

2 We must give an account of our words.

Of every idle word that men shall Word.
speak, etc.

Diverse of the learned Writers have diversely commented of this idle word, what
it should be: one, affirming one thing, another, another thing. Therefore I
will (in a word) set down the opinions of some of them, not incongruent,
neither disagreeable to the holy Scripture.

Gregory says, that Verbum otiosum Gregory.
est, quod ^^sta necessitate, and pia vtilitate caret: That is (says he) an
idle word which is spoken, either without just necessity, or godly profit.

Jerome says, that Verbu^ otiosum est, Jerome.
quod sine vtilitate loquentis vel audienti^ pro^ertur, That is (says he) an
idle word, which is spoken either without edification of the Hearer or Speaker.

Basil, Omne verbum quod non condu^it Basil.
ad propositam vtilitatem, vanum est and otiosum, that is, every word, which
belongs not to an intended profit, is a vain and an idle word.

Master John Calvin says: that Calvin.
Sermo otiosus pro inutili sumitur, qui nihil aedificationis vel fructus
assert: id est, An idle word is taken for a word unprofitable, for a word that
brings with it no fruitful edification. So that from these descriptions of
holy men, I do describe an idle word on this manner: Verbum otiosum est, quod
ad bonam rem non pertinet: quod non facit ad gloria^* Dei vnse^tis: quod mut^le
est and infrug^* ferum: quod nec loqu^ntem nec audientem ^di^icat: id est, An
idle word is that which does not appertain to a proposed profit; which tends
not to the glory of the everliving God: which is unprofitable and unfruitful:
which ed^^ieth neither the Hearer, nor the Speaker. If then (good breforen in
Christ Jesus) so great account must be given of every idle, vain, and
fruitless word; what account (think ye) shall be given for swearing,
cursing, banning and blaspheming?

What account shall the swearer give, that has not one word in his mouth but
it is guarded with an execrable oath?

How common (alas) this sin of swearing is, who knows not? for the small
infants and tender children in our streets, have cursed oaths, ad unguem, at
their fingers end: yea, at their tongues end too. What account shall the
cursing and banning tongue ^^ue, that Cruelly, Disdainefully, and Psalm. 31. 1^.
Despightfully, speaks against his neighbor? What account shall the
blasphemous person give, that speaks contemptuous^y of GOD, and says, that
Christ did cast out devils through the name of Beelzebub? If 1. Pet. 4. 1^
the Just shall scarce be saved, where shall the sinner appear? If account
must be made of every idle word, Lord, what account shall they make, that rap
and vomit out blasphemies against the terrible Judge of heaven and earth!

As men think, and fondly imagine, that the sin of thought (unless it
proceed into outward act) is but a small sin: so likewise do they imagine of
idle words, that they are but small sins, and a small account for them shall
be given.

But let all the world know, that no sin can be said to be small in respect of
it own nature, for the least sin that can be committed in the world, is so
weighty, as without repentance had, it will sink the sinner down to the
bottomless pit of hell. Yet, notwithstanding, an idle word, in respect of
other sins, may be said to be a small sin; yet as small as it is, it is
able to damn the soul forever.

Well therefore, says Petrus Damianus, Petr^^
sermon secundo de vitio linguae; Audiat lingua vaniloqua, audiat otiosa
lingua, audiat and pauescat, intelligat and perhorrescat sententiam horribilem,
extremique I^di^ij terrorem, etc. that is, Hear, O vain babbling tongue,
hear, O idle tongue, hear and tremble, understand and quake at the hearing of
the terrible day of Judgment: He that has hands to slay, has he not cares to
hear? He says: that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give an account thereof at the day of Judgment.

Although an idle word be a small sin in respect of greater sins* yet
nevertheless an innumerable company of idle words, congested, accumulated, and
heaped up together, they will make a mighty sin. Quid penna leuius? quid millio
breuius? What is lighter then a feather? and what is shorter then the
^eed-mill? Yet, notwithstanding, an innumerable company of feathers trussed up
together, will break the Porters back. Small were the gnats that troubled
Pharaoh, yet they being Exodus 8. 24
innumerable overcame proud Pharaoh, and all the power of Egypt. An hour is
but a short time, but, Dum hora horae continua successione congeritur: While
one hour by continual succession is added to another, the whole course of our
lives is finished. Quid s^xo durius, quid aqua liquidius? What is harder then a
stone, and what is softer then the water? Yet a Wiseman says: Gutta cauat
lapidem, con^^m^tur Po^^.
annulus vsu: that is, Water by continual drops does eat up the stone, and a
ring by continual use is worn in pieces. So an idle word, although it be but
a small sin, yet many a little makes a mickle, many of them heaped up
together make an intolerable lump.

It has been, is, and ever will be, the fond nature of man, to imagine sin a
great deal lesser then indeed it is. A man would think that Adam (through the
devils suggestion, and Genesis 3. 6.
through the abuse of his own free* will) eating of the forbidden fruit, had
committed but a small trespass: yet ^ee was guilty of everlasting torment for
the same. S man would Number. 15. 30
think, that that poor man had committed but a small sin in gathering chips*
(of mere necessity) on a Sabbath day* yet he was by the Law stoned for his
labor. A man would think that Peter had given his Master good counsel (when
as Christ told him that he must go to Jerusalem, and there suffer many
things) saying, Master, favor Mat. ^^. ^^, ^^
thy self and go not: yet he was called Satan for his labor. A man would
think that Ananias and Saphira Acts 5. ^.
had committed but a small sin, when as they did detain part of the Apostles
money, for fear of afterplays, and protested the contrary with a lie, yet they
dyed both suddenly at the feet of Peter. So a man would think, that an idle
word were but a small sin: yet Christ says here, that a great account must
be made for the same. For, by thy word, thou shall be Mat. 12. 35.
judged, and by thy words thou shall ^e condemned. Seeing this is true, it
behooves every man to set a watch* before the door of his lips, and to keep his
tongue from idle and evil words, that he may obtain that blessedness:
Blessed is he that has not fallen by the Eccle. 1^. 1
words of his mouth.

3 We must give an account of our works, as appears to the Corinthians:
Works. 2. Cor. 5. 10
We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and there receive
according to our works. Again the Preacher says: That God will Eccl. 12. 14
bring to Judgment every work, with every secret thing, whether it be good or
evil. He that has lived in sin, shall receive the reward of sin, which is
death and damnation; and he that has lived in faith and amendment of li^e,
shall receive a crown of glory, which the Lord will give him at that day. It is
the duty therefore of every Christian to labor and to end^uor, with all ^^ligent
carfulness ^o live well, that at the day of Judgment he may s^^d well.
(...), (...), that is, li^e well should be the delightsome posie, and sweet
perfumed Noseg^^ of eu^ry Christian: thus line well* that that may die well*
and after death eternal^ speed well, obtaining that blessedness Blessed are they
that dye in the Lord

4 We must give an account of ou^ 4 Good*
temporal goods, how we have gotten them, whether justly, or unjustly: how we
have spent them, whether we have clothed the naked with them, or whether we
have made naked the clothed for them; how we have disposed them, lest there
he any debate for them after we be gone: therefore Esaias telling Hezekiah,
that he should not live but dye, says: Dispone domum tuam (...) Set thine
house Esaias 38. 1. (...)
in order, for thou must not live, but dye. How then shall those griping
Vultures make an account, that have by oppression undone their brethren? The
world is grown so hard-hearted, that men will rather suffer their brethren to
starve in the streets, then to succor or relieve them: The dogs shall have the
remnant of the Rich man's table, before poor I azarus shall Luke 16. 21.
have one ^rum that falls from the same* ^ow shall these fiinty hearts ^o^ke
for one dram of mercy at the day of Judgment? Let them look with what measure
they have measured to others, it shall be measured to them again: let them
know, that if they will stop their ears at the cry of the poor, they shall
cry themselves and shall not be heard: if they will be partakers with the
Saints of the joys of heaven, their brethren must be partakers with them of
their wealth on earth: For this is to treasure up treasures in heaven, to lay
out their treasures on earth.

Let men therefore so use their temporal goods, and worldly riches, as they
may at the day of account receive a Crown of immortal Glory.

5 We must give an account of the 5 Time.
time wherein we live, and of our several vocations, how we have employed our
selves in the same.

Says Bernard: Omne tempus ti^i Bernard.
impensum requiretur a te qualiter fuerit expensum^d est, All the time that God
has given thee, shall be required at thy hands, how thou have spent it:
Whether in the service of God, or in the service of Satan.

The Prince must give an account how he has governed his kingdom whether he
has (as it becomes Gods Vicegerent) mildely, lovingly, and carefully
trained his Subjects up in the worship of God: or as a bloody Nero, and
hard-hearted Tyrant, cruelly oppressed them. The Ministers of the Word of God
(who have taken upon them curum animorum: The charge of souls) must give an
account, how they have behaved themselves in their Ministry: whether they have
preached Christ for Christ, that is; for the conversion of sinners to Christ,
or (as hirelings) for lucre and gain of worldly trash: whether they have fed
their Flocks carefully, or fed upon their Flocks couetously. The Magistrate
must give an account, how he has behaved himself in his Magistracy: whether
^ee has sought the maintenance of Virtue, and the confusion of Vice, or has
(his eyes being blinded with silver scales) maintained iniquity, and oppressed
the innocent. The Householder* how he has governed his Family: whether in
reading of holy Scriptures, and Prayer, to the praise and glory of God; or in
reading of foolish fables, in gaming, dicing, playing, swearing, and such like.
Yea, every man must give an account of the time spent in his several calling,
from the highest to the lowest. Let every Christian therefore beware of
mis-spending his time, living in security loosely, and of losing his time
securely, and carelessly: for there will come a day, when for every hour of thy
life thou shall give an account, how thou have spent it: according as Solomon
tells the careless liver: Rejoice O young man in thy youth, Eccl. 11* 9.
cheer thy heart in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know, that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment. Time lost can never be recovered, the hour past
cannot be recalled: Time is painted like an old man having a lock of hair on
the hinder part; to signify that men should lay hold of time coming, and make
much of it when they have it: for being once gone, it can never be recovered.
Augustine confesses Augustine.
that he spent his time idly when he stood gazing and looking on a spider,
how she caught a fly in her net. But alas, me^ in these days do not only spend
their time in idleness (which is a shameful fault among Christians) but also
in all manner of evil: They Amo^ 6. 3.
put off from them the evil day, namely, the day of death and judgment, and
boldly approach to the seat of iniquity: a matter much to be lamented.

Let every Christian therefore have a care of the expense of time, lest (had I
wist) come too too late: for the damned in hell, if they had this favor of God
to line on the earth again, and to have hell broken loose (which they shall
never have granted) they would live so strictly, as they might be chronicled
for admirable spectacles to the whole Example.
world: It is the duty therefore of every man to imitate that person, that
vigilant person, that carried always about with him in his pocket a little
clock, and when he heard it sound, he would instantly examine himself how he
had spent that hour: thus should Christians examine themselves, that they may
never be examined of the Lord; judge themselves, that they may never be judged
of the Lord; and account with themselves, that they may never be brought to an
account of the Lord. Thus much for the second part of the Text: namely, of what
things we must give an account.

But I say unto you of every idle word, etc. Before I speak of the third part
of this Text; namely, of the Judge, to whom we must give an account, I think
it very necessary to speak of a few things, which being well considered, we may
be able to abstain from idle words, and shall have the less account to make
at that day. Three things therefore there are, which being performed, we shall
abstain from idle words.

1. A man must consider what he speaks. 2. To whom he speaks. 3. When he
speaks. Quid.

1. What he speaks: Peter tells us what we ought to speak in his 1. Pet.
4. 1.
first Epistle: If any man speak, let him speak as the words of God. Again,
Paul to the Ephesians says: Ephesians. 4. 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is
good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the Hearer. So that
we ought to speak above all things of God and his word, of good and honest
matters, if we will show our selves to be true Christians, and abstinent from
idle words. We should say with David, I will always Psalm. 34. 1.
give thanks to the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth continually. We
should resolve with Job and say: My lips shall surely speak no wickedness, Job
27. 4.
and my tongue shall utter forth no deceit: then shall we use our tongues to
that purpose, to which they were created.

The tongue in Hebrew is called, K^bod: id est, Gloria, Glory: because it is an
instrument to sing forth the glory of God upon earth. If we use our tongues to
this purpose, then we may truly say with the Poet, Lingua quid Poet.
melius? What is better then the tongue? But if it be abused to the dishonor of
Almighty God, if it be an vn^amed member, uttering out idle, and evil words,
then may we conclude with the Poet, and say: Lingua quid Mat. 12. 34.
p^ius eadem? What is worse then the tongue?

Let every Christian therefore show himself (as he professes) a Christian in
his speech: For out of the abundance Mat. 12. 34
of the heart the mouth speaks. Even as the heart stands affected, so is
the speech of every man: For Lingua est mentis interp^es: the tongue is the
interpreter of the mind: the chaste man speaks chastely and honestly; the
wanton speaks lawdly and luxuriously: the envious person speaks bitingly,
and bitterly. Even as by his speech a man may be known what Country man he
is: so a man by his speech may be known to what kingdom he belongs.

Three kingdoms.
men by their talk may be known to which of these they belong. There is, 1.
Prouincia Coelestis, The Kingdom of Heaven: and the speech of this Country is,
praising of God, talking of his word, giving of thanks for the great benefits
we have received, and speaking of divine and heavenly matters: he therefore
that speaks on this manner ( Idqu^ non hypocritice; that is, not
hypocritically: For, Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas: counterfeit holiness
is double vngodlnesse) surely appertains to the Kingdom of Heaven.

2 There is, Prouincia terrestris, the Kingdom of earth: and the speech of
this Country is talking of terrene and earthly matters, muzling with the Mole
in the cranies, Terrarumque poris, and in the pores of the earth: quite
contrary to the nature of man: for, Os homini sublime dedit (says the Ovid.
Poet) coelumque tueri iussit: God gave man a lofty face, and bade him look
aloft, and hold up his head toward Heaven. According to that of John: Quide
terra est* de terra loquitur: He Ioh. 3. 31.
that is of the earth, speaks of the earth. And again: They are of the 1.
Ioh. 4. 5.
world, therefore speak they of the world.

3 There is, Prouincia infernalis: The Kingdom of hell: and the language of
this country is swearing, forswearing, cursing, banning and blaspheming: if
therefore thou see such a one, it is to be feared that he belongs to the
Province hell: Thou therefore that would belong to Gods thrice-blessed
kingdom, thou that would abstain from idle words, and so have the less
account to make; thou must beware what thou speak, thou must talk of God
and of his word, of holy and heavenly matters.

2 He that would abstain from idle (...)
words, must consider to whom he speaks: if he speaks to a fool, he must
use few words, for he spends his breath in vain: if he speaks to a
froward and contentious person, he must use mild and gentle words, or else he
takes the bellows to quench the ^^re: If he speaks to a wise man, he must
use no vain Tautologies, or needless repetitions: for frustra fit per plura,
quod fieri potest per pauciora. It is in vain to use many words, when we may
as well be conceived in few. If these things be not considered, we may (yea
speaking of divine and holy matter) offend in idle words.

3 If we would abstain from idle Quando.
words, we must also consider when to speak; says Solomon: There is a time
Eccles. 3. 7.
to speak, and a time to hold ones peace. Says one: There is a time when
something may be spoken, and there is a time when nothing may be spoken, but
there is no time when all things may be spoken. These three things well
considered of us, we shall abstain from idle words, and have the less account
to make at the day of Judgment. Again, every Christian, as he ought to
imitate Christ in all things, so he ought to imitate him in his words. Gregory
says: that Omnis Christi actio nostra debet esse instructio: Gregory.
id est, Every action of Christ ought to be to us an example of imitation.
Christ had three things in his words worthy of consideration, which we must
likewise labor to have, if we will abstain from idle words.

veritatem in verbis: truth in his words: ^ea, he reports of himself in
John: that he is Via, Veritas, (...)
and Vita: The Way, the Truth, and the Life: He therefore that speaks truth
to his neighbor, shows himself to be the Child of Christ Jesus, the
Fountain and Origo of all truth: but he that speaks leasings, and utters
forth lies, shows himself to be the child or the devil, the author and
original of all lies.

vtilitatem in verbis: profit in his words. As he spoke truly so he spoke
profitably: He never spoke one idle or unprofitable word through the whole
course of his life, which was above 32. years.

moderamen in verbis: A mean in his words: He never was in words excessive;
and when just and necessary occasion was offered* he was never deficient: but
Lady Mean (I mean golden virtue) drew forth his well contrived words out of
the rich Conduit of his euer^lowing heart* He fulfilled that saying of Jesus,
the son of Syrach: The Eccl 21. 2^.
words of the wi^e are weighed in a balance.

In these three things should every one imitate Christ Jesus, and then we
should abstain (as he did) from idle, vain, frivolous, and unprofitable
words; for which, a great account must be given: The which imitation of Christ,
the Lord, for Christ his sake grant to all men, that they being like unto him,
may be received to reign with him and his holy Angels, in the thrice-happy
heavens at that day. Amen.

But I say unto you, that of every Text.
idle word that men shall, etc.

3 To whom this account must be The third part.
given. Although in this Scripture that Judge is not expressly mentioned, yet
notwithstanding, quod subintelligitur non de est: that which is understood is
not wanting; and therefore not to be omitted.

This Judge therefore, before whose Tribunal Seat all mankind must appear*
it is Christ: for he was anointed of his Father into a triple office; to be a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech: to be a Prophet after the order of
David: to be a King after the order of Solomon: Therefore Christ, as he is
King over all in heaven and earth, is this Judge before whom we must all
appear: The truth of this is evident in the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Corinthians: We ^. Cor. 5 10.
must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, etc. We read also in
John; that the Father judges no man, Ioh. ^. ^^.
but he has committed all judgment to his Son. And in Matthew it is
written; that all power is given to Mat. ^^. 2^
Christ in heaven and in earth. This was prophesied of him in the Psalm: Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten Psalm. ^. ^^ ^. ^.
thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and
the ends of the earth for thy possession: Thou shall crush them with a scepter
of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

And again in another place: Sit Psalm. 11^. 1
thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Yea, it is
an Article of our faith to believe, that JESUS CHRIST shall come again to
judge both the quick and the dead.

Christ is therefore the Judge: yea Judge*
he is vere Iudex, a right Judge: for this word Iudex, that is, Judge, is as
much as ius dicens, id est: One that speaks Justice: and Iudico, that is to
Judge, is as much as ius dico, to speak justice: and iudicium, that is,
judgment, is as much as iurisdicium, if I may so term it, that is: a Just
and Right speech.

So Christ being an upright Judge, maintains Justice in Judgment: he is a
Judge that will use no partiality, but will reward every man according to his
works: he is a Judge that has no respect of persons. Men Rom ^ 1^
in this world may fitly be compared to Actors of a Comedy upon a Stage:
Wherein, one acts the part of a Prince, another of a Duke, another of an
Earl, another of a Nobleman, another of a Gentleman, another of a Magistrate,
another of a Merchant, another of a Countriman, another of a Servant: one
acts one part; one another, and so long as they are upon the stage, so long
there is respect (according to their parts) one of another amongst them: But
when the Comedy is ended, and the stage pulled down, then there is no such
respect amongst them: yea, many times he that played the basest part is the
best man.

So likewise, so long as men act sundry parts upon the stage of this earth,
that is, so long as men do live in several vocations, so long there is respect
amongst men, and that worthily: but when as the Comedy shall be ended; that is,
the day of doom shall come upon all men, when as the stage shall be pulled
down, that is, the earth shall be changed, (for the earth shall never be
brought ad non eus, to nothing: but only the corruptiue qualities shall be
consumed) then shall there be n^ respect of persons amongst men: yea, it may
be that the po^^e man shall be greater before God than the rich man. ^ea, and
besides all this, upon the earth God has no respect of persons (although there
be respect amongst men) but every man shall receive according to his works,
the Prince as well as the Subject, the Rich as well as the poor.

If a Judge then should come into a City, and should judge the greatest part
of the City to death, sparing no man, nec precio, nec prece, neither by
bribes, nor entreaties: would not every man in that City be in great
perplexity and fear? So fear this Judge, who shall come with thousands of
Angels in great Pomp, Majesty, and Glory, into the City of this world, and
judge the greatest part of mankind to death and damnation, sparing no man;
neither precio, nor prece, neither by bribes, nor yet by entreaties, a Judge
that will use no partiality: A Judge that is able to destroy both (...)2.
body and Soul in hell fire for evermore: Fear this Judge, this terrible
Judge, this just Judge, this strict Judge, that will not suffer one idle word
to escape in judgment: thou that have offended this Judge by thy manifold
transgressions, thou that have deserved for them everlasting torments in the
pit of hell, fear him, quake and tremble before him, at the hearing of this
hard saying: But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof at the day of Judgment.

If Paul a chosen vessel, and a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, was afraid
of this judgment? If the just and upright man Job cried out and said: Quid
agam, quo me conuertans Job, ^ 1^
cum venerit Dominus ad iudicandum^? What shall I do, O whither shall I turn
me, when the Lord comes to Judgment? If blessed Hilary (who from the
fourteenth year of his age served the LORD in singleness of heart, and in
sincerity of life to his lives end) was afraid of this day, as it appears by
his speech upon his deathbed; Egredere anima, egredere: H^^^^ion.
quid times? quid dubitas? That is, Go forth, O Soul, go forth: Why art thou
afraid? Why doubtest thou? ^ho^ have served Christ these seventy years, and
art now afraid to depart? If these holy men were afraid of this terrible day,
how ought thou (O sinner) that art defiled with sin, from top to toe, that
have not served thy God (as thou ought) one day in seventy years, how
ought thou to quake and tremble? If the Just shall scarce be saved, 1. Pet
4. 18
where shall thou (poor wretch) appear?

If the people of Israel trembled at Exo. 16. 18
the presence of God on Mount Sinai, when the Lord gave unto them his Law, and
(as a Schoolmasters) read a Lecture to all the world: how terrible will his
presence be, when he shall come to exact this Lecture at thy hands, how thou
have conned the same?

If John and Daniel, at the sight of a Apoc. 1, 1^ Dan. 8. 17.
mild Angel, fell upon the earth as dead: how shall thou (poor sinner)
endure the presence of this terrible Judge? If Haman could not abide the angry
countenance of King Ahasuerosh, Hest. 7. 6.
how shall thou (O wicked man) abide the angry countenance of this frowning
Judge? If Adam for the Genesis 3 8.
commission of one sin, ran from God in great fear, and hid himself
behind the bush: whither shall thou (O sinful Adamite, that have committed as
many sins, as stars in sky, as hairs on head, and sands by Sea, Immo horum
numerus numero non clauditur vllo: Yea, the number of them is not to be
numbered) whither (I say) shall thou desire to run? and where shall thou wish to
hide thy self from this terrible Judge? O (says Augustine) Mallent Augustine.
impi^ esse in inferno, quam videre faciem irati Iudicis: The wicked had rather
be tormented in hell, then see the face of this fearful Judge. Then shall
thou cry to the mountains; Cadite super me* Fall upon me: and to the hills,
(...)
Abscondire me a facie sedentis super thronum, and ab ira Agni: id est, Hide
me from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb.

Then shall the Book be opened, videlicet, the evidence of thy works in this
life, recorded freshly in the testimony of thine own conscience, and in the
true and infallible memory of Gods eternal wisdom: then shall thy sins be
set in order before thine eyes: heaven and earth shall witness against thee:
yea, thine own Conscience shall condemn thee: and Conscientia Psalm. 50. 11.
Psalm. 50. 4. Romans 2. 15.
est mill testes* Thy Conscience is a thousand witnesses to condemn thee. The
devil shall plead hard (most pitiful wretch) for thy Soul and body,
accusing thee on this manner: O Iudex iustissime, O most just Judge, thou have,
in the abundance of thy love, suffered many torments of hell upon the Cross at
Golgotha, for the redemption of this wretch: thou have offered him (times
innumerable) redemption, justification, and endless happiness: yet
nevertheless he has despised thee, and hated thy instruction, and has
chosen rather to follow me, then thee; rather to walk in iniquity, after my
example, then in holiness of life, after thine; he has chosen to be my
servant, rather then thine: therefore what remains, but that thou should
refuse him, that refused thee, and that I should receive him to everlasting
torments* that has hitherto served me?

When thou (poor soul) shall hear this pitiful Plea, and confess the same
to be too true: what shall become of thee, or whither shall thou turn thee for
comfort? Alack, alack, thou shall have no hope of salvation: for above thee
thou shall see the Judge angry with thee for thy sins, and the blessed Angels
rejoicing and laughing at thy destruction: beneath thee, thou shall see hell
open, and the fiery Furnace ready to receive thee to torment: on thy right
hand, shall be thy sins accusing thee: on thy left hand, the devils ready to
execute Gods judgments upon thee: within thee shall lie thy Conscience
gnawing: without thee, the damned crew bewayling, on every side fire burning;
and then shall thou receive this lamentable sentence: Go from me, ye Mat 25. 41
cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. Every one of these words are able to cut thy heart asunder. Go from
me: Go.
Hitherto I have bin a Father to thee, I have bestowed many comfortable
benefits upon thee, I have had great care of thee; but now go from me into
torments inexpressable, where thou shall cry unto me, but I will not hear
thee: in torment shall thou lie comfortless. in hell thy torment shall be
endless: I will put a gulf between thee and me, to make thy torments
remediless: thou shall be dying Apoc. 9. 6. Luke 6. 25
always, yet never dead: thou shall seek death, but never find it: thou
shall be burning always, yet never burnt to death: thy mente shall Psalm. 11.
6. Mat. 1^. 4^
be griping hunger, and famine intolerable, thy drink shall be lakes of fire
and brimstone: thy music shall be howling and roaring of crying devils, and
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Ye cursed: Thou have been called Ye (...)
hitherto by renowned and glorious titles; as Prince, Duke, Noble, Reverend,
Master, etc. But now thou shall have another title: thou shall be called
Cursed: cursed shall thou be of God, whose curse is ^^narum inflictio, id est:
punishment: cursed shall thou be of all the blessed Angels in heaven, whose
curse is Conscientiae cruciamen, id est: vexation of thy conscience: Cursed
shall thou be of all the devils in hell, whose curse is Poenarum executio, id
est: the execution of thy punishment prescribed; according to that of the Poet;
Minos ^xamen, Radamanthus dat cr^scia^en tertius heu frater tertia iura tenet,
id est: One devil cippeth up thy examination, another devil tormenteth thee,
the third is not behind to add one torment to another upon thee* Cursed
moreover shall thou be of all the damned crew, whose curse is Poenarum
aggra^^atio, id est, the augmentation of thy torment: Thus cursed shall thou
be of all things for evermore.

Into everlasting fire: O miserable Into everlasting fire
torment* There were some comfort to the damned soul, if these torments should
have end; but that shall never be. O miserable wretch! Thou shall Mat. 22. 13
be bound hand and foot, and cast into this everlasting fire. In respect of
which fire, all earthly elementall fire is but as fire painted on a wall; thy
torments shall be endless, easelesse* and remediless.

Which is prepared for the devil and Which is prepared.
his angels: Heaven was prepared for thee, and not hell: thou were borne to
glory, and not torment; but because thou have chosen to follow the devil and
not Me, therefore, Go from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and thee his wicked angel, where thou shall lie
weeping and wayling, and gnashing of thy teeth for evermore.

The consideration of these things should stir up every Christian to look
about him, to be careful and circumspect to all his ways, that ^ee tread not
his she^ awry at any time, that he offend not this fearful Judge in any thing,
that at this day of judgment he may find him a gentle and loving Lamb, and
not a Lion of Iud^; for as to the wicked this Judge is terible, so to the godly
he is a friendly and a welcome Judge: as to the wicked the day of Judgment is
a day of desolation, a day of clouds and blackness: so to the godly it is a
day of Redemption: ^^^^. 1. 1^
yea, the godly shall leap for joy at that day, and for the coming of that
day the blessed spirits in heaven try out, saying: How long Apo^. ^2.
Lord and the blessed ones upon earth desire the coming of this day also;
saying with Paul, Cupimus dissolui, and Phil 1. 23.
esse cum Christo: id est; We desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ:
and praying with John, Veni Domine Jesus, Apoc* 6. 9. 10.
Come Lord JESUS, come quickly. Let every Christian therefore so lead his life,
that it may go well with him at that day: What if I have all the Mat. 1^. ^^
world, and lose my soul at that day, what does it profit me?

If a man be called to appear before some earthly Judge, he will have an
especial care to array himself in the best manner he may, and to behave
himself accordingly, that he may be the better accepted of him. So every
Christian, against the day of Judgment, when he must appear before the King
of Kings, and Judge of all the world, must have an especial care to put on the
Wedding garment of Christ's Righteousness and Regeneration, lest he be sent
packing to hell with the wicked, and all those that forget God.

Mordecay, because he went basely Hest. 4 ^
in sackcloth, could not be permitted to come into the Kings Palace: and do
thou think (whatsoever thou art) that thou shall he admitted into that
Glorious Palace of the King of Hetnen, having on the stinking, defiled, and
abominable garment of impurity, and the menstruous cloth of iniquity? No, no,
the Lord will spue thee out of his mouth: a stinking carcass stinketh not so
before men, as a polluted sinne^ in the nost^ils of Almighty God.

Nebuchadnezzar would have no Dan. 1. 4.
children in his Palace, but those that were wise and beautiful: and doess
thou think that the King of Heaven and earth will have any fools; that is,
sinners (for the sinner is called a fool in the Scripture: The fool says in
Psalm. 14. 1.
his heart there is no God) to dwell with him in his Palace? or do thou think
that an ugly person shall be suffered there, that is, any sinner: (for the
sinner is an ugly and abominable thing in the sight of God?) No, the Lord will
entertain none into his Kingdom, but such as are beautiful, shining in
holiness, purity, and righteousness, as the portals of the burnish Sun:
such as are without spot or wrinkle, Omnino ad imaginem suam: altogether like
unto him: holy as he is holy, pure as h^e is pure: Such will the Lord have in
his Kingdom, to sing Halleluiah: Salvation, and Glory, A(...)
and Honor, and Power be to the Lord our God.

Therefore as the thief is exceeding provident, and very careful how he may
answer the Judge at the bar: and as in earthly Courts men will be very
careful to provide an answer against they be called: yea, and will make some
friend to the Judge, that they may speed the better: so likewise every
Christian soul should carefully provide a good answer against he be cited by
the Apparitour Death, to appear before Christ at the general Court of Heaven:
and that then it may go well with him, let him get some friend to move the
Judge in his behalf, as he tendreth the welfare of his dear Soul. And who
must that friend be? not Mary nor Peter; but it must be CHRIST JESUS, that
sits at the right hand of his Father in glory, and makes daily intercession
for the sins of the whole world. Get him for thy Proctour (who offers
himself to all) and then happy shall thou be; the Devil shall not prevail
against thee; for CHRIST has broken his head: the gates of hell shall not
prevail against thee; for Christ has conquered them: and death shall not hold
thee captine, for Christ has overcome it. Happy art thou that art in Psalm. ^.
4* 15.
such a ^ase; yea blessed art thou, if thou have the Lord for thy God.

Thus much for the third part of this Text: namely, of the Judge to whom we
must give account.

But I say unto you, that of every Text.
idle word, etc.

4 When we shall give an account: The 4. part.
It is said here, at the day of judgment.

The time when this great and general day shall be, cannot be known of
mortal man: yea, it is not for man to know of it: as we may read in the Acts:
It is not for you to know the Act. 1. 7.
times and seasons which God has put in his own power: yea, Christ him self
knows not of this day. But of that day and home (says Mark) Mark 13.
knows no man, no, not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the bonne
himself, ^a^e t^^ Father, id est, Christ according to his humane Nature
knows not of i^* but according to his Divine Nature, he knows of it as well
as God the Father: for he is co-equall with God the Father, in Knowledge,
Wisdom, and in all things whatsoever: yea, he knew of this day before the
foundation of the world was laid: yea, He himself shall sit Judge at that day.

God will not have us know of this day, when it shall be, for these three
causes.



Quae supra nos, nihil ad no^. Aristotle.
That which is above our capacity, we ought not to meddle withal.

3 To keep us in continual watchfulness: for if we knew certainly the day of
death and judgment, surely it would be a great and forcible motive to draw us
to a loose, negligent, and secure kind of life. Watch therefore, Man ^4. 42
(says the Evangelist) because ye know not when your Master will come. For
these three causes the Lord will not have us know of the time of judgment.

Although (my beloved in Christ) we know not the certainty of the time of this
day: yet nevertheless we must know that this great and general day cannot be
far off, both according to the Prophesies of holy fathers, as also to the
truth of holy Scriptures.

Augustine in his book upon Genesis, (...)
against the Manichees says, that the world should last six ages: the first
from Adam to Noah; the second from Noah to Abraham; the third from Abraham to
David; the fourth from David to the transmigration of Babylon; the fifth from
the transmigration of Babylon, to the coming of Christ in the flesh; the sixth
from the coming of Christ in the flesh, to his coming again to judgment. So
that according to his Prophecy, we (...) in the last age, which last age is
called of John, H^ra extrema, or hora (...)
nouissima, the last hour: But how long this last hour does last, he that is
Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, ye everlasting God alone does know

The Hebrews they boast of the Prophecy of Eliah, a great man in Eliah*
those days: he prophesied that the world should last 6000. years: 2000.
before the Law, 2000. under the Law and 2000. from Christ to Christ.

If this his prophecy holds true, the world cannot last 400. years: for since
Christ his coming in the flesh, it was 1619. at Christs-tide last past,
according to the computation of the Church from time to time. But leaving men,
and coming to the Scriptures, which cannot err, for Humanum est errare, Man
may, yea and do many times err:

Saint Paul says to the Corinthians: 1 Cor. 20. 11.
We are they upon whom the ends of the world are come. If therefore the ends of
the world were come upon those that lived above 1564. years ago, then surely
Doomes day cannot now possibly be far off.

James also says: Behold, the judge Iam. 5. 9.
stands before the door.

John Baptist preached repentance Mat. 3 2
to the Jews, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand*

So that by these places of Scripture it is evident, that the general day of
Judgment is at hand: as also by the signs and tokens which should go before
this day immediately, of which many, yea almost all are already fulfilled.

Moreover we must (dear brethren) know, that there is a twofold judgment;
the one called a particular judgment, the other called a general judgment.

1 The particular judgment is ^ (...) 2^.
exercised and executed upon every man, imediatly after his death, which is,
S^* regatio animae a corpore: A separation of the soul from the body.

Of this particular judgment we may read in the Epistle to the Hebrews: It
is appointed unto men that (...)
they shall once die, and after that comes Judgment. And though the general
judgment comes not these 4000. years; yet particular judgment comes at the
day of our death; and look as we at the day of our death shall be found, so
shall we be judged: and as we then shall be judged, so shall we be judged at
the general judgment

2 The general judgment (of which this Scripture speaks) is exercised and
executed upon all men together, by Christ: who shall by his power, raise all
those up again that have bin dead from the beginning of the world, to that
time: and they shall be presented all together (being again united to their
souls) before Christ's Tribunal seat, who shall come down in a Cloud from
heaven, in great Majesty and Glory, with thousands of blessed Angels attending
upon him: and he shall give sentence upon al in general: the wicked shall be
cast into everlasting fire, and the godly he shall carry up with him into
Coelum Empir^um, the third and highest heaven, (where he now in body reigns
and remains) there to reap joys unspeakable for evermore.

But some man may object and lay, Ob.
Why (I pray you) shall there be a general judgment, when as all are judged
in the particular judgment? what, shall there be two judgments executed?

There shall (notwithstanding the A^^
particular) be a general judgment, and that for three causes.







By reason of this general judgment, some light-braind Heretics there be
that say, that there is no particular judgment at all, and that the Soul
immediately after death is not judged; for whereas it is said, Hodie mecum ^ris
in Paradiso: To day thou Luke ^3. 4^
shall be with me in Paradise, the speech of our Savior to the thief: they
take that word ( body, id est, to day) for 1000 years; and bring for proof
hereof the place of the Psalm, A thousand years Psalm. 90. 4.
in thy sight are as yesterday.

But to answer them: this place of Scripture is not so to be understood, as
that a thousand years should be taken for a day, or a day for a thousand
years: for he says not a thousand yerees are a day: but a thousand years in
the sight of God, that is, in respect of the eternity and euerlastingnesse of
God, are as a day. It is therefore spoken on this manner, to express the
eternity of God, as if he should say: A thousand years with m^n, in respect
of the eternity of God* a^^ but as a day: for as many as are have bin and ever
shall be the days of man* so many thousand; yea, so (...) th^n sand thousands
years is the C^^^nitie of God: He is Alpha and Omega, the First and the La^^,
before all beginnings, and shall never have ending.

Again they allege that place of Genesis: In that day that thou eatest Genesis
2. 17.
thereof; (namely, of the forbidden fruit) thou shall dye the death.

Now (says the Heretic) that Ob*
day they dyed not, but lived many hundrd years after: Therefore, by a day, is
understood many hundred years.

ADAM did eat of the forbidden fruit) even that day did he dye* that is, that
day by sin he was separated from God, then the which separation no death is
greater* for* Vt v^^a corporis est anima, (...) v^^a (...) est Deus; Augustine.
toll animam (...) corpus; toll D^^^^* m^ritur anima^ ^d est, As the soul is
the life of the body, so God is (...) of the soul; take away the soul* the
body dies; take away God* the Soul (...) So Adam that day dyed in Soul,
^eing separated from the Lord; yea, that day Adam was made subject to death in
this life and in the life to come; that day he had the beginnings of death
seazing upon him: for he was presently cast out of Paradise, into the ragged
world, he was cursed and all his posterity; yea, he should have gone to hell,
had not the second Adam broken the head of the subtle serpent that enticed him
to sin. Yea, the Thief upon the Cross had Paradise that day in his soul,
in which he suffered in body; although he had it not in so full measure as he
shall at the general day, when his Soul shall take unto it the body again:
Hodie, to day, thy soul with my soul, shall be in Paradise: that is, in my
Fathers Kingdom.

Where is now the Heretic that confounds particular judgment?

Where is now the Epicure, that thinks there is no judgment at all*

Where is now the ignorant Papist, that dreameth of ^u^ga^ory? and he that
^ondly thinks that there is Limbus Patrum, and Limbus Puerorum? and where are
those that imagine of a place of abode between Heaven and Hell? I turn them
altogether to the Hebrews for wisdom, in this Heb. 9. 27.
point, where they shall find, that after death the soul of man is judged.

Would Paul have so earnestly desired Phil. 1. 23.
to have been dissolved, if he should not presently have been with Christ? He
says, That in this world we see in 1 Cor. 13. 12.
a glass darkely. We see but Gods back-part, as Moses did: that is, but a
little of the favor of God: But then, Ex. 33. 23.
that is, after this life ended, we shall see God face to face: that is, we
shall have the full fruition of him.

We read of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 19. 22
that after death, the one was judged to heaven, the other to hell: which is a
Parable, to signify the truth of this particular judgment.

And to conclude this point, we Eccl. 12. 7.
read in Solomon: That the dust returns to the earth from whence it came, and
the Spirit to God that gave it.

So that we may learn from hence the uncertainty of the day of Judgment. The
use hereof. Bernard.
Well says Bernard: Nihil certius morte, hora mortis nihil ^^certius: that is,
Nothing is more certain then death, and there is nothing more uncertain then
the hour of death.

Let every Christian therefore (that wishes the salvation of his Soul at the
day of death and Judgment) beware of security and careless living: let no man
defer repentance, and amendment of life, lest death come when he looks not
for it, and so being unprepared, he be cast into hell* fire.

The old world had 120. years to Gen 6. 3. Jonas 1* ^ Psa. 9. 5, 1^
repent in: Nini^e had 40. days to repent in: Israel had 40 years to repent
in: but thou (O man) know not how long thou have to live: thou have no lease
of thy life, thou art here to day, and gone to morrow: when the hours of thy
life be ended, and the glass out-runne, thou must away: death waits for
thee in every place, and at all times; therefore w^ite thou for it, playing the
five wise Virgins, that had the candle of says burning in the lamps of their
hearts, nourished with Mat. 25. 4.
the oil of love and works.

Jerusalem, because she could not be brought to repentance, she was destroyed:
many hundred thousands of her children were ^amisht to death: and many hundred
thousands taken captive by Titus Vespatian, the Roman (...)
Emperor: many cast to wild beasts and devoured.

The children of Israel, because they were a stiff-necked people, and a
froward generation, and would not be brought to Repentance; how many thousands
of men lay slain in the Wilderness? 600000. Males, except Joshua and Caleb.

The old world, because they would Genesis 7. ^^.
take no warning, and could not be brought to amendment of life: the s^oud
drowned them all, except faithful Noah and his godly family; And except thou
repentest, thou likewise shall perish; according to that of Luke: Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise Luk* 13 3*
perish: Beware therefore and repent betimes: F^lix quem ^^ciunt aliena
pericula cautum: Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.

Refuse no good motions knocking at the door of thy heart, but entertain them
willingly; according to the counsel of Augustine: If he offers Augustine.
thee grace to day (says he) take it, make much of it, for thou know not
whether he will offer the same to morrow: Make no long tarrying to turn to
the Lord, and put not off from day to day: the longer thou remainest in thy
sin, the h^r^er it is for thee to repent: for, Qui (...), cra^ Poet.
minus aptus ^rit: If thou b^^^l not fit for amendment to day thou will be
less fit to morrow. Therefore, while the Lord speaks to thee, make him
answer: while he calls unto thee, let there be an echo in thi^e heart, as
was in the heart of David: Seek ye my Psalm. ^7. ^*
face: thy face Lord will I seek: And while it is said to day* harden not your
hearts: in no case deserve repentance: for the day of death and judgment is
uncertain; as says Chrysostom: Poenitenti veniam spospondit, sed viuendi in
crastinum non spospondit, that is, The Lord has promised pardon to him that
repents, but to live till to morrow he has not promised.

At what Eze. 18. 2^. ^2.
time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his
heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.
And will pray to the Lord for forgiveness of their sins, as Augustine
Augustine*
said before his conuersion^: Ignosce (pater) ignosce mihi, at noli modo:
Forgive me my sins, but not now: let me sin in my youth, and pardon me in
mine age. Thus they would desire to dye the death of the righteous: but they
would not live the life of the righteous: but let these graceless persons
(that thus defer repentance) beware of two things.

1 Let them beware of sudden death: let them take heed, lest they be cut off
in the midst of their sins; as Jobs Children in the midst of their Job 1. 18
banqueting and ryoting were suddenly slain by the fall of a house: and as
the Flood came unlooked for, and drowned the old world.

Liuie reports a fearful example (...)
of sudden death: says he, There were two old men that frequented two
Harlots, and presently upon the fact committed, they both suddenly dyed: the
one was thrust through with a dagger: the other dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy:
which is a disease engendered of abundance of gross humors, which do fill
those vessels and receptories of the head, from whence comes feeling and
moving of the body, as says Galen, and therefore (...)
they that have this disease, are deprived of all sense, feeling and moving.

Let every lusty Younke^ and desperate russian, set this fearful example
before his eyes.

Again, the young man dies as soon as the old: the Lambs skin is brought to
the Market, as well as the old Crones: true is the saying of Augustine: Vita
dum crescit, decrescit: vita Augustine.
mortalis and mors vitalis: id est, Life while it increases, decreaseth; life
is dying, and death is living.

^ Let all men that refuse the mercy of God, and defer their repentance,
know, that repentance is not theirs at command, but it is the great mercy of
God: and it is to be ^^ared, that they that have refused it offered, when they
would have it, they shall go without according to that country Proverb: If you
will not when you may; when you will, you shall have ^ay: And it is commonly
seen, that Qu(...)a, ^^^^s ita: as a man lives (commonly) he dies: He that
will live without repentance, must look to dye without repentance*

(...) God spared the Thief at the la^^ gasp, yet let no man presume of that:
for that was a medicine against desperation, and not a matter of imitation:
says one; God spared one, that no man might despair; he spared but one; that
no man might presume.

Let every man therefore (in the fear of God) without all delay, seek for
amendment of life: let them (as Gregory wishes) Plangere, plangenda: Bewail
their sins that ought to be lamented: and as they have given Romans 6. 13
their members as weapons of unrighteousness to iniquity: so let them now
give them as weapons of righteousness to holiness. Repent (dear brethren)
betimes.

Vi^e Deo gratus, toti mundo tumulatus: Poet.

Crimine mu^datus, semper transire paratus.
That is:
Live unto God a thankful wight,
And to the world dye:
Cleanse thy self from wickedness,
Always ready hence to fly.
Play the wise Steward, lay up treasures in heaven for thy soul; imitate the
Pismire, which gathers in Summer, whereby she may live in Winter.

Damascene reports an excellent Damascene.
History touching this purpose: says he, There was a country where they chose
their King of the poorest and basest sort of the people, and upon any
dislikement taken, they would depose him from his Throne, and exile him into an
Island, where he should be sta^ued to death. Now one wise fellow (considering
hereof) sent money before into that Island, into which he should be banished:
and when he was banished, he was received into the Island with great triumph.

So, against thou be banished by death from this world, without penny or
farthing, (for naked thou came, and naked thou must go) thou must provide
w^^le thou art in this life, whereby thou may live in Heaven hereafter.

Let nothing therefore make thee (...)err thy amendment, but whiles^ Christ
calls thee, run unto him. Put on Ieromes resolution, who said: If my Mother
were hanging Jerome.
about my neck, if my brethren were on every side howling and crying, and if
my Father were on his bare knees; kneeling before me, to detain me in their
wicked and sinful course of life, what would I do? I would shake off my
Mother to the ground, I would despise and hate all my kindred and kins-folkes,
and I would tread and trample my Father under my feet* thereby to fly to
CHRIST, when he calls me.

So should thou resolve the amendment of life. The Lord of heaven for his
sweet Son Christ Jesus his sake, grant to thee (dear Reader) and me, to
both of us his holy Spirit, that we may stand unblameable before the Judge, at
that great and general day: that we (being ^l^athed with the long white robes
of righteousness) may be in the number of those to whom it shall be said
then: Come, ye blessed Children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom which was
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Grant this, dear Father, for
thy dear Sons sake, Christ Jesus, our only Lord and Savior: to whom with
thee and the holy Spirit, we ascribe all Power, Glory, and Dominion, and sing
Halleluiah to thee (O blessed Trinity) for ever and ever:

Amen.
A True and Comfortable Exposition of the Lords PRAYER.
FOrasmuch as Prayer to the Soul is as necessary, as the ^eele to the Ship,
the Foundation to the House, the moisture to the Tree, and the sinews and
ioints to the body: and forasmuch also as we can have neither grace to
believe, nor grace to obey, without fervent and faithful prayer, I have
thought good, as briefly as I can (for the helping of the Ignorant in the
performance of this Christian duty) to expound the Prayer of our Lord, being
the perfect ground of all our prayers* that so, we praying in wisdom, may
pray with comfort: for, alack, thousands (it is to be feared) that have this
prayer, Ad vnguem: at their fingers ends, are altogether ignorant of the worthy
contents of the same.

Concerning which prayer, I observe these four things.
First, the occasion hereof, and that ^
was upon the complaint and suite of the Disciples, who (being weak in this
gift) entreated Christ's help, saying: Master, teach us to pray, as John Luke
^^. ^, ^
also taught his Disciples: And he said unto them, When ye pray, say: Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

So that Christ gave them this prayer, not only to use the prescript form
thereof, but also to frame all their prayers suitable to the same. ^


Secondly, The br^uity hereof, containing but ^^^e, and those short Petitions.

It pleased Christ in his wisdom to make it brief and short, for these three
causes.



2 That it might be often repeated, ^
and not wearisome.

3 That it might take away all excuse ^
from those that in any respect neglect prayer.

Thirdly, The excellency hereof; ^
and that is double.





The necessity hereof; it is as necessary to the Christian soul, as a Castle
or Bulwark to the City.

This Prayer (whereof I have spoken) contains in it generally three things.

First, a Preface.

Petitions.

Conclusion.

The Preface is set down in these The Preface.
words: Our Father which art in heaven



The first part concerns our own selves* in these words: Our Father. The
second part.


The second part of the Preface concerns God, in these words: Which art in
Heaven.



Duty.

Prerogative.

Duty, in this first word, Our.

In this word ( Our) we are taught (Our*) Note.
what love, care, and affection, should reign in the members of the Mystical
Body.

We should pray for the whole Body of the Saints, as well as for our own
souls. The eye sees not for it self alone, but for the good of the whole
body: the hand labors not for it self alone, but for the whole body: So
should we crave all comfortable Graces for our Brethren, and for the whole Body
of Christ Jesus, as well as for our own selves.

Prerogative, in this word Father.

By (Father) here is not only understood (Father.)
the first Person of the Trinity, but the whole Trinity. For as God is said to
be our Father, in respect of Creation, Redemption, and Preservation: So the
whole Trinity have their parts in them all.

Again, the name of (Father) when it is put with any other Person of the
Trinity, is taken personally, that is, for the first Person of the Trinity* but
when it is put with his creatures, it is taken essentially for the whole
Trinity.

So that in Christ our Mediator, We that were by nature the children Ephesians.
^. 3.
of wrath, are become the Sons of GOD, and Heirs of eternal Life And this
is the great prerogative of the Children of GOD.

To be the son of a mighty Monarch Note.
and great Prince, is high eminence: but to be the Adopted Son of God,
unspeakable is the excellency of this title.

Behold, what love the FATHER has showed on us, 1. Ioh. 3. 13
that we should be called the Sons of GOD.

(Father) our faith is much strengthened in our prayers; for we pray not to an
inexorable judge, but to a merciful Father, who can deny us nothing, as we may
comfortably read, Mat. 7. 9, 10, 11.

You shall be my people, and Ezekiel. 36. 28.
I will be your GOD: We have Christ's warrant: When ye pray, say; Luke 11. 2.
Our Father: And we have the holy Ghosts instruction: Romans 8. 1^. Ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.

Fourthly, if God be our Father, then let us have a continual care (like good
children) to give him his due love, and deserved honor, as he calls for the
same of us in the Prophet: A Son honors his Father, Mal. 1. 6.
and a Servant his Master: If I be a Father, where is then mine honor? and if
I be a Master, where is then my fear?

Thus much of the first part of this Preface.
The second part of this Preface The second part.
concerns God in these words: Which art in Heaven.

This second part concerning God, contains in it a double description.

A description of the Majesty of God.

A description of the Habitation of God.

The description of the Majesty of GOD, in these words contained (Which art) is
double.

A description of his Immutability: Which art. Which are* Note.


The Lord in his Essence is immutable, and in his Attributes without shadow of
change: the Lord therefore sending Moses to Pharao, bad him say Exodus* 3. 14*
on this manner: I AM, has sent me.

And as God is thus immutable in his Essence and Attributes: so is he
immutable in his Word: Heaven and Mat. 24. 35
earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away.

And this is a Doctrine of much comfort, that the Lord in his Word and Promise
is unalterable, and without mutabilitie or change.

Secondly, A description of the Eternity: Note.
Which art.

The Lord is to day, yesterday, and the same for ever: He was before all
beginning, and shall never have ending: He was not in time, neither shall He
end in time, but remains the same ror ever.

Thirdly, A description of Gods habitation, in these words: (In heaven.) In
(...)en


We are here to know, that God cannot properly be said to be in a place,
because he is an infinite, and incomprehensible Spirit: He is in heaven by his
glory, in earth by his mercy, in hell by his vindicts, and in the depth of the
seas by his miracles. Behold, the 1. King. 8. 27.
heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain the Lord. Heaven
is his feat, earth is his footestoole, etc.

Yet the Lord is said to be in heaven, as Psalm. 2. 4. But he that dwells in
heaven, shall laugh them to scorn. and Psalm. 113. 5. Who is like to the Lord
our God, that has his dwelling on high? that is, in heaven: and Psalm* 123. 1.
I lift up mine eyes to thee, that dwell in the heavens.

God is said especially to be in heaven, for these four causes*

First, because his glory is most ^
manifested in Heaven: even as the seat of the soul, the head and the heart
may be said to be, because the soul is most seen there, though it be not in
any one place of the body included: so the Lord is said to be in heaven,
because his glory does there most appear.

Secondly, because heaven is the ^
place where Christ's Body is, and heaven is the Palace of Angels, and Court of
Saints, where they behold the glorious face of God.





So that, in that he is said to be in Note.
Heaven, his Majesty does not only appear, but also his Dominion and Power,
to which all things in heaven and earth are subject; as his Goodness in the word
(Father) so his power in these words (in heaven) are manifested to us.

^
our prayers before the great God of heaven and earth, who is able to damn
both body and soul in hell fire.

Secondly, we must come before Him with all possible reverence, because He is
not an ignoble father, or earthly, but an heavenly Father, and a glorious
Majesty.





Thus much of the second part of this Preface.
The second part of this Prayer, are The second part.
the Petitions themselves, in number six.

The first three concern Gods glory, The first Petition.
the latter three our own good.

The first Petition: Hallowed be thy Name.

This is put in the first place, to Note.
show that Gods glory is to be preferred above all things, even above the care
of our own souls salvation.

By hallowed, or sanctified, is not Hallowed.
meant that we should add holiness to God; but to acknowledge Gods Majesty
holy, and every way excellent, as it is: the like phrase is used in the Gospel
of Luke: Wisdom is justified Luke 7. 35.
of her Children: That is, acknowledged and declared to be just,

By the name of God, is not here Name.
meant his Commandments, as Leu. 22. 32. Neither the authority of God, as
Math. 28. 19. But by the name of God is understood the Essence of God, as 1.
Kin. 5. 5. and Psa. 116. 13. and his Attributes, by which his Majesty is made
known in some measure to us, as his Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Mercy,
Justice, etc.

So that in this Petition we desire these three things.



is a spiritual substance, most Wise, most Holy, Eternal, Infinite: that he
is Great without quantity, Sweet without quality, Everlasting without time: in
his Greatness Infinite, in his Power Omnipotent, in his Wisdom inestimable,
in his Judgments terrible: Invisible, yet seeing all things; Immutable, yet
changing all things; Immovable, yet moving all things.

Thirdly, that we may give unto ^
him his due honor, and bear his Image of holiness before the world; in the
heart, by loving him and believing in him: in the tongue, by reverent speaking
of him, by praying to him, and praising him; in the whole man, by obeying him,
and holily living to him.

These therefore fail in the performance of this first Petition.



Secondly, all Heathen Idolaters, ^
and ignorant persons, that worship not God aright.

Thirdly, all Infidels, that depend not upon his al-commanding Power and might.



JEHOVAH in their mouths.









Thus much concerning the first Petition.
The second Petition: Thy Kingdom The second Petition. (Thy)
come.

This word (Thy) shows that there is a double Kingdom. First, the Kingdom
of God. Secondly, the kingdom of Satan, called the kingdom of darkness, Col.
1. 13. We pray therefore that sin may not reign in our mortal bodies, that
we may not be bond-slaues to the prince of the air, but that the Lord would
admit us into his Kingdom; and rule and reign over us by his holy Word and
Spirit.

This word (Kingdom) is taken Kingdom.
many ways in the Scriptures.

Psalm 145. 13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion
endures throughout all ages.

the Kingdom of Grace: The Kingdom of God is within us, Luke 17. 21.

Angels, and this is called the Kingdom of Glory: In this Kingdom the Elect
shall reign with Christ for ever: Psalm. 94. 14.

In this Petition, the first acceptance is not to be understood, but the second
of Grace, and the third of Glory.

So that in this Petition we desire these three things.



we may grow, Ephesians. 4. 15. in grace and godliness; from the measure of the
gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. to the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ,
Ephesians 4. 13.

as Paul prayed, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ:
and as the Saints of God: Romans 8. 23. We that have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh and mourn, waiting for the Adoption,
even the Redemption of our body.

These therefore fail in the performance of the second Petition:









Fifthly, they that are not prepared for the coming of CHRIST, neither wish nor
long for his appearance in glory.

Thus much concerning the second Petition.
The third Petition: Thy will be The third Petition. (Will.)
done in earth as it is in heaven.

The will of God is double.

An hidden will; which is the immutable purpose and decree of future events:
Which will is always done, neither can it be changed, or altered by any. My
counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will, Esaias 46. 10. Neither
can any resist this Will: as Prou. 21. 30. There is no wisdom, no
understanding, no counsel against the Lord.

Good will of God: Romans 12. 2. and this Will is called the Revealed Will of
God: because it is revealed unto us by his Word: Of this Will we read, Psalm.
103. 21. Praise the Lord, all ye his servants which do his will: that is, his
Commandments: this is the Will which we pray may be done.

So that in this Petition, we desire these three things.

Thy Will.
own wills, and to do the will of God, and to submit our wills to Gods will, as
well in adversity, as prosperity.

In earth.
while we are upon the face of the earth breathing.

As in heaven.
it in heaven; that is, zeaiously, readyly, carefully, and sincerely. The
Cherubins have six wings: two to cover themselves from the face of the Lord;
two to cover their feet from men; and two to fly withal, and to do the will
of their Creator, as Psalm. 103. 20. Even as: These words As it is.
do not here signify equality, but similitude, as some imagine, because we
cannot do the will of God so p^^ fectly as the Angels do: yet, in my
judgment, we ought to strive for perfection, and resolve perfect obedience to
his will.

These therefore fail in the performance of this third Petition.















Thus much concerning the third Petition.
The fourth Petition: Give us this The fourth Petition.
day our daily bread.

Give: We are taught from hence Give.
to seek our food and maintenance from God* for he is Lord and giver of all
good things.

Ob. The rich man, that has plenty, Ob.
needs not to call upon God in this Petition.

Answ. Rich men, if they want Gods blessing, they have nothing, but want (in
effect) all. Rich men therefore daily must have this word (Give) in their
mouths, notwithstanding their abundance, and that for these two causes.



it is called the Staff of Bread: Esaias 3. 1. Take away a Staff from an old
man, and he falls; so take away Gods blessings from the bread, and it is
unprofitable.

This day: The Lord will have us This day.
pray for the present day, and not for longer time, for these three causes.

Manna, Exodus 16.



Iam. 4. 14. To day therefore we beg our daily bread, to morrow (it may be)
we shall have no need of this Petition.

Our: Though this bread be the Our.
Lords gift, yet for these two causes it is called Our.

First, to show unto us, that in Christ we have right and interest in the good
creatures of God, as in the 1. Corinthians. 3. 22. Ye are Christ's, and all things
are yours. God has given us Christ, and in him all things; they are but
usurpers that receive them out of Christ.

Our, which we obtain from God, by diligent pains in a lawful vocation.

Daily: Because our lives cannot Daily.
continue, without a daily supply of these necessaries, as by commen experience
we do find.

Bread* By bread is meant here (by Bread.
the figure Synecdoche) all things necessary for this ^^p^^a^^ life, as meat,
drink, cloth, peace, liberty, etc. so it is taken in Genesis: Thou shall (...)
eat thy bread with the sweat of thy brows: that is, thou shall get thy
living by labor and the sweat of the brows.

So that in this Petition we desire these three things.

First, that God would in Christ vouchsafe us all things necessary for the
maintenance of this mortal life.





These therefore fail in the performance of this fourth Petition.



Luke 12. 19. Soul, take thy rest, for thou have goods laid up for many years.





Fifthly, that pray for superfluous things, and for whatsoever is more then
necessary.





Thus much concerning the fourth Petition.
The fifth Petition: And forgive The f^^^h P(...) (...)e ^^.
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Our sins are called debts in the Gospel of Luke 11. 4. in regard of the
resemblance between them; for as a debt does bind a man either to make
satisfaction, or else go to prison; so our sins bind us, either to satisfy
Gods Justice, or else to suffer eternal damnation.

And because we cannot, of our selves, satisfy the one, nor willingly would
in our selves suffer the other, in Christ therefore we sue to the Lord for the
forgiveness of them.

And under this forgiveness of sins are understood these benefits, as
Justification, Sanctification, Redemption and Glorification.

Again, by sin, here is not Our sin
meant the guilt only, but the punishment also due to us for the same.

As we forgive, etc. These words As we forgive.
are not (as Papists imagine) the cause why God should forgive us; because we
forgive others, but a sign that God will forgue us.

Therefore these words ( as we forgive, are added for these two causes.

First, for our instruction, to teach ^
us, that God requires this at our hands, that we should forgive, as we would
be forgiven; that we should be mer^^full, as he is merciful, you know how he
was ser^^d, that having his debt forgiven him, would (...)
not forgive his brother.

Secondly, for our comfort, ^o give ^
us to understand, that if we, which be sinful men, can remit wrongs and
injuries done against us, much more will our heavenly FATHER (whose mercy is
above al his works) forgive his servants, when, in true repentance they shall
turn unto him: O, he is very ready to forgive!

And in forgiving our brethren, we are to know, that we may forgive the
injury done against us, but not the sin therein done against God: God only
forgiueth sins: He that steals, offends the Law* the injury is done
against him from whom he steals, but the sin against Gods Law: Thou shall
not steal: he may forgive the injury, but God only must the sin.

So that in this Petition we desire these three things.

JESUS. CHRIST, he would raze them out of the book of his memory, and save
our souls alive.

Ephesians. 4. 30.



Th^se therefore fail in the performance of this fifth Petition.

(...)e here(...)ll Nouatians are ^
(...) who deny forgiveness of (...) after Baptism.

(...) the Church of Rome ^
(...)ounded, that aver(...) (...)th remit the fault, (...) (...)meant; a
doctrine (...) (...)table, and diue(...)*

Thirdly, the Catharists are here also confuted, who think they can be
without sin in this life.











Thus much concerning the fifth Petition.
The sixth Petition: And lead us The sixth Petition.
(...) into temptation: But deliver us from evil.

Lead us not: to be led into temptation, ^ead^ us no^*
is to be overcome of temptation, and ens^ared therewith, as a (...) is taken
in the net: CHRIST was t^^pled, but not led into temp(...).

(...) to lead us into temp^^(...)o respects.

(...)

(...) in his (...) (...)trument of (...) wrath.

Into temptation: Temptation in ^* (...)
Scriptures is taken two manner of ways.

First, for that temptation where* with the Lord does prove and try those that
are his, of which (...) speaks: (...) ^0. Fear not for God is co^^^ to prove
^on: that is* (...) will ^bey His Pre^^nts, (...) (...) 19.

Again, Psa. 66. 10. Thou, O God, have proved, thou have tried us even as
silver is tried. Gods trials always tend to his own glory, and the good of his
children.



And in this sense, God is said not to tempt any man, Iam 13.

The Fathers define temptation to be a corrupt affection, tending, or enticing
to evil: and to imagine this to come near God, it is horrible blasphemy.

The matter of temptation is in us* even our own concupiscence; the Devil
needs but to bring his bellows to this ^ire, and it is forthwith kindled.

But deliver us from evil: By evil Put (...) (...)
is not here meant temptation (for temptations are many times profitable) but
by evil is meant the sin to which we shall be tempted by the devil, the
world, and our own concupiscence, which is of it self simply evil.

Lead us not into, etc. that is, though thou suffer us to be tempted, yet
suffer us not to be led away and overcome of temptations, but deliver us from
whatsoever evil we shall at any time be tempted to.

So that in this sixth and last Petition we desire 3. things.



Secondly, we crave that by the ^
power of Gods all-sufficient grace, when sin assaulteth us, we may not be
overcome of it, but overcome it, and be delivered from the power and slavery
of it.

Thirdly, seeing sin many times ^
is more powerful over us, then grace in us, we desire that it may not take
rooting in us, to reign in our mortal bodies, but speedily we may be
recovered and delivered from it.

These therefore fail in the performance of this Petition.





Thirdly, those that presumptuously ^
think, that of themselves they are able to withstand temptations, and of
their own power.

as the Devil and the flesh are ready to tempt them.

Fifthly, those that live and lie in sin, ^
and seek not to be delivered from this their damnable estate.

Sixthly, those that fly not the appearance ^
of evil, that prevent ^ot the beginnings of sin, and eschew not the company
of traders in iniquity.

Thus much concerning the sixth and last Petition.
The third and last part of this The third part. The conclusion.
Prayer, is the Conclusion, in these words set down: For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen

For thine is the Kingdom. (...)


The Kingdom is said to be the Lords for these two causes.

First, because he is owner of all ^
things that are*

Secondly, because he has sovereign ^
rule over all things at his will.

The Power: All power is of God, (...)
and from God that we have.

And Glory: All glory is due to the And Glory.
Lord our God.

First, the reason why we pray to ^
God, is, because whatsoever we have, we have it from God, for he is King and
Lord over all: and whatsoever strength of grace we have, we have it from God,
the fountain and giver of all grace.

Not to us, P(...) ^1 5^
O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

These therefore fail in the right knowledge of this conclusion.



Secondly, that deny h^^^ (...)tency, ^
and that all power and strength do come only from God, and that rest upon
their abilities for any thing.

Thirdly, that take to themselves, ^
or give to any other, glory and honor which only are due unto the Lord.

Amen: This last word is taken Amen.
two ways.

It shall be so: we believe that the Lord in his good time will grant our
requests.

So be it: we desire the Lord to grant our Petitions made unto him.

In the first acceptance we are admonished to pray Faithfully; in the second
we are admonished to pray Fervently: which two ( Faithfully and Fervently) are
the principal things to be observed in prayer.

And this word is as well to be spoken of the Minister as the people, though,
for the most part, the Minister puts it off to the people.

These therefore fail in the right use of this word.





Three Prayers never speed for a blessing.

T^mid^, a Fearful Prayer: when we believe not that we shall be heard.

T^pid^, a Lukewarm Prayer, when we pray in deadness of heart, and
drowsinesse of mind, without feruency of Spirit.

rash Prayer. when we pray either without wisdom, or due consideration.

Three prayers speed for a blessing.

First, Fidelis, a Faithful Prayer: ^
when we are persuaded that in Christ, the Lord will grant all good things
unto us.

Humilis, an Humble Prayer: when we (considering the greatness of Gods
Majesty, and our own baseness and unworthiness) in all humility and
lowliness call upon his name.

Feruens, a Fervent Prayer, when we power out our hearts before God, when we
pray with zeal and entire devotion of the soul.

Thus much concerning the conclusion of the Lords Prayer
THe Lord of infinite mercy and of endless consolation, guide our hear^^, and
direct our Spirits, by the (...) direction of his good Spirit, in all (...)
prayers, and in all other our Chri(...) du^^^s, that we may in them all ^iue
him ^rue service, and answerable obedience, and so follow him faithfully and
obediently in grace in this world, that we may be admitted to sing Halleluiah
to his Majesty for evermore in the world to come, and that for Christ Jesus his
sake, who is our only Lord and Savior: To whom with the Father and the
blessed Spirit, three glorious Persons, but one and the self-same Essential
God, we offer up, from the bottom of our hearts, all possible Power, Honor,
Dominion, and Thanksgiving for ever, and ever: Amen.

FINIS.
THE RACE CELESTIAL.

OR, A speedy Course to Salvation.

The Fifth Impression.

1. Cor. 9. 24. So run, that ye may obtain.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, and are to be sold by John Cl^^^, 1^^0.

TO THE MOST High and Mighty, most Gracious and Religious PRINCE, JAMES, by the
grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith Apostol^* call, etc. All blessed hap in this life, and eternal bliss in
the life to come.
THe picture of purity* and pattern of Piety, (most Gracious and dread
Sou^r^ign^ Lord) holy Bernard by name deciphereth o^t at large the gross
enormity of that ugly v^^^ Ingratitude, saying: that it is Inimica animae,
exinanitio mer^orum, dispersiovirtutum, etc* An enemy to the Christians soul,
an exile of merits, a ruin of virtues, and a consuming fire, that scorcheth up
the fountain of all godliness. Lest therefore I should condemn my self of
this sensual sin, and challenged be of gross Ingratitude; I have presumed
(craving pardon for my arrogant audacity herein) in token of my loyal duty to
your sacred Majesty, to transport these lines Laconicall, and letters Impolite,
to the happy haven of your Princely heart, wishing to your Royal Grace, the
silver of all earthly prosperity, and the gold of all celestial ^elicitie* If
your Highness respect the matter; it is celestial: ^f your Supremacy the
manner, it is t^o t^o terrestrial: Yet pardon (most religious Prince) this my
bold attempt, partly weighing the compulsion of ^ntire affection, and partly
considering the necessity of your simplest subjects erudition. Thus ceasing
further troubling your Majesty's sacred ^ares, prosterning my self upon the
knees of submission, at your Highness footstool, for pardon for my
presumption herein; I beg without intermission, before the Throne of Grace,
that it would please the Almighty to bless, protect and defend your Royal
Majesty, and all your Royal Issue, in this life present; and in the life to
come, crown you all with the Crown of immort all Glory: and that for Jesus
Christ's sake our only Lord, and everliving Savior. AMEN, From Hempstead in
Essex, this 16. of October. 1608.

Your Majesty's most humble servant, and most loyal Subject,

THE RACE CELESTIAL; OR, Aspeedy course to Salvation.
1. Cor. 9. 24. So run, that ye may obtain.
Boethius in his Book Boethius.
De consolatione Philosophiae, says: Quod vnicuique viro bono inserta est
quaedam cupiditas boni: id est, That in every good man there is inserted a
fervent desire of that which is good. Now the true and chiefest good thing that
may possibly be desired of mortal man (in which only the soul of man is fully
satisfied) is the Lord God: according to that of S. Augustine: Fecisti August.
in lib. confess.
nos Domine, ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec quiescat in te: id
est, Thou have created us (O Lord) for thine own self, and our hearts are
disquieted, until they find a firm rest in thy self. And (as well says S.
Bernard) Bernard
Illud est verum, and summum gaudium, quod non creatura, sed Creatore
concipitur: id est, that is the true and chiefest joy, which is conceived, not
of the creature, but the Creator.

Now the Lord (that is Omnium summum bonorum, Of all good things the chiefest)
can by no means be obtained, but by a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ
his well-beloved Son, proving it self by good fruits of amendment, by whom we
are reconciled again to the Lord, and brought into the ^auour of the most
High, of which by our sins we have justly been deprived: As well says ^^o:
(...)
Non dormicntibus peruenit regnum coelo^um, nec o^^o, nec desidia torpentibus
praemium aeternitatis promit^itur: sed vigilantibus and ben^ viue^tibus: id
est, The Kingdom of Heaven falls not to the Sluggards share, neither is
eternal bliss promised to idle and evil persons: but only to those that
live by faith, and are vigilant in the works of godliness.

The holy Apostle therefore, having in the former Chapters of this his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, carnestly and industriously taught them the true
path that leads to life: having also perceived that they had embraced his
doctrine willingly, and run in the same in some measure cheerfully: he does
here in this golden simile, (that they might have their portion in the Lord)
exhort them to perseverance, holding out to the end of their lives, knowing
that of our Savior in the Gospel to be true: He that endures to the end,
the Mat. 10. 12
same, and none but the same shall be saved.

In which words the Apostle b^rtoweth a similitude, A certami^e cursorio: from
a terrestrial Race for a temporary Prize: for as in that Race many run, but
one receives the Prize: namely, he that all the rest out-strippeth, and
comes first at the end: even so in the Race of Christianity no man shall be
crowned, but he that holds out to the end of his life: yet notwithstanding
there is this difference in this similitude, that in the Race terrestrial he
is only guerdoned with reward that touches first the But; and in this Race
Celestial, not only one, but all may be crowned with everlasting bliss.

In which excellent Simile the Apostle compares, Cursui vitam: Stadio
pietatem: praemio salutem: id est, Our life to a Race, or running: Piety and
Godliness to a Race wherein we must run; and everlasting bliss to a
promised reward.

So run, that ye may obtain. That Text.
is, so live in this life, under the Gospel of Christ Jesus, that ye may
obtain everlasting life in the life to come. In which heavenly exhortation of
Paul, we may generally observe these three things.

Quid sit currere, What is meant by this word, Run.

Secondly, Qualiter currendum how ^
we must run to obtain. So run.

Thirdly, Praemium promissum, the reward ^
promised, to all those that run lawfully.

Run: By this Race, or Running, is understood this present life of man.

The life of man is compared to many things: some of the Philosophers have
compared it to a bubble: some to a sleep, some to a dream* some to one thing,
some to another.

Job compares it to a Wind: the Job 7. 7. Psalm. 109. 23. Iam. 4. 24. 1. Pet.
1. 24 Esaias 40. 6.
Prophet David compares it to a shadow: James to a vapor: Peter to a flower:
Esaias to grass, and the Apostle Paul, in respect of the celeritiy and
swiftness thereof, compares it here to a Race or running. Quid aliud (says
Augustine.
S. Augustine) est vita nostra, nisi quidam cursus ad mortem? vita dum crescit,
decrescit* vita mortalis, and mors vitalis: id est, What is our life but a
certain running to death? Our life, while it increases, decreaseth: our life
is dying, our death is living.

The Traveler, she longer he goes on his journey, the nearer he is his
iourneys end: the children of Israel, the longer they wandered from Egypt, the
nearer they were the promised Land; so every mortal man, the longer he lives,
the nearer he is his iournies end* Death: for Time and Tide stay for no man:
young hayres do soon turn gray, and active youth is soon metamorphosed into
crooked age: Cito pede lab^^ur aetas: id est, The days of Poet. ^^id.
man do swiftly pass away. Temporae labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
and ^ug^^nt f^ae^o non remorante dies: id est, time swiftly passes, and old
age soon comes on; no bridle so strong, as can keep^ in our galloping days.

He that runs in a Race, never stays, till be comes at the end
thereof: so every mortal Wight ( vole^s ^^l^^s, willing, ^illing) never
stays, till death, the end of his race, stays him. The picture of Patience
( Job by name) considering the swift passage of the da^es of man, compares
them to the swift Race of a Post, saying, Dies m^i v^l^ciores sunt cursore. Job
9. 25.
id est, My days are swifter then a Post: yea swifter are they then a Weauers
Job 7. 6.
shuttle, they are as the motion of the swiftest ship in the Sea, and as the
Eagle Job 9. 26. Psalm. 90. 9.
that flies fast to her prey. Our years are spent (says the Psalmist) as a
tale that is told: yea, our life is Psalm. 90. 10
quickly cut off, and we are soon gone. Therefore fitly is our life compared
here of S. Paul (in regard of the velocitie thereof) to a Race, or Running.

From hence every Christian is to learn this lesson, that (seeing our life is
nothing else but a running to death) he redeem the time, make much of it*
whiles he has it: for the hour spent cannot be recovered, time passed, can
not be recalled.

Ecc^ nunc tempus acceptum: (says ^. Cor. 6. 2.
the Apostle) Behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation.
This life is the time wherein our election must be made sure, and sealed up to
our spirits by the infallible testimony of the good spirit of GOD: This life is
the time, wherein enerman in his calling, must work out his salvation with
fear and trembling: This life is the time wherein we must be admitted into
the kingdom of Grace, if ever we look to be admitted into the Kingdom of
Glory: In this life must we be matriculated into the mystical body of the
Church, if ever we will look to sit at the Bridegroomes Table in Heaven: In
this life must we have heaven in inchoation* if after this life we will have
i^ in perfection.

The Husbandman will in no wise slack his opportunity, and omit his time in
tilling and sowing his ground, that in Summer he may have the better croppe:
The Tradesman will not miss his Fayres and Markets, that he may increase his
stock the more in those his painful affairs: The Storke in the Air, the
Turtle, the Ie^em. 3. ^
Cra^e, and the Swallow observe their times, as says the Prophet: the little
silly creature (the Ant by name) ^^ou. 6^*
gathers in Summer, whereby she may live in Winter. Even so should every
Christian take his time, and treasure up (with the painful Be) the honey of
good works in the hiue o^ his heart in this life, that he may (will the
faithful servant) be welcomed into his Masters joy, in the life to come. But
alas, alas, men are so assotted with blindness and ignorance, that they may be
sent to the very senseless creatures for wisdom in this point. Ask the
beasts, and they shall Job. 12. 7, 8
teach thee; and the fowls of heaven* and they shall tell thee (says the just
man Job:) or speak to the earth, and it shall show thee, or the fishes of the
sea, and they shall declare unto thee Esays Ox knows his Masters stall,
Esaias. 1. 3. ^
and his Ass his Masters crib: but miserable man has not known his Maker.

O let us not be worse then Horse, Ass and Mule, that have no understanding:
but let us (in the fear of God) know our times and seasons: Let us seek the
Lord while he may be Esaias. 5^ ^.
found, and call upon him while he is near. Let us in no wise post off our
amendment from day to day: Let us ^iue no longer in careless security, like
sensual, brutish, and hellish Epicures, that neither believe nor yet respect
the judgment to come: that ^ing that cursed Epitaph of Sardanapalus*

^^^e, bibe, lude, charum praesentibus exple Poet.

Deli^^^s animum: post mortem nulla voluptas:
Id est, Eat, drink, play and be merry; li^e in all kind of pleasure* for,
after death there is no pleasure: That say with the old man in the Poet:

Because my days are shor^ which I have here to live;
To women, wine and pleasant sport, I mean my self to give.
Let us not be like those foolish Virgins, that knocked at the gates of heaven
too late, when the doors were shut against them: For, after this life there
shall be no place for pardon, no^ ^^^e for Repentance: therefore, in time look
to the welfare of thy dear Soul, that thy Soul may fare well not for a
time; but for ever.

One depth (says the Psalmist) calls Psalm. ^^ ^*
for another: The depth of our misery cries for the depth of Gods mercy: let
us therefore be as swift in running the race of Christianity, as ou^ lives are
swift to leave us: let us b^ as swift to kill sin in us, as sin is to kill
us. O (beloved) let us b^e as swift to pull out the sting of the Scorpion
(which is sin) as he is with his sting swift and ready to st^bbe ^s a^ the
heart, and wound our souls incurably: that when death, ^he end of our Race,
shall come (which is m^s^ certain, and yet his time most uncertain) it may be
unto ^^, ^^ it is to all the Saints of God; Ia^^a (...), (...)um ref^i^er^^,
^^^l^ ascensi^^is in c^lum* id est, The ga^^ ^^ life, the end of miseries, the
beg(...)* of everlasting refreshing, and the (...)r of ascension to the highest
a^^ happiest heavens.

So run, that ye may obtain* Text.


Qualiter currendum? id est, How must we run? To obtain. So run.

If we will run to obtain, we must run these three ways.

Direct, recta via, the right way.

Celeriter seu festinanter: Swiftly or speedily.

Perseueranter, Perseuerantly, holding out to the end.



Those that run in a race, will not make the furthest way about the nearest ^ay
home (as we say) but they will take the shortest cut that may be, and run the
directe^t way that can be, that they may the rather obtain: So should we run
in the right way that leads to life, if we will obtain life everlasting.

(...) speaking of man's creation, (...).
s^^th; that H^mo inced^ erectus in coelum: id est, Man goes right vplifting
his eyes toward Heaven: Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri Ovid.
iussit,


Id est, God gave man a lofty face, a face to behold the heavens; whereas other
creatures fasten their eyes upon the center of the world, from whence they
came, hanging down their heads to the earth like Bull* rushes. As man therefore
was created pure and up right in Soul, and straight and right in body,
carrying his head toward heaven: so must he run (if ever he will obtain
heaven) in the straight way, and right path that leads to Heaven.

Many there are that seek the Lord, and find him not, because they seek^
amiss: so many there are that run (yea all men living are runners) y^^ are
they far from obtaining, because they run amiss.

There are four sorts of groun^ yet but one ^ructi^er^us: there are four
wa^es in the world, yet but ^^^ (and that a narrow one) that leads to life.
Generally, there are but these two* the way of Godliness, and the way of
In^quity: whereof, the one in the Gospel of Matthew, is called The broad way
and the other, The straight and ^arrow gate: yet S. John (considering the
multiplicity of this dangerous Labyrinth) does cut out this ^road way into
three maine heads: into ^uxury, Covetousness, and Pride, ^ I^^^^* ^6
saying: Whatsoever is in the world, is either the concupiscence of the flesh,
the concupiscence of the eye, or the pride of life* Haec tria pro trino numine
mundus habet:
(...)


Id est, This is the trinity which the world does worship* These ways are wide
and large, and whole multitudes walk in the same: Magna ple^^^^d^ hom^num sed
magna solitudo bonorum: id est, There is a great plenty of men* but there is a
great scarcity of good men.

These ways seem pleasant to be walked in, yet Nouissima illarum mors est.
The end of these ways is death: for the devil, like a subtle fisher, shows
the bait, but hides the hook: shows the unprofitable profit, and unpleasant
pleasure of sin, but h(...)th the hook from men's eyes, which is death,
according to that of S. Paul, Stipendium (...) mors est: The wages of sin is
death here, hell and damnation hereafter. Sin seems at the first to fawn
upon a man, but yet in the end it will (with Caines dog) Genesis 4.
pluck out the very throats of our souls.

In these main rodes (the more is the pity) does the greatest part of mankind
run headlong to perdition, without any check of conscience, remorse for their
sins* or any reclam^tion in the world. Sin never more then in these our
days of the Gospel abounded: the devil has more followers then Christ, the
whole multitude ^^^ed, Crucify him, Crucify him, b^^ Mar. ^^* 1^
there was but one, (and that a ^^lly woman) that labored to set him ^r^e.

The saying of Paul to the Romans is verified in th^se our days of sin: There
is none righteous, no not one: Romans 3. 10. 11. 12.
There is none that understands: there is none that seeks God: all have
gone out of the way, all are altogether unprofitable; there is none that does
good, no not one. Pride, Whoredom, Gal. ^. 19. ^^. ^^
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Debate, Emulation, Wrath, Contention, Sedition, Heresy, Covetousness,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Forswearing, Blasphemy, Profaneness, contempt of the
Word, despising of Gods Messengers* and the like abominations are reigning in
every angle of this our Island; yea our Land is become a sink of sin, a pit of
pollution, and a place of abomination: defiled with iniquity, A vertice
capitis, vsque ad plantam pedis: id est, from top to toe, having no sound
part throughout it: yea, our whole Land is out of course; And it is the great
Lam. 3* 2^
mercy of God that we are not consumed.

Yea, these last days of the world are like to the days of Isreal's
provocation of the Lord in the wilderness: wherein we prefer the slavery of
Egypt, above the sweet Manna of heavenly bliss.

Yea, that saying of the Prophet is verified of the most part of mankind: That
the Children gather sticks, the Ierem. 7. 8.
Fathers make the fire, and the women bake cakes for the Queen of Heaven: That
is, they offered sacrifice to the Sun and Moon, and Planets, which they called
the Queen of Heaven. So the beast of Rome with his Antichristian crew does
sacrifice to Mary, making her an idol, and calling her (as in their Salve
Regina, and Regina Coeli laetare, does appear) the Queen of Heaven. They make
Ignorance the mother of their Devotion: Sir John Lacke-latine, and Sir Anthony
Ignorance are their chiefest Clerks, and best Masse-mongers.

Yea, the world is grown to that height of reprobation, that that which is
written in Job, is verified of many: They say to Go^, Depart from us, Job. 21,
14. 15.
^or we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: who is the Almighty, that we
should serve him? Full little thinking that the Lord shall answer them with the
like Dis^^^^^e Depart from me, ye Math* 7. 2^
workers of iniquity.

Thus we ^ee how the worldlings run in the race of iniquity, the broad way to
the lake unquenchable: some in the race of Atheism, some in Papisme, some in
Mahumetisme, some in Paganism, but few there are that run in the race of
Christianis^^^. But thou that would be saved, thou that would so run
that thou may obtain, run not in any of these ways, but fly from sin, as
from a stinging Serpent, and a biting Cocka^ri^^: For they that do such
things, shall not ^al. ^* ^^.
inherit the Kingdom of God.

The right way therefore wherein H^c (...).
we must run, is the way of Godliness, the way of Christianity, the way of
the Word of God, framing all our thoughts, words and operations, according to
the precise and strict rule of the same: For Factores legis iustificabuntur: id
est, The doers of the ^aw shall be justified, saved and glorified.

This way of Godliness is a blessed way to walk in: It is sweeter than Psalm.
^^. Mat. 11. 3^
the honey, or the honey comb: Iugum Christi s^^ue est, and onus suum leave: id
est, The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light. Mandata ^^^s gra^ia
^on 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
sunt: id est, His Commandments are not grievous: and his Commandments Psalm.
119.
are exceeding large: Her ways are ways of pleasure, and her paths Prou. 3.
17* ^s^l. 119. ^^5.
prosperity: It is a lantern to our feet, and a l^ght unto our paths: It is
a pillar of fire to carry us through the wilderness of this world to the
Celestial Canaan: It is the power of God Romans 1. 1^.
to salvation to every Believer, both lew and Grecian: It is able to save our
Iam. 1. 2^.
souls, it is able to make us wise to salvation: is is profitable to teach, to
improve, 2. Tim. ^. 15, 1^, 17.
to correct, to instruct, in righteousness, and to make us perfect in all good
works.

It is comfortable in all cases and parts of our life, both in prosperity and
adversity; both in life and death: If we fight, it is a sword: if we hunger, it
is meat: if we thirst, it is drink: if we be naked, it is a garment: if we
be in darkness, it is light: yea (in a word) the Word of God is The highway to
Heaven. Enter therefore Mat. 7. 13.
in at the straight gate of amendment: and run in the same, from faith to
faith, from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, from strength to strength,
till thou be a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Cast away the works of darkness, Rom* 13. 12, 13* 14*
and put on the armor of light: walk honestly, as in the day; not in
gluttony, and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife and envying: but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. Be Mat. 10. 16
wise as the Serpent, be innocent as the Dove.

Amongst diverse points of wisdom to be found in the Serpent, this is one:
namely, She casts her coat, and so renouateth her age, as Aristotle says.
These three beasts, Arist. de not* A^ mal. lib. 8 cap. 17. Stellio
Tum Vere, tum Autumno, both in the Spring, as also in Autumn, do cast their
skins, viz. the beast like a Lizzard, called in Latin Stellio: Quia habet
maculas, quasi stellas collo infixas: Because he has spots in his neck like
stars: Lacertus: the Lizzard; and Lacertus. Serpens.
the Serpent. And to do this, they go through some narrow cranny or other to
loosen their skins, and cast them within four and twenty hours. So
should thou put off the old man Col. 3. 9.
with all his works: And to do this, thou must go Per strictam rimam
poeniten^iae: id est, Through the narrow cranny, and straight gate of amendment.

Meditate therefore (with the Just Psalm. 1. 2.
man) in the Law of God day and night. Let the candle of faith burn clear in
the lamp of thy heart, and nourish it with the oil of love and good works:
Walk not in the counsel of the wicked: Psalm. ^. ^.
stand not in the way of sinners: ^it not in the ^ea^e of the scornful: but
run in the Race of (...) well, that living well, thou may dye well, and
after death eternally speed well, obtaining that blessedness: Blessed Apoc.
13. 14.
are they that dye in the Lord.

So run, tha^ ye may obtain. Text.


And that we may run in the race of Godliness, one Caveat is exceeding
necessary* namely, that we avoid wicked company, which will draw away our
hearts from this Race Celestial. Qui ^angit picem, co^^quinabitur Eccles. 13.
ab ^a: id est, He that touches pitch, shall be defiled therewith* Cum
sancto san^^us eris, and cum peruerso peruerter^s: id est, With the holy thou
shall be holy, and with the ^^^ward thou shall learn frowardness: for birds
of a feather will fly together.

It was not lawful for a lew to converse with a S^^ari^ane if an Hebrew did
^a^e with an Egyptian, it was counted an abomination* so must we ^o^nt it
abomination, and hold it a point of reprobation* to frequent the company of
damned hel-hounds, and hellish miscreants. Let us therefore fly all occasion
and every apparition of evil; let us delight in the company of those that
^eare the Lord, and excel in virtue. Well therefore says Seneca: Cum illis
versare, qui te meliorem S(...)
sunt facturi, vel quos meliores ^ffi^er^ possis: id est, Keep company with
those that may make thee better, or whom thou may make better*

I command you therefore, brethren, 2. These. 3. 6
(as says S. Paul) in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that ye withdraw your
selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not after the
instruction which ye received from me.

And (to conclude this point) I give every Christian this good counsel with
good King Solomon: My son, if Pro. 1. 10* 11, 1^, etc*
sinners do entice thee, consent thou not: If they say, Come with us, we will
lay wait for blood, we will swallow up the Innocent wh^le, like a grave: we
s^^ll find all precious ri^he^* and ^ill ou^ ho^^^* wi^h ^poyl^* (...)n thy
lo^ among ^s, we will have all ^ne pu^se: My s^nne, w^lke not thou in the way
with them, refrain^ thy foot from their path, for their feet run to evil,
and make haste to shead Job. ^9. 23. 24.
blood. O that these my words were written, O that they were written in a
book, O that they were written with an iron pen, in Lead, or in stone for
ever! O that they were engraven in brass Table of every young man's heart, that
so bad company may not be his destruction.

So run, that ye may obtain. Text.


Celer^^er, seu feslinanter, swiftly and speedily.

Vita breuis, vita longa (says S. Bernard:) Bernard.
si ^^s ^d metam peruenire, incipe celeriter currere: id est, The liff of man
is very short, the way to heaven is very long; if therefore thou will obtain,
thou must run exceeding swiftly. We see that those that run in an earthly
race (and that but for a mean reward) how swiftly do they strain themselves
to run? according to that of the Poet:

Qui cupit optata^ cursu contingere metam, Poet.

Multa tulit, fecitque miser, suda^it and alsit.
Id est, He that desires first to touch the Mark, takes much pains,
sweateth abundantly, and runs exceeding swiftly. Even so should we (that we
may obtain an everlasting reward in heaven, run in the path of Gods
Commandments, being shod with the shoes of the Gospel of peace, like Roes
exceeding swiftly.

The senseless creatures are a (...) king-glasse to all Christians in (...)
respect.

The Sun (as says the Psalmist) Psalm. ^*
like a Giant rejoices to run his race: that is, valiantly and swiftly: swift
in his motion, and speedy in his race, for in the space of 24. hours he
compasses the earth round about, that nothing is hidden from him, and passes
from the one end of heaven to the other, that nothing is wanting in him: So the
Lord our God has set every man his task upon earth, which is: To work out his
salvation will fear and trembling. A great work, a short time, a long way
from Egypt to (...) from the gates of hell, to the doors of heaven; therefore,
like Giants we ^ad need to run swiftly, lest we come too late, and be shut
out of heaven, like the five foolish aforesaid Virgins.

As the Sun in the heavens is a looking glass unto us in this regard: so is
also the Son of God Christ jesus, above the heavens to be imitated o^ us all in
this point. Omnis Christi actio, (...)
^^str^ deb^t esse instru^^io: id est, Every action of Christ ought to be a
matter of imitation to us Christians.

As he was I^mensus maiestate, in(...)bilis ^^r(...), so was he in(...)is
celer^^^^^: id est* As he was ^^^at in Majesty, incomparable in (...)o was ^e
^lso incomprehen^^^le ^^ celeri^^e and swiftness. He (...)
w^ought the wo^ke^ of him that ^ent (...)y, without ^^y delay in the world.

This Bridegroom Christ Jesus ^^^n as the Su^^e* went forth out of the Chamber
of the highest Heavens, from the bosom of the Father* and from the
inuisibility of the Divinity: and descended down to the earth, and became Man,
and was like unto Man in all things, sin only excepted; and valiantly in the
Wilderness pitched a field against Satan, that old Serpent and roaring Lion,
and overthrew him in the Desert* breaking his wyly head, and ouercomming his
chiefest power: fulfilled the Law in every point and tittle, satisfied Gods
Justice for us, appeased his wrath against us: purchased celestial mansions to
us, by offering himself in Sacrifice to the Lord of H^sts, upon the Cross at
Gol^o^ha for the sins of the whole world: by his death and passion, by
vanquishing hell, by conquering death, by his glorious resurrection and
ascension, and by sending of the Holy Ghost: He Io^. 16. 28.
went from the ^ather, and came into the world; And in short time (yea, in the
space of 33. years) wrought the redemption of all believers: And left this
world, and went again to his Job 1^. 28.
Father.

The Spouse of Christ considering her Husbands great velocity, celeritie Can.
2. 8. 9.
and swiftness, says: Behold! he comes leaping by the Mountains, and
skipping by the Hills, my Well-beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart, etc. Venit,
vidit, vicit,: He came from heaven, he saw the earth, and overcame the Dragon.

Thus, after Christ's example, should we that profess our selves Christians,
run swiftly in the race of godliness, holiness, purity, and obedience to
the commandments of our heavenly Father: Thus should we run, In vestigijs
Jesus, in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, who is Via, veritas Io^. 14. 6.
and vita, i. The Way, the Truth, and the ^ife: and the true way to life
everlasting. To the performance of which duty, the Lord grant to us his grace
(for of our selves we are not able to set one foot forward to heaven) that so
we may be able (to his glory and our Souls everlasting good) to do his will
in earth, as willingly, swiftly, and as speedily as the Angels do it in Heaven.

Now (dear brethren) that we may run thus swiftly in the race of Godliness,
and in the course of Christianity, two things are necessary.

Vt simus intus vacui, that we be empty within.

Vt simus extra exonerati: id est, That we be unladen without.



Now, what is that which cloggeth us so sore within, and hinders us from
running in this godly Race? Surely that is sin.

So weighty a thing is sin, As it Luke 10.
sunk down Satan from heaven.

So weighty a thing is sin, as it caused the earth to open her mouth, and
swallow up cursed Kor^, devilish Number. 16. 32.
Dathan, and that abject Abi^am with all their treacherous crew. The Prophet in
respect of the weight thereof compares it to lead, and that worthily: for as
lead in the clock can seth, by the weight thereof, the cogs, wheels and
gimmers successively to move one after the other: even so the weight of sin
does draw the cogs of our carnal concupiscence, the wheels of our lewd
desires, and the gimmers of our untamed affections, from one sin to another*
according to that of Saint Gregory. Peccatum quod per poenitentiam Gregory.
^on deletur, moxsuo pondere ad aliud trahit: id est, If sin by repentance
presently be not done away, by the weight thereof it will soon draw a man to
more sin: as we find it exemplisied in the Prophet David, who fell from
idleness to concupiscence, from concupiscence to adultery, from adultery to
murder.

Of the weight of sin the Prophet David speaks: Mine iniquities (...)
are go^e over mine head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me.

The Prophet Esaias calls the bands of wickedness heavy burdens intolerable
(...)
to be borne. The sins of the world being laid upon the shoulder^ of JESUS,
upon the Cross, were so weighty, and heavy, as they forced him (having the
weight of Gods wrath for them also upon him) to cry out on this manner to his
God: Eli, Eli, Lamasabactham? Mat. 27. 46
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? If the yoke of Christ be easy,
and his burden light: Mat. 11.
then of necessity on the contrary, must the yoke of Satan (which is sin) be
uneasy, heavy, and intolerable to be borne.

By which it may appear, that sin is an intolerable burden, and a great
impediment to this Christian Race.

Let us therefore (as the Chose^ H^^. 12. 1.
vessel does exhort us) cast away every thing that presleth us dowre, and the
sin that hangs so fast on: ^et us run with patience the race ^h^^ is ^et
before us. Where it is e^ident, that we cannot run with ^^^^en^^ ^^e race
that is set before us, un(...) cast away our sins from us, which do hang so
fast on us.

Moses was not permitted to come near the Lord, before he did discalciate
himself: Put off thy shoes: for, the place where thou stand is holy
ground* So must we put off the durty (...) of iniquity, and abandon sin from
the c^stl^ of our hearts, before we can b^e able to stand in the path way to
joys, which is an holy ground: therefore much l^sse are we able to run in
the same, and most unapt to run swiftly.

Let us therefore (in the name of God) purge our Souls and bodies from sin,
with the H^sop of Gods grace: Let us separate them from us, and our selves from
them, as far as the Cast is from the West, and North and South: Let us loath,
detest and abhor them, because the Lord does loath, detest, and abhor us for
them: as we have given our members as weapons of unrighteousness, to the
service of Satan in ungodliness of this life; even so let us give them as
weapons of righteousness, to the service of the Lord, in godliness of life:
as we have run in the race of the first Adam, by commission of sin; so let
us run in the Race of the second Adam, Jesus Christ the righteous, by
performance of righteousness: let us cease from sin, and do that which is
good, let us seek peace, and ensue it: Let us Plangere plangenda, bewail our
sins that ought to be lamented: Grauia peccata, grauia desiderant lamenta,
(says I^idore) great sins require great lamentation: sweet meat must have
sour sauce: rejoicing in sin, must have mourning for sin: let us therefore
be, Tam proni ad lamenta* sicut fuimus ad peccata: as prone to lamentation, as
we have been to transgression: as ready to lament them, as we have been to
commit them.

Let us sweep every corner of our hearts clean, with the broomes of penance,
and let us water them with the salt tears of earnest contrition: so that we
may be ^it receptaries for the Lord to dwell in; and (being anointed with the
oil of grace) we may run swiftly in the race that is set before us, and
obtain the reward prepared for us.

So run, that ye may obtain* Text.


Secondly, if we will run swiftly in the pathway to heaven, we must be
Extra exonerati: id est, unladen without.

Those that run in a race will lay aside their Cloakes, doublets, and such
like outward vestiments, that they may run the more speedily, and obtain the
more assuredly.

And so in like ^anner, we must be unburdened of all outward matters
whatsoever: especially, of the excessive care and affection that naturally we
bear to this wicked world, or else hell and damnation will be our best reward.

We must forsake all, if we will be followers of Christ; as Peter said to his
Master: Ecce, nos reliquimus omnia, and secuti sumus ^e. i. Behold, we have
Mat. 1^.
forsaken all, and followed thee. Well and wisely said Peter, (as says S.
Bernard* We have forsaken all and followed thee: for he could not have
followed Christ laden, as we have an example in the same Chapter of the Young
man, Mat. 19.
that at that Vende omnia, and da pauperibus: id est, Sell all, and give to the
poor, chose rather to leave Christ, then forsake his riches for Christ.

Yea, it is a thing impossible for such covetous Churles to run swiftly in
the way to life: It is easier for a Cammell Mat. 19. ^4
to go through the eye of a Needle, then for a rich covetous Carle to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nemo potest Dominis recte sur^ire duobus:
Poet.


Id est, No man can serve two Masters: no man serve God and Mammon, God and
riches. He that has his treasure in earth, cannot have his conversation in
Heaven: For, where Mat. 6. 21.
the treasure is, there will the heart be also.

If therefore riches increase, let us not set our hearts upon them. Let us use
this world as though we used it not: let us hold all dung for the gaining of
JESUS. As Christ said in the Gospel of John: That his Kingdom Ioh. 18.
was not of this world: So should we say, that our delight is not in this
world, but our hearts are altogether in the world to come. Let us take no care
what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewith we shall be
arrayed.

After all these things the mu^kewormes of this world, the Pagans, Infidels,
and Heathen people seek, that have neither knowledge of God, nor fear of God
before their eyes: but let us cast our care on the Lord; 1. Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 4.
for the Lord only cares for us: Therefore as Peter and Andrew left their nets
to follow Christ: And as Elisha 1. King. 19. ^^.
left his Oxen and his Plough to follow Eliah the man of GOD: Se should we
leave whatsoever is in the world, to follow the Son of God to Heaven.

We read of Crates Thebanus, that ^r^^. ^.
(because he could not apply himself to the study of Philosophy in regard of
his riches) he took his money, and cast it into the Sea, saying: Ego perdam
te, ne tu perdas me: id est, I will destroy thee, lest thou destroyest me. So
(if we find that our wealth, or any other thing in this world is an impediment
to our Christian race) let us cast them from us, not (as Crates did) into the
Sea, that were a fond and foolish thing: But let us cast our Eccl. 11. 1.
bread upon the waters: that is, bestow them on the poor, as Christ did wash
the young man in the Gospel of Matnew.

Thus therefore should we empty our selves of sin within, and unburden our
selves of the cares of this wicked world without, if we will run swiftly in
the Highway to Heaven.

So run, that ye may obtain. Text.


Pers^ueranter, Perseuerantly, and continually holding out to the end of our
Race.

Those that run in a race* though they run never so directly, though never
so swiftly, yet if they give over before they come at the and they lose their
reward. Even so, if we persevere not in the race of Godliness to the end of
our lives, we shall fail of the Kingdom of Heaven.

He that diggeth in a golden Mine, till he comes within five or six fadomes
of the gold, and then give over; is not all his labor lost, and all his cost
in vain?

A Traveler, that having taken upon him a long journey, and in the end gives
over within two or three miles of his iourneys end; is not all his labor lost,
and are not all his pains likewise in vain?

Even so, Nihil prodest cursus bonae vitae, (...) cons^^m^tur bo^o ^in^: id
est, The Race of a Godly life profits nothing, unless it be finished with a
godly end.

If a man had lived in the profession of the glorious Gospel of Jesus* for the
space of twenty, thirty, or forty years, and then prove an Apostata,
backsliding from the same, he is so far from obtaining salvation, as the
end of him is worser then the beginning.

So that there is no hope of happiness without perseverance: for as the tree
falls, so it lies, whether it falls toward the South, or North: And as a
man dies, so shall he be adjudged: If in the Lord, then shall he have his
portion with Saints: if in impenitency, then shall he have his portion with
devils.

The Soldier is not guerdoned with spoils, before he has obtained victory:
no more shall we be crowned, before we have been more then Conquerers in Jesus
Christ Well therefore says one: Sinullus esset hostis, nulla esset pugna* si
nulla pugna, nulla victoria: si nulla victoria, nulla denique Corona. i. If
there were no enemy, there were no fight: ^f there were no fight, there were no
victory: if there were no victory, there were no Crown: Nam nemo coronab^^ur,
2. Tim. 2.
nisi qui le^u^^e cert^^^rit: id est, For n^ man shall be crowned, but he
that figh^eth lawfully. Ideo homines tentantur, vt tentati resistant,
resistentes vincant, vincentes coronentur: Men are for this cause tempted; that
being tempted, they may resist; resisting, they may overcome; and ouercomming,
they may be crowned.

So that the perseverance is all in all.

The woman of Canaan by perseuerant crying after Christ, got her Daughter to
be dispossessed of the Mat. 15.
Devil.

The man that had ghests come late to his house, by his perseuerant knocking,
got bread for them of his neighbor at midnight.

So by perseverance in the Race of Godliness, we shall obtain the bread of
life, Christ Jesus, that reigns at the right hand of his Father in glory for
evermore.

Chrysostom speaking of this spiritual Chrysostom.
Race, says thus: Incipere multorum, finire paucorum: id est, Many will
begin to run in this godly Race, but few there are, that will hold out to
the end.

Rome began well, and embraced the Gospel of Christ willingly; but with the
dog they returned to their Pro. 26. 11.
former vomit of Idolatry; and with the Sow that was washed, they wallowed
again in the mire of iniquity: So that Friar Mantuan reports thus much in
commendation of their City: Heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat: Mant^^n.
exilium virtus patitur: vrbs est iam tota lupa^ar: id est, Alas, alas,
Covetousness is Queen of Rome: all godliness is banished from thence: the
whole City is become a Stews. And hereupon he gives this Caveat to all
Christians:

Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma: Poet.

Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum:
Id est, All you that will live a godly life, depart from Rome; for all things
are there suffered save godliness.

Oh, it had been better for this vvhorish ^. Pet. 2. ^1
City, never to have known the way of Righteousness, then after they have
known it, to turn from the holy doctrine given unto them: For (...)
^he latter end is worse with them then the beginning, according to that in the
Gospel: If S^tan be cast out, and (...). 4^
^n^^r in again with seven devils worser th^n himself, the end of that man is
worser then the beginning.

So Julian Emperor of Rome, began well, and for a while embraced the Gospel
of Christ: but he proved an Apostata in the end, dying, (...)ing, banning, and
blaspheming, and casting his blood into the air.

Demas followed Christ awhile, but afterward forsook him: Demas (...)
^^^h forsaken me, loving this present world. Many of Christ's Disciples (...)
b^cke, and walked no more with (...) Thou know (says S. Paul) (...)
that all they which are in Asia, are tur^ed (...)* of which sort are Phy(...)
and (...)ogenes.

^o we see, that many have begun well, but few have perseuered: but it w^^^
better that a Mil stone were (...) about the necks of such ^^^ol^^s, and cast
into the midst of the Sea: For The Lord will tread down Psalm. 18. 22.
reuolters under his feet, as clay in the streets.

He that puts his hand to the Luke 9. 6^.
Plough and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. He that
looks back to his house and home, having his mind busted in other matters,
cannot possibly make good work: even so he that intangleth himself with the
things of this present world, is not able to work out his salvation with fear
and trembling: for where the dead carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort:
and where our treasures are, there will our hearts be also.

He therefore that will obtain the Land that flows with Milk and Honey, must
forget the Fleshpots of Egypt: And he that will obtain Heaven, must not cast
his eyes to the earth: he that is on the house top, must Mat. ^4. 17
not come down to ^e^ch any thing out of his house* and he that is in the
fields, must not ^^^urne back again to his house. He that is in the way to
Heaven, let him not turn back again to this world, lest he be attached of the
Lion, and cast into hell.

Lots Wife for backe-looking was turned into a pillar of salt: And so every
man that turns back from the way of godliness, shall be turned into a
Firebrand, and burned with unquenchable fire: for whosoever shall deny JESUS
CHRIST in this world, shall be denied, the Kingdom of Heaven, of Christ Jesus
in the world to come.

Backe-looking, and backsliding must no^ be in Christians. Let us therefore
(with Saint Paul) not look Phil. 3 13.
behind us, but to that which is before us; namely, to the reward. Let us
fasten our eyes upon heaven gates, and never leave running, till we come at
them.

The Bride of Jesus would not turn back from her holy Race, saying: I Cant. 5.
^.
have washed my feet^, how shall I defile them? So should every member of the
mystical body of Christ say: I have washed my self from my sins* and by
Gods assistant grace, will I never defile my self any more. For he Ecc. 34. 26.
that washes himself (says the son of Syrach) because of a dead body, and
touches it again; what avails his washing? So is it with a man that fasteth
for his sins, and commits them again. Who will hear his prayer? or what
does his fasting help him? Even so, beginning well does nothing avail a man,
unless perseverance be resolved.

Thou therefore that would obtain, pull not thy neck out of Christ's yoke:
give not in any case; but at the very first step thou set into this godly
Race, resolve to persevere to the end of thy life, come what can come.

Manus igitur remissas, and genua soluta Heb. 12. 12
er^gite: id est, Lift up your hands that hang down, and your weak knees:
take heed that ye fall not away from the grace of God. Be not weary 2. These. 3.
13. 1. Cor. (...)6. 13.
of well-doing: Stand fast in the faith, and play the men, be strong, take
courage to you, and persevere to the end: for he that endures to the end, 2.
Chron. 15. 7.
the same shall be blessed.

Esto fidelis (says Saint John) vsque Apoc. 2. 10
ad mortem, and dabo tibi coronam vit^: id est, Be faithful to thy death, and
I will give thee a Crown of life.

Qui vicerit, dabo ei sedere in thr^no, Apoc. 3. 1^
etc. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne.

Non enim incipisse, sed perfecisse virtutis H^^^on.
est: id est, It is not the nature of Godliness to begin well, but to perfect
the work begun: Nec in^hoantibus, (...)
sed perseuerantibus praemium tribuitur (says Remigius:) id est, Neither is
the reward given to enterers, but to enders; not to beginners, but to
perseuerers.

Whereupon S. Gregory says: Inc^ssum curritur, ^i ceptum iter, ante ter(...)
d^^er^^^r: i^ est, He is a mad Traveler, that will not see the end of his
journey: and he is a fond Professor, that will not labor to dye in the Lord.

We read in the Gospel of John, that our Savior in the end of his life, said
in this manner: Opus consummaui Ioh. 1^. ^.
quod ded^ras mihi vt facerem: id est, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. And in the hour of his death he said in like manner:
Consummatum est, It is finished: So Ioh. 1^. 3^.
should every Christian after the example of his Savior, labor to finish the
work which the Lord called him to do: that so he may (with great peace of
Conscience, and with unspeakable solace of heart) say upon his Deathbed, with
the chosen V^^sel, in his second Epistle to Timothy: 2. Tim* ^. ^, ^.
Certamen bonum decertaui, cursum consummaui, fidem serua^^, etc. I have ^ought
a good fight, and have finished my course, I have kept the ^aith: therefore
henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not unto me only, but unto all
them that love ^i^ appearing.

Such was the resolute zeal, and zealous resolution of al holy Ma(...) in
former ages: that nothing (...) make them forsake the profession of the
glorious Gospel of JESUS: yea, this was their constant answer to there bloody
Butcherers: Ure, tunde, diuelle, lan^a, seca: Idolatua non adorabimus: The
resolution of Marty^^.
potes corpora ista ( O Caesar) cruci^tibus absumere; facere vero vt aliud
sentiamus, aut loquamur, non potes: tua s^^itia nostra est gloria: cum nos
inter^icere credas, d^ carcere corporis liberas: citius saxa, scopulosque and
montes d^ loco suo moue^is, quam nobis fidem Christo d^tam eripies: id est,
Burn, buffet, slay, devour, hew in pieces: thy abominable Idols will we never
worship: thou may (O cruel tyrant) consume with torments these our mortal
bodies; but to make us think, or speak otherwise then we do, can thou
never do: thy cruelty is our glory: killing us, thou do but deliver us from
(...) prison of our bodies: thou shall (...) remove the rocks and moun^^i(...)
their places, then make us (...) from the profession of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus.

Such was the resolution of Sydrach, Myshach and Abednego, that rather then
they would crouch to Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, which wa^ Dan. 3. 1, 23.
60. cubits high, they would be cast into the hot fiery Furnace, which was made
seven times more hot, then usually it was for necessary uses.

Such was the resolution of blessed Paul, that nothing could separate him from
his LORD and Master CHRIST: whose courageous vow we may find in his Epistle to
the Romans on this manner: Who shall separate Romans 8. 35 33, 39.
us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No verily, for I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us, from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, neither the love which we have to God from ^^, who are made his sons
through Christ Jesus.

And ^ndeed that which Paul promised, he performed: for he was beheaded at Rome
for the Gospels defense; although the sword did separate his head from his
shoulders, yet it could not separate him from his head Christ Jesus.

Such was the resolution of the pattern of patience: that though the Job. 13.
15.
Lord should kill him, yet would he put his trust in him.

Such was the resolution of Ignatius, Ignatius.
Bishop of Antioch, after Peter, that the ravening Beasts could not make him
flinch from his Redeemer: yea, being commanded by the King of Sy^ia, to be
torn in pieces of wild Beasts, and being led to the place of execution, the
uttered this golden sentence: Nihil moror visibilium, nec inuisibilium, modo
Iesum Christum acquiram: id est, I care neither for things visible, nor yet for
things invisible, neither for things seen, nor yet for things not seen:
Only, this is my care, that I may obtain CHRIST JESUS, and with him
everlasting salvation. And when the Beasts were let loose upon him, these were
his last words (as says S. Jerome) I am Gods corn, and the Jerome.
teeth of these wild Beasts must grind me in pieces, that I may be pure bread,
and fine manchet for Christ Jesus his Table in Heaven.

Such was the constant resolution of that good old woman Apollonia, Apollonia
that she chose rather to have her teeth dashed out of her head willingly, and
to be burnt to ashes, then to worship any other god, besides the true and
everliving God.

Yea, this was the constancy of all holy Martyrs, that they would rather endure
a thousand deaths, then shrink back from the word of Life. Peter Peter.
was beheaded for the Gospels defense: James thrown down from an James.
high Pinnacle, and his head cleft asunder: yea, almost all the Apostles were
put to grievous deaths, some were stoned, some broyled, some put to one death,
some to another.

Old Simeon (that was cousin germane Simeon.
to Christ, son to Cl^ophas, and Mary) Bishop of Jerusalem, after James was
nailed to the Cross, being six score years old and more. S. Cyprian beheaded
at Sexti nigh the Cyprian.
City Carthage.

Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna, Disciple Polycarpe.
to John, was most pitifully tortured to death by fire: yea, for the space of
300. years after Christ, and more, the Lord sent persecution ordinarily to his
Church.

Willingly did these Saints suffer, and joyfully did undergo all these
afflictions for the Kingdom of Heaven sake.

Hic ure, hic seca, vt in eternum parcas, (...)
Domine, says Saint Augustine: i* Here burn me (Lord) here slay me, to spare
me hereafter: Do what thou will (Lord) with my body, so that thou will spare
my soul.

Vtinam (says S. Jerome) ob Domini Ie(...)
mei nomen, atque iustitiam, cuncta Gentilium turba me persequatur and
tribulet: vtinam in opprobrium meum stolidus ^ie mundus exurgat: tantum vt ego
mer^^d^m Jesus consequar: id est, I would to GOD that the whole Nation of the
Gentiles, Pagans and infidels would, for the name of my God, and for the glory
of his Gospel, persecute me and trouble me: I would to God this mad and
foolish world would rise up against me for the profession of Gods blessed
Truth: only, that I may obtain CHRIST JESUS for my reward.

Ammonation, Mercuria, Dyonisia, Ammonation.
with diverse other godly women, would run to the fire with their children, as to
a joyful feast or banquet, thinking no greater glory on earth, then to suffer
for the Gospel of Christ.

And thus should every man and woman (as they tender the welfare of their
dear souls) resolve to suffer willingly, and bear patiently, whatsoever
calamity may befall them in this heavenly Race: considering the torments of
Hell, which by reuolting they shall undergo, considering the joys of Heaven,
which they shall have by patience* and considering what others have done before
them, as the Martyrs, and what Christ has suffered for them, that so with
perseverance holding out to the end, they may obtain everlasting bliss.

The Merchant will through fire and water suffering no repulse, that he may have
his Pinnace fraught with plenty of pure gold at the Indian Haven, according to
that of the Poet*

Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos: Poet.

Per mare paup^riem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
Id est, The painful Merchant aduentureth to the foreign Indians beyond the
Seas, through fire and water, fearing nothing, that he may eschew poverty, and
obtain much treasure.

Even so, he that will have the Pinnace both of Soul and body fraught with the
silver of all earthly prosperity, and with the gold of all celestial
felicity, must run the ra^e that is set before him with patience, leaping
over the wall of all obuious afflictions, perseuering till he comes at the
happy haven of Heaven: that then he (being more then Conqueror in CHRIST
JESUS) may triumph over Death, Hell, and Damnation, saying with the Prophet:
Ero mors tua, ^ mors: id est, O death, I will be thy Hos. 13. 14.
death; O grave, I will be thy destruction: and with valiant Paul; Death, 1.
Cor. 15.
where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory? Of necessity afflictions must
meet with us that run in the highway to heaven: yea, no man living can be
freed from them. All that will 2. Tim. 3. 12. Act. 14. 22.
live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: we must through many
afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God.

Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, H^. 12. 6, ^.
and he scourges every son whom he receives; we are bastards and not
sons, if we be free from afflictions.

^go quos amo, argu^, and castigo: id est, Apoc. 3. 10
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.

Qu^ diligitur, corrip^t^r: id est, He ha^ ^^ loved, is reproved.

The Oxen that are appointed for the slaughter, are let run in sat Pastures;
but those that are not appointed for so terrible an end, are daily wrought and
subject to much travel.

The barren tree is not beaten: but the tree that is planted by the rivers
side, and brings forth his fruit in due season, is sorely shaken, and yearly
beaten.

The stones that were for Salomons 1. King. 7.
Temple, were squared and hewne before they were laid in the building.

So every Christian ( who is a lively 1. Pet. 2. 5.
stone in this spiritual building, as says S. Peter) must be hewne with the
axe of affliction, and squared with the saw of correction, before he can be
received into the triumphnt Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the head
cornerstone.

Ideo Dominus quibusdam hic parcit Gregory.
non f^r^endo, vt in aeternum ^e^^at: ideo hic ferit non parcendo, vt in
aeternum parcat: id est, The Lord spares some for a time, that he may punish
them for ever: and he chastneth some for a time, Luke 16.
that he may spare them for ever. Dives that was spared on earth, was
tormented in hell: and Lazarus that was corrected on earth, was spared in
heaven.

For Qui vult cum Christo conregnare in regno coelorum: id est, He that will
reign with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven, must cum Christo compati in valle
lachrimarum: id est, must suffer with Christ in the vale of tears: qui vult
consequi, must sequi: id est, he^ that will obtain Christ, must follow Christ:
and he that will follow Christ, must take up his Cross and follow him.

Christ suffered before he entered into I ^^* ^4* ^.
glory: so must every Christian first suffer* before he can be glorified: The
I^^. 1^. ^.
servant must not be above his Master* Si ergo compatimur, conregnabimus: id
est, (...)
If we suffer with him, we shall raign^ with him. Dulcia non meruit, qui non
gusta(...)*
(...)
Id est, He deserves not to taste of the sweet, that will not taste of the
sour.

Iouinian, a King, having two sorts (...)
of wine in his Palace, the one sweet wine, and the other sour, decreed that
whosoever would taste of the sweet wine, should first taste of the sour: So
whosoever will taste of the sweet joys, that run through the celestial
Paradise, must first with Christ, sup of the cup of salt tears of affliction.

No marvel, therefore, if the Prophet in general says: that many are ^^^^*
34.
the troubles of the Righteous. No marvel if he compares afflictions to
waves of the Sea: for as one wave dasheth over the neck of another: so one
affliction continually follows another; For God is not like a wasp, that
having stung once, can sting no more: but there is a plurality of crosses with
God, he can sting again, and again. As one sorrowful messenger came to Job
after another; even so one affliction visits the Christian after another: as
the Viper leapt upon PAVL, and leapt off again; Act. 27.
even so afflictions leap upon Gods servants, and leap off again.

Those therefore that run in the Race of Godliness, must not think this
strange, neither must they think themselves free from all afflictions: for
they are hedged in on every side, with sundry kinds of troubles, and have three
deadly enemies continually warring against them.

Whereupon Job calls the life of man, a war-fare upon earth, and that
worthily: for we fight against three mighty enemies: the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh. The first enemy that withstandeth us in the way to heaven, is
the Devil, who in respect of his cruelty and might, is compared to a roaring
Lion: The 1 Pet. ^.
Devil like a roaring Lion, goes up and down* seeking whom he may devour.
The second enemy is the World, which is as subtle, as the devil is powerful,
for by the p^^^^^s and pleasures therein, it draws many to the service of
Satan. The third enemy, which is the Flesh, is no whit inferior to either of
them. For Caesar being asked what was the greatest thing in the world to
overcome, said: Seipsum vincere, to overcome a man's own self* and his untamed
affections. It does always rebel against the good motions of the Spirit: It is
a Judas to betray our souls into the hands of old ^euiathan.

The Prophecy must be fulfilled: I will put enmity between thee and Genesis 1^.
the woman, between thy feed and her feed: Therefore, the Church of God, in
this respect is called Eccl^sia mili^^ns: a warring Church: a Church that
fights manfully under the banner of Christ against the adversaries aboue-said.

No marvel therefore (our life being a war^are) if this world be called,
V^llis lachrimarum: A vale of tears: for afflictions are so common, that we
^a^e ^lw^^es cause to shead forth whole Oceans of tears with the Proph^^
D^u^^, who (although he were a man according to Gods own heart) was a
Pellicane in the wilderness of this world, whose nature is always to have
tears trickling down her Bill: his tears were his meat and drink: He
watered Psalm. ^.
his bed with salt tears, and washed his couch with continual weeping.

This is the state and condition of 1. Pet. 5. 9.
all Gods children in this life, that will run the Race of Christianity: so
that we may conclude with Job, and say: Man that is borne of a woman, Job 14.
^.
is of short continuance, and is full of trouble.

Seeing then that we are borne to travel, as the bird to flying, let us arm
our selves with patience: let us possess our souls with patience, and let us
run the Race that is set before us with patience: Knowing, that Non sunt
condign^ passionis, etc. that the passions that we can suffer in this world,
are not worthy of the joys in the world to come.

And seeing we are withstood in this way by three mighty enemies, let us, like
wise Soldiers: Put on the Ephesians. 6.
whole Armor of God: the helmet of hope, the breast plate of righteousness,
the shield of faith, the girdle of sincerity, the shoes of peace, and let us
always have ready drawn the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God,
which is able to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, and slay the Dragon in
the deep.

Moreover, let every Christian (that runs in the Race of Godliness) know,
that as afflictions are by no means to be avoided, so are they necessary for
the good of Gods children. All things work for the best to them Romans 8. 2^.
Psalm. 119. ^1.
that love God. And it is good for me (says the Prophet) that I have been i^
trouble, for thereby have I learned thy Law. For affliction to the Godly,
Medicina est, non p^na* castigatio, non damnatio: id est, is a curing medicine,
not a destroying punishment: a profitable chastisement, not a devouring
condemnation.

For diverse causes therefore does the Lord suffer his dear children to be
afflicted.

Gregory: A^rem^ Gregory.
cordis tribulatio aperit, qu^^ ^^^^ prosperitas huius mundi claudit: id est,
Tribulation does open the ^^re of ^^^ heart, which worldly prosperity does many
times shut.

As Antiochus in his prosp^^^ty thought himself equal with ^^^* yea above
God; but having in (...) of his Chariot, and being in (...)ty, he sung a new
song, saying: I^ (...)
stum est hominem mo^^al^m (...) Deo: id est, O! it is meet and requ^sit for
mortal man to be subject to the immortal God. So Alexander being hurt with an
arrow, said:

Homines dicunt esse me filium Iouis, sed s^gitta haec probat me esse mortalem:

Id est,

Men say that I am the son of Jupiter, but this arrow proves me to be but a
mortal man.

So Nebuchadnezzar proudly vaunted himself against the Lord of Hosts in his
prosperity: But when the Lord took him to task, metamorphosing this proud
king into a base beast, then could he say: That the Dan. 4. 34.
Lord was able to abase all those that walk in pride.

Thus therefore does the Lord chassen us in this world, that we may neither
be entangled with the love of this world: Nor be condemned with (...)
this world.

For as the Nurse, to weane her child seem thirsting after her milk, ^oth
anoint her teat with Aloes, or some such bitter thing: even so our heavenly
Father, to weane us from the pleasure of this wicked world, does send us many
sharp afflictions in this world.

Secondly, the Lord suffers us to ^
be afflicted, thereby to draw us to amendment of life. Before I was troubled,
Psalm. 119. 67.
I went wrong, but now have I learned to keep thy Law. The rod (says Prou. 29.
Solomon) brings wisdom.

As the rod of Moses striking the Deuteronomy. 8.
stony Rocks, caused whole Rivers of water to flow therefrom. So the Lord
striking upon our stony hearts with the rod of affliction, causes us to shed
forth buckets of tears for our sins committed.

Aduersa corporis, animae remedia sunt: Is^d.
aegritudo carnem vul^ erat, sed mentem curat: id est, The affliction of the
body is wholesome Physic for the soul: it kills the flesh, but cures the
Spirit: it wounds the outward man, but renueth the inward. Cum infirmor, tunc
fortior sum: i. when I am weak, then I 2. (...) 1^. 10.
am strong.

Afflictions therefore may be fitly compared to a Goldsmiths Forge, which
tries the pure Gold, from the impure dross.

It is like a purgation, which expels corrupt humors from the Body.

It is like a Shepherds crook, whereby the Lord does bring again his
wandering sheep to the fold.

It is called of the Prophet, Virga Ierem. 1.
vigilant: i. a watchful rod, a rod that keeps men in continual
watchfulness.

The Prodigal child, that wandered Luke 15.
far in the by-ways of sin, by this sheep-crooke was brought back again to
his fathers house: So the Lord by this means does bring home many that have
erred from the way of truth, and wearied themselves in the way of wickedness.
For as the careful mother cannot see a more amiss in her beloved child, but
will immediately wash the same away. So our heavenly Father cannot endure the
blemish of sin upon the face of his dear children, but he will wash it
presently away with the water of affliction: If thou sinnest to day, he
afflicts to morrow.

Thirdly, the Lord suffers us to be afflicted, that we may the more
earnestly call upon him, and the more speedily seek unto him. Mala quae nos
hic Gregory.
premunt, citius ad Deum ire compellunt: i Adversity that oppresses us here
in this world, does make us swiftly and speedily run to the Lord.

Lord, in their streights they sought Esaias 2^. 16 Dan. 13 4
thee. Susanna being ready to be put to death, cried out to the Lord. The
Prophet Jonas being in the Whales Jonas 2 1.
belly, powered out his prayers to the Lord. David in many of his Psalms, being
in trouble, called upon the Name of the Lord; especially in the 1^0. Psalm. De
profundis clama^^ ad te Domine, ^sal* (...)
Domine exaudi vocem meam: id est* Out of the deep have I cried unto thee, O
Lord: Lord hear my voice, etc.

So the Prodigal child being in a straight, sought to his father, de ring
(...) 1^. 1^*
him to make him but as one of his hir^d servants.

So the Disciples, when the ship was ready to suffer naufrage, by reason of the
tempest, awaked their Master, saying: Lord, save us, we perish.

So Peter being ready to sink, cried Mat. 14. ^
out to Christ, saying: Master, save me. Therefore that men may be compelled to
seek the Lord, he sends afflictions upon them, according to that of good S.
Augustine: A Deo premuntur Augustine.
iusti, ^t pressi clamant; clamantes, exaudiantur; exauditi, glorificent cum:
id est: Men are therefore oppressed of God, that being oppressed, they may cry
unto him; crying unto him, he may hear them; and hearing them, he may deliver
them; and delivering them, may be glorified of them.

Fourthly, the Lord does suffer us to be afflicted, thereby to try us, whether
we will depart from him in time of trouble yea or no.

And thus was Job tried of the Lord: For though the Lord had permitted Satan to
tempt him, his enemies to undo him, his children (by sudden death) to be
taken from him, his body to be afflicted from top to toe with Byles, Botches,
and Sores, having no sound part throughout: his wife to be an occasion of
offense unto him, who in these his distresses should have been a comfort to
him: yet notwithstanding all this, Job sinned not against his Maker: yea, he
was so far from mistrusting in God, as he said, Though the Lord killed him,
yet would he put his trust in him: and so far from murmuring against him, or
cursing him, as with admirable patience in them, he blessed the Lord for them,
saying on this heavenly manner: The Lord gives, and Job 1.
the Lord takes away; blessed be the name of the Lord.

Thus were the Apostles and the holy Martyrs tried, who were so far from
recantation, as they willingly chose to lose their lines in tribulation. And
thus were the three Children tried in the furnace.

By affliction are the children of the ^o^d, and the so was o^ ^eliai
disc^r^ed: Even a^ (...) vessel^ will break (...)
in pieces when they come to the fire, and the sound only hold out: So the
wicked (like counterfaits) will bewray themselves, when they come to the
faggot, and the godly only stand to it; as we read in the Gospel of S. Luke:
They depart from him in the Luke 8. 15.
time of tribulation.

Many will (with Peter) vow to follow Christ Jesus, and to stick close to him:
but when they come to Pilars Hall, a silly Maid will make them forswear him.

The Lord therefore afflicts us, to try our Faith, our Patience, our Hope,
and other virtues.

Faith is exercised in affliction, by Faith.
considering the causes of Gods permission, and by believing most assuredly his
promises concerning our deliverance.

Hope is exercised in affliction, by Hope.
assuring our selves of the rewards promised to all those that suffer patiently.

Love is exercised in affliction, by Love.
considering the love of Christ in suffering for us: and thereby we are
provoked to suffer for him again.

Obedience is exercised in affliction, Obedience.
by conforming our wills to the will of Christ, saying with Christ, Not as we
will, but as thou will, O Lord God of Hosts.

Patience is exercised in affliction, Patience.
by suffering quietly, willingly and cheerfully, and by welcomming them sent
of God for our good.

Humility is exercised in affliction, Humility.
by abasing our selves in the sight of God, acknowledging that they are but as
flea-bitings, in respect of the torments of hei, which by our lewd lives for
evermore we have deserved.



We read in the Gospel of John, that the Apostles having asked our Savior the
reason why the man was borne blind, he answers them; Ioh. 9. 2, 3.
Not for his fathers, nor for his own sin, but that the works of God should
be shown on him: From which we may truly gather thus much: namely, that the
man was borne blind, especially to this end, that our Savior might have
occasion to show the greatness of his power in curing him.

Again in the same Gospel, we read that Lazarus dyed to this end, that God
might be glorified in raising him from death. The wonderful Ioh. 11.
power of the Lord was showed in the delivery of the three Children from sire,
by his Angel: of Jonas from drowning, by the Whale: of Susanna from death, by
Daniel: of Daniel from the L^ons, by his own immediate power: of Eliah from
staruing, by the R^ens: And our gracious Sovereign Lord, King James, from the
sword in Scotland, and from the Powder Treason in England by his extraordinary
favor, and wonderful love, which he had to this his gracious servant: which
the Lord in mercy vouchsafe unto him, and his Royal Progeny for evermore.

Thus the Lord brings men into deep afflictions, that his power might be
shown in bringing them out again: Dominus deducit ad inferos 1. Sam. 2. 6
and reducit: id est, The Lord brings to hell, and brings back again* to
great afflictions, and out of them Poet.
again: Vna eademque manus, vulnus, opemque tulit. The same hand that
wounds, the same hand cures: Vulnerat, ^ob. 5. 18.
and medetur: percutit, and sanum reddit: ^ He makes the wound, and binds
it up: he smites, and his hand makes whole. So that howsoever many are the
troubles of the righteous in their journey to heaven, yet the Lord powerfully
in his good time delivers them out of all, if he sees it best for their
good: otherwise suffering for the testimony of the truth, and the glory of his
name, they shall change this life for a better.

Thus have I somewhat largely spoken of Afflictions, both in regard of their
necessity, as they cannot be shifted of any that run in the way of Godliness,
as also in regard of their conueniency, being more help then hindrance in this
spiritual journey, that so we may make good use of the^, when it shall please
the Lord to send them.

And thus much shall suffice for this third point: namely, for perseverance in
this course of Godliness, beseeching the Lord of his goodness to give us
grace, that we may not shrink back for fear of afflictions, but wade throrow
with patience, holding out in this Race, to the end of our Race.

So run, that ye may obtain. Text.


The third thing in order to be spoken of, is Pr^mium promissum: id est, the
promised reward: But before I enter into the handling thereof, one thing
necessarily must be observed, and that worthy of annotation.

The Apostle says not here: Seem s^ to (...), that ye may obtain: or make ^^
outward show of running: (...) ^^ run, that ye may obtain.

^n which spee^h, he excludes all hypocrisy, and banisheth all counterfeit
godliness from this Christian Race: For in this visible Church there are many
that outwardly profess CHRIST, but inwardly serve Belial: Christians in name,
but Reprobates in deed: Saints in show, but devils in conversation.

Many Hypocrites there are, like painted Sepulchers, dissembling Pharisees,
fair without, but foul within: Lambs in apparition, but Wolves in condition:
Ones habitu, Bernard.
(as says S. Bernard) Vulpes actu, and crudelitate lupi^ id est, Sheep in
show, Foxes in deed, and Wolves in cruelty. Mente sub agnina latitat men's
saepe lupina:
Poet.


Id est, They have Lambs skins, but Wolves hearts. Yea, howsoever they seem
to be members of Christ's body, courteous and kind to the flock of Jesus,
zealous lovers and earnest embracers of the sincere milk of the word, running
in the path of true godliness: yet nevertheless, they are a Mat. 3. 7
generation of Vipers, of whom the Evangelist speaks, ready to suck out the
very heart blood of the Saints of God, and rend them in pieces like ravening
Wolves: they have Mel in ore, fell in cord: id est, Honey in their mouths, but
gall in their hearts; sugared words to entrap, but poisoned hearts to torment:
carrying themselves like Judas, who saluted his Master with a kiss, having the
poison of Asps lying under his lips: For

Quando bonum ore faris, mala cord tamen Poet.
meditaris,
Oscula quae Domino Judas dedit, haec mihi tu da^:
Id est, When men speak well, and think ill, their kindness is treason, as
was the kiss of Judas. And for all other enmities in the world, this is the
greatest, as says Cassiodorus: Grauissimum (...).
inimicitiae est genus, cord aduersarios, and lingua simulare deuotos: id est,
This is a most grievous kind of enemy, when men pretend much love in tongue,
and bear much more malice in heart.

These cursed Hypocrites, these dissembling Hel-hounds, and these venomous
Vipers, are the very pictures of the Devil, and lively representations of the
old Serpent: For as the Devil lies, coggeth, counterfaiteth and dissembleth:
so do these.

The subtle Serpent pretended great kindness to our first Parents,
counselling them to eat of the forbidden fruit, that so they might see, and be
as gods; but he intended their everlasting destruction: so these crafty Foxes
seem to be charitable Christians, and to give good counsel whersoeuer they
become: but yet they devour (...)
Widows houses, and that under color of long prayers.

The subtle Serpent seems to be an Angel of light, but yet he is a devil
of darkness, settered with the chains of everlasting darkness. So A(...).
these Apes of the Devil, do bear an outward show of holiness and puri ty:
yet they are Wels without water, and clouds carried about with every tempest,
to whom the black darkness 2. Pet. 2. 17
is referned for ever.

These Hypocritical mock-gods may fitly be compared to Idols: For as an Idol
has an outward shape of (...) in (...).
a living man, but yet has no life at all within: So Hypocrites seem to live
by the life of grace, yet are they dead in sin, and rotted in corruption.
They are new vpstart Giants, having two faces under one hood: they come near
unto God with their (...). ^9 ^3
mouths, and honor the Lord with their lips, but their hearts are far
removed from him. Deum laudant in t^mpa^o, se^ non in choro: i^ They praise the
Lord in the Tabor, but not in the dance: they serve God in show, but not in
truth: they bear (with the Figg^^tree) great store of leaves, but no fruit at
all.

But alas, alas, these Hypocrites (that thus deceive themselves, having their
reward on earth, which they through vain glory, greedily look for at the hands
of men) shall never obtain a Crown of righteousness, being altogether
unrighteous, but they shall have their portion with Hypocrites, where shall be
weeping, wayling (...) ^5. ^5
and gnashing of teeth. For the Lord abhors all hollow hearts, and double
tongues, all outward odlations and burnt sacrifices, all outward show and
hypocritical worship: he is a Spirit, and he will sp^e all such out of his
mouth, as worship him not in Spirit and Truth. Simul^ta san^litas, duplex
iniquitas. i. Counterfeit godliness is so far from holiness, a^ it is
double ungodliness. I say therefore unto thee with Saint Chrysostom* Aut esto
quod appares, aut appar^ (...); (...)
id est, Either be as thou seem^st or seem as thou art.

It is not seeming, but being that shall go for pay: Non audi^o^^s s^d f^
^^or^s legis iustisic ibutur: id est, No^ the hearers, but the doers of the
^^^^ shall be justified: N^^ eandem pr^^i^^ntes, sed eidem obedientes glorifi^
^^untur: id est, Not professors, but performers shall be glorified.

Woe therefore to all hypocritical Mock-gods, that run not in the Race of
Christianity, as they boast themselves by profession; they shall roar at the
gates of heaven, and say: Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and
by thy name cast out devils? and by thy Name done many good works? have we
not professed thy Gospel, and borne the name of thine? But because they did
not the will of our heavenly Father, our Savior shall send them packing to
hell, with a Nescio vos: professing on this manner unto them: I never knew Mat.
7. 22. 23. Mat. 23. 23
you, depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. O ye viperous Serpents, O ^ee
generation of Vipers, how shall ye escape the judgment of hell?

Let every Christian therefore beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy. Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in ^^^. (...).
Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves: ye shall know them by
their fruits: do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

Walk wisely toward them that are Col. 4. 5.
without, redeeming the time, for the days are evil.

That you may therefore prevent the damned traditions of this devilish brood, I
say unto you, as our Savior said unto his Apostles a little before his Passion:
Behold, I have told you Mat. 24. 25
before.

Let every Christian therefore (avoiding all counterfeit and hypocritical
profession) run in the Race of godliness, serving the Lord with all his
heart, with all his Soul* with all his strength, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of his life.

God calls for our hearts: My son, give me thy heart: The Lord Pro. 23. ^^
August^ne.
(as says S. Augustine) Quia totum fecit, totum exigit: id est, Because he
made all, he will have all: not a piece of the heart, nor a room in thy
heart, but the whole heart, for the Lord is a jealous God: and as a jealous
husband cannot endure, that his wife should give her heart or any part thereof,
to any other man* so the Lord cannot abide that we should give any part of our
heart from him* He calls not for a stony heart, nor for a double heart; but
for a fleshy heart, a heart purged by faith in CHRIST JESUS, bathed in the
blood of the Lamb, and thoroughly cleansed by the fire of the Spirit: not an old
heart, neither a corrupted heart; but a new heart, and a new Spirit: for which
the Prophet David begged: Create in Psalm. 51. 10
me a new heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Let us therefore (I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God) give up our
bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is our
reasonable serving of God: and let us Romans 12, 1, 2.
not fashion our selves like to this world: but let us be changed by the
renewing of our mind.

In stead of dead beasts, let us give up our bodies, which are lively
Sacrifices: And in stead of the blood of beasts, which was but a shadow, and
pleased not God of it self, let us give up the acceptable sacrifice of the
spiritual Man, framed by faith, to Godliness of life; Let us sanctify the
Lord 1 Pet. 3. 23.
in our hearts, who daily calls for our hearts: let us say with David: My
Soul, praise thou the Lord, and all Psalm. 103. 1.
that is within me, praise his holy name: Let us praise him in his Sanctuary,
and in the firmament of his power: let us praise him in his mighty acts, and
according to his excellent greatness: let us praise him in the sound of a
Trumpet, upon the Violl and Harp: yea, let every thing that has breath praise
the Lord: And that not only in word and in tongue, but in deed, and in truth:
not in outward show and profession only, but in our pure lines, and holy
conuersations: that so running in the Race of Godliness to the end of our
lives, we may be blessed for ever: and glorifying the Lord God by our holy
conuersations in this world, we may be eternally glorified of the Lord our God
in the world to come.

So run, that ye may obtain. Text.


Praemium promissum: The promised reward, to all those that run lawfully: so
great a reward it is, as should stir up every Christian to run in the Race of
Godliness.

If the King of his Princely bounty would offer 10000. pounds to him that
should first come at a miles end: would not thousands hazard their lives, and
adventure a surfeit willingly, that they may obtain the same? But the Lord has
offered us a Kingdom: Yea, it is the pleasure Luke. 12. Heb. 13. 14 1. Pet. 1.
18.
of our heavenly Father to give us a Kingdom: an habitation not made with
hands, nor purchased with gold and silver, but with the blood of the immaculate
Lamb: And shall not we labor and strain our selves with might and maine, to
run the race that is appointed for us? How will men toil and moyle for a little
trash? How will men use all their wits, and bend all their studies to be
worldly rich? Alas, those are dung in respect of this reward: shall we not
therefore much more labor for the meat that shall never perish, and for this
glorious reward that shall never be taken from us?

The greatness of this reward is painted out unto us in the holy Scriptures,
by the diversity and greatness of the names thereof.

Regnum coelorum: i. The Kingdom of Heaven: for there they enjoy great
liberty, honor, power, pleasure, glory, and all good things whatsoever.

Regnum Dei and Christi: id est, The Ephe. ^ 21
Kingdom of God and of Christ: because that Jesus Christ (having over come
death, hell, and damnation, together with all the enemies that did oppose us in
the way to heaven) does rule there, and govern his Church triumphant with
heavenly peace and everlasting tranquillity.

Thirdly, it is called by the name of Paradisus: id est, Paradise: in respect
Luk^ 23.
of the abundant plenty of all good and pleasant things, which the Saints can
either wish or possibly desire.

Caelum tertium* id est, the third heaven: 2. Cor. 12.
which is called Coelum Empyraeum, i. igncum: not in respect of fire, but in
respect of the glorious light that shines therein: For it is Situ altissimum,
quantitate maximum, natura purissimum, luce plenissimum, capacitate
amplissimum: id est, High in situation, great in quantity, pure in nature, full
of light, and exceeding large: Able to receive ten thousand times more persons,
the^ there are drops of water in the sea, or s^^d lying by the shore.

Sancla Ciuit^s: an holy City, built Apoc. 21. 10.
with most precious pearls: because the company that dwell therein are holy
and pure, shining in holiness, and glistring in purity, as the portals of the
burnish Sun.

Summa be ^titudo: inestimable blessedness: Because the Saints enjoy the full
presence of the blessed Trinity, wherein true bliss consists.

Vita aeterna: Life everlasting: because there shall be no more death, nor
lamentation, no more crying nor sorrow, but the Saints shall enjoy these
blessed joys, so ^ong as God shall be God, which is for everlasting. This is
the reward promised to all those that will run in the race of Godliness,
holding out to the end. A large reward, and no man knows it, but he that
enjoys it: Adeo magna est, quod nequit numerari, adeo pretiosa, quod n^ qui^
comparari, adeo diutina, quod nequit terminari* id est, So great is this
reward, as it cannot be numbered: so precious, as it cannot be valued; so
lasting, as it is everlasting: it is great without quantity; sweet without
quality; infinite without number; everlasting without end.

So great is this reward, as neither ^e has seen, nor ea^e has heard of 1.
Cor* ^
he like, neither can it be expr^sted of (...) ^a^^ of man. Quod (...), says
S. Augustine) Diligentibus se Augustine.
Deus side non capitur, spe non attingitur, charitate non comprehenditur,
desideria and vota transgreditur, adquiri potest, aestimari non potest: id est,
That which the Lord has prepared for those that love and fear his Name, is
not fully attained to by faith, neither fully retained by hope, neither fully
contained by charity; it far surpasses the desires of men and Angels: It may
be in some measure be obtained, but valued it can never be. Deus (says S.
Bernard) est mel Bernard.
in ore, melos in aure, and iubilus in cord: i. God is honey in the mouth,
melody in the ear, and joy in the heart. Ibi nihil in tus fastidiatur, nihil
foris quod appetatur; ibi rex veritas, lex charitas, possessio aeternitas: id
est, In heaven there is nothing that may seem fulsome or loathsome; out of
Heaven there is nothing that may be wished or desired, (for then were there no
perfection in heaven; for, Persetium est, cui nihil addi potest: i. There is
perfection, where can be no addition:) there the King is Verity, the law
Charity, and possession Eternity. Saint Augustine speaking of the joys of
heaven, says thus: Ibi laetitia sine Augustine.
tristitia, locus sine dolor, vita sine labor, lux sine tonebris: ibi
i^uentus semper vigescit, and nunquam senescit: ibi dolor nunquam sentitur, nec
gemitus vnquam auditur: ibi tristitia nunquam videtur, sed aeternum gaudium
possidetur: id est, There is mirth, without moan; place without pain; life,
without labor; light, with out darkness: there youth always flourishes, and
never decays: there is no torment felt, no howling heard, no sorrow seen,
but possession of everlasting joys.

Ibi est summa, and certa tranquillitas, Augustine.
tranquilla foelicitas, foelix aeternitas, aeterna beatitudo, and beata
Trinitas: id est, There is great tranquillity, tranquil felicity, happy
eternity, everlasting blessedness, and the blessed Trinity. O gaudium, super
gaudium, vincens omne Augustine.
gaudium, extra quod non est gaudium: quando intrabo in te, vt Deum meum
videam, qui habitat in te? id est, O joy a boue all joys, far surpassing all
joys, without which there is no joy: When shall I enter into thee, that I may
see my God that dwells in thee?

This holy man Augustine, considering the greatness of the joys of heaven,
says on this manner: Facilius exponi Augustine.
potest quid non sit in coelo, quam quid sit in coelo: id est, A man may sooner
tell what is not in Heaven, then what is in Heaven: for the joys which are
there, are innumerable.

Even as a learned Geometrician, finding Hercules his foots length upon the
high hill Olympus, drew out his whole picture by the proportion of the same,
though far unequal to it: so we may guess at the greatness of the joys of
Heaven, though far unequal to them.

As the Queen of Sheba, having heard the wisdom of Solomon which before she
believed not, said to Solomon: Lo, the one half was not told me: So the
Saints of God inioying the unspeakable joys of Heaven, may say; it is true
which we have heard concerning the joys of Heaven by the mouth of preaching
Ministers* but lo, the thousand part of them was not told unto us.

The greatness of these joys do appear in the entertainment of the
faithful Servant into joys by our Lord Jesus, saying: Enter into thy Masters
joy: Our Savior says not, Let thy Masters joy enter into thee: but Enter thou
into it: showing unto us: that the joys of Heaven are so many, as the thousand
parts of them cannot be contained in the soul of man.

Thus at large have I spoken of this reward, the more to allure all men to
run in the Race of Christianity, which is the high way to this glorious
reward.

Four things there are, that being well considered, are excellent motives to
cause men to leave the broad way of iniquity, and to betake themselves to run
in this Race Celestial: The day of death: The day of doom: The joy; of
Heaven, and the torments of Hell

Let every Christian therefore (as he tendreth his everlasting salvation) cast
his eyes upon this reward, and run in the race of Godliness, so long as life
shall last; that whenever it shall please the Lord to call him out of the
vale of tears, he may (having his name written in the book of Life) be
welcomed into his Masters joy, with this blessed harvest song: Come thou
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee, from the
beginning of the world: To the which thrice-blessed Kingdom, he bring us that
has so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who has taken away
the sins of the world: To whom with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost,
three Persons, but one eternal and everliving God, we ascribe both now and
ever (as is most due) all power, glory, dominion, and thanksgiving. Amen.

A MORNING PRAYER.
O Most glorious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our
Father, the Fountain of all our welfare, and the giver of all grace: we thy
poor children (according to our bounden duty) are at this present assembled
together before thee in Prayer, to offer up even from the ground of our hearts,
the Morning Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, for all thy loving mercies, and tender
kindnesses whatsoever, bestowed upon us. We highly bless thy Majesty for
electing us in thy Christ to life eternal, before all worlds, for creating us
after thine own most glorious Image in purity and perfection of holiness, for
justifying us by the perfect obedience of thy Son, for sanctifying us by thy
holy Spirit: and for the hope that thou have given us of our future
glorification with thee hereafter in Heaven. We also return unto thee all due
and possible praise, for preserving of us hitherto of thine especial goodness
and mercy; supplying abundantly all our necessities both in soul and in body:
and at this present we heartily magnify thy name for thy watchful providence
over us this night, and for thy blessing upon us and ours, keeping us from
diverse dangers, that might justly for our sins have come upon us, both
spiritual and corporal. O what shall we render unto thee for all these thy
mercies done unto us? what are we, that thou should thus respect us? or what
are our deseruings, that thou should thus esteem us? To us (O Lord) to us
most miserable sinners, there nothing belongs but shame and confusion. If
thou (Lord) markest strictly what is done amiss, who is able to abide it? O
how far does thy mercy exceed thy justice? O the deepenesse of thy favors
toward us? So unsearchable are they, as no man can express them, so
vn-vtterable, as no man can declare them.

And (most merciful Father) we humbly entreat, for thy Christ's sake, the
continuance of these mercies toward us: bless us this day and ever with thy
heavenly protection and benediction, guide us by thine own Spirit into all
godliness, that we may profitably and conscionably walk before thee in our
vocations, both general and particular: bless us in the house, and bless us
in the field, bless us in the basket, and bless us in the store: bless us in
our outgoings, and in our commings in, compass us on every side with thy
mercies: guard thine Angels round about us: keep us from the evil of this
world, and every work of darkness; and sanctify both our souls and bodies
with thy fear to thy service, that as heretofore we have served the Devil and
the World by profaneness, so ever hereafter (redeeming the time) we may
apply our selves unto holiness.

To which end we most earnestly crave (O heavenly Father) the presence of thy
Spirit always to direct us, the powerful preaching of thy Gospel always to
instruct us, the holy use of thy Sacraments always to confirm us, that (all
heresy and ungodliness removed far from us) by these means sanctified unto
us, we may glorify thy holy Name, by our holy conuersations in this life, and
be glorified of thee everlastingly in the life to come.

And because (by reason of our sins) in stead of thy mercies we have deserved
thy furious indignation against us: we therefore seriously beg at the Throne
of thy mercy, in the meritorious mediation of Jesus Christ, that thou would
remove far from us and our Land, all thy fearful and heavy judgments
whatsoever; as famine, pestilence, sword, and the like; and give us all grace
from the King to the beast, that we may be truly humbled for all our
iniquities, that we repenting us of our evil, which is sin, thou may be
pleased to repent thee of thy evil, which is punishment for sin.

Hear us (O blessed Lord God) in these our Petitions, pardoning our sins,
and granting to us all our requests, with all other thy graces that we stand
in need of, that may make for thy glory, and the saving of our poor souls, at
the dismal day of Judgment, and that for Christ Jesus his sake: To whom with
thee and thy blessed Spirit, three glorious persons, but one immortal God, we
desire to return all possible praise, power, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, this
morning, and everlasting, Amen.

AN EVENING PRAYER.
O Most gracious God, and in Jesus Christ our most loving and most merciful
Father, the Father of all mercies, and God of all consolations: we thy poor
servants do most humbly cast down our selves before the Throne of thy
dreadful Majesty, confessing and acknowledging our manifold sins, from time to
time most grievously committed against thee, in thought, word and work: O Lord
our God, we must needs confess with mourning and sorrowing hearts and spirits,
that we were all borne in sin, all conceived in iniquity, and that all our life
hitherto has been most fearfully corrupted, and stained with all manner of
sinful transgressions, to the great dishonor of thine own Majesty, to the
great discomfort of our own souls, and to the everlasting confusion both of
soul and body in thy just justice and judgment in the world to come. Yea (O
Lord) we cannot but confess that (so soon as ever we came into the world)
thou might justly for our sins have taken us both body and soul, and
given us our portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone: it is
thy great mercy that thou have spared us hitherto, and not consumed us from the
face of the earth.

To thee therefore (God of endless compassion) we most miserable wretches make
our pitious moan: to thee in Christ Jesus, we come now for mercy: hear us,
heal us, help us, and have mercy upon us, pardon and forgive us all our
sins, let shine thy favorable countenance toward us, and say unto our
souls that thou art our salvation.

Thou have promised in thy holy and heavenly Word, that a broken and a contrite
heart thou will not despise. Fulfill therefore now (O Lord) this thy gracious
promise to us, that are weary and laden with the affrightments of sin, and
that offer up our prayers with groans that cannot be expressed.

Wash us (O Lord) in the blood of Jesus Christ, make us clean within and
without, by thy sanctifying and renewing grace, preserve us both in body and
soul from the guilt and punishment of all our mis-doings, assure our
consciences of the same by faith, and seals us by thy good Spirit to the day of
redemption. And (heavenly Father) we humbly entreat thee to work thy good
work in every soul of us, to give us faith in thy promises, zeal to thy
glory, love to thy truth, obedience to thy will, care and conscience to walk
upright before thee in all our ways, and to offer up our souls and bodies a
lively sacrifice to the service of thy Majesty, in holiness all the days of
our life to come.

And in these our prayers, we crave also (at thy merciful hands) thy gracious
blessings for all thy faithful Children, and elect persons, wheresoever
dispersed, and howsoever distressed upon the face of the earth; and more
especially for these thy churches amongst us, of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland: replenish the Kings most excellent Majesty with all necessary graces
meet for so worthy a Personage: Redouble thy gracious Spirit upon our most
hopeful Prince, and multiply thy blessings upon all His Royal Issue. Bless
all the Nobility of our Land, all the reverend Clergy, from the highest to the
lowest; all of the civil Magistracy; all Schools of learning, with the two
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, and all the Commons of this Realm; show
pity upon all thine that are in any kind of tribulation, or affliction,
especially upon all those that suffer persecution for thy Gospels truth:
comfort all those that lie languishing in spirit, Soule-sicke at the heart, for
remorce of their sins; say unto their Souls that thou art their Redemption.

Bless moreover (we beseech thee) all that are dear and near unto us in the
flesh, as our Parents, Father, and Mother, Brother and Sister, and Kinsfolk,
together with our dear Friends, and Christian acquaintance, absent, or
present: Lord be present with them, and keep them as the apple of thine own
eye, from every evil work and way, to thy everlasting Kingdom and salvation.

And (holy Father) we finally entreat thee to redouble thy gracious blessings
upon every one of us, at this time humbled in Prayer before thee: bless us
bodily and spiritually, give unto our bodies comfortable rest and sleep, that
so we may be the fitter to do the works of our several vocations before thee:
and grant unto our souls the continual assistance of thy grace, that they may
never sleep in sin, but that they may be always waking and waiting for the
coming of our Lord Jesus to Judgment; that so Soul and body may be
preserved from the evil of sin in this life, and from the evil of damnation
in the world to come, and that for Christ Jesus his sake our sole Savior and
only Redeemer: to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, three glorious
persons, but one Essential God, we offer up all possible Thanksgiving and
praise this evening and everlasting: Amen.

FINIS.
Tormenting TOPHET, OR, A TERRIBLE DESCRIPTION of HELL, Able to break the
hardest heart, and cause it quake and tremble.

Preached at Paul's Cross the 14. of June. 1614.

The fifth Edition corrected and amended.

Esaias 30. 33. Tophet is prepared of old; it is even prepared for the King: he
has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire, etc.

Printed at London by George Purslow, and are to be sold by John Clarke. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and my very dear friends, Sir Lestraunge Mordaunt
of Massingham Hall, in the County of Norfolk, Knight Baronet, and Lady
Frances Mordaunt, his most loving Bedfellow: HENRY GREENVVOOD. Wishes all
increase of Grace in this Life, and Eternal Life in Life to come.
IT is, and has been long since (Right Worshipful) the custom of the
Learned, that when they commended to public view (therein aiming a^ common
good) their Christian pains and divine endeavors (knowing that the truth has
and always had many oppositions and detractions) to present them to men of
high place, and well affected in Religion, that so their works might pass with
less fear, and danger of disgrace and opprobry: I (though unlearned) making
bold to imitate their Christian policy herein, have presumed to present that
doctrine to your Worships eyes, that lately in public place was sounded in
your ears, both of which senses are great instruments in the furtherance of
our souls in the way of Gods Kingdom; for as the ear conuayeth grace to the
affections of the soul; so the eye brings much matter to the understanding
of the mind; nay, the ear cannot so often be an Andito, as the eye an Orator
to the Conscience.

For which cause (your Worships nothing more affecting than growth in grace and
Religion) I have attempted to commend to your often consideration, Tormenting
Tophet: for as nothing allureth the heart to grace, more then Gods mercies, so
nothing is more preualent against sin than his fearful and terrible
Judgments.

If therefore your gracious Worships shall vouchsafe to accept of these my poor
presented pains, it will give much content to mine own heart, and (doubtless)
answerable comfort to your own souls.

And to conclude, as the Lord has abundantly blessed your Worships with
graces internal, and blessings external; So (to use the words of the Apostle)
the very God of peace sanctify you still throughout, and I pray God that your
whole spirits, and Souls, and bodies, may be kept blameless to the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

From Hempsted in Essex, January, 10. 1629. Your Worships always ready Henry
Greenwood.

To the CHRISTIAN Reader.
CHristian Reader, I commend to thy charitable view, this terrible and
lamentable description of Hell, a subject most necessary in these days,
wherein Iniquity has gotten the upper hand: the greatest part of mankind
labors of this dangerous disease; namely, hardness of heart and contempt of
all grace: I therefore for the removing of this damnable evil, have prepared
this Tormenting Corrasiue. Blame me not, if I be too bitter in denouncing Gods
Judgments against sin, the presumption of the time compels me, this only is
the aim of my intention herein, that many may be saved from the damnation
hereof. Thus commending this Tractate to thy Christian consideration, and thy
self to Gods most blessed protection, I rest

Thine euer-louing and wel-willing Henry Greenwood.

Tormenting TOPHET, Or, A terrible description of Hell, able to break the
hardest heart, and cause it quake and tremble.
Esaias. 30. 33. Tophet is prepared of old; it is even prepared for the King* he
has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the
breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone does kindle it.
ALbeit the LORD in the beginning created man in glorious manner, omnino ad
imaginem sui, ratione sapientem, vita innocentem, dominio potentem, altogether
after his own most glorious Image, in purity, and in perfection of holiness
both in soul and body, yet withal he gave him naturam flexibilem, a mutable
and changeable nature; creating him in potestate standi, seu posse cadendi: in
power of standing, and in possibility of falling: power of standing, that he
had from God his Creator, possibility of falling, that he had from himself,
being a creature.

A reason whereof S. Augustine gives Augustine.
in his book of Confessions: Because the Lord created man ex nihilo, of
nothing: therefore he left in man possibility to return in nihilum, into
nothing: if he obeyed not the will of his Maker.

And as Basil says, Si Deus dedisset Basil.
Adae naturam immutabilem, deos potius quam homines condidisset: id est, If God
had given Adam an immutable, and unchangeable nature, he had created a God, not
a man: for this is a maine truth in Divinity, immutabiliter esse bonum proprium
solius est Dei: id est, to be immutably, and unchangeably good, only proper to
God.

Adam therefore being thus created, that he might either stand or fall, by the
Devils subtle suggestion, and by the abuse of his own free will received a
double downe-fall, the fall of sin by disobedience, and the fall of death by
sin, the last fall, being the wages of the first fall, as ye may read Rom 6.
last verse: The wages of sin Romans 6. 23.
is death.

The Lord therefore having pity upon this his miserable estate, vouchsafed in
his Son to show mercy upon some by election to salvation: as to show justice
upon other some by reprobation to damnation.

According to which irreuocable decree, the LORD has prepared even from the
foundation of the earth, answerable places: a glorious habitation for the one,
and a terrible dungeon for the other.

Which general truth is confirmed in the words of my Text, having particular
reference to the reprobat Assyrians. For, as the Lord in his mercy does promise
in this Chapter to his people repenting them of their sins, manifold blessings,
spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal: so does he threaten in his
justice terrible vengeance to their enemies, the Idolatrous Babylonians and
Assyrians, not only temporal, but also eternal, not to the mean subject
alone, but to the King himself; saying: Tophet is prepared of old, it is even
prepared for the King, etc.

Not to insist therefore too long upon introductions, lest it should be said to
me, as once a flowting Cynick said to the Citizens of Myndus, a little City
with great gates: Shut your gates, lest your City run out: I come to the Text
it self, which contains in it a terrible and lamentable description of Hell,
prepared of old, for the tormenting of all ungodly people of the world, of what
estate or condition soever they be, even for the King. For Tophet is prepared
of old, it is even prepared for the King, etc.

In which terrible Description of Hell, I observe so many seuerals, as the
Beast had heads in the Reu. 13. 1.
Revelation, that must be tormented in her.

First, the certainty of this place of torment: Tophet is prepared of old.

Secondly, the parties for whom: for all ungodly wretches: yea even for the
King: It is even prepared for the King.

Thirdly, the impossibility of getting out, once in: He has made it deep.

Fourthly, the great number that shall be tormented in her: expressed in this
word, Large.

Fifthly, the extremity and bitterness of the torments of Tophet: the burning
thereof is fire.

Sixthly, the eternity and euerlastingnesse of the torments of Tophet: much
wood, so much, as shall never be wasted.

Seventhly, the Author or inflictor of these fearful tortures: and that is
the Lord offended: in these words, The breath of the Lord like a River of
brimstone does kindle it: wherein I note the severity of God against sin and
sinners.

The certainty of this place of torment The first part.
is here described by three: by the Name, by the Act, by the Antiquity.

First, by the Name: Tophet.

Secondly, by the Act: is prepared.

Thirdly, by the Antiquity: of old.

Tophet is prepared of old.

This Tophet was a valley near Tophet.
unto Jerusalem, iuxta piscinam fullonis and agrum Acheldema, ad austrum Sion:
that is, Near to the Fullers poole and the field Acheldema, on the South side
of Sion: Called also Gehinnom, the valley or dale of Hinnom: Quia locus iste in
praedio erat viri cuiusdam Hinnom Aretius.
dicti: Because this place was in the possession of a certain man called
Hinnom: as says Aretius. In which place the Jews (following the cursed
example of the Ammoni^es) did sacrifice their children in the fire to the Idol
Moloch, Quem pro Mercurio colebant: whom they worshipped for Mercury, as says
Montanus: or rather, pro Saturn^ Montan. in Esaias.
colebant, for Saturn, as says Scultetus: Quem Poetae proprios fingunt
Scultet. in Esaias.
deuorasse filios: whom the Poets fained to have devoured his own Children.

This Moloch, was Idolumaereum, Scultet. in Esaias.
concauum, passis brachijs, ad excipiendos infantes sacro nefario destinatos,
subiectis prunis torrendos: that is, A brazen Idol, hollow within, his hands
spread abroad to receive Infants, that were through their cursed Idolatry
tortured in the fire, and sacrificed to him, as writes Scultetus. Snepfsius
describes this Snepfsius in Esaias.
Idol on this manner: Idoli statua erat cuprea (sic enim annotarunt Hebraei)
porrigens brachia ad excipiendos pueros: that is, This Idol was made of copper
(so the Hebrews have observed) stretching forth his hands to receive those
massacred children.

The Jews more at large write of Descriptio Molo^h.
him, that he was of great stature, and hollow within, having seven places or
chambers within him: the first, to ^eceu^e meal offered: the second, Turtle
Doves: the third, a Sheep: the fourth, a Ram: the fifth, a Calfe: the sixth,
an Ox: the seventh, a Child: he was faced like a Calfe, imitating the idolatry
of Egypt: his hands were ever stretched out to receive bribes and gifts: his
Priests were called Chemmarims, because they were smoked with the incense
offered to Idols, of whom ye may read 2. King. 2. Ki. 23. 15.
13. 5. Hos. 10. 5. Zephan. 1. 4.

This Tophet or valley of Hinnom was put down by good King Josiah, and in
contempt thereof, dead carrions and the off-scowrings of Jerusalem commanded to
be cast therein.

The Jews report, that in Tophet there was a deep ditch, which they callled
Os inferni, the mouth of Hell, Ier. 7. 32.
which never could be filled: into which the Chaldeans having slain the
Israelites, threw them.

For the deriuation of this word, some think that it is derived a Tophes
lapidibus pretiosis in modum Punicis, inter quos ^ntr^ebatur ignis: that is, Of
the Topaze stone like the Pumicke, in which fire was nourished: but this
deriuation is far fetched and faulty.

But for most certain, Tophet is Tophet ^nd^.
derived of that Hebrew Toph, quod tympanum sonat: which signifies a Tabret,
or loud instrument: because, when they sacrificed their children to Moloch,
they did tympana pulsare, ne exaudi P^^^^^. Esai*
rent eiulatum liberorum qui comburebantur: id est, Smite upon the tabret, that
they might not hear the lamentable screeching of their children in the fire,
as says Piscator.

So that by a certain Simile, the Spirit of God does here compare hell How
Tophet taken for hell.
to Tophet: for as in Tophet there was lamentable screeching of the children in
the fire: so in hell there shall be screeching and screaming, weeping and
wayling for evermore.

Hell has many names in like respects: as it is called TARTAROS of TARTARAS^^.
TAROSSO* to terrify: because of the terrors thereof.

It is called HA^ES of the prinitiue HA^ES.
particle A(...) not to s(...) pl^ce without light: which express^th the dolor
of Hell: as says Chytreus. Chytreus in. 20. ^^. Apoc. numero 7. de poenis
impiorum. Auernus.


It is called Auernus: absque veratemperatura: without true temperature: for
there the freezing cold shall not mitigate the scorching heat, nor the
scorching heat the freezing cold.

And here it is compared to Tophet, in regard of the terrible tortures, and
pitious outcries of the condemned.

Vt per hortum voluptatis, Paradisi Sim ^^.
scilicet, seeds beatorum figuratur: ita per hunc locum terroris, Tophet,
scilicet, infernus describitur: that is: As by the garden of pleasure; namely,
Paradise, the place of the blessed is figured: So by this place of terror;
namely, Tophet, the dungeon of hell is described.

From which fearful Metaphor, Obseru.
we may justly make this our observation: namely, that Hell is a most
lamentable and woeful place of torment, where (in regard of the extremity of
torments imposed upon the damned) there shall be screeching and screaming,
weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth for evermore: and this is Tophet.

Where torment shall be upon torment, each torment easelesse, endless,
remediless; where the worm shall be immortal, cold intolerable, stinch
indurable, fire unquenchable, darkness palpable, s^ourges of Devils terrible,
and screeching and screaming continually: and this is Hell.

In hell (says S. Austine) there is August.
vermis conscientiae, ignitae lachrymae, and dolor sine remedio: that is, The
gnawing worm, the burning tears and sorrow, that can never be eased*

And again, he says in his third Tom. de Spiritu and Anima: Ibi trit metus,
Aug. 3. tom. de Spiritu and Anima*
and moeror: luctus ^ dolor: tunc vere nihil lugere erit nisi f^ere, quia
poenitere tunc nulli poterit valere: ibi erit tortor c^dens, vermis corrodens,
ignis consumens: that is, In hell there is howling and horror, sobbing and
terror: where weeping helps not, and repentance boots not: where is pain
killing, worm gnawing, and fire consuming.

Vermis and tenebrae flagellu^, frigus and ignis: Poeta Tertul. in Apologet.
Daemonis aspectus* sceleru^, confusio luctus.

Tertullian in Apologetico, speaking of Hell, says thus: Gehenna est ignis arc
a^ ni subterraneus ad poenam thesaurus: that is, Hell is a treasure of secret
fire kept under the earth to punish withal. The truth of this heavy report
Dives with the residue of the damned, do find by woeful experience, who still
cries out, I am tormented in this flame.

This is miserable Tophet, prepared for all ungodly people of the world.

Baltazar, when he saw Dan. ^. 5.
the handwriting on the wall against him: these should be an extractiue force
and power, to draw groans from our hearts, tears from our eyes, and sins from
our souls. Grauia peccata grauia desiderant lamenta:
Great sins require great lamentations:


Sweet meat must have sour sauce: sin must have mourning, either here by
attrition Legal, and contrition Evangelical, or else hereafter we shall be
cast into Tophet, where we shall lie screaming and screaming continually.

Plangite igitur plangenda: Bewail Greg^r.
your sins therefore that ought to be lamented. Estote tam proni ad lamenta,
^^^odo.
sicut fuistis ad peccata: Be as prone to lamentation, as ever you were to
transgression, as prone to lament them, as ever ye were to commit them.

In a book inscribed De natura rerum, I read of a Byrd called Auis Paradisi:
the Bird of Paradise: which is so called in regard of her splendid and
excellent beauty: which Bird being taken in the snare of the Fowler, does
iugemiscere ac lachrymare dies noctesque: Lib. ^^ na^. (...).
mourn and lament night and day, until she be restored to liberty: So we
that were once Aues Paradisi: Birds (...)
of Paradise, but now captiuated in the thraldom of sin and Satan: and
liable to this tormenting Tophet, should never cease mourning and wayling,
until we be restored ^o Grace again.

Blessed are you that have grace thus to mourn, ye shall be comforted: the
Lord will wipe away, as ^ll sins from your souls, so all tears from your
eyes in the Kingdom of salvation.

Tophet should cause us willingly to embrace the counsel of the Psalmist: To
stand in awe and sin Psalm. 4. 4.
not: And work in our hearts that fear spoken of in the Gospel of Matthew,
Fear him that is able to destroy Mat. 10. 28
both body and soul in hell: This terrible report should strike us into a
threefold fear.

Fear to be deprived of the grace of God.

Fear to be excluded the loving presence of God.

Fear to be tormented in the Lake unquenchable.

It was the practice of an holy man, Exemplum.
who says: I fear him that is able to damn both body and soul: I tremble at
Hell: I tremble at the Judges countenance, which is able to make all the Angels
and powers of Heaven to tremble: I tremble at the voice of the Archangell: I
tremble at the roaring devils: I am afraid of the gnawing worn, the smoke, the
vapor, the brimstone, the darkness* the burning: Ah woe is me that am the
son of bitterness, indignation, and eternal weeping.

This made Paul endeavor to keep Act. 24. 16.
a clear conscience both toward God and man.

This made Jerome afraid to offend: Whether I eat or drink (says he) or
whatsoever I do else, me thinks I hear this saying sounding in mine ears,
Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment:
Which when I consider, it makes me quake and shake, and not dare to commit
sin, which otherwise I should have committed.

And what is the cause (I pray) that wicked wretches run into all excess and
riot of sin as they do? Is it not because they lay not to heart this
tormenting Tophet? witness else the Prophet Amos, who says: that they Amos 6*
3.
put off from them the evil day, and boldly approach to the seats of iniquity.
If putting off the remembrance of the vengeance to come, will make men dissolute
and wretchlesse, then surely laying to heart the inutterable torments of
Tophet, will be a notable mean to reclaim men from all ungodliness.

But if men will harden their hearts, above the hardness of an Adamant, and will
not be moved, neither by mercies nor judgment: let all such know that Tophet
groneth for them, where they shall howl and yell in fiery torments for
evermore.

Thus much in a word for the word Tophet.

The second obseruable for the certainty of this place of torment, is the Act
or thing done, in these words: Is Is prepared.
prepared. Parata Tophet, non paranda: It is not said, That Tophet shall be
hereafter prepared, or it is now preparing; but it is already prepared: Tophet
is prepared.

The malicious devil labors nothing more, then to persuade men that there
is no such place of torment, that so the more easily he may lead them
thither, as the thief is led to execution Simile.
with a veil before his eyes. But for the truth hereof, let these things
following duly be observed.

As a princely magnificence requires Simile.
that a King have a beautiful Palace for the best sort of men, and a dismal
prison for the rebellious: So the King of kings has a glorious Palace, wherein
are many mansions for his Saints, and a dark and loathsome dungeon for the
Devil and his Angels.

The law of nations requires that Malefactors for their offenses be banished
for ever: so the Lord does banish from his gracious presence all the ungodly of
the earth into the fearful Island of hell.

The Cicilian Aetna, called at this Aetna.
day, Gibello Monte, where roarings are heard, and flames of fire are seen:
the flashing of Vesuuius; the cracking, as it were, of fire in a Furnace in the
Marine Rock of Barry* what do all these presage, but assure all these that
fear the Lord (besides his counsel revealed in his word) that Tophet is
already prepared.

Again, in all things natural and supernatural, there is an opposition,
there is a contrariety: there is good, there is evil: there is light, there is
darkness: there is joy, there is sorrow: there is a Heaven, and therefore there
must be a Hell, into which the souls of the reprobate shall be carried when
they dye, by the black and grifly angels.

Again, the Scripture speaks every where of this place of torment: Whosoever
shall say, Fool, shall be Mat. 5. 22.
worthy to be punished with hell fire.

Again, It is better for thee to go Mar. 9. 43. 35. 47.
into the Kingdom of God, with one foot, with one hand, with one eye, then
having two feet, two hands, and two eyes, to be cast into Hell fire.

But that of the 25. of Matthew is very pregnant for this purpose, where the
word it self is used: Go from me Math. 25.
ye cursed, into everlasting fire: which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

This doctrine meets with all Atheists that say, There is no heaven, Refut.
Atheist. Psalm. 14. 1.
no hell, no God, no Devil: As that noted fool that said in his heart, There
is no God.

With all Epicures, that think there Epicure.
is neither time nor place, either of heaven or hell after death: that sung
that Esa. 22. 13.
cursed Epitaph of Sardanapalus.

Ede, bibe, lude, charum praesentibus exple Poet.

Delitij^ animum: post mortem nulla voluptas:
Eat, drink, and be merry; for after death there is no pleasure: They say
true, for after death they shall find small pleasure in Tophet.

This Doctrine conuinceth also all Heretic.
heretics that deny both Resurrection and Judgment, nineteen several sorts
whereof are reckoned up together all on a row by that learned writer Danaeus:
the Appellites, Archontikes, Danaeus.
Basilidians, Bardesanists, Caians, Carpocratians, Cerdonians, Heraclites,
Hermaines, Marcites, Marcionites, Ophites, Proclians, Symonians, Saturninians,
Sethians, Seuerians, Selucians, and Valentinians.

Seeing then that Hell is already prepared, and stands ready to receive to
torment all that work iniquity: seeing there is but a twine thread betwixt the
soul of a sinner, and this scorching flame: O how should this prepare us for
the Kingdom of Heaven! Paratis patet ianua, imparatis clauditur: that is said
for Heaven: The prepared Virgins enter in, the imprepared not.

Imparatis patet ianua, and paratis clauditur: and this is said for Hell: The
imprepared enter, the prepared not.

But, alas, the presumptuous security of this our age: men live as though there
were no Hell: or if there be, as though it were afar off, and yet
notwithstanding it follows them as near as the shadow does the body: Death
and Hell both follow close the R(...).
person of every sinner, Death to devour the body, and Hell to swallow up the
soul.

Yet for all this, the wicked will sport themselves in their sins, and
^oniall be in their iniquities: but mark the end, Nouissima illarum est mors:
the end of these ways is death: as well notes that just and upright man Job:
Job 21. 12, 13.
they rejoiced in the sound of Organs, and in a moment they go down into
Tophet: they say, Peace, peace, when Tophet is prepared to take away their
souls.

O that careless people would consider this: it would make them live so
precisely, as though it were the last moment they had to live: it would make
them cry out in the terrors of their souls with the Iaylor, O, what Act. 16.
must I do to be saved from the damnation of Tophet.

The third thing obseruable for the certainty of this place of torment, is the
antiquity of the same: Of old. Of old.


Non casu aut fortuna parara erat Tophet, sed certo iudic^o omnipotentis
definita: that is, Tophet was not casually prepared, but in the determined
counsel, and decreed purpose of God: not lately sounded, but from the
foundations of the earth, before man or Angel was created.

For Hels antiquity, I refer you to the second of Peter, Chap. 2. verse. 4. 2.
Pet. 2. 4.
where it is said: If GOD spared not the Angels that fell, but cast them down
to hell. Now they could not be cast into that which was not: therefore Hell was
ordained before the fall of Angels: for the Lord (who beholds all things
past, present, and to come; vno actu, vno ictu, simul, and semel, at one and
the selfsame present) foreseeing what would become of Angels and Men,
preordained answerable places: for those whom he has elected in Christ, Heaven
he has treated of old: and for those whom he has left to glorify his
Justice, Tophet is prepared of old

Where we plainly s^^, that the Note.
Lord ha^^* (...)ocabl^ d^^reed of the state of Ang^^^ and men, before all
worlds, for Heaven and for Hell: a^ there are but two ways, so there are but
two ends, Salvation and Damnation, Heaven and Hell.

Idle is the opinion of Rome concerning Error Romae.
their intermedia loca, middle places, twixt Heaven and Hell.

The perverting Papist has added to Tophet three subterrestriall places more:
Purgatory, Lymbus Infantum, Lymbus Patrum.

Purgatory, for those that dye in Purgatory
their denial sins, and light transgressions: and for those which have Bell.
l. 2. de Purgatorio. cap. 1.
their sins remitted, but not satisfied for the punishment.

And they place this next to Tophet, where there is both poena damni, an^ poena
sensus, punishment of loss, a(...) punishment of feeling: this lasts (...)
ever, but for a time: for it sh(...) dissolved at the coming of C(...)
judgment.

Lymbus Infantum, wh^^^ ^hildren Lymbus Infantum.
remain, dying without Baptism.

And this they place next to Purgatory; where there is poena damni, but not
sensus, the punishment of loss, but not of feeling: and this lasts for
everlasting.

Lymbus Patrum, where the Fathers Lymbus Patrum.
were before Christ's coming.

And this they place uppermost: where there was poena damni, but not sensus,
the punishment of loss, but not of feeling: but this was dissolved long ago,
by Christ's descension into hell.

Thus you see how the pope by these his lies and fopperies, thoroughly proves
himself the most dear child of the devil, the Author and founder of all Ioh.
8. 44.
lies. But let every Christian take this for an inalterable truth, that there
is but Election and Reprobation, grace and sin, the narrow gate, and the broad
way: but two ends, Heaven and Hell; to one of these must all flesh go.

Athanasius speaking to this point, Atha^^s^de (...). Christ.
says: Impius in duas parts discerpitur, and vt ad duo loca discedat,
condemnatur: that is, A wicked man is distracted in two parts, and condemned to
two places, his body to the Grave, and his Soul to HADES, that is, to Hell.

Seeing then that the Lord has prepared Tophet of old, and the Decree of God
is gone out upon all flesh, either for heaven or for hell: this should hasten
us carefully to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and to make
sure our Election: For what if we have all the world, and be cast into Tophet?
what shall become of us? it had been better for us never to have been borne.

Observe (I beseech you) the carriage of the Apostles in the Gospel, when they
heard that one of them should betray their Lord and Master CHRIST, and woe
worth that party that should do that cursed act: it had been good for that
party never to have been borne: they were all amazed and astonished, and could
not be at quiet, till they knew who should do that damnable deed: they came
therefore to our Savior, saying: Numquid ego, Domine? Mar. 14. 19
Is it I, Lord? Another, Is it I, Lord? So we hearing, that Hell is prepared of
old, and the greatest part of mankind (as shall be shown hereafter) shall
be swallowed up of her: Oh, this should make us careful, first, and above all
things to seek the Kingdom Mat. 6.
of God, and the righteousness thereof, that we may see our selves in the
number of those l^w, whose names are written in the book of Election, and not
in the number of those that shall be tormented in Tophet.

Let us resolve with the Psalmist, Psalm. 132. 3.
not to suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber, nor the temples
of our head to take any rest, till we have found the salvation of our God, our
souls sealed to the day of redemption, and freed from the damnation of Tophet.
But where is this religious care and godly resolution? O the dissolute and
desperate course of this our sinful age! men put their salvation to a hazard
with Ludouike, Si Ludouic.
saluabor, saluabor: Si damnabor, damnabor: that is, If I be saved, I be saved:
If I be damned, I be damned, there is the care that I take.

In the fear of God, I earnestly beseech you, above all things to make sure
your Election, and that by your Romans 8.
Vocation: your Vocation by your Justification: your Justification by your
Sanctification, the reward whereof will be eternal Glorification.

Join virtue with your Faith: ^. Pet. 1. 5.
with virtue, knowledge; with knowledge, temperance; with temperance, patience:
with patience, godliness; with godliness, brotherly kindness; and with
brotherly kindness, love: Labor hereby to make your Calling and Election
sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall into the vengeance of
Tophet.

The second part of this Text, are The second part.
the parties for whom Tophet is prepared, and that is for all ungodly people of
the world, of what estate or condition soever they be: It is even prepared It
is even prepared for the King. 2. Re. 18. 30.
for the King.

These words in particular have reference to blasphemous Senacherib, who was
flaine of his two sons in a Temple of Nineueh, worshipping his god Nisrosh:
and in general, it extends to all idolatrous Kings, Emperors and Superiors
whatsoever.

Here then first we see, that no person, Obseru. 1.
in what dignity soever he be, by his eminent place, is exempted from Hell.

Dives, a great personage, yet tormented Luke 10.
in those flames: Quid profuit Wisd.
sibi superbia? quid diuitiaru^ copia? What has pride pronted him? or what
has the pomp of riches done him good? Alas, these could not save his Soul:
For (as says the Psalmist) a man by Psalm. 4^. 67
his riches cannot redeem his brother, he cannot give his ransom to God: so
precious is the redemption of souls, and their continuance for ever.

And in Samuel we read, That-kings are not exempted from the judgments of God:
If ye do wickedly, ye shall 1. Sam. 12, 25.
perish, and your King.

In the first Epistle to the Corinths, we may read, who they are that are
threatened with Tophet: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, 1.
Cor. 6. 9.
nor wantons, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God: This is spoken of Kings, as well as of others. And
in the Reu. we find, Reu. 21. ^.
that the fearful and unbelieving, the abominable, murderers and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, Idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone: and this is spoken of the King,
as well as of the Btgger: for the Lord in judgment freeth from hell, not
according to place, but grace: not outward condition, but inward disposition.

Nay moreover, great men, Noblemen, and mighty Princes, are not only liable to
Tophet, but the greatest part of them shall to the devil: Not many wise men,
nor many mighty, not many noble are called: for as God 1. Cor. 1. 2^ 1. (...).
2. ^.
would have all men saned, and come to the knowledge of the truth. i. some of
all sorts, some Jews, some Gentiles, some Kings, some Nobles, some Preachers,
some Rich, some Poor: so of all these the greatest sum go down to Tophet.
Yet for all this, great men must not be reproved forsooth, the truth that
makes against them, must not be embraced of them.

Abner could not abide to hear Isbosheth 2. S^m. ^.
tell him of his going in ^o Rizpah his father Saul's Concubiae

Ahab hated Micaiah the son o^ (...).
Imlah for not prophesying (as he said) good unto him.

The people cried out in Esayes time: Dicite nobis placentia, placentia: Esaias
30.
that is, speak pleasing things unto us.

The Priests and people of Anathoth let. 11. 21.
threatened Jeremy to take away his life, if he prophested to them in the name
of the Lord.

Amaziah said to Amos the Prophet: Amos 7. 12. 23.
Go, be gone, prophecy in Judah: but prophecy no more in Bethel, for it is
the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court.

They hated him that rebuked in the Amos 5. 10
gate, and abhorred him that spoke uprightly.

The people in the time of Micah, liked Mica. 2. 11.
them well that prophesied to them of Wine and strong Drink. I pray God that
the great Ones of this Land be not tainted with this corruption.

Well, for mine own part, I had rather be stormed against for preaching Tophet
to you here, then ye should curse me in Tophet hereafter, for smoothing and
flattering you.

Yet this reprehension of great men, I would wish it might be done in wisdom
and humility: which I beseech Rom 12. ^.
you, O King, by the tender mercies of God, reform these and these things: for
some in this case are indiscreet and too too saucy, and rather exasperate the
hearts of their hearers against them, then win them to the Lord by their
exhortation.

Tophet, what should this work in them but obedience to that counsel of the
Psalmist, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.
serve the Lord in fear? Look up to heaven, acknowledge your selves subjects
to a greater.

As the Lord has honored Kings above others, so he looks for a greater
return of honor from them than from others: for where the Lord gineth much,
there the Lord requires the more.

Kings and Princes are the Keepers Deu. 17. 18
of the two Tables of the Law of God: and to them is committed from God the
government both of Church and Commonwealth: they must therefore be careful
that the Word may run very swiftly throughout every Angle of their Realms:
So shall God gain Psalm. 147.
an universal glory, and Kings themselves a more fiable subjection.

Kings and Queens are called nursing Esaias 49. 23
Fathers, and nursing Mothers: and al to commend unto them the care they should
have of Gods glory, and the good of their people.

Joshua was such a Ruler, that remained Ios. 24. 1^.
resolute and constant in the worship of God to his lives end.

David prepared a place for the Arc 1. Chapter 15. 1.
of God, and was careful for the Church of the Lord.

Iehoshaphat, Ezechias and Josias 2. Chapter 17. ^. chapter 29. 1, 2. chapter 34. 1, 2.
were reformers of their Kingdoms, enemies to idolatry, and graciously
defended the Word of God.

And blessed be God for our Kings most excellent Majesty: who is maiesticall in
his place: in religion zealous* in life virtuous: and in mercy abundantly
gracious: The Lord increase his graces in him: the Lord anoint him with the
oil of Holiness above his fellow Princes: and the Lord keep him from this
terrible Tophet: and let all people that bear good will to this our English
Sion, to this my Prayer say, Amen.

It is even prepared for the King.

Secondly, we may here perceive Obseru. 2. Acts 10.
with Peter; that verily there is no respect of persons with God in judgment:
he judges the rich as the poor; the father as the child; the master as the
servant; the King as the beggar* as the Prophet David says, With righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

Though wickedness among men, be Eccl. 3. 16.
in the place of judgment; yet the Lord our God will deal justly

Though among men there is respect of persons to be had, without which a
confusion would (and this is necessary to be urged, for men are full of
contempt, and too saucy with them of superior place and authority:) yet when
all shall be summoned before the tribunal of God, the Lord will indifferently
proceed to judgment without any respect of persons.



As they sit in Gods place, so they should imitate the Lord in judgment: this
should make them obey the counsel of the Lord delivered by the Prophet David:
Be learned ye that are Psalm. 2.
Judges of the earth.

O the care that Iehosaphat took for just and righteous judgment! after he
had made Judges, and set them in every City of Judah, he gave them this
charge: Take heed what ye do, 2. Chapter 19. 1, 6, 7.
for ye execute not the judgments of man, but the judgments of the Lord, and
the Lord will be with you to preserve you, if you do justly, but to confound
you if you, do unjustly: wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with our God, nor respect of
persons, nor receiving of rewards.

O that this gracious counsel were entertained of the Judges of this land;
then we should not hear of so many complaints in our Land as we do: then we
should not have cause to complain with the Prophet, That judgment Esaias 59. 14
is turned backward, and justice stands a far off: that truth is gone, and
equity no where to be found: then we should not have so many beggered by the
Law, as daily are: Law was never made to undo men, but to compel men to do
well: it was made to curb the unruly, but not to beggar the innocent: it is
grown to this saying now a days, I had rather lose it, being my right, then
go to law for it; why, what is the cause? O because of rack^ fees, close
bribes, and the perpetuity of attendance.

Iudicate secundum iustitiam, Judge, judge, O ye sons of men, according to
righteousness: let your judgment

be in veritate, in truth. be in iudicio, in judgment. be in iustitia, in
righteousness.
I pray God it may never be said of our Judges of England, as once was said of
the Judges of Israel; The ^say 57.
Lord looked for judgment, but behold oppression: for righteousness, but behold
a crying.

Let there not be found in a Land where the Gospel dwells, such Judges 1.
King. 2. 1
as were those that killed innocent Nakoth.

Let none be like the sons of Samuel, 1. Sam. 8. 3.
That turned aside after lucre, and took rewards, and perverted the judgment.

The duty of Judges is notably set down in Exodus 23. Thou shall not receive a
false tale; Thou shall not overthrow the truth for the multitudes sake; Thou
shall not overthrow the right of the poor in his suite: Thou shall keep thee
from a false matter: Thou shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise,
and peruerteth the words of the righteous.

And this charge is continued in Leuiticus: Leu. 29. 15
Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment: Thou shall not favor the person of
the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou shall judge thy
neighbor justly.

A Judge must be Scientia potens, and Judi^is officium.
Virtute valens: i. Able in learning, and zealous in living: by the one, he
shall discernere inter allegata, Discern betwixt causes propounded: by the
other, disrumper^ iniquitatem, without hinderance punish and confound all
manner of iniquity.

In all your judgments let these be^ aimed at; the glory of God, the righting
of wrong, the suppression of evil, and the maintenance of truth.

Be zealous for the glory of our God; and let the good laws that are, be duly
and impartially executed.

It was a great commendation that was given to Selcucus Governor of Selcucus.
the Locretians, who having made this Law against whoredom, That whosoever
committed the act, should lose both his eyes: his son being taken in the
fact, was not pardoned, though the Citizens begged it earnestly: but he caused
one of his sons eyes to be pulled out, and one of his own eyes: So he
showed himself a merciful Father, and a just Judge.

O that we had the like Laws against this and the like most odious offenses,
and that they were as strictly executed: that many hereby may be saved from
Tophet.

The Lord guide that honorable assembly in Court of Parliament, that they may
all join with one voice and spirit, for the banishing of Popery, the reforming
of iniquity, and maintaining and countenancing of the Word of Truth, and
painful Preachers of the same.

And you ( my Honorable Lord) as you have begun well, in reforming many
foul abuses in this City, so in the zeal of the Lord, Prosper Psalm. 45.
with your glory: ride on with the Word of Truth, Meekness, and
Righteousness, and your right hand shall teach you terrible things.

Thus am I bold to cast in among you, the silly myte of my counsel, merely of
Christian charity, that ye may never taste of the woeful damnation of Tophet.

The third part of the description of The third part. He has made it deep.
Tophet, is set down in these words, He has made it deep.

Many from these words do go about to prove the local place of Hell,
concluding it to be below: as from the signification of Sheol also.

Sheol is taken for a Pit* or Grave, Sheol.
or Hell: the state of the dead, the place of the damned spirits.

In the Scriptures, sometimes it is taken for the Grave, and sometime for Hell:
so is HADES also.

The Septuagint translating the Hebrew into Greek, and expressing there the
sense of Sheol, used HADES, both for the death of the body in the grave, and of
the Soul in hell.

Mercer upon Genesis says, That Mercer in c. 37. Genesis
the proper signification of Sheol, is to signify all places under the earth,
and not the pit or grave alone: whereupon it is every where opposed to heaven,
which is highest of all.

Hell is called by the name of Abyssus Abyssus.
in the Scriptures, which signifies a deep and vast gnife under the earth, a
bottomless pit: into which the devils Luke 8. Reu. 20.
fear to be sent: and where they are chained and bound when it pleases God.

From which Abyssus, there is an ascent to the earth, no descent lower: Reu. 9.
2. and 11. 7. and 17. 8. and therefore helf suspected to be beneath.

Because Tophet is here said to be Nic. de Lyra in Esai.
profunda, deep, Nicolaus de Lyra putat esse circa centrum terrae: Thinks
that it is about the center of the earth.

The Apostles that preached to the Jews, used the word Gehenna, from the
Hebrews, which they well understood: and Saint James writing to the Jews,
says: The tongue is inflamed of Gehenna, of hell: but the rest of them that
preached to the Gentiles, used the word HADES, which name was known unto them,
and they took it to be a place under the earth, where the wicked after this
life were punished.

Tartarus (which is used for hell) is Tartarus Hesiod. in ^^^^goma.
so far under the earth, as Heaven is above the earth, says Hesiodus.

The Poet speaking of it, says, Tartarus ipse bis patet in praeceps tantum: id
est, Tartarus is twice as deep as Heaven is high.

The Rabbines hold hell to be below, Rab. Abr. in cap. 2. ^o^e.
as Rabbi Abraham says: Sheol makom, etc. Sheol is a deep place opposed to
Heaven which is on high.

And Rabbi Leui says, Sheol hi mattah, Rab. leu in cap. 26. ^o
etc. Sheol is absolutely below, and is the center.

The Scriptures also place hell below, Esaias 14. 9.
Sheol beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming.

Moses calls it the lower hell: Fire Deu 32. 2^
is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn vsque ad infernum inferior^m, to the
bottom of hell.

The Psalmist calls it a deep pit: Let him cast them into the fire, and into
P(...)
the deep pits, that they ri^e nor* And ^^ one^^er place he calls it, (...)
(...).
(...).

(...) calls it a B^^ning Lake, in (...).
^^^ ^^ (...)on, which must needs ^e (...).

(...) on speaks of the depth of (...)*
this place saying; The ghests of ^n (...) in the depth of hell.

And again, The way of Life is on (...)*
(...) from hell beneath.

Thus it is manifest, that hell is beneath in the lowest parts of the
workmanship of God: But precisely to say where, whether in the center of the
center of the world, or in the air, or (...).
in the water, or upon the earth, it is ^^^ revealed; neither is it needful
for us to know: but surely it shall be in the most remote place from Heaven,
which is in ^ about the earth; for the (...) of the righteous, when they are
(...) from their bodies, do pr^(...) ^^^^^ to the local place of (...)* and
the souls of the (...) ar^ constraine^ to stay below (...) (...) (...), where
t^^y ^^^ ^ shall be torments ^or evermore.

But if a man be too curious in this point, I would wish him confer with
Socrates, who being asked what Socrates.
was done in hell, said: He never went thither, nor communed with any that
came from thence: By which answer he derided the curiosity of the demander.

Euclides (as Maximus writes) being Maxim. (...). 23.
demanded of one what the gods did, and with what things they were best
delighted, said; As for other things I know not, but I am sure of this, that
they hate all curious persons.

But this is not the thing we aim at in this depth of hell.

This word Deep does bewray unto (...).
us the impossibility of getting out, once in: for God has made hell so deep,
as there is no hope of crawling out.

In inferno nulla redemptio: In hell there is no redemption: Therefore Infernus
(...).
ab inferendo dictus, quia ita inferuatur and praecipitantur, vt nunquam (...),
that is, Hell is said of calling in, for they shall be so cast down, as they
shall never have hope or power of craw^ing out.

Infern^s (says Hugo) est profund^^ (...) ^.
^ine ^undo: that is, A deep without bottom. That party that had not on the
Wedding garment, was not only cast into hell, but he was also bound hand and
foot: and all to show the impossibility of getting forth, once in: Bind him
hand and foot, and cast him Mat. 22. ^^
into utter datknesse.

Now alas, if a man be bound hand (...)
and foot, and cast into a Well five thousand fadomes deep, what hope has he
of ever coming out? so hell is deep, and he that is once tumbled in, shall
never come forth more.

This is evident by the speech of Dines* who said, O Father Abraham, send (...)
L^zarus, or some from the dead, that my brethren may not come into the like
place of torment. What is the reason that Dives begged not for his own passage
from thence unto them, who was able to have taught the d^lors of hell by woeful
experience? O he knew that that had been bootlesse, for he saw ingentem
hiatum, A great gulf set betwixt Heaven and Hell, that made the passage
impossible.

In earthly prisons and dungeons, a man by some or other means happily may get
out: but hell is deep, so deep, as Heaven, Earth, and Hell can never help
one poor soul forth.



One depth cries and calls out for another: the depth of hell calls to us
for answerable humiliation: he that will not be humbled for his sins here,
shall be humbled and tumbled to the deep of hell hereafter.

God gives grace to the humble* yea the deeper thou art in the Law, the higher
thou shall be in the Gospel* the deeper in hell, the higher in beauen: a
bucket the deeper it goes into (...)
the well, the more water it brings up with it: so the deeper a man is
humbled for sin, the more shall be his grace of salvation. Humble your selves
there fore under the mighty hand of God* that ye may be all exalted in the day
of Visitation.

In this deep was the poor Publican, Luke 18. 13
when in bitterness of heart he uttered these words, Lord, be merciful to me
a sinner: A sinner by birth, a sinner by life, a sinner by thought, a sinner by
word, a sinner by work, a sinner by sins of omission, a sinner by sins of
commission, a sinner before my conversion, a sinner many thousand times since
my conversion: Lord be^ merciful to me, a lamentable sinner.

Let Esaias. 56. 6.
us seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near. Ecce nunc tempus acceptum: Be 1. Cor. 6. 2.
hold, now the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation.

This life is the time wherein we must work out our salvation with it are and
trembling, if after this life we will be freed from the deep damnation of
Tophet.

The irrational creatures them selves are very careful to take their times
and seasons, as says the Prophet, Ier, 8, 7. The Storke, the T^ Crane and the
Swallow observe (...) times and seasons: there is a time when the Swallow is
with us in England, and there is a time when he takes his leave of us.

That silly creature in the (...) of the Proverbs, gathers in Summer, to
maintain the poor life of it in Winter: So should we take our time: for after
this life, there (...) neither place for pardon, nor time for repentance.

Yet for all this, golden Time is not respected, but men do ^ost off their
repentance from day to day, till at the last they (...) into the depth of (...)

Yea, the time of Grace is (...) to many, they must have (...) or a(...)
delight to drive it (...) It Is death to many to all (...)ly upon the (...) of
their (...), but (...) a time, when they shall wish, that all their life had
been spent at the hearing of Sermons and Prayer, as tedious as it seems to
them now.

O the damned in hell would give (if it were in their power) a million of
worlds to have but one hour granted Tempus gratia negligere, est absolute
anima perdere.
them to live on the earth again, that so they may come within compass of
offered grace to salvation. But if ye will not hear the Lord when he calls
to you, there will come a day when ye shall cry, Lord, Lord, and his ears shall
be shut to your prayers, and his Justice shall cast you into the deep dungeon
of Tophet, there to remain, till Mat. ^. 26.
ye have paid the uttermost farthing.

The fourth part of the Description The 4. part And large.
of Tophet, mentioned in this word, Large.

As the Lord has made hell Deep, so has he made it Large, in regard of the
great number that shall be tormented Oecolam. in Esaias. Obser^^^. Esaias ^. 14
in her, as says Oecolampadius.

This word is used in the fifth Chapter of this Prophecy, Hell has enlarged
her self, and has opened her mouth without measure: It has set open her
mouth, as it were with a gag, and all to receive the great multitudes that
shall descend into her.

It is called Lacut magnus in the Revelation, 14. 9. A great Lake.

That this doctrine is too true, witness that of the Gospel of Mat. 20. 16.
Multi vocati: Many are called, but few converted: Many called, but few chosen.

The most High made this world for 4. Esd. 8. 1.
many, but the world to come for very few.

Tophet.

Saint Matthew says, That many Math. 8. 11
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: many, an innumerable company, shall be
saved.

Saint John in Reuelat. 7. 9. does point out that great number that shall be
saved, with that nota stellifera, that starry note. Behold, I saw a great
multitude of all Nations* and (...) and People* (...) tongues, (...) before
th^^ Throne, and (...) the Lamb^* ^loth^^^ in long whe^^ (...), and (...)* ^^
(...) (...): (...) whi^^ (...) ^^ w^^^ of ^^^^^y, and (...) i^ th^i^ (...) in
(...) of (...)

It may seem by these (...) that ^any shall ^e (...), and no^ ^^^^ a multitude
damned.

I (...) that though the n^mber (...)
of the Elect ^e great, by ^^ ^^lfe considered (to (...) praise of (...) mercy
be it (...)) yet if it be (...) to the number of those that (...) (...) ^^
Gods (...) (...) Alas* ^hen ^ re(...) (...) (...) (...) ^he^ are ^^^ a
handful, and t(...) hell will be made e^^eedi^g (...)

^his great ^estruction of (...) in hel^, is liuelily shad(...) (...) to us in
the judgments of God on (...) (...) with mercy* as in the (...) of the old
world ^^ (...) holy (...) (...) there alive? only N^(...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) ^^ the destruction of (...) by ^^^^ how few ^s^aped
there alive? only Lot with his daughters: in the destruction of Jericho by the
sword; how few escaped there alive? only Rahab with her family, that Ios. 6. 22.
entertained the Israeliticall Spies. To come to later times, in the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, how few escaped there alive? Many
hundred thousands of them were starued to death, many hundred thousands of them
taken captives to the Roman Empire, some put to one death, some to another, and
few escaped alive, and those of the meaner sort, agricolae and vinitores:
Husbandmen, and laborers in Vineyards.

If (beloved) in the judgments of God in this world so few have escaped alive,
how few (think you) shall escape at the dreadful day of judgment, when of
every idle word that men shall Mat. 12. 36
speak, a great account must be made for the same? yea, when Inquisition
W^^d. 1. 9.
shall be made for the very thoughts of the ungodly: If the Just shall scarce
be saved, where shall the sinner appear? Again, that great is the number of
those that shall to Tophet, and therefore Tophet made large to give them fiery
intertainment, it appears in the very lives of men upon earth: for, where
there is one that comes to the profession of the truth, truly with the
sincere heart of Nathaniel: there Ioh* 1^
are ten, yea twenty, yea more, that walk in the way of sin, in the road to
Tophet, without any check of conscience, remorce for their sins, or
reclamation from their sinful courses in the world, some in the way of
Atheism, some in Paganism, some in Epicurisme, some in Brownisme, some in
Anabaptisme, some in Mahometism, some in Papisme, yea some in Diuelisme: a
matter with many tears to be lamented.

But would thou not be with this (...)
large company in this large place of torment: O then follow not a multitude to
do evil* Revel. 18. 4. Come out from amongst them: for if thou be partaker
with them in their sins, thou must be partaker with the in their punishments:
Fashion not thy self after the wicked fashion of this world: rather walk
alone by thy self to heaven, than go with the multitude to hell: Walk in the
narrow way of grace to salvation, shun the broad and large way; for that will
bring thee to Tophet, which (as thou hear) is made exceeding deep and large.

The fifth part of the description of The fifth part. The burning thereof is fire.
hell in these words, The burning thereof is fire: expressing the bitterness of
the torments of Tophet. There is great controversy among the learned about
this fire. Whether it be true An in inferno ignis.
substantial fire, or fire allegorical? if it be true fire, whether it be
material, corporal, or spiritual?

If it be Corporal, whether it burns the body only, or soul and body also?

Whether there be true fire in hell? Quaestio 1.
or whether these words (the burning thereof is fire) be taken allegorically?

Calvin would have it taken allegorically; Calvin. in Esai.
and thinks there is no true fire in hell.

His reason is this, If Wood and the Worm be taken metaphorically, why not
then the fire also?

But this is no argument to prove (...) (...) (...)
this fire allegorical: For in the holy Scriptures, things spoken together are
not always taken in the same manner and nature: For example sake; CHRIST is
called a Door, a Vine, a Rock, a Stone, figuratively: and does it therefore
follow, that he was not God and Man substancially?

Again, in S. Lukes Gospel, our Luk(...)
Savior says, I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me,
that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom: Eating is allegorical:
but will you say that the Kingdom is allegorical also?

I confess that wood in hell is taken allegorically, but that fire is taken
so, I utterly deny.

Bullinger holds true and substantial (...) in (...)
fire in hell: and so do the most and best of the learned.

Christ punished with fire in this world, Sodom: and the M^^murers G^^. ^9.
in the Book of Numbers* Chap^r^ Numb. 1^.
and called the name of that place Th^^^^^^^ because the fire of the Lord burnt
amongst them.

And Christ shall come to judgment Esaias. ^^
with Fire: which shall have two properties*

To burn: this property shall punish (...). ^^ (...)
the wicked: to shine^ this property shall comfort the Saints, as faith
Theodoret.

And what shall hinder the being of fire in hell, when the extremity of
tortures shall be put upon the damned? he that will not believe this, shall
one day seele it to his sorrow.

If then it be granted that there is substantial fire in hell, the next
question will be, Whether it ^ee Material, Quaest. ^.
Corporal or Spiritual?

Surely Material fire, that is, fire (...) ^. (...)
nourished and maintained with wood, it shall not be: for as the flashings of
Aetna and Ves^^ius, and other places of the earth do burn without fuel* so
shall the fire of hell do^ ^e that is able to make the damned ^^^^ (...) (...)
is able to maintain this fire without wood.

Whether then it be Corporal, or Spiritual, (for if it be Substantial, it
must be one of these) Gregory calls it Gregory.
Ignem incorporeum, a Spiritual fire, but that is not likely, for it passes
the nature of fire to be Spiritual: and to go about to make it Spiritual, is
to make it no fire at all.

But it is most probable, that it is, and shall be, a Corporal fire, with an
extraordinary afflicting power, given unto it, tormenting both Soul and body.

Saint Augustine affirms the fire (...)
of hell to be Corporal.

If it be Corporal, whether it tormenteth Q(...)
the body only, or both Soul and body: and how a Corporal fire should work
upon a Spiritual substance.

Saint Bernard says, that Ignis exterius (...) d^ (...) domo. ^^. 38.
carnem combur^^, vermis inter^us conscientiam corrodet: id est, Fire shall
outwardly burn thy flesh, and a worm shall inwardly gnaw thy conscience.

Again he says, Duo mala sunt vermis Idem part. ser. 16.
and ignis, altero roditur conscientia, altero concremantur corpora: that is,
the worm and fire are two insufferable torments: by the one, the soul is
vexed, by the other, the body scorched.

Again he says: In earne cruciabuntur Idem meditat. 4. cap.
per ignem, in spiritu per conscientiae vermem: that is, in the flesh they shall
be tormented by fire, and in the Spirit by the worm of conscience.

Isodore says, that there is duplex Isodor. de summo bono. l. 1. c. 31.
poena damnatorum, quorum mentem vrit tristitia, and corpus flamma: that is,
Their minds burn with sorrow, and their bodies with the flame.

Beda says, Ignis erit poena extrinsecus Bed. l. 3. in ca. 9. Man.
sauiens, vermis dolor, interius accusans: that is, The fire shall be a torment
outwardly raging, and the worm a grief inwardly accusing.

Though these maintain fire in Hell, yet they hold (as you see) that it is not
of power to touch the soul* but only to torture the body: but ^ ^m persuaded
according to the judgment of many learned Fathers, That this fire tormenteth
both body and Soul.

Zanchy de Operibus Dei, says, That (...) O(...) (...) 1. (...) 19.
the devils, men's bodies and souls are tormented with fire everlasting. For as
they were (as Simeon and Leui) brethren in the same evil, so both of them shall
be tormented in the same fire.

Iustine Martyr says, That the devil Just. Mar^. (...) ^^ 1. (...) (...).
shall suffer punishment and vengeance enclosed in everlasting fire: and they
are no bodies, but spirits.

The truth of this is ratified by Christ himself: Go from me, ye cursed, Mat.
25. 41
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

And the speech of Dives proves this most true: for it is no Parable, but
History (as Chrysostom says) Chrys^st.
Parabol^ sunt vbi exemplum ponitur, tacentur nomina: that is, Those are
Parables, where an example is propounded, and no names mentioned: he cries
out, and shall for everlasting, I am tormented Luke 16* 24
in this flame.

And if a man will not believe this, I make bold to use against him, the words
of Ruffinus, who says, Si quis R^ffinus.
negat diabolum aeternis ignibus mancipandum, partem cum ipso aeterni ignis
acc^piet, vt sentiat quod negauit: that is, If any man does deny that the
Devil is tormented with everlasting fire, he shall one day be partaker with
him of that fire, that he may feel that which he would not be brought to
believe.

But how this Corporal fire shall torment the devils and the spirits of the
damned, I know not, and I trust never to know, and it is but curiosity to be
too too inquisitiue in these points: for as a Father says, Melius est dubitare
Augustine.
de occultis, quam litigare de incertes: viz. It is better to doubt of unknown
things, then to strive for uncertain.

Compes^at igitur se humana temeritas, and id quod non est, non quaerat, ne
illius quod est non inueniat: that is, Let no man rashly meddle about those
things that are not revealed, lest he finds not the good of those things
that are revealed.

It being probable that there is in hell a Substantial and Corporal fire,
that vexes both the souls and bodies of the damned, let us now see the
difference of this fire from our elementall fire.

This fire of hell differs from our Ignis inferni medium differt ab
^lementari.
elementall fire, in five respects.

First, In regard of heat: Our fire in regard of hell fire, is but as fire
painted on a wall, in regard of our fire.

Oh, it is fierce and an intolerable fire.

We read of one, who (upon the violence Exemplum.
of any strong temptation) would lay his hands on burning coals, and being
not able to endure the same, would say to himself: O! how shall I be able to
endure the pains of Hell fire?

The fire into which Sydrach, Misach Dan. 3. 21.
and Abednego were cast, was exceeding fearful: but alas, nothing to hell fire.

Esaias speaking of this terrible fire, says: Who is able to dwell in this
devouring Esa. 33. 14.
fire? or, who shall be able to dwell in these everlasting burnings?

Secondly, In regard of light, our fire gives a comfortable light, but the
fire of hell gives no light.

Cremationem habet, lumen vero non Greg. Moral. l. 9. c. 46
habet, (says Gregory:) It burns, but gives no light at all.

It is a darkish fire (says Basil) that Basil. in Psa. 33.
has lost his brightness, but kept his burning.

Phauourinus in verbo (...) says: Hades Phauor. in verb. hades.
is a place void of light, and full of eternal darkness.

Sophocles calls it (...): black Sophoc. in Oedipo.
darkness.

Euripides calls it (...): the Eurip. in Aristide.
house without Sunne-light.

Theognis calls it (...): the Theognidis gnome.
black gates.

Eustathius says, (...): Eustath. in 1. I^ad^s.
Hell is a dark place under the earth.

The darkness of Egypt was wonderful Exo. 10. 21
and fearful: Wonderful, because it was so thick as it might be felt:
Fearful, and therefore made the ninth plague of Pharao: yet that darkness
was nothing to the darkness of hell, which is called the Black darkness. Jude
13.


The Poets, in regard of the darkness thereof, do compare hell to a certain
territory in Italy, betwixt Baiae and Cumae, where the Cimerij inhabit: so
environed with hills, that the Sun never comes to it: whereupon this Proverb
comes: Cimeris Cimerae ten^brae.
tenebris atrior, Darker then the darkness of Cimeria. Whosoever he be, that
loves darkness more then light, shall have his heart full of darkness in
Tophet.

Thirdly, Our elementall fire burns the body only, but the fire of hell
burns both soul and body, as ye have heard at large.

Fourthly, Our elementall fire consumes that which is cast into it: but the
fire of hell does always burn, and never consume.

Fifthly, Our elementall fire may be quenched, but hell fire can never be
quenched: The chafe will he burn Mat. 3.
with unquenchable fire: their worm shall never dye, their fire shall never
Esaias ^6.
go out.

As there is nothing that maintains it, so there is nothing that can
extinguish it.

From all this we may observe the Obseruatio.
extremity and bitterness of the torments of Tophet: Yea, minima poena inferni
Tho. Aquia.
mayor est maxima poena huius mundi: that is, The least torture in hell, is
greater than the greatest torture that ever was devised upon the earth. That
Hellhound that murdered the King of France, had as heavy a punishment as this
world could afford: for his arm that did that cursed act, was taken from his
shoulder, his nails pulled from his hands and feet, his flesh piece by piece
pulled from him with hot burning pincers, and in the end rent in pieces with
four horses: all this is nothing to ye least torment of Tophet.

Chrysostom ad populum Antiochenum, Chrysast a^ po^. Ar^^^ch. ^^^ 49.
says, That fire and sword and wild beasts, or any thing more grievous than
these, are scant a shadow to the torments of hell.

And this bitter torment slandeth in these two: In poena damni: that is, In the
punishment of loss: and in p^n^ sensus: that is, in the punishment of feeling:
the former whereof is the greatest (as says Saint Chrysostom) this poena
damni, this punishment of loss is more bitter then the pains of hell, yea,
worse then a thousand hels*

This poena damni, though it be a privative Poe^a damni.
punishment, yet it has a positive effect: For, to be deprived of joy, cannot
but bring intolerable sorrow: even as the absence of the Sun causes Simile
darkness, so the want of Gods presence brings inexpressible grief.

When the Ark of God was taken by the Philistims, old Eli, with grief, 1. Sa.
4. 18.
fell backward and died.

Demosthenes took his banishment (...)* in vito Demosthe^is
so heavily, that many times he would weep bitterly when he looked toward
Athens, though he found much kindness at the hands of his enemies.

Tully, when he was banished from Italy, though he were in Greece, yet he wept
bitterly when he looked toward Italy.

Absolon took his banishment from (...) 14. 22
his fathers presence very grievously.

If these exiles breed such sorrow, how fearful will it be to be banished
from the presence of the Lord! Who is 2. Cor. 1. 3.
the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation: in whose presence is joy,
in whose pleasure is life: to be banished from the presence and loving
countenance of the Lamb: from the fellowship of Saints and Angels: from all
joys and felicity, with that Mar. 25.
bitter sentence, Go from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his angels. Go from me: these are words of separation and ye
cursed: these are words of obiurgation: into everlasting fire: these are words
of desolation: prepared for the devil and his angels: these are words of
doleful exemplification.

This is the greatest part of the second death: for as the first death
separateth the soul from the body, so the second death separates soul and
body from the presence of the Lord for evermore.

Oh what weeping and wailing will Luke 13.
there be, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob entertained into the
Kingdom of God, and ye your selves shut out!

He therefore spoke truly that said, The tears of hell are not sufficient to
bewail the losses of heaven.

Infoelicissimum genus infortuni^, meminisse fuisse foelicem: that is, it is
the unhappiest thing of all, to think that ever we were happy. Dura satis
miseris memoratio prisca bonorum:
Poeta.


It is misery enough, and though there were no more misery, to remember the
joys we have lost.

As the old man in the Poet said, I. Terent.
have a son, nay, alas, I had a son: so the damned may say: We have a
heaven, nay, alas, we had a heaven.

Lysimachus King of Macedonia, Lysimach.
warring against the Scythians, being enforced by extreme thirst, to yield
himself into the hands of his enemies, after he had drunk cold water, brake
out into these lamentable words: Good God, for how short a pleasure, how great
a Kingdom have I lost? So the damned soul may say, Good God, for how short a
time of pleasure, how great a Kingdom have I lost?

And surely this is just with God, that those that separate themselves from him
here, should be banished from him hereafter: That those that hate the Saints
here, should be debarred their company hereafter: that those that crucify the
Lamb here, should be cursed of the Lamb everlastingly hereafter.

The second thing that makes Hell torments so bitter and intolerable, is poena
sensus: the punishment of feeling. Poena sensus.
Every member of body, and every faculty of soul, together tormented for ever.

The eye afflicted with darkness, the ear with horrible and hideous
outcries, the nose with poisonous and stinking sauors, the tongue with gally
bitterness, the whole body with intolerable fire: a fire that shall burn so
violently, that the damned shall prize a drop of water above ten thousand
worlds.

The faculties of the soul also shall be most pitiously tormented: the memory
with pleasures past: the apprehension with pains present: the understanding
with ieies lost: and in this faculty shall lie the worm of conscience Mis^ria
reproborum maxima.
gnawing, which the Scriptures so often threaten to sinners: this worm is a
continual repentance and sorrow full of rage and desperation, by reason of
their sins: and this worm or remorse shall chiefly consist in bringing to
their minds the means and causes of their present calamities: how easily they
might have been freed from hell, and how often they have been invited to Heaven,
and they would none, but now when they would, they cannot. And this worm
biteth and gnaweth on the bowels of these miserable men for evermore.

The will also shall be most grievously tormented with a furious malice against
God, and against the Elect. And in this their cursed estate, they shall recurse,
curse God again, because he made them, and making them, adjudged them to
death, and dying, they can never find death: they shall curse his punishments,
because he punishes them so vehemently: they shall curse his benignities,
because they are sawced with contrary seuerities: they shall curse Christ's blood
shed upon the Cross, because it has bin available to save thousands, and
nothing auailable to save them: they shall curse the Angels in Heaven, and the
Saints in bliss, because they shall see them in joy and themselves in torment:
cursings shall be their Hymns, and howlings their Tunes: blasphemy shall be
their Ditties, and lachrymae their notes: lamentations shall be their Songs,
and scriching their strains: these shall be their evening and morning, yea,
mourning songs: Moab shall cry against Moab: father against child, and child
against father that ever he begat him: Vae, vae, vae, Reu. 8. Vae prae
amaritudine, vae prae multitudine, vae prae aeternitate poenarum: id est, Woe
in regard of the Bitterness, woe in regard of the Multitude, and woe in regard
of the Euerlastingnes of the torments of Tophet.

Now therefore I may truly say of all the damned crew, as our Savior said of
Judas, It had been good Mat. 26 24
for him if he had never been borne. So it had been good for the damned, if
they had never been borne: or if they must needs have a being, they had bin
toads or serpents, that so they might never have known these unspeakable
sorrows of Tophet.

I cannot but muse at a company of wicked hel-hounds, that will use these
execrable words: Would I were damned if ever I knew of this or that: God damn
me body and soul, if I do it not. Alas, alas, full little do these wretches
know, what it is to be damned: if they did understand aright, they would be
hanged up before they would use these fearful speeches: unless they meant
with the moth-slye, never to be at quiet, till they have ^lipt their wings in
those flames.

I therefore conclude this part with Pro(...) (...) ^^(...) alib. 3. ^^. 12.
the admonition of Prosper, who wishes all men to think, how great an evil
it is to be excluded the presence of God, to be banished from Heaven, and cast
into everlasting fire with the devil and his angels, to see no light, but
feel excessive heat, to be drowned in the deep Lake of Gehenna, and to be
eternally torn with most greedy worms: To think on these things (says he)
is a sure way to renounce all vice whatsoever: and he that will not be brought
to lay to heart these, I leave him to feel the smart of them for everlasting.

The sixth part of the description of The sixth part. And much wood. Obseru.
Tophet, is set down in these words, Much wood.

Wherein is noted the eternity of the torments of Tophet.

The Perpetuity of these torments is every where mentioned in the book of God.

The Prophet Daniel speaking of the condemnation of the wicked, adds
perpetuity to their shame: saying, Some shall awake to perpetual shame Dan.
12. 2.
and contempt.

S. Mark, speaking of the vexing worm, adds perpetuity to the gnawing of it:
their worm never dies. Mar. 9. 24.


S. Paul adds to the perdition of the wicked, perpetuity also: Their
Perdition is everlasting, 2. These. 1. 9. Saint Jude adds the like, That they
Jude.
suffer eternal fire.

And Saint John does add unto the Reu. 20. 10
lake, perpetuity: The devil was cast into the lake, where he shall be
tormented day and night for evermore.

Thus we see that the torments of hell are infinite, ratione sinis: without
Reu. 9. 6.
end: and though they seek death, yet find it they shall never.

Thus shall they be like a man that Simile.
is to be pressed to death, who calls for more weight, more weight to
dispatch him of his pain: but alas, he must not have it: So in hell they
shall cry for death, and go without it.

As the Psalmist speaks of Gods mercy, That his mercy endures for ever; Psa.
136.
so the damned may say of his Justice, that his justice endures for ever.

There were some comfort to the damned souls, if these their torments might
have end; but that shall never be: that is that that breaks the hearts of the
damned: no torment in hell comparable to this of perpetuity: what, never have
end, never? O this is such a torment, that the damned themselves are not able
to express.

It is a common saying: But for Adagium.
hope the heart would burst; but they are shut out of all hope: and therefore
who can express their torments?

O (says a heathen man) God shall once give an end to these evils: but the
damned shall never be able to say this. For (as Gregory says) Mors miseris
Gregory.
fit sine morte: finis sine fine: defectus sine defectu: quoniam mors semper
viuit, and finis semper incipit, and defectus deficere nes cit: that is, The
death of the damned is such as shall never dye; their end shall never end; and
their destruction, a perpetual confusion.

No marvel therefore if S. Bernard Bernard d^ c^nsid ad E^^en. li^ ^
says; Horreo in manus incidere mortis vinentis, and vitae mortentis: that is,
It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of living death, and dying life.

If there might be an end of these pains, it were something, though it were
after so many millions of years* as there are drops of water in the sea, stars
in the firmament, motes of dust upon the earth, and as there have been moments
of time since time began: but this cannot be granted: but when the Lord does
give over his being, then, and never before then shall the damned be
discharged, though the blockish Catabaptist persuades the contrary.

The reason of the perpetuity of these torments is threefold.

The first, Drawn from the Majesty of God offended: an infinite Majesty
offended, an infinite torment imposed.

The second, Drawn from the state and condition of the damned* For as long as
they remain sinful, so long shall they remain tormented for sin: but in hell
they ever remain sinful, therefore in hell they shall ever be tormented.

Sin is like oil, and the wrath of God like fire: as long as the oil
lasts, so long the fire burns, and so long as they are sinful, so long for
sin tormented; therefore for ever damned.

For most sure it is, that in hell there is neither grace nor devotion: the
wicked that be cast in exteriores ^enebras extra limitem diuinae misericordiae:
They shall be cast into outward darkness, out of the limits both of grace and
mercy. Though their weeping in hell may seem penitentiary, yet they do but
lugere poenas, non peccata: they do but mourn their sorrows, not lament
their sins.

And though Dives his prayer for his brethren may seem to proceed from a
charitable soul, yet it was not for their good, but for his own: for he knew
that if they should come to hell, (his lewd and vicious example being part
occasion thereof) his torments should be doubled, nay centupled upon him. In
hell therefore there being neither grace nor devotion, but still affected
iniquity, their torments must be everlasting.

The third reason, Drawn from that stinging attribute of Gods Justice; because
life was offered them here, and they would none, it is just with God, that
when in hell they beg it, they should go without it: yea, that they should
seek death and never find it.

Once they were offered salvation, being gone in Adam, but that offer being
neglected, let them never look for another.

O if this long torment were always thought upon, it would make us use this
short time of our life better; they are Spiritual Lunatikes, and worse then
mad Bedlomites, that will purchase an eternal torment for so short a pleasure.

I beseech you therefore (beloved brethren) for your souls sake, which should
be more worth unto you than a thousand worlds, let not these infinite torments
be passed over with a short or shallow consideration, but write the
remembrance of them in the inward parts of your souls with the Diamond of
deepest meditation, that so this Tophet may never be your destruction.

The seventh and last part of the The seventh and last part. The breath of the
Lord, etc.
Description of Tophet, set down in these words, The breath of the Lord like a
River of Brimstone does kindle it.

In which words there is not only a Prosopopeia in the breath, but a
Topographia in the brimstone used: both which figures do notably express the
furious indignation of the Author, and the fierce severity of the act: the
Author or Inflictour of all these fearful punishments, is the Lord God
offended, at whose anger the Heavens do melt, the Earth quakes, and the whole
Creation trembles, into whose hands to fall is most fearful, For the Heb. 2^.
^9
Lord our God is a consuming fire.

The Lord is the decreer, appointer and commander of all these fearful
torments: and the Lord does execute them upon the damned, both immediate,
immediately from himself: and mediate, mediately by his instruments, as by the
devils, fire, darkness, stinch and other creatures.

Fear therefore (in the fear of God) this fearful and terrible name JEHOVAH:
that at the day of need, ye may find him a mild and gentle Lamb, and not A
roaring Lion of Judah. Revel. ^


The severity of punishment is set down by a double allegory, Breath and
Brimstone.

To express the rage and ^yranny of Saul against the Lambs of JESUS, this
word is used in the Acts: And Act. 9. 1.
Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, etc.

So here, to express the furious indignation of the Lord against sinners, the
Breath of the Lord is used.

Like a River of Brimstone.

The perplexing property of brimstone is to burn: Darkely; to grieve the
sight: Sharply, to afflict the more: Loathsomly, to perplexe the smell.

We read in the Scriptures, that the Lord being much provoked, punished not
only with fire, but with burning brimstone, which is ten to one more terrible.

As upon Sodom, he rained fire and Genesis 19. 24
brimstone from heaven.

I will rain upon him a fore rain, Eze. 38. 22*
haile-stones, fire and brimstone.

Upon the wicked God shall rain Psalm. 11. 6.
snares, fire and brimstone, and stormy tempest, this shall be their portion
to drink.

The beast, and the false prophet, Apoc. 19. 20.
both alive were cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone.

Oh, who can express now the lamentation of Tophet, for the breath of the Lord
like a river of brimstone does kindle it!

As this should be of power to keep you from the least iniquity: so it should
possess you with the knowledge of the right nature of sin: that it is the
most odious and loathsome thing in the world: A stinking carcass stinketh
Gregor.
not so in the nostrils of man, as a polluted sinner stinketh in the nostrils
of Almighty God.

As Plato says of virtue: That if it Plato.
could be seen with a bodily eye, it is so splendid and glorious a thing, that
all the world would be ravished with the love of her: So may I say the
contrary of vice: That if sin could be seen in his own colors, and in his
right nature, all the world would loath, and utterly detest it.

But miserable man (the more is the pity) conceiueth not aright of sin, one
would think that Adam had committed but a small sin in eating the forbiden
fruit, at the entreaty of Eve, yet he and all his pouerity guilty of eternal
death for the same: One would think that that poor man had committed but a
small fault, In gathering a few chippes on the Sabbath day; (we have fouler
matters committed on our Sabbaths, and go unpunished) yet he was stoned to
death for his labor: one would think that Ananias Acts. 5.
detaining part of the money, and maintaining ^he contrary with a lie, had
committed but a small fault, yet he was struck dead for the same at the feet of
Peter: one would think that an idle word were but a small sin, yet of every
idle word that men shall speak, a great account must be made for the same.

And as men coureiue of sin, so they imagine of punishment, they think that
the Lord will not deal so severely with them; and yet my Text says, That the
breath of the LORD like a River of Brimstone does kindle it: The terror of
whose wrath is indurable.

Harken here all you that make but a sport of sin, look upon your
punishments prescribed: the least sin that ever you have committed, ( being
Zach. 5. 8.
weighty as lead) is able to sink your souls down to damnation.

Cease therefore from evil, and do that which is good: Cast away the works
of darkness, and put on the armor of light: hate the little sin as well as
the great, an idle thought as well as blasphemy: make much of offered grace to
salvation: Christ now knocks at the door of your Souls, and would gladly
come in and dwell with you: For it is his delight to dwell Prou. 8.
with the sons of men: shut him not out as did the Bethleemites: Bid him not
be gone, as did the Gadarens, but Be ye open, ye everlasting doors, that the
King of glory may come in; that you having given him entertainment here, he may
do the like by you hereafter, placing you with the sheep on his right hand, and
singing this blessed harvest song unto you, Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

To the which most blessed place of glory, the Lord bring every Soul of us at
the day of our death and dissolution; and that for JESUS CHRIST his sake, to
whom with God the Father, and God the blessed Spirit, three glorious persons,
but one immortal God, be ascribed all honor and glory both in Heaven and
Earth, this day and ever, Amen,

(*)

FINIS.
An Earnest and zealous Pray er, to be saved from the damnation of TOPHET.
O Most glorious everliving, and euerlouing Lord God, the fountain and
wellspring of all our happiness, we thy poor servants (unworthy, in regard
of our manifold transgressions, of the least of thy blessings) do most humbly
fall down before the throne of thy dreadful Majesty, confessing in the
bitterness of our souls, the baseness and vileness of our estates by sin:
O Lord, ashamed we are to come before thee, that are nothing but sinful
corruption and abomination, but thou a Majesty most pure, in comparison of
whom, the Angels themselves are counted impure: we dare not therefore (being
thus loathsome and abominable) presume to present our selves before thee, as in
our selves, but in thy manifold mercies, and thy Son Jesus Christ his merits,
in whom thou art delightfully pleased with all that faithfully call upon thy
name: Lord, in thy Son behold us, we humbly beseech thee, accept us in his
worthiness, cleanse us in his blood, justify us in his righteousness, sanctify
us with his spirit, and in his most precious death free us from the damnation
of hell. O till these comfortable tidings be sealed up to our souls, how
perplexed are we! O how do our hearts quake and tremble, till we have found the
salvation of thee our God! Reject us not (O heavenly Father) that feign would,
as be saved of thee, so uprightly serve thee: we plead now and ever for pardon,
so for grace, whereby we may in plentiful manner bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment.

Lord keep us in body and soul to thy everlasting Kingdom and salvation: Lord
preserve us from the terrible torments of Tophet: O what shall become of us, if
we for our sins, when we dye, be thrown into that Lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, so bitterly, as forces screeching and screaming continually!
Lord deal not with us according to our sins, and thy justice; but in the
multitude of thy mercies, save our souls alive: O consider the* terrors of our
troubled Souls: Let not the groans of our hearts be despised, but suffer them
to pierce the heavens for a blessing: O thou that art the God of endless
compassion, cast us not away from thy presence: we are the workmanship of thine
hands, O Lord confound us not: O Lord (that delightest not in the death and
damnation of a sinner) be moved to show pity upon us: O Christ our blessed
Savior, make intercession to God the Father for us* speak by thy gracious
Spirit peace to our disquieted Souls, bind up our broken hearts: give us that
we may clearly see our names written in the Book of Life, and our souls
released from the fearful damnation of Tophet.

To this end (gracious God) remove all sin from our souls, and plant in the
garden of our hearts, all those spiritual and heavenly graces that are proper
and peculiar to thine Elect, that we may be always a sweet smelling savor
before thee: give us faith in thy promises, love to thy Majesty, zeal to thy
glory, obedience to thy laws, and guide us daily by thy blessed Spirit into
all truth and godliness: Lord, give us to be out of love with the vanities of
this life, to hate every work of darkness, the little sin as well as the great:
quicken us (O Lord) by thy quickening Spirit: O give us hearts to be inflamed
with the love of thy truth: O that we could hunger and thirst after grace, as
the chased Heart does the running Brook: O that we could experimentally say
with thy servant DAVID, that all our delight is in thy Commandments.

Thus (O Lord) we receiving grace from thy Majesty, to repel the fiery darts
of the devil, and to fly even from every apparition of evil: so doing we may
reap much comfort to our souls in this world of trouble, and at the fearful
day of Judgment, we may be freed from the lamentable tortures of Tophet,
where howling and yelling shall be for evermore, and that for Jesus Christ's
sake thy Son our Savior: to whom with thee and thy most glorious Spirit, we
desire, even from the bottom of our hearts, to have offered up all
thanksgiving and praise both in heaven and earth this day and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A IOYEFVLL TRACTATE OF The most blessed Baptism that ever was solemnized: VIZ.

Of the Baptism of our Lord JESUS by JOHN in Jordan.

The fourth Edition corrected and amended.

JOHN 3. 5. Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, and are to be sold by John Clarke. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. ROBERT MORDAVNT of Massingham Hall, in the County
of Norsolke, Esquire, and Mistress AMY MORDAVNT, his mostlouing Bedfellow: All
increase of Grace in this life, and of glory in the life to come.
Seldom or never (Right Worshipful) do we find Tractates, either Humane, or
Divine, pass without their particular Dedications, that being shrouded under
the safe-garding gourds of honorable and right godly dispositions, they might
the better be preserved from the parching detractions of malignant Cynicks: I
make bold therefore (discarding all selfe-humour and irregular singularity) to
commend this poor Present, vostrum ad patrocinium, to the worthy patronage of
your well-affected Worships, two especial reasons moving me hereunto. First,
that mine unfeigned gratitude, entire affection, and most humble duty for all
your favors inexpressible, might hereby be made apparent: Secondly, it being
delivered at that solemn baptism of Charles your first born and hopeful
heir, none I know more worthy of this Dication, than your worthy and right
Christian persons.

I present it to your religious considerations, as a loving and friendly
New-yeeres gift: for it aims at that blessed New birth, and happy New life,
lively in baptism represented, without which it is not possible for either of
you to possess the Kingdom of God.

Accept therefore (I humbly beseech you) and take in good worth this short
Treatise; short both in line and learning: respect not (as is that Proverb)
the measure of the gift, but the mind of the giver, what is wanting in the one
(I dare boldly promise) is made up in the other.

At your best leisures vouchsafe, I pray, now and then to peruse it, and I
trust that your Christian pains herein shall be well reguerden'd with
heavenly pleasures herefrom.

The Lord God make this (with all other like Christian helps) much profitable
to your souls, and as he has abundantly blessed you withoutward honors and
dignities external, he would also even fill your hears and spirits with the
inestimable riches of his all-sufficient grace: that having granted this
twofold blessing to you in this life, you may have the more assured hope of a
third in the life to come, which is his blessing of glory: for all which
forenamed blessings, your Worships shall have my best and most devout prayers,
continued to the Lord; to whose sweetest protection I betake you both with your
hopeful son this present day and evermore:

From Hempsted in Essex, January, 10. 1620. Your Worships always ready Henry
Greenwood.

To the CHRISTIAN Reader.
A Religious and right virtuous Gentlewoman, courteous and I. M.
Christian Reader, much importuning me for a written Copy of this extant
work (upon good consideration) proves the only occasion of this printed
Tractate: for things written, as they are more tedious, so are they less
profitable; but printed Tractates less tedious and more profitable: I am not
borne alone to my self, my particular friends I love to satisfy, but the
general good still shall be my aim.

And that my pen thus happily should turned be to Press, I am no whit
unwilling: both because few have written upon this worthy subject; as also for
that I see this heavenly Sacrament seldom made right use of, the most
contenting themselves with the bare sign, very few acquainting themselves with
the blessed power of the signified. That therefore our profession may not be
(as in many Antichristian parts of the world) in superficial sign and show
alone, but in substance, life, and power: I commend unto thy view (for the
better information of thine head, and reformation of thine heart) this short
(yet I trust profitable) Treatise of that blessed Baptism of our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

Here (Christian friend) may thou learn a double lesson to live to dye: to
dye to that, which otherwise must be thy death: to live that Christian and
happy life, wherewith who-euer is not acquainted, everlastingly must dye.

The Lord God (from my very soul I heartily desire) bless these my poor
pains to the best good of thine own Soul, and work in thine heart a death
to all that is evil, and a life to all grace and godliness, that his glory
more and more by thee may be advanced, and thine own soul more and more by
him refreshed: and that for his own mercy sake; to whose most happy
protection, I commend thee both in body and Soul in his dear Son Christ
Jesus, and rest

Thine euer-louing in the Lord, Henry Greenwood.

CHRIST'S BAPTISM.
Math. 3. 16, 17. And Jesus, when he was baptized, came straight out of the
water: And lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the Spirit of
God descending like a Dove and lighting upon him. Verse 17. And lo, a voice
came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
AS by the disobedience of one man, sin entered Romans 5. 12
into the World, and by sin death: Romans 5. 12. So by the obedience of one man
righteousness entered into the world, and by righteousness life, Romans 5. 18.
Romans 5. 18.
For as Adams sin has bound us all to a double misery, guilt and punishment:
So Jesus Christ (being made of God to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.
30.
Sanctification, and Redemption: 1. Cor. 1. 30.) has delivered us both from
guilt and punishment of all our transgressions.

The truth of which thrice-blessed report, is not only mentioned in the
Gospel of God, and therefore called EVAGGELION, but confirmed also by
sacramental signs and seals in the first and last Testament: In the first,
against sins guilt, by circumcision, against sins punishment, by occasion,
the one a Sacrament cutting, the other a Sacrament killing: In the last,
against sins guilt, the Sacrament of Baptism, against sins punishment, the
Sacrament of his Supper.

And as Adam sinned in his own person: So the second Adam for his recovery
has performed both the Sacraments and substance of the same in his own
person: for he was circumcised, sacrificed, baptized, to take away the sins
of the world: Circumcised: Luke 2. 21. Sacrificed, Luke 2. 21.
Heb. 7. 27.

Baptized in the words of my Text* And when Jesus was baptized, etc.

In which words for method sake, I note in general three:

First, Christ's baptism: And when Jesus was baptized.

Secondly, Christ's immediate action after baptism: He straight came out of the
water.

Thirdly, Gods, of Christ's miraculous approbation:

Testified by two: By Vision, By Voice.
By Vision two ways: 1. By the heavens apertion: And lo, the Heavens were
opened unto him. 2. By the Spirits descension: And John saw the Spirit of God
descending, etc.

By Voice: Behold, a voice came from heaven, saying: etc.

In which voice I note also,

two: 1. A double circumstance. 2. A singular substance.
A double circumstance: 1. Of the Person: God the Father: Behold a voice. 2. Of
the place: supercelestiall: Came from Heaven.
A singular substance: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

In Christ's Baptism ^ observe three*

First, the Baptist. Secondly, the Baptized. Thirdly, the element.
First, the Baptist: and that was John, as it appears in the precedent verses.

Not John the Evangelist* but John the Son of Zachary the Priest: A worthy
instrument and nomene and numine: a gracious name, and a gracious person,

A gracious name: whereof Saint Augustine in his second Tractate upon John
says: Magnum aliquidiste Johannes, ingens meritum magna gratia, magna
celsitudo* A great name is this name of John, a name of great grace, a name of
great valuation. Magnus exim erat Johannes virtute, magnus sanctitate, magnus
and officio: Great was John in power, great was John in sanctity, great was
John's office.

A gracious person: sanctified in his Luke 1. 15.
mothers womb: Luke 1. 15. that which was spoken of Jeremy the Prophet, is
verified of John the Baptist: Priusquam te formarem in vtero nouite, and
antequam illin^ exires, sanctifica^i te: Jeremy 1. 5. Before I formed thee in
the womb, I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified
thee, At one and the selfsame time, there was in John the Baptist, Spiritus
vitae, and Spiritus gratiae: the Spirit of Life, and the Spirit of Grace, as
says Origin*

Whose sanctity you may read at large commended by Josephus, lib. 18.
Antiquitatum.

Yea, Christ himself says thus much in commendation of him, that inter natos
mulierum mator Iohanne non surrexit: Math. 11. 11. Among those that Mat. 11. 11.
are borne of women, a greater then John arose there not.

Though Enoch was translated, Genesis Genesis 5. 24.
5. 24. yet was he not greater than John: Though Eliah was taken up to Heaven:
2. King. 2. 11. yet was he not greater than John: Moses a great Lawgiver, and
the Prophets great men, yet were they not greater than John. Non enim ego
Prophetas Prophetis andeo comparare; I dare not compare Prophets with Prophets;
yet the Lord of him, the Lord of them, the Lord Jesus of us all has pronounced
of him, that inter natos mulierum, among them that are born of women, a greater
than John the Baptist arose there not: he does not say, inter natos virginum,
among them that are borne of Virgins; for Christ Jesus himself was borne of a
Virgin, whose shoes latchet John Mat. 3. 11
was not worthy to unloose, Math. 3. 11. great was John, but what to his Lord
and Master Christ? a rare preacher, but what to that great Lawgiuer? a baptizer
with water, but what to him that came to baptize with the Spirit and Fire? This
is he that here baptized Christ: yea, he was the first that ever baptized with
water to repentance, yea his office was to baptize in remissionem peccatorum
before Christ, Luke 3. 3. to lead the people by water to him that baptized with
the Spirit and fire: As one says of him, that he did praeire nasciturum
nascendo, praedicaturum praedicando, baptizaturum bapti zando, moriturum
moriendo; that in birth, baptism, doctrine and death, he preceded JESUS, the
Reconciler of the world.

The place where he baptized Christ, was in the River Iordane: Fluuius eximiae
dulcedinis, qui in lacum Genezareth, Genesis 13.
deinde in mare mortuum funditur: A delicate River, so called, because it was
composed of two Fountains, the one called Ior, the other called Dan, and
therefore the River has this name Jordan: In which River Naaman was 2 King. 5.
14.
washed and cleansed from his Leprosy, 2 King. 5. 14. which River Eliah and
Elisha divided with their Cloak, 2. King. 2. 8, 13. In this Jordan did John
baptize our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The Baptized; Jesus: And when Jesus was baptized: Jesus: this word
signifies a Savior.

A name worthily given him from the Lord, because he came to save his Mat. 1.
21.
people from their sins, Math. 1. 21. from the guilt of sin by his
imputative righteousness, from the punishment of sin by his imputative death
and passions: the one properly resembled in Baptism, the other in his last
Supper.

But whether did Christ purchase this great salvation for us iure pacti, or
rigore iustit^e, a great question in divinity: by a Covenant made twixt God the
Father and him, or in regard of worth for worth, that is, whether his merits
did equalize the salvation of so many Saints?

Ans. To satisfy this question, give me leave to use a familiar comparison.

Suppose I should say to a Porter or some such fellow, If thou will bring me a
burden of an hundred weight a mile upon thy back, I will giu^ thee a thousand
pound for thy pains the Porter does it, he has purchaset this sum, ture
pacti, in regard of the covenant, but not rigore iustitiae: hi^ pains were not
answerable to the gift, for I could have had it done so; a crown: but suppose
I should mak^ bold with a great man of worth in the like case, he has deserved
this rewar^, and iure pacti and rigore iustitiae: O the dignity of Christ's
person makes his merit precious: and thus became Christ our Jesus.

Object. But it may be demanded why CHRIST should here by John b^ baptized,
that was sinlesse, baptism being a remedy against original sin* For BAPTISMA
of BAPTEIN sigri(...) a washing away, resembling the washing away of sin?

Ans* It is true, Christ in regard of himself had no need of Baptism:
wherefore John forbade him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? yet notwithstanding, Christ vouchsafed to be baptized for
eight especial causes.

First, because he was bound to fulfill the righteousness both of Law and
Gospel, in the behalf of man as he told John: Thus it becomes us to Mat* ^.
fulfill all righteousness, Math. 3. The Law inioined Circumcision, therefore
Christ must be circumcised: the Gospel enjoined baptism, therefore Christ must
be baptized: for Christ came not to break the Law, but to fulfill it*

Secondly, that he might confirm the baptism of John, to be both reverend
and profitable, l^st any should hold baptism a vain or frivolous thing.

Thirdly, that he might sanctify the water to his mystical end (viz.) to the
washing away of sin: Hesych: Christus ad sacrandas aquas baptismatis in
Iordane baptizatus est: that is, Christ was baptized in Jordan, to sanctify
the water of baptism, to the mystical washing away of sin.

Fourthly, that he might hereby show his wonderful humility: for Phil. ^* 6.
though he were equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. yet he makes himself of no
reputation, but comes even among sinners to baptism, who notwithstanding knew
no sin.

Fifthly, to teach us, that as he was baptized being the head, so should we his
members: to show that baptism is not lightly to be respected, nor of any to be
neglected: therefore they that bring not their children to baptism (as much as
lies in them) shut them out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

For Baptism is necessary ad tollendam maledictionem (as says Pareus) non vt
pharmacum aut opus expiatorium: sed vt sacramentum foederis obsignatorium: non
necessitate medi^, sed mandati^. not as though outward baptism either simply
saved us, or without it no salvation could be, but because it is commanded.

It is therefore necessary ^ATAT^ propter mandatum Dei: for the straight
command of God: but not praecise, simpliciter, and absolute, that as those that
want it should be damned, for whom the blockish Papists have devised a Lymbus
infantum.

Sixthly, to testify the blessed communion and fellowship, that he our head
has with us his members, to our unspeakable consolation.

Seventhly, to signify to all the world, that he came to be baptized with
the baptism of death: For baptism does reprensent dying to sin: so Christ
dyed for sin: Luke 12. 50. Luke 12. 50
I must be baptized with a baptism, and how am I grieved, till it be ended?

Eightthly, vt veritas typo responde^et: that the truth may answer in every
respect the type and figure: for as the high Priest when he was inaugurated,
they first washed his whole body with water: Afterward having put upon him his
priest-like garments, and brought him to the open view of the people, they
sounded trumpets, and powered oil upon his head: Exodus 29. Exodus 29. 4, 5. Number.
10. 3
4, 5. Number. 10. 3. So Christ our Priest was washed by John in Jordan, in the
open assembly of much people, a voice thundered from Heaven, and with the spirit
of grace he was anointed with Psalm. 45. 7.
the oil of holiness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7.

And thus ye see the reasons why our Savior would be baptized.

Oh how are we bound to his majesty, that thus would vouchsafe to pay our
debt: like a good Cyrenite that thus would stoop to carry our cross, and
fulfill every part of the Law for our sakes, to save our poor souls
everlastingly alive!

Thirdly, The element: water, It is John's own confession: I baptize with water.

We read of many baptismes in the holy Scriptures.

First, Baptisma typicum: A typical baptism: wherewith Paul says that the
Israelites were baptized of Moses in the sea: 1. Cor. 10. 2. That was a 1. Cor.
10. 2.
type of baptism: for as baptism to us is a passage by death to life: so was
that passage through the sea to the shore, a passage through death to life.

Secondly, Baptisma Iudaicum: A Jewish Baptism: wherewith Judith is Judith 12.
^. Heb. 9. 10.
said to have baptized her self before prayer in a fountain of water* Judith
12. 7. de quo: Heb. 9. 10.

Thirdly, Baptisma Pharisaicum: A Pharisaicall Baptism: Baptisma calicum, and
vrceorum: A Baptism of cups and pots, and hands before they ate: Mark.

Fourthly, Baptisma sanguinis: A baptism Luke 12. 50
of blood: Luke 12. 50. I must be baptized with a Baptism, and how am I
grieved till it be ended! called baptisma Martyrij: A baptism of Martyrdom.

Fifthly, Baptisma aquae: called baptisma fluminis: A baptism of water:
wherewith John baptized.

Sixthly, Baptisma Spiritus: A Baptism of the Spirit: called Baptisma flaminis:
the baptism of fire: wherewith Acts 2.
the Apostles were baptized: Acts 2. wherewith Christ baptizeth: he shall Mat.
3.
baptize with the Spirit and fire: Mat. 3.

The Spirit is compared to fire in a triple respect: for as fire does

Illuminare: inlighten. Calefacere: make warm. Comburere: burn up.
So the Holy Ghost does inlighten the understanding: make warm with zeal the
affection: and burn up the dross and corruption that is in the Soul.

But John baptizeth with water.

A ^it element for this Sacrament: For (as Augustine says) Si Sacramenta
similitudinem quandam earum rerum quarum sunt Sacramenta non haberent, vtique
non essent Sacramenta: If Sacraments had not a lively representation of those
things whereof they are Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments.

Now water does notably resemble Christ's Spirit and blood, and that in many
respects.

First, as the water washes a way filth from the body: so does the Spirit
sin from the soul.

Secondly, as every generation is ex humida or aquosa materia, of a wa^ry
matter: (where upon some of the Philosophers, as Thales, said that water was
the beginning of all things:) So regeneration by the Spirit of grace is
resembled here in the Sacrament by water.

Thirdly, as water makes the earth fruitful, sertill, full of increase: So
that Spirit that moved upon the waters, Genesis 1. 2. makes us fruitful in all
good works.

Fourthly, as water does very much refresh a man in his extremity of heat: So
the Spirit of grace refreshes us in the fiercest fire and greatest heat of
tribulations.

Fifthly, as water does quenth the thirst of man and beast: So does the Spirit
of grace quench our thirst after temporal things, Ioh. 7. 37. He that is Ioh.
7. 37.
a-thirst, let him come to me, and he shall never thirst more.

This sacramental water is figured per aquam expiationis: by the water of Number.
19.
Expiation: Numb. 19.

This sacramental water is figured per aquam illam, by that water which
Ezekiel saw go out of the right side of the Temple, Ezekiel. 47.

This sacramental water is figured per fontem illum, by that fountain which
the Lord promised by his Prophet, Zach. 13.

But this sacramental water is especially figured per aquas dilu^ij, by the
water of the flood: Genesis 7. for as that Genesis 7.
water drowned the old world, so water in Baptism (as it has reference to the
Spirit of grace) drowneth the old man, and washes away all corruption and
sin: in which respect baptism is called Lauacrum regenerationis
mentanominic^, The Lauer of regeneration, Tit 3. 5.
Tit. 3. 5.

So that water (ye see) is the element that John uses in baptism: aqua pura,
simplex, vulgaris, pure, simple, and common water: not mixed, not made, not
stilled, not oil, not blood, not fire, nor any other element: not salt in the
mouth: not spittle in the ears and nostrils with a pronunciation of the word
Ephata, be thou open: not milk, not honey, to signify the right they have to
the heavenly Chanaan: not Chrysine or holy oil for the anointing of breast and
forehead, to signify the anointing of the Spirit: not burning lights, to
signify their delivery from darkness to light.

A couple of notable heretics, Seleucus and Hermias, baptized their children
and aqua and igne, in water and fire also.

Musculus says, that it is reported, that certain Christians of India baptize
their children and aqua and igne, in water and fire also, signaculo crucis per
ignitum ferrum fronti impresso: branding them on the forehead with the sign of
the cross with a hot burning iron: but this is horrible and hard.

Horrible: because cursed is he that adds or diminishes from the Word of the
Lord: Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

An horrible thing that we should make our selves wiser then Christ: what
Christ has commanded to be used in this Sacrament, that in the fear of God
let us do: adding nothing to the same, for that is abomination.

An hard thing to be burned in the Sacrament: therefore we are much bound to
Christ for those Sacraments we have, for they are very easy: the old were hard
and bloody: in Circumcision blood lost, in the Passover life lost.

The Sacraments of the New Testament are virtute maiora, vtilitate meliora,
actu faciliora, numero pauciora; id est, for virtue greater, for profit better,
for act easier, for number fewer.

And as this Baptist here baptized with water, so we must know that it passed
his power to baptize with the Spirit and fire.

Cyprian gives to John only outward baptism.

Longobard says, that Iohannis operatio visibilis tantum exterius Lauantis
muisibilis gratia Dei Interius operantis: John's baptism washed without, but it
is Gods grace that washes within.

John's baptism was not called the baptism of repentance, as though all that
were baptized were regenerate, but because it was a sign and token of
repentance.

Augustine dares not altogether derogate remission of sins from John's
baptism, neither dares he simply give remission of sins to the same.

It is not (beloved) it is not in the Ministers power to regenerate, neither is
there such a sacramental union twirt the sign and the signified, as he that
takes the one, must of necessity take the other: then Simon Magus should have
had the Holy Ghost, for he was baptized.

Neither are they cast away that cannot come to be baptized with water: then
whither went the Thief that believed? he was not baptized, yet in Paradise.

And whither went the child of David? It was not circumcised: surely to Heaven,
for he says, he should go to it

And what became of all that dyed before the eight day, the day of
Circumcision? though they had not the sign, yet were they borne in the Church,
and were within the compass of that general covenant, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed.

Indeed if we contemn baptism, then it is another matter: As he that was not
circumcised, should be cut off Genesis 17.
from the people: Genesis 17. this is spoken of Adulti that contemned circumcision.

Alas, children, if they be not brought to baptism, and dye unbaptized, it is
not their fault: shall they be damned for their fathers offense? God forbid:
No, the child shall not bear the fathers Ezekiel. 18.
sin: Ezekiel. 18.

Again, water is but a sign of the inward washing, water it self does not
work regeneration.

Though it be said: Except a man be borne of water and the Spirit: Ioh. 3. 5.
it is the Spirit that does regenerate, not the water: and therefore a man may
be regenerate without outward baptism.

It is the speech of the Apostle Peter: Baptism saves us, not that baptism
that puts away the filth of the flesh, ( viz.) water; but in that a good
conscience makes request to God; 1. Pet. 3. 21. Indeed water is said to 1.
Pet. 3. 21
wash us from our sins sacramentally, but not really nor substantially, that
the Spirit does.

Nay in the effectual and complete baptism, tollitur peccatum, non quod non
sit, sed quod non obsit: non quod ad actum sed reatum: that is, sin is taken
away, not that sin is not, but that sin is not to condemnation: not in
regard of the act, but in regard of the guilt.

Seeing then that John could but baptize with water, and the Minister can give
but outward baptism, it is Christ Jesus that baptizeth with fire: O let
Parents be instant with the Lord in prayer, that as the Minister powers on
water, so the Lord Jesus would power on his grace, that as they are instruments
of their childrens first birth, which is damnable through sin, so they may
be instruments of their second birth, without which neither they nor their
children shall ever see the salvation of God.

And thus much for the Baptism of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Secondly, Christ's immediate action after baptism: He straight came The
second text.
out of the water.

In this a mystery is observed: to show that all that are effectually baptized,
do presently come out of their sins, making no delay to serve the Lord in
holiness.

O that this were verified of all that are baptized.

We see then what God requires at our hands, that when we are little ones,
even in our infancy (for then we are baptized) we sacrifice our souls and
bodies to the service of our God: for the Lord looks for the Alpha of our
lives as well as the O meg^, for praise even out of the mouth of Babes and
sucklings.

All therefore that are baptized, and yet deserre their repentance, here are
justly reprehended.

It was Saint Augustines fault before his conversion: Ignosce pater, ignosce:
pardon me (O Lord) pardon: At noli modo: but not now: let me sin in my
youth, and pardon me in mine age.

But let such persons beware of a double danger.

Sudden death. Hardness of heart.
Life is uncertain, who knows it not? Let us therefore with the wise Virgins
be always surnisht with the candle of faith, and the oil of love in the
Lamps of our souls, that so we be not excluded the bride-chamber of glory.

Again, let all such desperate wretches know, that custom in sin hardens
the heart of a sinner: Qui non est body, c^as n^nus aptus e^^t: He that is not
sit for repen^ance to day, will be less to (...) even as a ruinous house, the
longer it is let run, the more it will ask to repair: and as a nail, the
more blows a man gines it, the harder will it be to pull out.

Let us therefore, while it is said to day, resolve perfect obedience to our
God: while the Lord speaks, make him speedy answer: Let there be an echo
resounding in the thickets of our hearts, as was in the heart of David, Psalm.
27. 8. Seek ye my face: thy Psalm. 2^ ^.
face Lord will I seek: that having regarded the Lord and his service in time,
the Lord may reward us with his blessed favor, not for a time, but for ever.

Thus much for Christ's immediate action after Baptism.

Thirdly, Gods, of Christ's miraculous approbation:

testified by two:
by Vision. by Voice.
By Vision two ways,

by the heavens appertion. by the Spirits descension.
First, by the heavens appertion:

And behold, the heavens were opened Text.
to him.

Behold: Ecce: lo.

This word is used in holy Writ 600. times; a word ever placed before matters
of great weight and moment; whereupon Bernard calls it notam stelliferam: a
starry note, pointing out extraordinary matters revealed, as the Star pointed
out Christ to the Wisemen, and stood over the house where he lay.

Sometimes placed before Gods inexpressible merctes: as Esaias. 7. 14 Behold, a
Virgin shall conceine and Esaias. 7.
bear a Son, and his name shall be called IMMANVEL.

Sometimes before his invtterable judgments, as Amos 8. Behold, I will bring a
famine upon you, not a famine of bread or of wine (which of outward deaths, I
know none worse then staruing to death) but a famine of hearing the Word of the
Lord: and ye shall go from sea to sea, and coast to coast (as little account
as you make of Sermons now) and shall not find it.

The exposition of this word, you may find by comparing Math. the 6. Math. 6.
Luke. 12
with Luke 12. for S. Matthew speaking of GODS providence for the Fowls of the
air, uses the word Behold: Behold the Fowls of the air. Saint Luke speaking
of the selfsame subject, uses the word Consider. Consider the Ravens, etc So
that Behold is as much as Consider, or seriously perpend what it is that shall
be spoken.

The use of this word is, to stir up auditories diligently to attend to those
things that make for Gods glory, and the everlasting peace of their own souls.

The heavens were opened to him. Text.


The heavens have been opened to many, as you may read in the Scriptures of
God.

1. To Steven martyred, Act. 7. 56. Act. 7. 56.
2. To Peter in prayer devoted, Acts. 10. 3. To Christ transfigured Math. 17.
5. 4. To Christ ascended, Acts 1. 9. 5. To Christ here baptized.
And when Jesus was baptized, behold, the heavens were opened to him.

By the heavens apertion, many times is understood the manifestation of the
glory of God* but here it does signify, visibilis coeli scissura^, ita vt
Johannes perspicere potuit, aliquid planetis and austris superius: the division
of the visible heavens, whereby John saw something higher than the Planets and
Stars: and therefore Mark says, that the heavens were cloven in twain, Mark
1. 10. Man. 1. 10.


But by this visible scissure and cleft of the heavens is signified:

1. The presence of God* 2. That Christ himself came from thence, to reveal
to man the secret will of his heavenly Father. 3. That he it was that should
reconcile all things both in heaven and earth to God, Colos. 1. 20 Col. 1 ^^
4. That Christ Jesus opened the Kingdom of heaven to all believers, which
Adam by sin had shut. 5. That all that are effectually baptized, have heaven
opened unto them, and the Lord God ready to embrace them to glory.
O the power and force of baptism it opened that which all the creatures of
heaven and earth were not able to open: Lord show the like power in baptism
this day, open the Kingdom of Heaven to this Infant that shall be baptized,
and receive it for thy Christ's sake into thine everlasting favor and salvation.

Thus much for the first vision.

The Spirits descension.

And John saw the Spirit of GOD T^^t.
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.

That we may the better lay open the true sense of these words, four
questions must be propounded.

First, how John is said to see the Spirit of God, the spirit of God being
invisible?

Ans. It is, impropria locutio, an improper speech, for John could neither see
Spiritus essentiam, nor virtutem, neither the essence nor yet the power of the
Spirit of God: but here the Spirit of God is said to be seen, quia praesentiae
sue signum demonstratur and cernitur: because the sign of his presence
(namely, the Dove) was seen by John. it is locutio me tanonymica, an
etanonymicall speech, whereby the name of the signified is given to the sign:
as the bread is called Christ's body, and Baptism regeneration.

Secondly, how is the Spirit of God said to descend upon Christ, when he was in
Christ before, and is (being infinite) every where?

Ans. This also is an improper speech: but because Christ's authority might be
declared among men, and now Christ being to perform the office of a Redeemer,
might be answerably furnished with the power of Grace, therefore the Spirit of
God is said in visible sign to descend upon him.

Esayes Prophecy is here fulfilled: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Esa.
61. 1.
therefore has the Lord anointed me to preach good things to the poor, etc.
Esaias. 61. 1.

Thirdly, why did the holy Ghost descend in the form of a Dove, rather than in
fiery form, as sometimes he sometimes he did upon the Apostles*

Ans. This was done, (as it is coniectured) not only to demonstrate the
Doue-like qualities of the Spirit of God and of Christ; but especially to show,
quam blande and comiter Christus vocaret in spem salutis peccatores: how
kindly, lovingly, and gently JESUS CHRIST should call sinners to repentance and
salvation.

The truth whereof maintained is by the Prophet Esaias: A bruised reed he shall
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench.

Fourthly, whether was this a natural Dove from the common slight, or only a
spectrum, an apparition, and no body: or a body substantial out of the
elements formed by God, of all birds likest a Dove?

Ans. Luke says it was like a Dove, Luke 3. 22.
therefore not a natural Dove: Luke 3. 22. And surely it was not an apparition
without substance, but without all doubt it was a substantial creature, much
like a Dove, vel ex nihilo, vel e^ elementis formata, formed either of nothing,
or out of the elements, as was that Star that led to Christ, and resolved
again into his first matter, the pleasure of God performed by it.

Upon every one therefore that is effectually baptized, this Doue-like Spirit
descends, making us of Lions, Lambs; of Vultures Doves; of crooked and
perverse, harmless gentle, and kind, bringing us likewise news with the
Dove of Noah, that the flood of sin is down, and that all is well twirt God
and us.

Lord, let thy Done-like Spirit this day descend, with the Olive leaf of thy
favor upon this thine Oliu^ plant, and of the child of wrath, make him in
Christ heir apparent to the crown of salvation.

Thus much for the second vision.

Now for the voice that was heard from heaven: And lo, a voice came from
heaven, etc.

The voice of God concerning Christ, has three times sweetly sounded from
heaven: In his Agony and Passion: John 12. 27, 28. propter nostram
redemptionem: For our redemption.

In his transfiguration: Math. 17. 5. Mat. 17
Propter nostra^ glorificationem: For our glorification.

And here in baptism: Propter nostram adoptionem: for our adoption.

And lo, a voice came from Heaven, saying, etc.

Aperitur hi^ mysterium Trinitatis* says one: In this Scripture the Trinity
of Persons with God is manifest^^ expressed: For Patris vox auditur, (...)
humanitas conspicitur, Spiritus (...) signum perspicitur: the Father is heard,
the Sun seen, and the Holy Ghost in visible sign perceived.

The foolish Papists say, that there is no such mention of the Trinity in the
Scriptures. Indeed the litterall word is not found in the Scriptures, but if
they would put on their spectacles, and look, they should soon find the
substance of the same; namely, the unity of essence, and Trinity of persons,
that is with God.

As in De^teronomy: Audi Israel, De^t. ^.
Deus Deus noster Deus vnus est: God our God is God only: Deuteronomy. 6. Why does
Moses mention the name of God thrice, but to show the distinction of the
persons Divine? why does he put the word ( vnus, that is, only) but to show
the unity of their Essence? why is ( noster, that is, our) put to God in the
second place, not in the first or last, but to show that the second person
should take our nature upon him?

Again in ^say: Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Deus exerciti^um, plena est omnis
^erra gloria c^^^: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts: here is the Trinity of
the Persons: the earth is full of thy glory: thy; here is the unity of their
Essence.

For though God be simplicissimus, most simple, in respect of his Essence, yet
is he trin^s ratione personarum, three in regard of his persons.

One example or two more let me give you hereof.

In the first verse of the Book of God, Creauit Elohim Coelum and terram: GOD
created the Heaven and the earth: Genesis 1. 1. the Verb singular, Genesis 1. 1.
( Creauit) notes out the one and most simple Essence of God: the substantive
plural ( Elohim, not El singular) points out the Trinity of persons.

Again, in the same Chapter, Faciamus Genesis 1. 26.
hom^em ad imaginem nostram: Let us make man after our own Image: Genesis ^ 26.
faciamus, shows the plurality of persons, and nostram the unity of Essence.

Again, in the Gospel of Matthew Baptiz^ (...), and Spiritus san^t^^: B^ptize
them in (...) Name of the Father, the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Math. 28.
1^* in nomine, Mat. 28. 19
not nominibus: in the name, not names: here is the unity of Essence: of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: here is the Trinity of persons.

Augustine illustrates this mystery by a Simile from the Sun and Fire.

We see the Sun in the heavens,

Running: Shining: Giving heat
The Fire has three properties,
Moving: Light: Heat.
Now thou Arrian, if thou can divide the Sun and Fire* divide thou also the
Trinity: No, the Trinity must be distinguished, but by no means divided.

The holy Ghost is called digitus Dei: the finger of God: the Son is called,
manus Patris, the hand of the Father. As therefore the finger in the hand, and
the hand in the body, so of the same Essence and Substance is the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost.

But to search too much into this mystery, is dangerous, as says Bernard: To
enquire too much of the Trinity, is perverse curiosity: to believe as the holy
Church holds, is faith and security: To see as it is, is most absolute
selicitie.

I remember an old report that runs of Alanus, who promised his auditorie to
discourse next Sabbath following the mystery of the Trinity: It happened (as he
meditated by the Sea side) he saw a young boy go about with a shell or spoone
to empty the water of the Sea into a little hole: Alanus demanded of him what
he meant? I intend (says he) to bring the whole Sea into this hole. Why go
thou about a thing impossible, answered Alanus? So do thou (says the boy)
unto him: for it is as possible for me to bring the whole sea into this hole,
as for thee thoroughly to discourse the mystery of the Trinity. Alanus being
very much dismayed, and coming into the Pulpit, his auditorie looking for the
performance of his promise, was silent for a pretty space, at last brake out
into these words: Sufficit vobis vidisse Alanum: it is enough for you to have
seen Alanus; for to utter that which I promised, is above my reach: and so
came down.

So surceasing the prosecution of this mystical point any further, I come to
another observation from hence, and hasten to an end.

And that is this:

As the whole Trinity was present at the Baptism of Christ, so it is the
pleasure of Christ, that every of us should be baptized in the name of the
whole Trinity.

Not in the name of one person alone:

Nor in the name of any creature.

Objection.

But against the first may be objected that in the Acts: where Peter exhorts
them to be baptized in the name Act. 2. 38.
of JESUS, Acts 2. 38. and no more persons mentioned*

Answer.

He speaks not there of the form of Baptism, but shows that the whole effect
thereof consists in Jesus Christ: Again, under the name of JESUS the other
persons are comprehended.

Objection.

Against the second may be objected that in the Corinths: The Israelites were
baptized in ^ Mosen: unto Moses 1. Cor. 10, ^*
in the clo^d and sea, 1. Cor. 10. 2.

Answer.

It is an Hebrew phrase: and in Mosen, unto Moses, is as much as per Mosen, by
Moses* as Augustine says: Duce Mose, seu Mosis ministerio: by the ministry of
Moses.

Ambrose says: they were baptized into M^ses, that is, duce Mose foeliciter
transi^runt, and erapti sunt morte: Moses leading them, they passed the Sea
without dange^, and were s^ued from death.

Or, in Mosen, into Moses, in (...) nam, and legem Mosis: into the doctrine and
law of Moses: as those twelve are said to be baptized in baptisma Iohannis:
unto John's baptism, Acts 19. Act. 19. ^.
3. 7. that is, in doctrinam Iohannis: unto John's doctrine, as writes that
learned man Pareus: so the like phrase is used, Exodus 14. and 19. Where the
people Exodus 14. and 19.
are said to have believed in Moses: that is, in Deum per Mosen: in God by
Moses.

This is my beloved Son* Text.


Christ is Gods Son:
Only. Natural. Consubstantiall. Coeternall.
We are but by adoption Gods children.

O the wonderful love of God the Father to us* that would vouchsafe to give us
his Son, his only Son, his only beloved Son, that whosoever (...)
believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting* Ioh. 3. 16.

In whom I am well pleased. Text.
Complaceo nemini nisi in te, and per te:
I am pleased with none but in thee, and for thee.


In quo oblector: In whom I am wonderfully delighted, as says Euthymius.

In quo requiesco, in quo placor: says Theophilact. i. In whom I rest fully
satisfied, in whom I am well contented.

As that verse goes: In quo laetitia est, in quo mihi facta voluptas.
In whom I much rejoice.


So that these words do testify that Jesus Christ is that worthy Mediator, in
whom the world is reconciled to God.

Let us not therefore go to Rome for a pardon, nor to Mahomet for a blessing,
nor to the Magician for counsel, nor to the Sorcerer for skill; but let us
^locke to Jesus our Redeemer, in whom only we shall find GOD well pleased
with us, saying with Peter: Quo ibimus? Whither shall we go, for thou have
the words of eternal life?

There is in the world a fourfold Call, yet but one salutiferous.

The Devil says, Come unto me, sed destruam, I will destroy you.

The World says, Follow me, sed decipiam, I will deceive you.

The Flesh says, Follow me, sed de^icia^^, I will fail you.

Christ only says; Come unto me, and egore^^ciam, I will refresh you.

Christ now knocks at the doors of your hearts, and would gladly come in and
dine and sup with you: Ren^^ ^. 20. drine him not out of your country, as did
the clay headed Gadarens: Shut him not out of your houses, as did the ^u^lling
Bethleemites; but be ye open, ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory
may come in: that having given the Lord Christ entertainment into the houses of
your hearts in this life, he may vouchsafe to put you all in possession of his
heavenly mansions in the life to come.

To the which most blessed place of glory, the Lord bring every soul of us at
the day of our death and dissolution; and that for Jesus Christ's sake his
beloved Son, in whom only he is well pleased, to whom with God the Father,
and God the blessed Spirit, three great persons, but one Essential Godhead, be
offered up all praise and thanksgiving, even from the bottom of our hearts
this day and evermore. Amen

FINIS.
A Godly and right Christian Prayer, made for the instructiou and comfort of
his weakest Parishioners of Hempstead, reverently to be used every Evening in
their several Families.
O Most gracious God, and in thy sweet Son Jesus our most merciful heavenly
Father, we thy poor servants and unworthy Creatures, with mourning spirits,
and perplexed hearts do in most humble manner fall down before thy dreadful
Majesty, bewayling bitterly all our offenses committed against thee, and
quaking and trembling for fear thou should in thy Justice utterly cast us
from thee, into that woeful Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

Lord, we confess by birth our foul pollution, by life our manifold
transgression, and therefore ashamed we are (that are but dust and ashes, yea
worse, most loathsome and abominable sinners) to come before thee, or commence
the least suit unto thee, that art a Majesty most pure, abhorring and severely
punishing all that work iniquity*

Therefore (oh Lord our God) we most humbly beseech thee not to deal with us,
according to thy justice and our own merits; for then shall we be utterly
condemned, but (coming unto thee as a child that fears to be beat) for thy
Christ's sake, with the ey^ of pity and fatherly compassion, look thou
graciously upon us: behold us in him, in whom thy Justice will soon turn it
self into mercy, thy frown into favor, thine indignation into everlasting
salvation. Lord, for thy favor now and ever we crave; grant therefore to us
that ask: for pardon of our sins at thy hands alone we seek, grant that we may
find: at thy gate of Salvation we earnestly do knock, good Lord therefore
open unto us.

But because thy sacred Word does tell us that thou will look to none, but
those that are of a contrite heart, and tremble at thy words; Lord, fit and
prepare us all by true humiliation to embrace the saving health of our souls:
grant (gracious God) that we may mourn our sins thoroughly, and lament our
iniquities bitterly, not so much because they might justly condemn us, as that
they have so highly displeased thee, and moved thy Majesty to anger, that have
been so merciful a God unto us: O give us hearts to grieve, for that we cannot
sufficiently grieve for our sins committed against thee.

And (gracious Father) we further entreat, that we may not ^nely taste of the
sour of thy Law, but likewise receive in thy good time, and in good measure
the sweet and unspeakable comfort of the Gospel: grant that thy Son Jesus
may be Jesus to us all, that his righteousness may cover our
unrighteousness, that his death may bring our souls to life: that in him and
for his sake thou would ^e well pleased to make us thine by adoption, to
witness the same to our souls, by the infallible testimony of thy blessed
Spirit, to work in our hearts a strong and resolute persuasion of Faith,
whereby we may graspe and hold fast this thy great mercy in Christ toward us,
to the peace of our consciences in this life, and the salvation of our souls
in the life to come.

And (holy Father) for as much as all those that have put on Christ, are become
new creatures, grant unto us a new heart, and renew a right Spirit within us,
purge us from our sins, wash us from our iniquities, infuse thy saving grace
into our Souls, whereby we may dye to all that is evil, and live to all
godliness of life all the days of our life to come.

Frame, our hearts (dear God) to true and perfect obedience, obedience being
the best sacrifice that thou requirest: oh grant that all our delight may be in
thy Statutes, that it may be even our meat and drink to walk in thy
Commandments: indeuoring always and in all places to keep a clear
conscience, both toward thee and man.

Teach us (blessed Father) to rely upon thee alone by faith; to fear, love,
honor and truly obey thee in wisdom and true sanctity: to give no worship
from thee, that is only proper to thee: reverently to think and speak of thy
most glorious name and word: carefully to sanctify thy Sabbaths, and wholly
set them apart for thy service. Give us grace also (thou that art the Author
and giver of all grace) to carry our selves dutifully to man: to honor and
reverently respect all our superiors, both in nature and place: to preserve
and maintain the good name, goods and bodies of our brethren amongst whom we
live, and not impair, hurt, or maliciously massacre the same: to keep our
selves chaste and unspotted from all fleshly lusts, and every act of
uncleanness: injuriously to take away no man's right or due: to speak the truth,
and not to bear false witness against our brethren: to be content with our
own estates, more or less, and not to repine at, or covet that which is
others: O grant that our lives may be unreprovable before thee and men.

But because (O Lord) of our selves we are able to do no good thing, but it is
thou that workest the will and the deed, Lord therefore stand ever by us with
thy preventing, assisting, and consequent grace, whereby we may be able in some
measure to do thy will on earth, as thy Angels do it perfectly in heaven.

Moreover (heavenly Father) we (fully believing our selves to be true and
lively members of that body mystical, whereof our blessed Savior is the Head)
do earnestly desire at thy gracious hands the like mercy for the whole body of
Christ's Church, as we beg for our own souls: Lord bless and defend thy
Church and Chosen in all Kingdoms of the earth wheresoever: enlarge the bounds
of thy Gospel, increase the number of thy Saints, and daily add unto thy
Church such as shall be saved. Bless the Kings most excellent Majesty with
all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, meet for so great and worthy a
personage: with the Prince, and His whole issue in this Kingdom and beyond the
Seas: Grant that He may never want one out of his own loins to sit upon his
Throne for the maintenance of thy Gospel, till the coming of Christ in the
clouds.

Bless all afflicted members, whether grieved in conscience, troubled in body,
or persecuted for the Gospel, according to their several oc^^sions and need.

Bless those that are nearer and dearer unto us in the flesh, as are our
Parents and kindred, whether father or mother, husband or wife, brother or
sister, or child, with our Christian acquaintances and friends, keep them all,
and us with them, to thine everlasting kingdom and salvation*

And in mercy (good Lord) this night look down upon us, preserve us and ours
from all dangers bodily and ghostly, within doors and without: give unto our
bodies a comfortable rest and sleep, that they may be more able to do the
works of their particular vocations before thee: and (sweet Lord) watch
evermore over our poor souls, keep us from sin and evil, both sleeping and
waking: and when that sleep of death shall fall upon us, grant that our souls
may wake to thy glory and salvation everlasting: and that for Christ Jesus his
sake our only Lord and everlasting Redeemer: to whom with thee and thy good
Spirit, three persons, but one God, we heartily desire to offer up all
thanksgiving and praise this evening and everlasting: Amen.

THe grace of our Lord and S^uiour Jesus Christ, and the lo^^ of God our
heavenly Father* and the most blessed presence of God the holy Ghost, be with
v^ all, and within v^ all, both in Soul, in Spirit, and in body, and with all
things that remain or belong unto v^, either within doors, or without, this
^ight and everlasting. AMEN

FINIS.

