The Spanish Masquerado. Wherein under a pleasant devise, is discovered
effectually, in certain brief sentences and Mottos, the pride and insolency
of the Spanish estate: with the disgrace conceived by their loss, and the
dismayed confusion of their troubled thoughts. Whereunto by the Author, for
the better understanding of his device, is added a brief gloss. By Robert
Green, in Artibus Magister.

Twelve Articles of the state of Spain.
The Cardinals solicit all.
The King grauntes all.
The Nobles confirm all.
The Pope determines all.
The Clergy disposes all.
The Duke of Medina hopes for all.
Alonso receives all.
The Indians minister all.
The Soldiers eat all.
The people pay all.
The Monks and Friars consume all.
And the devil at length will carry away all.
Printed at London by Roger Ward, for Thomas Cadman. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, M Hugh Ofl^y, Sheriff of the City of London, Robert
Green wishes ^^crease of worship and virtue.
SVCH pictures (Right Worshipful) as were presented to Alexander the great,
had Art to please the eye, and conceit to please the wit: Such as writ to
Julius Caesar discourses of Wars: Those that dedicated ought to Traian of
peace and to Seuerus of Justice: a^^ing the effects of their studies to the
affectes of those worthy men whom they resolved to honor, with the Patronage
of their labors: The consideration of these premises (Right Worshipfulfull)
embouldened me to make choice of your worship as a Maecenas, fittest for a
work of such gr^ue import, persuaded thereunto by the report of a friend, whose
opinion I craved, for the choice of a Patron: and made the more resolute by
the general Censure that Fame sets down, imblasoning your virtuous
disposition, in the care of the common weal, and favor to good letters:
Encouraged by these causes, I present unto your worship the Masquerado of
Spain, a devise containing the discovery of the Spanish insolent pride alaied
with a deep disgrace, and their presumptuous braues pulled down with the
resolution of English soldiers: which work, if your worship receive as
gratefully, as I present it hartelie, I have the desired end of my labor: In
which hope resting, I commit you to the Almighty,

Your Worships to command Robert Green,

Sonnet.
Le doux Babil de ma lire d'iuoire
Serra ton front d'un laurier verdisant:
Don't a bon droit ie te voy iouissant,
(Mon doux ami) eternisant ta gloire.
Ton nom (mon Green) anime par mes verse
Abaisse l'oeil de gens seditieux,
Tu de mo^teles compagnon de Dieux:
N'est ce point grand loyer dans l'uniuers?
Ignoti nulla cupido. Thomas Lodge.

To the Gentl^men Readers.
Hitherto Gentlemen I have writ of loves* and I have found you favorable at
the least smiling at my labors, (...) a plausible silence; now least I might
be thought to tie my sel^^ wholly to amorous c^nceites, I have aduen^ured to
discover my conscience in Religion. If I write barely in this Theological
Phrase, as in all others, so I crave your favorable patience, which if you
grante, I have my desire, and promise recompenc^ in what I may, ever, and every
way to rest

yours. Robert Gr^^^^.

THE SPANISH MASQVERADO with the MOTTOS.
1 First the Pope having put off his triple Crown, and his Pontificalibus,
sitting malecontented, scratching of his head, throwing away his keys and his
sword, in great choler says thus. Neque Petrus, neqe Pa^lus, quid ^gitur
restat. 2 Phillip King of Spain, attired like an Hermit, riding toward the
Church on his Mule, attended on only with certain his slaves that are Moors,
says thus. Iubet Ecclesia, dissentire non a^deo. 3 The Cardinals of Rome,
seeing that the Pope was male-contented for the bad success of the Spanish
Fleet, appareled like Mourners, go solemnly singing De profundis, from Castle
Angelo to S. Peter's Church: to them is said. Lugete quia cecidit Meretrix. 4
The Clergy of Spain, mounted richly on their Iennets, ride up and down
consulting, and at their wits end, fuming and fretting that their counsels had
no better success: to them is said. Achithopheli^ con^ilium, Achithopheli^
l^queum. 5 The rest of the rascal Rabble of the Romish Church, as Monks,
Friars, and di^ging Priests, storming at these news, sitting banqueting with
the fair Nuns, having store of (...) Cates, and wines before them, stall-fed
with ease, and gluttony, groan out of their ^at panches this passion. Quanta
patimur pr^ (...) Christi. 6 The Nobility of Spain, grieved at the dishonor
of their shameful return: after (...) ^onsultation, vow general Pilgrimage
to S. James (...), in hope of his aid for revenge: to them is said. Si Petrus
dormit Pap^^, number Iacobu^ vigilabit vobis? 7 The Duke of Medina, Captain
general of the Army and Spanish forces, rydeth on a Iennet, with one foot out
of the Sti^^op, his cappe pulde over his eyes, and his points untrust: to him
is said. P^llulae Britanic^^ in dissenter^am te (...). 8 Don Martines de
Ricaldo, chief Admiral of the Fleet, standing in the Haven, and seeing his
tattered Ships, considering what goodly Vessels were taken and drowned, and
what store of men and munition they had lost, leaning his back against a
broken ancker, and shaking of his head: says thus. O Neptune, quantas ^pulas
vna coen^^ (...)? 9 Don Pedro de Valdes, General of the Army of A^delosia,
now Prisoner in England greeuing at his fortune, sits sad, and leaning his
head on his hand, with a great ^^gh ^aith. He^ quanta de spe decidi. 10 The
Princes, noble men, and other men of name that of their free will offered
themselves adventurers in this Spanish attempt: frustrate of their intent,
walk at home muffled in their cloakes, as men disgraced, and say one to
another in great passion. Te^^eritatis nostra cum Briareo poenas (...). 11 The
V^^^geren^es of his Indies having lo^t by Sea and land, (...) of their Kings
treasure: sitting as discontented men on the hatches of their ships, to them is
said. Si^ vos (...) vo^is mellificatis Apes. 12 The c^mmon Soldiers, haled
forward, rather by command then cou^age, fearing at the first to attempt so
dange^ous an exploit, and grieved at the la^t with their hard misfortune, half
mu^inous, murmr this* Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achi^^.
The Spanish Masquerado.
The Pope having put off his triple Crown, and his Pontificalibus, sitting
male-contented, sc^atch^^g of his head, throwing away his keys and his Sword,
in great ^holler says thus,

Neque Petrus, neque Paulus, quidigitur restat. GLOSSA.
REading the A^nales or Records making mention of Antechriste, who being the
worst amongst men extolleth himself above God, calling himself his Uicar, and
yet making his Patron by transubstantiation: Peter's successor as he faineth,
and yet his enemy in ^aith: we shall find that since sincerity in Religion,
and humility were put to exile, and men's traditions and pri^e erected as
pillars of the church, that from Feeders of the flock, they have refused to
enter by the door, and have proved ravening Wolves, and sub^erters of Christ
and his doctrine. Their great pomp unfitting for the humble purity of
Christ's Disciples: their extreme covetousness selling the gifts of the holy
Ghost for money: their open Simony: their secret ^^gling in dispensation for
sins: their Whordomes, and their Sodomie, their palpable and gross heris^es
main^ained, not with Peter's doctrine, but with Paul's sword: with rigours, not
with reason, proves that since Peter's time, Peter's seat has pleaded, Sede
vacant, and that these shauelings are not his successors, but approved by
their lives and doctrine, to be professed Antechristes. Peter was humble and
spent his time in prayer and preaching, these are proud and meddle with
states, Empires, kingdoms and Monarchies, pulling down one and creating
another having Emperors kneeling at his feet, and casting off their crowns
with his toe, treading on their backs, and blasphemously applying the text to
him self, Calcabo super Aspidem, and Leonem. These presumptuous thoughts were
not found in Peter, who imitating his Master Christ, walked abroad to feed
his Flock: this (the Pope I mean) following the aspyring attempt of Lucifer,
is carried on men's shoulders, and yet in his heretical Bulls to blind the
People, he calls himself Seruus Seruorum: guarded not as Peter was with the
faithful of Israel, but either with his stout Cardinals, Copesmates of
Caiphas Crew, or with some detestable Courtizans, the best imblazers of his
profession. Long did this Monster mask in a Sheep skin, partlye covered by
his own policies* and partlye by the favor of Princes: but at last breaking
out into his own^ proper shape, his name and nature was discovered, so that
Pardons, his Bulls, his Excommunications, his Curses, nor such Paltries could
prevail, but he was manifestlye laid open for Antechrist to the world. So
that his very Countrymen Italians, nursed up under his nose, seeing his
detestable life, his great profession, and little performance, his heretical
pomp usurped in his Papacy, could not but in conscience in their books pen
down his sundry abuses and great absurdities, as Pasqum, Mantuan,, John
Boccac^, Petrarch, and lately Ludouico Ariosto, who in one of his Cansons
describes him for a monster thus.

Ariosto. Qui^i vna Bestia vscir de la Foresta,
Par^a di crudell vista, odiosa and bella
C'hau^a l'orecchie d'Asino, e la testa
D^ lupo, e in denti, and per gran fame asciuta
Branchi hauea di Leon, l'altro chi resta
Tutta era volpe, and parea scorrer tutta.
Et Francia, and Italia, espagna and Inghilterra,
L'Europa e l'Asia alfia tutta la terra.
Here the Poet describes this Monster, this Antechrist the Pope, to be in
form like a beast, his ears like those of an Ass, the h^ad of a Wolf, lean
and il favored as insatiate of his pray, the claws of a Lion, and what
rests resembled a Fox. This monster says he, had overcome al France, Italy,
Spain, England, Europe, Asia, nay the whole world, triumphing in the pomp of
his iniquitye, till his date being expired, and the term of his reign ended,
diverse princes hating to brook the imperious ravening of such a reasonlesse
monster, sought to hunt him out off the Forest, and therefore sent diverse good
and expert Blood-houndes to rowse him from his Den, as was John Husse, Jerome
of Prage, OEcolampadius, and Zwinglius After, Luther and the Duke of Saxony,
who for the defense of the truth maintained wars, against the Church of Rome.
The Hunts-men that pursued this Monster in chase, was first Francis the first
of that name, king of France, who was so wh^t, that he thrust his sword to the
hiltes in the ribs of this beast: Next him Maximilian of Austria: Third,
Charles the fifth Emperor, who with his spear passing eager, peirced y^ throat
of this monster but he that with his bore-speare stabd him in the breast, and
gave the deep and mortal wound, was Henry the eight, king of England, who
seeing the abhominatio^ of that proud Antechrist, by his lawle^ dispensations
for coin, and the abuse his shauelings used in England, their massing and
masking, their gluttony and lechery, the falsnesse of Religion: lastly, the
extreme abuse of their profession, flying to the text, whatsoever my father
has not planted, shall be rooted up by the roots, he suppressed their
Abbeyes, pulled down their sumptuous buildings, and scarce left one stone upon
an other, subverted their estate, changed their religion, for blind Papistry
gave us the light of the Gospel. This his own Countriman Ariosto re^eateth in
the same Canson in an other Stanzo thus.

Ariosto. La Chanea fui elza n^lla pancia,
La Spada immersa a la maligna fera,
Francesco primo hanea Scritto di Francia,
Massimo homo d'Austria, a par seco era,
E Carlo Quinto Imperator d^ Francia,
Hanea passata ill monstro alla Gorgiera,
Et l'altro chi d^ strale gli fige il petto,
Lottau^ Henrigo d' Inhil-terra e d^tto.
This Monster wounded thus by so worthy a woodman who knew how to strike his
game with advantage, feeling the wound incurable, yet somewhat salued and but
now rubbed a fresh, by our mighty and famous princess Elizabeth daughter to
that renowned Henry, who with her father rightly taking upon her the
Ecclesiastical supremacy, has utterly raced and abolished al his trash and
traditions as absurdities and heresies, out of her Churches of England and
Ireland, hating the Pope as Antechrist, and the Church of Rome as that whore of
Babylon, figured out in the Revelation: This cause makes this Monster to stir
so that to revenge, he bent al his policies, suborning diverse false Traitors
to attempt her death, persuaded thereunto by false Jesuits and Seminaries sent
by him into these our parts, which the Lord discovering, has given them their
hyre, and mightily preserved his anointed: seeing these petty practices could
not prevail, nor his Bull would not carry any credit, he ^lieth to incense
princes to bend their forces against this our little Island, which defended by
God, and governed by so virtuous a Princess as GOD has chosen after his own^
heart, stands and withstandeth their forces, without aid of spear or horse,
having the wind and sea Captains sent from above to quell the pride of such
heretical enemies of the Gospel, so that the Pope seeing his purposed intent
could not speed: as in a doubtful anguish of mind ^ell into this bitter
passion.

Neque Petrus, neque Paulus, quid igitur restat. Phillip king of Spain,
attired like an Hermit rydeth toward the Church on a Mule, only attended on
with certain his Slaves that are Moors, and says thus.

Iub^t Ecclesia, dissentire non a^deo. GLOSSA.
PHILLIP of Spain no^^^ed from his infancy in the dark and obscure dungeon
of Papistry, led as one blinded with the vale of ignorance, by this proud
Antechrist, drunk with the dregs of that poison which the whore powers out
to the ^inges of the earth, pleasant in ta^t, but more bitter then worme-wood
in the mawe: offered by the flattering Strumpet, ryding on the Beast with the
seven heads, drunk (I say) with her impoisoned cup, he sleeps securely in
y^ Popes lap, till the Uiols of Gods wrath poured down, his conscience new
^ear^d with a whot iron, then feels the ^^ing of (...), as a plague following
all such as have received the mark of that inces^ious Strumpet. Phillip
therefore taking the Pope for Peter's successor, suffers himself to be led
and ruled by this man of Sin, holding his pr^ceptes for Oracles, and that who
sits in that seat, how bad so ever of life, yet he cannot err, that what
Cannons or Decretals he sets down, are as true, and as firmlye to be
believed, and observed as the Gospel penned by the holy Evangelists who were
inspired and directed by the Holy^ Ghost: whereas notwithstanding we see by
manifest and dailye instances, tht every Pope abolisheth another Cannons and
Decretals, as false and erroneous: yet PHILLIP is so blinded, as he has not an
insight into this their iugling, for that he is taught by their Doctrine that
the Church of Rome is the supreme Church, and that there is no Church which
is not a perfect member of the same: these, making the Church material, and
tying is to a local and particular Seat: Soothing himself up in these
Heresies, he so fears the frown of the Pope and his Cardinals, doubting
to be excommunicated with some paltrye Bull, that what they demand he
grants, as well in mat^ers of temporal estate, as in Ecclesiastical rightes
and Ceremonies: that if the Clergy concludes Peace, PHILLIP confirms it:
if the Clergy do proclaim Wars, he sendes forth straight a press for
Soldiers: so that being a mighty Prince of Inheritance and Revenues, yet
he rules by the Clergy and Nobility, especially them of the Spiritual
sect: that ryding quietly with a few Moors to hear Mass, he shakes off
all cares, leaving the glory of his Kingdom in the power of his Clergy, who
being enemies to the truth, seek by all means possible to subvert the truth:
well, persuaded by the Pope, and them of the Ecclesiastical sort, he
provides a great Armado, his Ships huge and monstrous, his men the chosen
Caualiers of Spain, Portugal, Italy and other Provinces: For munition^, it
is much and marue^lous, that the premises considered, they seem to threaten
ruin to the greatest Monarchy of the whole world, and yet theyr^ Forces
bended against a little Island, a handful in respect of other Kingdoms: But
see as the Lacedaemonians ^ewe in number subverted Xerxes and his N^uie, which
for multitude of Uesselles covered the Ocean: Joshua* with a handful s^rooke
the Cananites: (...) GOD hearing their great braues against him and his people,
did put a hook into their nostrilles, and a Bridle into their Jaws, and
brought them back the same way they came, not suffering them to enter into the
land, nor to come against it with a shield, nor to cast a bank about it, but
scattered them as du^t before the wind: and no doubt if we enter into the deep
consideration of the Spanish attempt, we shall find it sent into these parts
by the Lord for special causes. First to show us how for our sins he can
bring the very enemies of his truth, as Ministers of his wrath, to punish
offenders, as often he did against the Israelites when they transgressed his
Statutes and Laws, neglected the preaching of the Prophets, and contemned the
word, then he brought in the Edomits* the Assirian^, the Egiptians, and other
nation^, which carried them away Captive. Second, seeing how secure we slept,
careless, reposing our selves in that our own strength, for that we^ were
hedged in with the sea, and had a long and peaceable time of quiet: made
sloothfull by these his favors, his Majesty brought in these Spaniardes to
waken us out off our dreams, to teach the brave men of this realm, that after
peace comes wars, that in the greatest quiet we should apply our selves to
martial endeavors, and know how to handle the Sword and spear, not only in a
sloothfull security, to say the Lord is ^ur defense, but to use the ordinary
means he has appointed, and then to invoke upon him, and bending ^ur
sw^rdes, say in faith, the Lord is on ou^ side, who can be against us: for the
Israelites never subdued the Cananites, but the Lord did put weapons in their
hands to execute the end of his victories. The third, he sent them as sommons
and Ambassadors to encourage us to attempt the like: for when the Sarasens in
the time of Charles the great, had invaded Germany, and the frontes of
France, the news hereof brought to the Emperor, he presently said, how does
the Lord fauourablye accuse us of sloth and carelessness of increasing his
religion by those Pagans, when they for their Mohomet and the advancement of
his blasphemies, hazard their lives to suppress the contrary. And I seem to
sit at home: and dare not for the Lord of Hosts cause, enter arms against the
Infidels, so that awakened with this, Charles not only withstood them in his
own land, but having given them the repulse, spent many years in setting
forth the glory of GOD by the sword, among the miscreants: So no doubt these
Spaniardes, the Soldiers of Antechrist, are sent to tell our Nobles, Captains
and martial men of this land, that they sleep secure, that the Bees hiue in
their Helmets, that their pampered horses serve for foot-clothes, not for the
field: that we suffer the enemies* of the truth too much to offer us the
brave: These causes no doubt moved the Lord to send them, and yet to subvert
them: to show them he fouoreth his people, and uses revenge against the
despisers of his Gospel: therefore are such men greatly to be commended, that
for the benefit of their Country, fear not to hazard their lives,
especially if it were with the advancement of the glory of God. If then the
mighty men which Solomon sent to fetch gold from his friends to Jerusalem,
were highly extolled: If the Portugals cronicled them which first sought by
navigations to find out strange lands, returning with no profi^e but the
discovery of Countries, how then has this Island cause to ^ternise with their
pens the worthy deeds of Sir Francis Drake, who passing malgrado of the
Spaniard, hard by his door, nay setting foot into his land, and having prays
went with a few small Barks and Pynasses into his Indies, and fetched from them
gold and treasure for the enriching of his prince and country, and returning
back in triumph feared not^ what the Spaniard with all his great Uessels dard
attempt, in so much that the report of his valor, both by sea as he past and
by land when he arrived in India, being bruted in Spain: his very name is
as great a terror to the Spanish, as Scipio to the Numidians. Then Sir Martine
Frobusher a man of great travel and experience in navigations: and last M.
Candish who so lately ventured with the farthest, showing great courage and
fortune* in bringing home from far so rich treasure: Thus we may see that
the Lord is on our side, that brings us home safe, with a few little Pinasses
from the very jaws of our enemies, when the Spaniards could not return,
having so strong an Armado fu^nished for battle. These considerations no doubt
makes Phillip to let his Clergy sweat in these friuolus attemptes, while he
himself quietly may for excuse say, Iubet Ecclesia, dissentire non audeo.

The Cardinals of Rome, seeing that the Pope was male-contented, for the bad
success of the Spanish Fleet, apparelled like Mo^^ners go sollemnly singing
De pro^^ndis, from Castle Angelo to S. Peter's Church: to them is said.

Lugete quia cecidit Meretrix. THis brood of Antechrist whom Francis Petrarch
and John Bocca^e calls I^sipidum Sal terrae, the Cardinals I mean, no sooner
have any thing to contrary their minds, but with the Pharisees they anoint
themselves, and causing trumpets to be blown before them, fly to their Dyrges
and Tren^als: as, Causa sine qua non, their misfortunes may not be redressed.
But seeing they oppose themselves to Christ and his religion, their lyp labor
is turned unto sin, and cry they Domine, Domine, never so loud, yet their
feigned exclamations in vain, are only breathed into the air: But leaving their
religion as palpably heretical to al true Christians, let us in a word or two
look into their lives, wherein as in a Crystal Mirror, we shall see
figured and pourtraid the Anatomy of the seven deadly Sins. For Pride both
in their hearts, puffed up with aspiring thoughts, and in their Apparel,
set out with inestimable bravery, the meanest Scholar of the least Traueyler,
either by reading or experience may manifest: For who meets a Cardinal
mounted, first marking the trappings and furniture of his horse richly studded,
his foot-clooth of velvet fringed with gold, his brave attire covered with his
Scarlet Robe, and his sumptuous train following him, shall think that he
meets not one of Peter's Disciples, but some great Potentate, or Monarch of
the world, rather resembling ALEXANDER in his effeminate Persian robes, when
he surnamed himself the son of AMMON, then a Christian, a Pillar of the
Church, that should in the humbleness of his life, give light unto the
People. Their Sodomie, as they keep not very secret, for they in their
Palaces, imitating the heathen God IVPITER, gett^ them Ganimedes, which
Stantes a poculis, serve for Pages: yet they as much as they can obscure, but
their Lechery they fear not to make manifest, as being Fathers of many
Bastardes, and Paramours of sundry Courtizans, to whom in their Carnouale,
they go in Maskes, and so openly co^rt with sundry deuelish devises. Their
slooth is seen in the security of their lives: for apply they themselves
never so strictly to study, while they are of mean degree, yet after they
attain the calling of a Cardinal, they answer with their master the Pope, that
with Peter they have cast the Net and labored all night, and now caught the
fish, not the souls of men, but some great dignity and preferment: which
gotten, they say to their souls, live at ease.

Their glutony is seen in their sumptuous banquets, which exceed in such
riotous abounda^ce, to pa^per themselves, not to feed the poor, that the
Monsters of Rome, their predicessors in belly cheer, Heliogabolus, Commodus,
Iulianus and Lucellus Emperors and Senators, never surpassed in this vice ^hese
peevish shauelings: Envy is seen, in their ^rowning at the fortunate success
of their very friendys: for when any amongst them is preferred to the Papacy,
then the rest incensed with envy, ^all to treasons, conspiracies, privy
murders, and poisonings: that some Popes have scarcely lived 2 days, nay some
one day: before they have been made away by the Cardinals, who through envy
seek to establish the Papal seat with blood, as did pope Alexander and diverse
others: so that oftimes it may be said of their Pope, as Tully said of the
Consul that lived but one day: Vigilantissimum habuimus Papam, qui t^to su^
Papatu somnum vix vidit.

Their wrath and fury, let the Chronicles of the state of Italy, as of
Venecia, Florence, Vrb^e, Naples, Geneua and the rest, discover: in which
places, having been appointed (...) Legates, they have displaied the Trophies of
their wrath, as upon the house of the Medices in Florence after y^ death of
old^ Cos^o against Peter Ludouike and Lorenzo, their intent to murder these
brave Gentlemen, so to satisfy their extreme wrath and fury.

Their Covetousness Italy cries out on, as burdened with their taskes,
extortions, and impositions, for Bul^, Pardons and dispensations: nay England
it self may be produced as a witness, who ^ long while paid to Rome many
extraordinary duties. Poole ^ Woolsey are late instances, what in^atiate
co^^tousnes is barbour^d under the pr^t^nsed show of their religion: these
(...) linges sleeping thus in their wickedness, att^nding upon that rich whore
of Babylon, who professes, himself Patroness of their practizes, mourn
least our abolishing of their abhomidations in England, should incense the rest
of Europe by our examples, to shake off their heavy yoke of ignorance, and to
embrace the light of the Gospel, and therefore rightly to them is said,
Lugete, quia cecidit Meretrix.

The Clergy of Spain mounted richly on their lennets, (...) up and down
consulting, and at their wits end, fuming and fretting that their counsels had
no better success, to them is said.

Ahithophelis consilium, Ahithopelis laqueum. GLOSSA.
PHILLIP being old, holding in the one hand a sword, in the other a crootch,
as ready to step from his Scepter to the Grave, has his mind troubled with
contrary passions, so that he may say with Don Pedro, Spiritus est ab
inquietudine co^c^us. Devout he is, although it consists in ignorance,
ambitious, desiring still to enlarge his possessions and kingdoms: and
covetous as never satisfied with all his ter^^tor^s and treasures: yet age
somewhat cools th^se desires, (...) casts water in the ^lame, but his
Clergy make supply by their persuasions, in what his pears do fail in
defect: for they sorry that little England should suppress their graund
Patroness, that proud Who^e of Babylon, or oppose it, self against Antechrist
the Pope, thinking that if either these ^^^lde, or the ^ight of the gospel did
flourish, that Princes and Nations having a deep insight into their iu^ling^,
their religion should fail: they inc^nse poor Phillip to set himself Ex
diametro against the truth, and to endeavor in what he may, t^ subvert the
estate of true Christianity, aiming especially at our most gracious Soueraign
Lady Elizabeth, as the chief Defendresse and Patroness in all Europe, of the
puritye of the Gospel: giving counsel with Achitophell against David, against
the Lords anointed, but he turning their worldye wisdom into foolishnes,
overthrows their policy and practizes, veryfieng upon their heads the
proverb. Malum consilium Consultori pessimum.

These shaulinges, this presumptuous brood of Antechrist, puffed up not only
with this blind zeal, but with the spirit of pride, which fills them with
aspiring ambition, in so much that they imitating their father the Pope, seek
not to content themselves with ecclesiastical power, but to entermeddle with
kingdoms and states, so that they fear not to bridle the affections of
Phillip, as far as they list to limit, burning his Son at their pleasure,
and letting him blood to abate his courage, almost to the peril of his life.
Judge gentle reader, if this becomes a Subject, an inferior, ^ay a Clergy
man who should be humble, and give these duties to Caesar, that belong to
Caesar, and those honors to God, that beelong to God: But the Devil w^rking
their confusion, by their own imaginations, hardneth their hearts with Pharao,
and makes them sham^lesse with Achitophell, to give wicked counsel against the
truth: (...) as Pharao was drowned in the ranckour of his thoughts, and
Achitophell seeing the Lord had ouerthrown his counsels, went home and
hanged himself. So shall confusion come to all that with Saul kick against
the prick, that rightly it may be said to (...) confused C^^argie men.
Achithophelis consilium, Achithophelis l^queum.

The rest of the rascal Rabble of the Romish church as Monks, Friars, and
di^ging Priests, storming at these news, sitting banqueting with the fair
Nuns, having store of dainty Cates, and wines before them, stall-fed with
^ase, and gluttony, groan out of their fat pa^ches this passion.

Quanta patimur pro amore Christi. GLOSSA.
NOw Gentle Reader give leave, that this crew of popish Madcaps may presume
amongst the rest into our Masquerado: these are they which saying A^^ Rex
Iud^^orum, yet smote Christ on the face with a reed: these are the Bulls of
Basan, that fatted up in the Popes stall, feed them selves against the day of
slaughter: these are the jolly fellows that once in England lived like Princes
in their Abbeies and Frieries, whose bonnettes were valed and their top sails
so low stricken, that no wind would serve them, from sinking into the
bottomless gulf: These be they, who when Christ commands, that who so
l^ueth him shall take up his cross and follow him, clapping on their backs a
basket stuffed with good cheer: ^ay Quanta patimur pro amore Christi.
Whereupon are merrily recited these verses.

O Monachi quorum Stomachi sunt Amphora Bacchi:
Vos esti^, Deus est testis, mundi mala.
Of this generation John Boccace in his Decamero^ tells many pretty tales: of
their Lechery, as when ^air Albe^^ under the shape of the Angel Gab^iell, lay
with Dame Lezet^a; of their false Legend, as a Monk preaching to the people,
having found a very rich feather of some some ^^range Foul, intended to make
his Parishoners believe, it was a plume of the Angel Gabriell: Certain good
Companions his Familiars noting his knauerie, secretelye ^^ole out off his
Casket the feather, and put in coals. Well, Mas Monk come once into his
Pulpit, after a long Exordium, t^lde to the People what a Relic he had, one
of the feathers of the Angel Gabriell, but putting his hand into his casket,
and finding nothing but coals, straight found the knot in the rush, and said
he had taken the wrong Casket, but yet brought them a Relic, no less
precious, which was the coals that Saint Laurence was roasted on: so that
making crosses with them upon their Garments he departed with Monkish
credit. Many of these and worse pranks, abominable to rehearse, have their
own Countrymen and Papists penned down against them, amongst choice one
mer^ly (I call not his name to remembrance) sets down, that a Monk ^itting
in his cel, had on the ^ne side his Leman a fair Nun no man on he other side,
his portasse being thus seated as in a Dileman, laying one hand on the Nonnes
knee, and the other on his Mass book, he fetched a great ^^gh and said, Quo
m^ vertam, nescio: the Devil behind, made him answer, Haud refert: vtraque
enim ducit ad infernum. Whereupon to avoid the doubt, he made proof of
both. Another sets down these verses as a Censure.

O Monachi nigri, non es^is ad imp^a rigri,
A^ran^t^t vestis, qualis intrnisceus estis.
Their religion and their nature thus agreeing, debating amidst their cups and
their courtisans of the Spanish repulse, full of wine and and delicate cheer
they cry out. Quanta patimur pro amor^ Christi.

The Nobility of Spain grieved at the dishonor of their shameful return,
after great consultation, vow a general Pilgrimage of S. James of Compostella,
in hope of his aid for revenge: to them is said.

S^ Petrus dormit Papae, number Iacobus vigilabit vobis. GLOSSA.
WHen Hannibal had given the Romans a repulse before Capua, the Senate hearing
the il nowes, resolved in the Senate house to sacrifice unto Mars, fearing he
was displeased with their Army: which sentence Scipio hearing, starting up
amongst them said: I will no other God but our fortunes, no other vows but our
right, no other Sacrifice but the Sword. I infer this heathenish comparison,
both accounting their Saint of Compostella with the Pagan Idols, and thinking
them far inferior to the courage of Scipio, although none glories more in his
Chiualr^e then the Spaniard: But I suppose his religion and his stomach to be
equally poysed: the one false, the other faint, that what they attempt, is not
to be overcome with prowess, but to suppress with multitudes: for their
service in wars is either by policy, to circumuent by pe^iurie, to intise
by treason, to undermine, or by some litte martial practice to weaken the
enemy, whom if they find valiantly to (...), their brave once cooled, they
seldom or never dare give a fresh Encounter whereupon these the Nobles of Spain
danted, choose rather fearfully to seek out S. James of Compostella, then
valiantly with Scipio to swear revenge with the sword. This custom brooks
not an English heart, for our Nobles having taken repulse, fly not to S.
George, but managing their swords, cry, God and their right, seeking either
with Epaminondas to win their honors with their blood, or to be carried out
with him resolutely on their shieldes: They faint not with Julian at the frist
frown^ of Seuerus, but valiantly expect with the Argentinin of Alexander the
great, the coming of their ^oes: not asking how many there be, but where they
be: not attending with Xerxes and his faint-hearted Soldiers, to have the
brave, but valiantly like the Caualiers of Troy, thrusting amidst the attending
Grecians. Diverse instances, as when in the time of Robert the third king of
Scotts, Earl Douglas with a mighty and puissant army entered the Frontiers
of England, making ha^ocke as far as Newcastle, sundry times ^ickered with
our men, and gave them the foil: which Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland
surnamed Henry Hot-spurre noting, fuming at such bad Fortune, and as it were
struck to the heart with the dishonor of the English, sought not to S.
George, or other Pilgrimages (whereof then there were many in England) but
offering his prayers unto GOD, and vowing a courageous resolution on the hiltes
of his Sword, having a very small company in respect of the Scotts, he
pricketh toward them, and although he was sharply repulsed at the first and
second encounter, yet thinking how sweet it were to die rather then to li^e
with dishonor, he gave a fresh charge, and overthrew the Scotts with such a
slaughter, that he took Prisoners, the Earls Douglas, Fife, Murrey, and
Angus, Thus do our Nobles of England make their pilgrimage, and end their
revenge: which if it be not true, I report^ me to the Nobles of Spain
themselves, who lately had experience o^ their Courage, that they were feign,
for the vowing of their Pilgrimage to S. James to deserve this mock. Si Petrus
dormit Papae, (...) Iacobus vigilabit vobis?

The Duke of Medina, Captain general of the Army and Spanish forces, rydeth
on a Iennet, with one foot out of the Stirrup, his cappe pulde over his eyes,
and his points untrust: to him is said.

Pillulae Britanicae in dissent eriam te coni^c^runt. GLOSSA.
WHen Julius Caesar was sent by the Senate Dictator against the Gauls, his
friend Lepidus asking him whether he now iournyed: In Galliam (quoth he) quae
sit urus ant sepulchrum, aut honorem. This valiant resolution of Caesar was not
sound in the Duke of Medina Sidonia, for though he was sent by his Prince and
Sovereign, as General of all his Forces, yet he choose rather to return
with dishonor, then with valiant Caesar to seek a Sepulcher in England: For
coming with a mighty Fleet, well provided with martial furniture such as
might have amazed the greatest Monarch in the whole world to encounter: coming
with as great a brave toward England, as Xerxes against Lacedemonia: setting
up his S^^^amers as Commanders that Eolus should he favorable to his Navy.
And with him the Admiral Don Ma^t^nes de Ricaldo, Pedro de Valdes, Martin
Bretendona, Gomes de Medina and others, whose Hierogliphicall Simb^ls, Emblems,
impr^sses and devises did prognosticate (as they supposed) their triumphant
victory, and our dishonorable and miserable overthrow, playing at dice for our
Noblemen and knight^ and dividing our Land into portions: Medina and Ricaldo
sytting thus as Princes of the Sea, brauing Neptune in our Straightes: no
sooner came along our Coaste, and were encountered with our Fleet, filled
with Noblemen of invincible courage, but Medina the great Champion of Spain,
took the lower end of the ship, Ricaldo his bed, whereas our Lord Admiral,
the Lord Charles Haward, stood upon the vpp^r deck, resolutely and valiantly
encouraging his m^n to fight for the honor of their Country. The Lord Henry
Seymer, a noble man or worthy prowess, standing in the face of the Enemy to
p^t oil in the flame, and valor in an english heart, taught the Spaniards
with Bullet, that the noble men of England, ^^er^d with sparks of honor,
counted life no more but a debt, every hour due unto nature. With him the Lord
Thomas Haward whose forward resolucion the Spaniards may report in Spain, to
their great dishonor. Next these, that worthy Gentleman, that famous
Caualier, the terror of Spain, that fortunate Knight, Sir FRANCIS DRAKE,
be^^irred himself, as his wonted manner, not fearfully as Medina, but valiantly
standing in the fore room, delivered with Cannon his Embassage to the Enemy.
With him Sir Martin Frobusher, Sir Roger Townesend, and others which I omit,
not as men of less valor, but for breuities sake. Then let us note and
rejoice, how our nobles of England, and worthy Knights behaved themselves, how
God inserting courage in their minds, fought for us, and the truth, and how
striking a terror and cowardice into the Lords of Spain, as unto Senacherib
and his host, bending their Forces against Samaria, the Lord of Medina
hasted out off our Seas, and our Fleet held them long in chase spoiling and
praying on their Ships daily.

Thus the great General of Spain was content to pockett^ up this Dishonor
to save his life, and therefore must abide ^he reproachful taunt that our
English Pills has cast him into a laske, and such a ^yxe, as has defiled all
his honor: then (for me) let him have the deserved scoff. Pillulae Britanic^^
in dissenteriam te coniecerunt.

Don Martines de Ricaldo, chief Admiral of the Fleet, standing in the Haven,
and ^eeing his tattered Ships, considering what goodlye Vessels were taken
and drowned, and what store of men and munition they had lost, leaning his
back against a broken ancker, and shaking of his head: says thus.

O Neptune, quantas ^pulas vna coena deuorast^? GLOSSA.
ALthough Don Martines, for his expert skill in Navigations, and policy in
nauall ^^ght, was elected chief Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, yet such his
fate, his Fortune* or his little courage, that coming to England, as proudly
as the Turk came into the gulf: yet he went away worse dishonored then
Calig^la, that in stead of Battle, gathered Cockles on the western shore.

Six year at the least he was great Commander for furniture necessary for
this intended Fleet, which no doubt he stuffed and stored to the full,
gathering together such provision, as if should with the Giantes, inte^d (...)
against Mars and Jupiter: He had in his Flee^^, of Gallions* Hulkes, Pataches,
Zabres, Galeas^^s, and Galleys ^^^. The receipt being 57868. Tons (...),
19295. Mari^ers, 8450. And of great brazen Pieces, 2630. Provided thus, as
might be supposed, for the conquest either of Asia or Africa, he bends his
course aga^^st England, a little Island, where as S. Augustine says, their be
people with Angels faces, so the Inhabitants have the courage and hearts of
Lions: which poor D^n Martines tried true: For GOD using ELIZABETH his servant
and her subjects, as his instruments, to punish the enemies of his truth, no
sooner cam^ (...) proud Holofernes into our seas, but the Mice crept out off
little Betulia, Judith sitting peaceably in her royal seat, and incountring
fiercely with their Foes, taught them that God fought on their side, then not
to be daunted with multitudes: and Martines fearful* shrunk away. But God who
holds revenge in his hand, let loose the winds, and threw a storm into the
sea, that many of their ships which escaped our hands, perished on the
Rocks: using the Sea for revenge, as he did against Pharao, when he persecuted
the children of Israel: So that Don Ricaldo with dishonor passed into Spain,
and our Admiral returned with glorious triumph into England, bringing home
Ships, Prisoners, and Furniture, that our English shoares sounded with
Echoes of triumph, and every mouth was filled with the praises of of the Lord
Charles Haward, while Ricaldo dismayed at at his misfortune, and his tottered
ships, says. O Neptune, quantas epulas vna coena deuorasti?

Don Pedro de Valdes, General of the Army of Andel^si^, now Prisoner in
England, greeuing at his fortune,: sits sad, and leaning his head on his
hand, with a great s^gh says.

Heu quanta de spe decidi. GLOSSA.
AMongst the Generals of these intended Squadrons, Don Pedro de Valdes was not
of the meanest account, nor thought of the least valor, but suposed for his
courage and resolution to be a second Hector, in so much as Medina, Ricaldo,
and the rest relied much both upon his policy, and prowess, and he himself
at his departure from the King, and his loosing from Lisbon, by his brave
words, his great promises, and martial threats, was of surpassing great hope
amongst the Spaniardes, so that the King of Spain sent him as Senacherib sent
Rabsaketh to de^^e Ezekiah. And Pedro himself resolved by a pre^^xt time, to
enter the Land with conquest: in so much that the Romans never conceived
better hope in Horatius Cocles, in Torquatus, in Scipio African, nay in Caesar,
when he was Dictator, then the Spaniards did in Don Pedro, thinking that no
sooner he would have arrived in the English co^st, but he would have written
back, as the Romain Monarch did, Veni, vidi, vici: but if he or his fellows
had read the Conquestes of England, how difficult they were, either of the
Saxons, Danes, or of the Romans, or lastly by the ^ormanes, either he would
have provided a greater Fleet, or a better courage: For being imbarqued in a
Ship of 1330 tons, carryin^ ^^tie Cannons, after a while he had ^^ragled on
our coast, meeting our Fleet, which presently gave the charge, he was one of
the first that was taken, not making any resistance at all, or showing any
point of honorable reresolution, not so much as drawing his sword in defense.
Is this the mind of a Nobleman of dubbed Chy^alry? of a Captain, to submit in
the first extremity? Do the Spaniards prize life so high, that they make no
estimation of honor? Fortitude is high, and will not be stained in mean
dangers: Courage is like the Eagle, that catches not at Flies. First D^n
Pedro was commanded by his King to attempt his purpose with death his vow was
to purchase England though with death: His promise at his departure, was to
conquer, or to seal the attempt with death, and yet coming in the Skirmish,
a few b^llets had but bruised his Ship, and spoiled his tacklinges, but
sub^^isse he yielded without one stroke, having three hundred and forty men
of war, and a hundred and eighteen mar^^ers: or without one denial with
(...), having fifty Cannons in his ship: He that like a Lion came storming
from Spain, humbly like a lamb crouched to our Admiral in the English sea^,
yielding himself and his, prisoners: Now note the Spanish brauing promises,
what cowardly conclusions they infer. Cato V^icensis choose rather to murder
himself, then to fall into the hands of Caesar his Enemy, nay, Cleopatra a
woman, suffered rather death by stinging of Aspick^s, then she would submit
to her Foe: Honor amongst Soldiers is highly prized, and to bear the yoke
of an Enemy is more bitter to a noble mind then death: Yet liked not Don
Pedro of this philosophy: he thinks, to die is the last deed, and therefore
to live is sweet: but this was not aunswerable to his Emblemes and Impresses
which he gau^ in his En^i^nes, Banners and Streamers, ^or in the one was
^^gur^d a Sun and a Moon, the Motto in Spanish, but to this effect ^eri
plemlu^^um, hodie defectus: Ye^^erday the Full, but to day the Wane: meaning
(as I suppose) tha^ the fullness of Englands pr^speritie was at an end, and
now by his means should it fall into the Wane: on the other side was
depainted an Altar with sacrifice ^uming the Poe^^e: Sic cupio, sic cogito:
Spiritus ab inquietudine ^oactus: I cannot well discourse his meaning in this:
but no doubt whatsoever he wrote, what he invented, yea all his devises,
practices, and thoughts were of the subversion of England: Well, those Banners
and Ensigns which he hoped to have displaied in England to our great reprooch,
were to his deep dishonor hanged to the joy of all true English hearts,
about the Battlementes and cross of Paul's, and on London bridge: he himself
Prisoner, and feeling the burden of his misfortune, could not (though never
so well used in England) but sigh and say. Heu quanta de spe decidi.

The Princes, noble men, and other men of name that of their free will, offered
themselves adventurers in this Spanish attempt: frustrate of the^r intent,
walk at home muf^led in their cloakes, as men disgraced, and say one to
another in great passion.

Temeritatis nostra cum Briareo poe^as lui^^^. GLOSSA.
IN this Spanish Fleet were many voluntary adventurers, Princes* Dukes,
Counties, Barons, Knights, Esquires, and gentlemen, younger brothers* ^o the
number of an 124. besides their Servants, who without request or command,
upon their own free will, offered themselves as Consortes in this voyage,
moved first with a blind^ zeal of religion, then with desire of honor,
especially against the English, who they heard were full of Coucourage:
Thirdly for hope of preferment in this our Island, after the conquest hoped for
of the Spanish. Moved with these considerations, they came triumphing in this
Fleet: finding a cooling card to alay their hot stomachs, they returned hom^
discouraged, dishonored, and disgraced, in so much, tha^ looking with a deep
insight, into our victory, and their overthrow: seeing our ships like little
P^^^sses, and their huge barks built like Castles, over peering ours: they in
their own consciences confessed that God was on our side: saying, that their
oversight in being so forward was requited as the detestable attempt of
Briare^s the Giant with the hundred hands, and Tiphes who, the Poets feign,
did war against the Gods, and hea^ed hill on hill, as Pelion on Oss^, to
climb up to the Heavens, whereupon Jupiter with a Thu^nderbolte, pashed them
all to powder: so they, blinded with the vale of ignorance, attempted against
the Gospel, the truth, and the Defendresse of them both, Queen Blizabeth the
Lords chosen, and his anointed: and therefore against God: which consideration
made them murmr to themselves. Temeritatis nostrae cum Briareo poenas l^imus.

11 The Vicegerentes of his Indies having lo^t by Sea and land, much of their
Kings treasure: sitting^s discontented men on the hatches of their ships, to
them is said.

Sic vos non vobis mellificatis Apes. GLOSSA.
THE Indies being first sought out by the Portugal, and lately conquered and
possessed by the King of Spain, yeldeth him al his treasure wherewith he
feeds his Clergy in their pomp, his Nobility in their bravery, and his
Soldiers in their pay. In this Conquest of the Indies, did the Spaniard show
his courage, his faith, his clemency: his courage, in performing so haughty
and dangerous a Conquest: for being armed at al p^ints with his Curets, his
Cor^^et, Burganet, his, horse, his Pike, his spear, with store of men at
arms, and demilance, he invaded a company of naked Moors without armor or
knowledge of use of weapon, but a few fish bones: his faith, in that these
naked men flying into the woods and Mountains, whether the Spaniard neither
could nor durst march, was persuaded upon his oath by the christian God, to
come and yield with promise of life and liberty: who no sooner were in his
reach, and circuit with his Soldiers, but breaking his o^th, as one y^ swear
by none of his friends, he caused his Soldiers to apprehend their Nobility as
prisoners: His clemency in using the victory, not as Caesar, that gloried in
his courtesies used to his foes, but like brute beasts, caused the Indians to
be hunted with dogs, some to be torn with horses, some to have their hands
cut off, and so many sundry Massaquers as greeueth any good mind to report.
The Spaniard seated thus in the Country, straight sought out the Mines of
gold, and causing the remnant of the Moors as slaves to dig in the Mines,
sent yearly with a great Fleet, much treasure from thence into Spain: which
being blazed abroad through all the world, the report coming into England,
there rose up a man of ^igh and hardy resolucion, Sir Francis Drake: who sent
by her Majesty to discover that Co^ntrie, not only found it out, but brought
home great riches, and the same time as a warrior went, and malgrado of the
Spaniard landed, entered up into the country near Carthagene, and Sancto
Domingo, putting the Spaniard to the foil, and the sword, brought home store
of wealth and treasure, and getting by his valor such endless fame and glory,
as far surmounteth such momentaine trash: using the Moors, conquered with such
courtesy, as they thought the English Gods, and the Spaniardes both by rule
and conscience half Devils. Sir Francis Drakes happy success in India, and
the late loss of their Sovereigns Fleet, joined together, sore danted the
minds of the India generals, that they (...) as men discontented in their
hearts: to whom is objected (as in deri^^on) the verses that Virgill wrote
against Batillus.

Sic vos non vobis m^llificatis Apes,
Sic vos non vobis nid^ficatis Aues,
Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra Boues,
Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis O^es.
Meaning, that as the Bees make heavy themselves, yet not for themselves, but
men reap it to their use, so the Spaniard dug out sweet honye from the
golden Mines, and Sir Francis Drake fetched it home to be tasted in England
reaping his profit out off their labors: so that the India Generals are feign
to bear this scoff. Sic vos non vobis:

12 The common Soldiers, haled forward, rather by command then courage,
^earing at the first to attempt so dangerous an exploit, and grieved at the
last with their hard misfortune, half mutinous, murmr this.

Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui. GLOSSA.
CAESAR being Dictator for the Romans, and having conquered France, hearing
that there was a little Island beyond, full of hardy and courageous people,
thirsting after honor, and coveting to increase the Roman Monarchy, he
rigged his Fleet, and cut over into England, where he found such hard
landing, that he was glad to pass away with the repulse: but he, whose mind
was impatient of dishonor: after he had renewed his fleet, made a long
oration to encourage them, but they found so hard a breakefast, that hardly
they could be induced to give the second attempt. The Spaniardes being but in
respect our Neighbors, hearing how not only we have defended our own Realm,
but made diverse invasions with great victories: as Edward the third in
France, and Henry the fifth, who forced the King by arms to proclaim him
heir apparent, in so much that Henry the sixth sat crowned in Paris. The
poor Soldiers having heard of these and other our resolutions, were
discouraged before they came, and feared to buckle with men so hardy and
fortunate although they were both charged by their King, and encouraged by the
Pope with a general pardon a poena and culpa, yet all the persuasions would not
serve, for diverse hid themselves, and other by fained excuses sought absence,
but at last compelled forward, and forced to take shipping, they found here
that they feared: men that durst abide their brave, and return them blow for
blow, not the naked Moors, nor the fainting Portugal, but English men that
prize honor as dear as their lives: who if they hear but this word
Elizabetha, they fly like Lions in the face of the Enemy, nay in the mouth of
the Cannon, rather opposing themselves to ten thousand deaths, then the
fortune of her enemies should touch her royal Majesty with any contrary
passion. Feeling thus what they feared, some taken Prisoners, others slain, a
multitude drowned in the sea by Shipwreck, the remnant of poor mercenary men
cry cut in bytternesse of mind. Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achi^i.

THus Gentle Reader, thou have seen the Spanish Masquerado, which I have now
devised, to discourse to thee their estate, how although the malicious enemy
seeks (puffed up by ambition and covetousness) to subvert our religion, and
make a Conquest of our Island: yet he that seated our most royal Princess in
her Kingdom, as his Minister to set forth his truth, and plant his Gospel,
still shrowd^th her under his wing, and protectes her from the violent attempt
of all her foes, and breaks off the wheels of their Chariotes, that s^^ke
with Pharao, to persecute his people.

Then rejoice and give thanks to God for all his gracious favors, and be
faithful and true hearted to thy Prince, whom God so loves: stand steadfast
in the truth, wherewith he blesses thee, and then fear not what the
Spaniards can do, for their ^owes shall be broken, and their arrows cracked
asunder: the Lord shall send forth his wrath, as hot as coals, and the breath
of his nostrils as a consuming fire, to burn such chafe as purged out with
the Fan of his justice, lies scatterd abroad with the wind: I^ Spain shall
attempt against England as Pharao did against the Israelites, Moses shall show
wonders to amaze them, and maugre the Prince of Egypt, lead his people through
the sea. If Samaria be begirt with Edodomites and Assirians, yet shall the
Lord send a fear and a terror into their thoughts, that they shall fly and
^e discomfited with their own imaginations: If the pope and Spain with their
heretical confederates fill the narrow seas with Uessels, whose tops muster
like a wood, in the Ocean, yet shall the Lord if we keep his commandementes and
obey his statutes, send gusts and storme^ to scatter their Navy, and confound
them with his creatures as men that do make war against God, and plant their
Engine against the holy mount of Sion. Let Englishmen then shrouded under the
wings of the most highest, not fear what thousands can do against them: nay
let them give thanks to God who has blessed us with such a Prince as makes us
eat fruits of our own vineyard, and drink of the water of our own wells:
our Cities are full of joy, and our children are seen sporting in the
st^eetes: peace and plenty flourishes in England, and all our Land flows
with milk and ho^ie: nay more, that heavenly Manna the food of our s^ules,
the Gospel of our Savior Christ is franckly freely and truly not only
preached, but louinglye embraced by the Queen and her Subjects.

Seeing then we are every way blessed and favored from above: that the Lord
our merciful God makes ENGLAND like EDEN, a seco^^ Paradise: let us ^^are to
offend him, and be zealous (...) execute the tenor of his commandments,
then shall we be sure his Majesty will send our Queen long life, his Church
to (...) faithful Ministers, and our Realm perfect Subjects, and shroude us
against Spain, the Pope, and all other enemies of his Gospel.

FINIS.

