The Repentance of Robert Green Master of Arts.

Wherein by himself is laid open his loose life, with the manner of his death.

AT LONDON, Printed for Cutbert Burbie, and are to be sold at the middle shop
in the Poultry, under Saint Mildreds Church. 1592.

The Printer to the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, I know you are not unacquainted with the death of Robert Green,
whose pen in his life time pleased you as well on the Stage, as in the
Stationers shops: And to speak truth, although his loose life was odious to
God and offensive to men, yet forasmuch as at his last end he found it most
grievous to himself (as appears by this his repentant discourse) I doubt not
but he shall for the same deserve favor both of God and men. And considering
Gentlemen that Venus has her charms to inchaunt; that Fancy is a Sorceresse
bewitching the Senses, and folly the only enemy to all virtuous actions. And
forasmuch as the purest glass is the most brickle, the finest Lawne the
soonest staind, the highest Oak most subject to the wind, and the quickest wit
the more easily woone to folly: I doubt not but you will with regard forget
his follies, and like to the Be gather honey out of the good counsels of him,
who was wise, learned and polliticke, had not his lascivious life withdrawn
him from those studies which had been far more profitable to him.

For herein appears that he was a man given over to the lust of his own
heart, forsaking all godliness and one that daily delighted in all manner of
wickedness. Since other therefore have forerun him in the like faults, and have
been forgiven both of God and men I trust he shall be the better accepted,
that by the working of Gods holy spirit, returns with such a resolved
Repentance, being a thing acceptable both to God and men.

To conclude, forasmuch as I found this discourse very passionate, and of
wonderful effect to withdraw the wicked from their ungodly ways, I thought
good to publish the same: and the rather, for that by his repentance they may
as in a glass see their own folly, and thereby in time resolve, that it is
better to die repentant, than to live dishonest.

Yours. C.B.

To all the wanton youths of England: Robert Green wishes reformation of
wilfulnes.
WHen I consider (kind Cuntrimen) that youth is like to the spring time of
man's age ready in the bloome to be nipped with every misfortune, and that a
young man is like to a tender plant, apt to be wrested by nurture either to good
or evil, as his friends like good Gardeners shall with care endeavor his
education, seeing in the prime of our years vice is most ready to creep in,
and that want of experience commits sundry wanton desires, I thought good to
lay before you a president of such prejudicial inconveniences, which at the
first seeming sweet unto youth, at the last grow into fruits of bitter
repentance: For a young man led on by self will (having the raines of liberty
in his own hand) foreseeth not the ruth of folly, but aims at present
pleasures, for he gives himself up to delight, and thinks every thing good,
honest; lawful and virtuous, that fitteth for the content of his lascivious
humor: he foreseeth not that such as clime hastily, fall suddenly: that Bees
have stings as well as honey: that vices have ill ends as well as sweet
beginnings: and whereof grows this heedles life, but of self conceit,
thinking the good counsel of age is dotage: that the advice of friends
proceeds of envy, and not of love: that when their fathers correct them for
their faults, they hate them: whereas when the black Ox has trod on their
feet, and the Crows foot is seen in their eyes, then touched with the
feeling of their own folly, they sigh out had I wist, when repentance comes
too late. Or like as wax is ready to receive every new form, that is
stamped into it, so is youth apt to admit of every vice that is objected unto
it, and in young years wanton desires is cheefely predominate especially the
two Ringleaders of all other mischiefs, namely pride and whoredom, these are
the Sirens that with their enchanting melodies, draw them on to utter
confusion, for after a young man has sucked in that sin of pride, he grows
into contempt, and as he increases proud in his attire, so he is scornful in
his looks, and disdaines the wholesome admonition of his honest friends, whose
advice he supposes to be done of malice, and therefore esteems his own
ways best, and had rather hazard his life, than to loose an intch of his
credit. Pride is like to fire, that will die and go out if it be not
maintained with fuel, and yet lay on never so big logges, it consumes them
all to ashes, so pride craves maintenance, or else it will fade: and had a young
man never so great revenues, pride at last will reduce it to beggar you, for it
is such a sin, as once got into the boane it will step into the flesh, he
that once ietteth in his bravery: if he have no means to maintain it, it
will leave no bad course of life unattempted, but he will have corners to
uphold his folly. Hereof grows coossenages, thefts, murders, and a thousand
other petty mischiefs, and causes many proper persons to be trust up at the
gallows, purchasing thereby infamy to themselves, and heart breaking sorrow to
their friends and parents for ever.

Companion to this vice, is lust and lechery, which is the viper, whose venom
is incurable, and the only sin that in this life leads unto shame, and
after death unto hell fire: for he that gives himself over to harlots,
sells his soul to destruction, and makes his body subject to all incurable
diseases. These two vices do not only waste a man's substance, but also
consumes his body and soul, and makes him attempt to do any mischief for
his maintenance therein. If happily the young man has any grace, and is loath
to take any unlawful ways, the ordinary course of his copesmates, is straight
to call him coward, and cast him out of their favor, or else by svveete
persuasions and flattering words, make him forsake God and all good means
of life whatsoever: this is the manner, life, and course of such as will not
listen to the grave advice of their parents, but seek thereby to bring their
graie hairs with grief unto their graves.

This ensuing discourse, gentle Reader, does lay open the graceles endeavors
of my self, who although I were for a long time given over to the lust of my
own heart, yet in the end, Gods grace did so favorably work in me, that I
trust herein thou shall perceive my true and unfeigned repentance. Accept it in
good part, and if it may profit any I have my desire.

Farewell, R. G.

The Repentance of Robert Green, Master of Arts.
AS there is no steel so stiff, but the stamp will pierce; no flint so hard,
but the drops of rain will hollow: so there is no heart so void of grace, or
given over to wilful folly, but the merciful favor of God can mollify. An
instance of the like chanced to my self, being a man wholly addicted to all
graceless endeavors, given from my youth to wantonness, brought up in riot who
as I grew in years, so I waxed more ripe in ungodliness, that I was the mirror
of mischief, and the very pattern of all prejudicial actions: for I neither
had care to take any good course of life, nor yet to listen to the friendly
persuasions of my parents. I seemed as one of no religion, but rather as a
mere Atheist, contemning the holy precepts uttered by any learned preather: I
would smile at such as would frequent the Church, or such place of godly
exercise, and would scoff at any that would check me with any wholesome or
good admonition: so that herein I seemed a mere reprobate, the child of
Satan, one wipt out of the book of life, and as an outcast from the face and
favor of God, I was given over to drunkenness, so that I lightly accounted of
that company that would not intertaine my inordinate quaffing. And to this
beastly sin of gluttotonie, I added that detestable vice of swearing, taking
a felicity in blaspeming and profaning the name of God, confirming nothing
idly but with such solemn oths, that it amazed even my companions to hear
me. And that I might seem to heap one sin upon another, I was so rooted
therein, that whatsoever I got, I still consumed the same in drunkenness.

Living thus a long time, God (who suffers sinners to heap coals of fire
upon their own heads, and to be fed fat with sin against the day of
vengeance) suffered me to go forward in my loose life: many warninges I had to
draw me from my detestable kind of life, and diverse crosses to contrary my
actions: but all in vain, for though I were sundry times afflicted with many
foul and grievous diseases, and thereby scourged with the rod of Gods wrath,
yet when by the great labor and friendship of sundry honest persons, they had
(though to their great charges) sought and procured my recovery, I did with the
Dog Redire in vomitum, I went again with the Sow to wallow in the mire, and
fell to my former follies as frankly, as if I had not tasted any jot of want,
or never been scourged for them. Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati; my
daily custom in sin had clean taken away the feeling of my sin: for I was
so given to these vices aforesaid, that I counted them rather venial scapes
and faults of nature, than any great and grievous offenses: neither did I care
for death, but held it only as the end of life. For coming one day into
Aldersgate street to a welwillers house of mine, he with other of his friends
persuaded me to leave my bad course of life, which at length would bring me
to utter destruction, whereupon I scoffingly made them this answer. Tush, what
better is he that dies in his bed than he that ends his life at Tyburne, all
owe God a death: if I may have my desire while I live, I am satisfied, let me
shift after death as I may. My friends hearing these words, greatly grieved at
my graceless resolution, made this reply: If you fear not death in this
world, nor the pains of the body in this life, yet doubt the second death, and
the loss of your soul, which without hearty repentance must rest in hell fire
for ever and ever.

Hell (quoth I) what talk you of hell to me: I know if I once come there, I
shall have the company of better men than my self, I shall also meet with some
mad knaves in that place, and so long as I shall not sit there alone, my care
is the less. But you are mad folks (quoth I) for if I feared the Judges of the
bench no more than I dread the judgments of God, I would before I slept diue
into one Carles bags or other, and make merry with the shelles I found in
them so long as they would last. And though some in this company were Friars of
mine own fraternity to whom I spoke the words: yet were they so amazed at my
profane speeches, that they wished themselves forth of my company. Whereby
appears, that my continual delight was in sin, and that I made my self
drunk with the dregs of mischief. But being departed thence unto my
lodging, and now grown to the full, I was checked by the mighty hand of God:
for Sickness (the messenger of death) attached me, and told me my time was but
short, and that I had not long to live: whereupon I was vexed in mind, and grew
very heavy. As thus I sat solempuly thinking of my end, and feeling my self
wax sicker and sicker, I fell into a great passion, and was wonderfully
perplexed, yet no way discovered my agony, but sat still calling to mind the
lewdnes of my former life: at what time suddenly taking the book of Resolution
in my hand, I light upon a chapter therein, which discovered unto me the
miserable state of the reprobate, what Hell was, what the worm of Conscience
was, what torments there was appointed for the damned souls, what unspeakable
miseries, what unquenchable flames, what intolerable agonies, what
incomprehensible griefs; that there was nothing but fear, horror, veration of
mind, deprivation from the sight and favor of God, weeping and gnashing of
teeth, and that al those tortures were not termined or dated within any
compass of years, but everlasting world without end; concluding all in this
of the Psalms: Ab inferis nulla est redemptio.

After that I had with deep consideration pondered upon these points, such a
terror stroke into my conscience, that for very anguish of mind my teeth did
beat in my head, my looks waxed pale and wan, and fetching a great sigh, I
cried unto God, and said: If all this be true, oh what shall become of me: If
the reward of sin be death and hell, how many deaths and hels do I deserve,
that have been a most miserable sinner? If damnation be the meed for
wickedness, then am I damned? for in all the world there never lived a man of
worser life. Oh what shall I do? I cannot call to God for mercy; for my
faults are beyond the compass of his favor: the punishment of the body has
an end by death, but the pains of the soul by death are made everlasting.
Then what a miserable case am I in if I die? yet if my death might redeem my
offenses, and wash away my sins, oh might I suffer every day twenty deaths
while seven years lasts, it were nothing: but when I shall end a contempt to
the world, I shall enjoy the disdain of men, the displeasure of God, and my
soul (that immortal creature) shall everlastingly be damned: Oh woe is me,
why do I live? nay rather why was I borne? Cursed be the day wherein I was
born, and hapless be the breasts that gave me suck. Why did God create me to
be a vessel of wrath? Why did he breath life into me, thus to make me a lost
sheep? Oh I feel a hell already in my conscience, the number of my sins do
muster before my eyes, the poor men's plaints that I have wronged, cries out in
mine ears and says, Robin Green thou art damnd; nay, the justice of God tells
me I cannot be saved. Now I do remember (though too late) that I have read in
the Scriptures, how neither adulterers, swearers, thieves, nor murderers shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven. What hope then can I have of any grace, when
(given over from all grace) I exceeded all other in these kind of sins? If
thus upon earth and alive I feel a hell, oh what a thing is that hell, where
my soul shall everlastingly live in torments. I am taught by the scripture to
pray; but to whom should I pray? to him that I have blasphemed, to him that I
have contemned and despised, whose name I have taken in vain? No, no, I am in
a hell. Oh that my last gasp were come, that I might be with Judas or Cain,
for their place is better than mine; or that I might have power with these
hands to unloose my soul from this wretched carcass, that has imprisoned so
many wicked villainies within it. Oh I have sinned, not against the Father, nor
against the Son, but against the holy Ghost: for I presumed upon grace, and
when the spirit of God cried in my mind and thought, and said, drunkenness is a
vice, whoredom is a vice; I carelessly (in contempt) resisted this motion, and
as it were in a bravery, committed these sins with greedines. Oh now I shall
cry with Dives to have one drop of water for my tongue, but shall not be
heard: I have sinned against my own soul, and therefore shall be cast into
utter darkness: and further I shall not come till I have paid the uttermost
farthing, which I shall never be able to satisfy. O happy are you that feel
the sparks of Gods favor in your hearts, happy are you that have hope in the
passion of Christ, happy are you that believe that God died for you, happy are
you that can pray. Oh why does not God show the like mercy unto me? The
reason is, because in all my life I never did any good. I always gloried in
sin, and despised them that embraced virtue. God is just, and cannot pardon
my offenses; and therefore I would I were out of this earthly hell, so I were
in that second hell, that my soul might suffer torments: for now I am vexed
both in soul and body.

In this despairing humor, searching further into the said Book of Resolution,
I found a place that greatly did comfort me, and laid before me the promises
of Gods mercy, showing me that although the Justice of God was great to
punish sinners, yet his mercy did exceed his works: and though my faults were
as red as skarlet, yet washed with his blood, they should be made as white as
snow: therein was laid before mine eyes, that David (who was called a man after
his own heart) did both commit adultery, and sealde it with murder: yet when
he did repent, God heard him, and admited him to his favor. Therein was laid
before me the obstinate sin of Peter, that not only denied his Master
Christ, but also forswore himself: yet so soon as he shed tears, and did
heartily repent him, his offenses were pardoned. Therein was laid open the
thief that had lived licentiously, and had scarce in all his life done one
good deed, and yet he was saved by hope in the mercies of God. Therein was
also laid open how the severity of the Law was mittigated with the sweet and
comfortable promises of the Gospel, insomuch that I began to be somewhat
pacified, and a little quieted in mind, taking great joy and comfort in the
pithie persuasions and promises of Gods mercy alleged in that Book. And yet
I was not presently resolved in my conscience, that God would deal so
favorably with me, for that still the multitude of my sins presented me with
his Justice: and would therefore reason thus with my self. Why, those men
(before mentioned) were elected and predestined to be chosen vessels of Gods
glory, and therefore though they did fall, yet they rose again, and did show it
in time, with some other fruits of their election. But contrariwise, I (the
most wicked of all men) was even brought up from my swaddling clouts in
wickedness, my infancy was sin, and my riper age increast in wickedness; I took
no pleasure but in ill, neither was my mind set upon any thing but upon the
spoil: then seeing all my life was lead in lewdnes, and I never but once felt
any remorse of conscience, how can God pardon me, that repent rather for fear
than for love? Yet calling unto mind the words of Esaias, that at what time
soever a sinner does repent him from the bottom of his heart, the Lord would
wipe away all his wickedness out of his remembrance.

Thus being at a battle between the spirit and the flesh, I beggane to
feel a greater comfort in my mind, so that I did tears confess and
acknowledge, that although I was a most miserable sinner, yet the anguish that
Christ suffered on the Cross, was able to purge and cleanse me from all my
offenses: so that taking hold with faith upon the promises of the Gospel, I
waxed strong in spirit, and became able to resist and withstand all the
desperate attempts that Satan had given before to my weak and feeble
conscience. When thus I had consideratly thought on the wretchedness of my life,
and therewithal looked into the uncertainty of death, I thought good to write
a short discourse of my the same, which I have joined to this treatise,
containing as follows.

The life and death of Robert Green Master of Arts.
I Need not make long discourse of my parents, who for their gravity and
honest life is well known and esteemed amongst their neighbors; namely, in the
City of Norwitch, where I was bred and borne. But as out of one self same
clod of clay there sprouts both stinking weeds and delightful flowers: so from
honest parents often grow most dishonest children; for my Father had care to
have me in my Nonage brought up at school, that I might through the study
of good letters grow to be a friend to my self, a profitable member to the
common-welth, and a comfort to him in his age. But as early pricks the tree
that will prove a thorn: so even in my first years I began to follow the
filthiness of mine own desires, and neither to listen to the wholesome
aduertisements of my parents, nor be ruled by the careful correction of my
Master. For being at the University of Cambridge, I light amongst wags as
lewd as my self, with whom I consumed the flower of my youth, who drew me to
travel into Italy, and Spain, in which places I saw and practizde such
villaime as is abominable to declare. Thus by their counsel I sought to
furnish my self with coin, which I procured by cunning sleights from my
Father and my friends, and my Mother pampered me so long, and secretly helped
me to the oil of Angels, that I grew thereby prove to all mischief: so that
being then conversant with notable Braggarts, boon companions and ordinary
spend-thrifts, that practiced sundry superficial studies, I became as a Sien
grafted into the same stock, whereby I did absolutely participate of their
nature and qualities. At my return into England, I ruffeled out in my silks, in
the habit of Malcontent, and seemed so discontent, that no place would please
me to abide in, nor no vocation cause me to stay my self in: but after I had
by degrees proceeded Master of Arts, I left the University and away to
London, where (after I had continued some short time, and driven my self out of
credit with sundry of my friends) I became an Author of Plays, and a pennier of
Love Pamphlets, so that I soon grew famous in that quality, that who for that
trade grown so ordinary about London as Robin Green. Young yet in years,
though old in wickedness, I began to resolve that there was nothing bad, that
was profitable: whereupon I grew so rooted in all mischief, that I had as
great a delight in wickedness, as sundry has in godliness: and as much
felicity I took in villainy, as others had in honesty.

Thus was the liberty I got in my youth, the cause of my licentious living in
my age, and being the first step to hell, I find it now the first let from
heaven.

But I would wish all my native Countrymen, that read this my repentance;
First to fear God in their whole life, which I never did: Secondly, to obey
their Parents, and to listen unto the wholesome counsel of their Elders: so
shall their days be multiplied upon them here on earth, and inherit the
crown of glory in the kingdom of heaven. I exhort them also to leave the
company of lewd and ill livers: for conuersing with such Copes-mates, draws
them into sundry dangerous inconveniences: nor let them haunt the company of
harlots, whose throats are as smooth as oil, but their feet lead the steps
unto death and destruction: for they like Sirens with their sweet inchaunting
notes, soothed me up in all kind of ungodliness.

Oh take heed of Harlots (I wish you the unbridled youth of England) for they
are the Basiliskes that kill with their eyes, they are the Sirens that allure
with their sweet looks; and they lead their favorers unto their destruction,
as a sheep is lead unto the slaughter.

From whordome I grew to drunkenness, from drunkenness to swearing and
blasphemiug the name of God, hereof grew quarrels, frayes, and continual
controversies, which are now as worms in my conscience gnawing incessantly.
And did I not through hearty repentance take hold of Gods mercies, even these
detestable sins would drench me down into the damnable pit of destruction;
for Stipendium peccati mors.

Oh know (good Countrymen) that the horrible sins and intolerable blasphemy
I have used against the Majesty of God, is a block in my conscience, and that
so heavy that there were no way with me but desperation, if the hope of Christ's
death and passion did not help to ease me of so intolerable and heavy a
burden.

I have long with the deaf Adder stopped mine ears against the voice of Gods
Ministers, yea my heart was hardened with Pharao against all the motions that
the spirit of God did at any time work in my mind, to turn me from my
detestable kind of living.

Yet let me confess a truth, that even once, and yet but once, I felt a fear
and horror in my conscience, and then the terror of Gods judgments did
manifestly teach me that my life was had, that by sin I deserved damnation,
and that such was the greatness of my sin, that I deserved no redemption. And
this inward motion I received in Saint Andrews Church in the City of Norwich,
at a Lecture or Sermon then preached by a godly learned man, whose doctrine,
and the manner of whose teaching, I liked wonderful well: yea (in my
conscience) such was his singlenes of heart, and zeal in his doctrine, that he
might have converted the most monster of the world.

Well, at that time, whosoever was worst, I knew my self as bad as he: for
being new come from Italy, (where I learned all the villainies under the
heavens) I was drowned in pride, whoredom was my daily exercise, and gluttony
with drunkenness was my only delight.

At this Sermon the terror of Gods judgments did manifestly teach me, that
my exercises were damnable, and that I should be wipte out of the book of
life, if I did not speedily repent my loosenes of life, and reform my
misdemeanors.

At this Sermon the said learned man (who doubtless was the child of God) did
beat down sin in such pithie and perswasiue manner, that I began to call
unto mind the danger of my soul, and the prejudice that at length would
befall me for those gross sins which with greedines I daily committed: in
so much as sighing I said in my self, Lord have mercy upon me, and send me
grace to amend and become a new man.

But this good motion lasted not long in me; for no sooner had I met with my
copesmates, but seeing me in such a solemn humor, they demanded the cause of
my sadness: to whom when I had discovered that I sorrowed for my wickedness of
life, and that the Preachers words had taken a deep impression in my
conscience, they fell upon me in ieasting manner, calling me Puritan and
Presizian, and wished I might have a Pulpit, with such other scoffing terms,
that by their foolish persuasion the good and wholesome lesson I had learned
went quite out of my remembrance: so that I fell again with the Dog to my old
vomit, and put my wicked life in practice, and that so thoroughly as ever I did
before.

Thus although God sent his holy spirit to call me, and though I heard him,
yet I regarded it no longer than the present time, when suddenly forsaking it,
I went forward obstinately in my miss. Nevertheless soon after I married a
Gentleman's daughter of good account, with whom I lived for a while: but
forasmuch as she would persuade me from my wilful wickedness, after I had a
child by her, I cast her off, having spent up the marriage money which I
obtained by her.

Then left I her at six or seven, who went into Lincolneshire, and I to London:
where in short space I fell into favor with such as were of honorable and good
calling. But here note, that though I knew how to get a friend, yet I had not
the gift or reason how to keep a friend: for he that was my dearest friend, I
would be sure so to behave my self toward him, that he should ever after
profess to be my utter enemy, or else vow never after to come in my company.

Thus my misdemeanors (too many to be recited) caused the most part of those
so much to despise me, that in the end I became friendles, except it were in a
few Alehouses, who commonly for my inordinate expenses would make much of me,
until I were on the score, far more than ever I meant to pay by twenty nobles
thick. After I had wholly betaken me to the penning of plays (which was my
continual exercise) I was so far from calling upon God, that I sildome thought
on God, but took such delight in swearing and blaspheming the name of God,
that none could think otherwise of me, than that I was the child of perdition.

These vanities and other trifling Pamphlets I penned of Love, and vain
fantasies was my chiefest stay of living, and for those my vain discourses, I
was beloved of the more vainer sort of people, who being my continual
companions, came still to my lodging, and there would continue quaffing,
carowsing, and surfeting with me all the day long.

But I thank God, that he put it in my head, to lay open the most horrible
coosenages of the common Conny-catchers, Cooseners, and Crosse-biters, which I
have indifferently handled in those my several discourses already imprinted.
And my trust is, that those discourses will do great good, and be very
beneficial to the Commonwealth of England.

But oh my dear Wife, whose company and sight I have refrained these six
years: I ask God and thee forgiveness for so greatly wronging thee, of whom
I seldom or never thought until now: Pardon me (I pray thee) where soever
thou art, and God forgive me all my offenses.

And now to you all that live and revel in such wickedness as I have done, to
you I write, and in Gods name wish you to look to your selves, and to reform
your selves for the safeguard of your own souls: dissemble not with God, but
seek grace at his hands, he has promised it, and he will perform it.

God does sundry times defer his puishment unto those that run a wicked
race; but Quod defertur non aufertur, that which is deferde is not quittanst, a
day of reckoning will come, when the Lord will say; Come give account of thy
Stewardship. What God determines, man cannot prevent: he that binds two sins
together, cannot go unpunished in the one: so long the Pot goes to the Pit,
that at last it comes broken home.

Therefore (all my good friends) hope not in money, nor in friends, in favors,
in kindred, they are all uncertain, and they are furthest off, when men think
them most nigh. Oh were I now to begin the flower of my youth, were I now in
the prime of my years, how far would I be from my former follyes? what a
reformed course of life would I take: but it is too late; only now the
comfortable mercies of the Lord is left me to hope in.

It is bootlesse for me to make any long discourse to such as are graceless as
I have been, all wholesome warninges are odious unto them, for they with the
spider suck poison out of the most precious flowers, and to such as God has
in his secret council elected, few words will suffize. But howsoever my life
has been, let my repentant end be a general example to all the youth in
England to obey their parents, to fly whoredom, drunkenness, swearing,
blaspheming, contempt of the word, and such grievous and gross sins, least
they bring their parents heads with sorrow to their graves, and least (with
me) they be a blemish to their kindred, and to their posterity for ever.

Thus may you see how God has secret to himself the times of calling, and
when he will have them into his vineyard, some he calls in the morning, some
at noone, and some in the evening, and yet has the last his wages as well as
the first: For as his judgments are inscrutable, so are his mercies
incomprehensible. And therefore let all men learn these two lessons; not to
despair, because God may work in them through his spirit at the last hour;
nor to presume, least God give them over for their presumption, and deny them
repentance, and so they die impenitent: which finalis impenitentia is a
manifest sin against the holy Ghost.

To this does that golden sentence of. S. Augustine allude, which he speaks
of the thief hanging on the Cross. There was (says he) one thief saved and
no more, therefore presume not; and there was one saved, and therefore despair
not. And to conclude, take these caueats hereafter following.

Certain Cauiats sent by Robert Green to a friend of his (as a farewell:)
written with his own hand.
1 THe fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: therefore serve God, least
he suffer thee to be lead into temptation.

2 Despise neither his word nor his Minister: for her that hears not can
have no faith, and without faith no man can be saved.

3 Obey thy Prince: for he that lifts his hand against the Lords anointed,
shall be like unto a withered plant.

4 Despise not the counsel of thy Father, nor the wholesome admonition of thy
mother: for he that listeneth not to their lessons, shall be cut off in his
youth.

5 Spend the prime of thy years in virtue: so do thou lay an earnest penny
of honorable age.

6 Fly the sweetness of the grape: for a man that is given to much wine shall
never be rich.

7 Take not the name of God in vain: for then thou shall not be guiltless,
nor shall the curse of God come near thy house.

8 A man that delights in harlots shall heap sin upon his soul: he shall be
an open shame in the streets, and his place shall not be known.

9 He that robs from his neighbor, purchases discredit to himself and his
kindred, and he shall not go to his grave with honor.

10 Who medleth with pitch shall be defiled, and he that eats the bread of
Robbers, fatneth himself against the day of vengeance.

11 Give not thy youth over to the Devil, neither vow the dregs of thy old
age unto God; for a repentant mind comes from God.

12 Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss, and let the law of the
Lord be a lantern to thy feet: so shall thy paths be aright, and thou die
with honor.

Robert Green.

The manner of the death and last end of Robert Green Master of Arts.
AFter that he had pend the former discourse (then lying sore sick of a surfeit
which he had taken with drinking) he continued most patient and penitent;
yea, he did with tears forsake the world, renounced swearing, and desired
forgiveness of God and the world for all his offenses: so that during all the
time of his sickness (which was about a months space) he was never heard to
swear, rave, or blaspheme the name of God as he was accustomed to do before
that time, which greatly comforted his welwillers, to see how mightily the
grace of God did work in him.

He confessed himself that he was never heart sick, but said that al his
pain was in his belly. And although he continually scowred, yet still his
belly sweld, and never left swelling upward, until it sweld him at the heart
and in his face.

During the whole time of his sickness, he continually called upon God, and
recited these sentences following: O Lord forgive me my manifold offenses.
O Lord have mercy upon me.
O Lord forgive me my secret sins, and in thy mercy (Lord) pardon them all.
Thy mercy (O Lord) is above thy works.
And with such like godly sentences he passed the time, even till he gave up
the Ghost.

And this is to be noted, that his sickness did not so greatly weaken him,
but that he walked to his chair and back again the night before he departed,
and then (being feeble) laying him down on his bed, about nine of the clock
at night, a friend of his told him, that his Wife had sent him commendations,
and that she was in good health: whereat he greatly reioiced, confessed that
he had mightily wronged her, and wished that he might see her before he
departed. Whereupon (feeling his time was but short, he took pen and ink,
and wrote her a Letter to this effect.

SWeet Wife,
as ever there was any good will or friendship between thee and me, see this
bearer (my Host) satisfied of his debt, I owe him ten pound, and but for him
I had perished in the streets. Forget and forgive my wrongs done unto thee,
and Almighty God have mercy on my soul. Farewell till we meet in heaven, for
on earth thou shall never see me more. This 2. of September. 1592.

Written by thy dying Husband Robert Green.


Greenes Prayer in the time of his sickness.
O Lord Jesus Christ my Savior and redeemer, I humbly beseech thee to look
down from heaven upon me (thy servant that am grieved with thy spirit that I
may patiently endure to the end thy rod of chastisement: And forasmuch as thou
art Lord of life and death, as also of strength health, age, weakness, and
sickness, I do therefore wholly submit my self unto thee, to be dealt withal
accor.+ding to thy holy will and pleasure. And seeing O merciful Jesus, that my
sins are innumerable like unto the sands of the sea, and that I have so
often offended thee that I have worthily deserved death and utter damnation, I
humbly pray thee to deal with me according to thy gracious mercy and not
agreeable to my wicked deserts. And grant that I may (O Lord) through thy
spirit with patience, suffer and bear this Cross, which thou have worthily
laid upon me: notwithstanding how grievous soever the burden thereof be,
that my faith may be found laudable and glorious in thy sight, to the increase
of thy glory, and my everlasting felicity. For even thou (O Lord) most sweet
Savior did first suffer pain before thou were crucified: Since therefore O
meek Lamb of God that my way to eternal joy is to suffer with thee worldly
greeuances, grant that I may be made like unto thee, by suffering patiently,
adversity, trouble, and sickness. And lastly, forasmuch as the multitude of thy
mercies does put away the sins of those which truly repent, so as thou
remembrest them no more, open the eye of thy mercy, and behold me a most
miserable and wretched sinner, who for the same does most earnestly desire
pardon and forgiveness. Renew (O Lord) in me, whatsoever has been decayed by
the fraudulent malice of Satan, or my own carnal wilfulnes: receive me (O
Lord) into thy favor, consider of my contrition, and gather up my tears into
thy heavenly habitation: and seeing (O Lord) my whole trust and confidence is
only in thy mercy, blot out my offenses, and tread them under feet, so as
they may not be a witness against me at the day of wrath. Grant this O Lord, I
humbly beseech thee, for thy mercies sake. Amen.

FINIS.

