THE ROYAL EXCHANGE.

Containing sundry Aphorisms of Phylosophie, and golden principles of Morrall
and natural Quadruplicities.

Under pleasant and effectual sentences, dyscouering such strange definitions,
deuisions, and distinctions of virtue and vice, as may please the grauest
Citizens, or youngest Courtiers.

First written in Italian, and dedicated to the Signorie of Venice, now
translated into English, and offered to the City of London.

Rob. Green, in Artibus Magister.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewood for William Wright. Anno. Dom. 1590.

To the right honorable Sir John Heart, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London: and to the right worshipful Ma. Richard Gurney, and Ma. Stephen Soame,
Sheriffs of the same City. Robert Green wysheth increase of honor and
worship.
WHen the golden Tripos, (right Honorable, and no less Worshipful) whereon
was written Detur sapients, was found in the Promontories of Grecia, they
presented it to Socrates: and such Antiquaries as could from the Gymnosophists,
draw any special principle of government, brought all their opinions into the
Library of Themistocles. The Graecians doing the one because Socrates was a
wise man, the Antiquaries the other, for that Themistocles was a great
polytitian. Apollo is worthy of his Laurel, Mercury of his Caduceus, Jupiter
of his Scepter: Caesar must have his due, Kings their fealty, and Magistrates
their honors, even with reverence. Having (right Honorable and Worshipful)
read over an Italian Pamphlet, dedicated to the Signorie of Venice, called La
Burza Reale, full of many strange and effectual Aphorisms, ending in short
contrived Quadruplicities, translating it in^o our vulgar English tongue, and
keeping the title, which signifies the Royal Exchange, I presumed, as the
Italian made offer of his work to the Venetian state, so to present the
imitation of his labors to the pyllers of this honorable City of London,
which to counteruaile their Burza Reale, have a Royal Exchange: flourishing
with as honorable Merchaunts, as theirs with valorosissim^ Mercadori. But to
leave off comparisons, because such insertions are odious, yet this boldly we
may boast out of the Antiquaries, that our City of London, that famous
Troyno^ant, plotted and erected by Brute^ and after famozed by king Lud, and
his successors, is more ancient far then their City of Venice. For their
Magistrates, although their chief Governor be a Duke, yet his estimation is
so circumscript within the counterchecks of the Consiliaedori, that his
Dukedom is a bondage, his authority small, and his command little, and Ex
Cont^mptu s^mper manca ^st iustitia, in so much that the very poor C^ttizens
will in derision, call him Aurco s^ruidore: whereas the Lord Mayor of London,
entitled with honor and knight-hoode, purchased by his Predicessours valor,
under whom the Sheriffs are next in authority, has by a special Charter and
privilege, granted him from the Crown, the Lie^tenantshyp, and absolute
governance and reg^ment of the City, in such ample manner, as his command
stretches to the setting up and aduauncing of ve^tue, and to the suppressing
and abolishing of vice and vanities. Provided that the honorable C^ttizens
always careful for the Commonwealth, elect such a grave, an ancient
Magistrate, as for his virtue, religion, wealth and worthiness, may rightly be
called Pater Patria. For our Merchaunts and other Citizens, though they
generalli^ attain not to that excess of riches that the Venetians do, yet for
the enlargement of the liberties of their City, they stand so much upon their
credits, as they grudge not to disburse any sum, either necessary to their
private Polut^ia, or helpful to the common profit of their Country. For
religion they have the Gospel, for justice a severe law executed with
clemency, being Merchaunts with their friends and traffic fellows,
otherwise martial minded soldiers, to resist the violence either of any
private mutiny, or any common enemy, as valiant to attempt in wars as to
counsel in peace. And although Venice be a City seated in the Ocean, and
environed round about with the Sea, standing much upon their Armado and Nauall
fight, yet our Citizens of London, (her Majesty's royal fleet excepted) have
so many ships harbored within the Thames, as will not only match with all
the Argoses, Galleyes, Galeons, and Pataches in Venice, but to encounter by sea
with the strongest City in the whole world: Considering therefore, (right
honorable and worshipful) the excellency of this City, the honor of the
Magistrates, the worship of the Merchaunts, and the general worthiness of all
in one simpathie. I thought good, as the Italian presented his Bursa Reale to
the Venetians, so to presume the patronage of this Royal Exchange unto your
Honor, being worthily advanced to the regiment of the City, and to the
right worshipful Sheriffs, for their virtues called to their special
offices: hoping your Lordship and their worships, will vouchsafe to patronise
the labors of so mean a Scholar, if not for the worthiness of the matter, yet
for the name and title of the Pamphlet: from which Royal Exchange, if any
Citizen or other gather any principle of worth, or have in-sight for the
following of virtue or avoiding of vice, their profits shall be noted to
proceed from your honorable and worshipful dispositions, under whose
patronage this book is shrouded. And thus resting upon your gracious and
favorable acceptaunce, I commit your Lordship and their worships to the
tuition of the Almighty.

Bounden to the honorable and worshipful of the City, Rob. Green.

To the right honorable Citizens of the City of London.
WHen I enter into the consideration how honorable the estate of this your
City is, famozed with great and ancient buildings, excelling for laws
executed with justice, renowned for worthy Magistrates, and peopled with
warlike M^rchaunts, and politic Citizens, I cannot but compare it to the
imagined Commonwealth of Plato, and say, O fortunate City for so famous
Citizens. Seeing therefore the parts and members of your Poluteia are
Homogenei, concordant and consonant in one unity, to erect virtue and abolish
vanities, having translated a book called the Royal Exchange into English, I
thought good, as it was patronaged under the L. Mayor and Sheriffs, so to
shrowde it likewise under the favors of such honorable Citizens, considering
your Exchange in London, every way duly weyed, excels all the Burse
reales in the world: for as you find in theirs welthy Burgamaisters, and
Grandi Mercadori, so in ours you find, men that esteem more of honor then of
wealth, and such as for the defense of their City hyre not straggling
Mercinaries to withstand their enemies, but they themselves well appointed, et
armis et side, march like approved Caualiers, to abide the brunt of any
injurious mutiny. But now honorable Citizens, look not into my Exchange
for any wealthy traffic of curious merchandise, either silk to make men
effeminate, or costly abiliments to make women proud, here be no fans to
shadow the face, nor no Alexandrine paintings to make honest wives seem like
curtizans, no commodities to wrape Gentlemen in statutes or recognisaunces:
only this Exchange is royal, and the Philosophers set abroche their
principles: here you may buy obedience to God, performed in the careful
mayntenaunce of his true religion, here you shall see curiously set out
reverence to Magistrates, faith to friends, love to our neighbors, and
charity to the poor: who couets to know the duty of a Christian, the office
of a Ruler, the calling of a Citizen: to be brief, the effects Tullie pende
down in his Officies, either for the embracing of virtue, or shunning of vice,
let him repair to this Royal Exchange, and there he shall find himself
generally furnished: hoping therefore, if it be but for the name sake, you will
with a courteous acceptance, think well of my labors, and view over the work,
I commit you to the Almighty.

Rob. Green.

CORNVCOPIA: OR The Royal Exchange.
Art. Art.
Four things are made good by art^.

1. A wise wife. 2. An eloquent tongue. 3. A ripe wit. 4. And favor in worldly
affairs.
Cicero in his works De Oratore, calls art the polisher of nature, saying:
that what nature (as presuming too much in her cunning by oblivion,) has left
imperf^ct: art by the m^anes of industry, reduces to a sp^cial singulariti^,
so that alluding to the opinion of Plato, he thinks nature neu^r in her
^xcellencie, till she be beautified by art.

Animale. Creatures.
Four creatures live severally and solie in the four Elements.

1. The Herring in the water. 2. The Salamander in the fire. 3. The Moule in
the earth. 4. And the Camelcon in the air.
Pliny in his natural Histories, assigns these four creatures to the four
El^ments, proouing that nature has so particulerlie tied them to these
several limits, as otherwise they cannot live: for proof, he says that the
Herring seeing the North star, leapeth at it, but by thrusting her head out of
the water, ly^th a long while after dazeled. The Salamander (says Aristotle)
in his books De natura Animalium, is of a cold c^nstitution, and therefore
harbors near to the Mount Etna, where amidst the continual flames he
batheth himself in the fire: whereof comes the foolish comparisons of our
Poets, that seeing Lovers scorch^d with affection, like^eth them to
Salamanders. The Cameleon feeding only with the air, has this property,
that he can change his color, and turn himself into the likeness of every
object, whereupon flatterers that by their ad^lation feed every man's humor,
are compared to Cameleons.

Four creatures above others are most fruitful.

1. Sheep. 2. Oxen. 3. Hens. 4. Bees.
These cr^atures says Auicen in his Aphorisms, are as they are most familiar
to men, so most fr^endly to men, yielding for every benefit a requital, and
paying them due with thankfulness: for being nourished by the hand of man,
they yield the fruits of their bodi^s, their lives or labors for payment,
appeaching us thereby of ingratitude, that show not the like grateful minds
to our benefactors.

Abondanza. Abundance.
The abundance of four things are hurtful.

1. Of women. 2. Of meats. 3. Of gaming. 4. Of words.
The Philosophers whose sayings have been holden as Oracles, have set down
this for a principal, that how perfect a woman be either in virtue, beauti^,
or wealth, yet they are to men necessary evils: so that Tymon of Athens who
was called Mysanthropos, seeing a tree whereon diverse women had hanged
th^mselues, wished that every tree might yield such fruit. More says the
wise man, has died by gluttony then by the sword. E^cesse of meats is
prejudicial both to soul and body, inferring (says Socrates) both sin and
poverty. Too much gaming in old time was so odious, that Chilon the
Lacedaemonian being sent Ambassador to Corinth and finding the noble men
playing at dice, he returned without unfolding the cause of his coming: not
so much as naming the league that he should have entreated o^ betwixt them,
saying: that he would not eclipse the glory of the Spartanes with so great an
ignominy, as to join the^ in society with dice-players. Antisthenes was wont
to say, that in many words, did either lie hid much fraud or folly: wishing
his disciples to take heed to their talk, for that words had wings, which once
let slyp, could never be recalled.

Affetto. Affect.
In four things principally men do affect.

1. The gain of money. 2. In clyming unto dignity. 3. In governing a family.
4. In doing evil.
These four breed a restless desire, and affectionate passion in the mind
of man, being covetous to get coin, ambicious to seek after preferment,
imperious in rule, and insatiate in doing evil.

Four affects are insatiable in man.

1. The will to profit. 2. The desire of knowledge. 3. The sight of the eye. 4.
And to hear.
Tullie in his Orator, calls Laelyus helluo Librorum, a deuourer of Books,
as one never satiate with reading over many and sundry Authors. Plato spent
the greatest part of his life in travel, only for the desire of learning. And
the Bragmaes and Gymnosophists, counted not those bearers amongst their lives
wherein they learned not somewhat. Zeno the Stoic, b^eing foure-score and
fourteen years old, lying on his death-bedde, and hearing some in
disputation, lifted himself up to hear, and being demanded why he did so,
answered, that when I have learned this principle I may die.

Abuzo. Abuse.
Four things are of great abuse in this world.

1. A king unjust in his government. 2. A mind negligent of Religion. 3. A
wise man without showing the fruits of his wisdom. 4. A rich man
uncharitable, and not giving any alms.
Plato in his Commonwealth, and Aristotle in his Polliticks, sets down, that
the heauiest burd^n which a a Monarchy can bear, is to suffer an unjust king.
Tynion at his death wishing y^ overthrow of the state of A^hens, prayed that
the City might be seditious, and gou^rn^d with unjust Rulers. If justice
(says Anaxagoras) be to give every man his due, what a Monst^r is injustice,
that defraudeth every man of his right.

There be four sorts of people of great aabuse in the world.

^. A Christian given to factions and dissension. 2. A poor man proud. 3. An
old man without religion. 4. A Woman that is not sh^mefast.
It is one of the principal badges of the true Church says Chrysostom, to
live in unity, ^or there is but o^e God, one faith, and one baptism: then
since concord in the principles of Religion be precious, it follow^s, that
scismes and controversies are most pernicious. Whereunto a Poet merrily alludeth
this distichon.

Cur nunc tot sidibus luditur vna fides.
There is four great abuses in this world.

^. A noble man without virtue. 2. A people without discipline. 3. A
Commonwealth without Law. 4. A young man without obedience.
Lycurgus was wont to say, that the Laws were the sinews of a kingdom, which
as they did wax weak, so the Commonwealth did decay: and being kept in
force, did remain in their pristinate strength and vigor, whereupon, when he
had given Laws to the Spartans, he swore them to keep his statutes inuiolate
till his return from Delphos, whether he banished himself: and after his
death, caused his bones to be burned, and the ashes to be thrown into the Sea,
that they might for ever be tied to the observing of his Laws.

Allegrezza. Mirth.
There are four things that breed sudden joy.

1. To be freed out of prison. 2. To be married. 3. To become a Soldier. 4. To
be promo^^d to dignity.
The sw^etest thing that can happen unto man says Crates, is hope in
adversity to come unto prosperity, and eclipsed w^t^ d^rkn^s to see the light
^f ^he ^^nn^: for misery is not so ^itter as felicity is pleasant, so that
well says Virgill in the person of Aeneas: Olim hec maem^iss^ Iuuabit.


Afflictione. Affliction.
For four causes a man does will^ngly suffer affliction.

1. To g^tte honor. 2. To avoid p^^^rtie. 3. In es^hew disgrace. 4. To in^i^^
his children
It has been an old Proverb, that happy is that son whose father goes to
the devil: meaning by this allegorical kind of speech, that such fathers as
seek to enrich their sons by covetousness, by briberie, purloyning, or by any
other sinister means, suffer not only affliction of mind, as grieved with
insatietie of getting, but with danger of soul, as a just roward for such
wretchedness.

Antonomazia. Agnomynation.
Four sorts of men are known by excellency, or title of agnomination.

1. Solomon when they name the wife. 2. Aristotle when they name the
Philosopher 3. Uirgill when they name the Poet. 4. Paul when they name the
Apostle.
The first admonishes with wisdom. The second with Philosophy. The third
with Poetry. The fourth teaches the true faith.
These being ^wo Jews and two Gentiles, famous for Theologi^ and Philosophy,
shows to us by what sundry gifts God does glory in his creatures, for
although Virgill and Aristotle were ignorant of the divine essence, and knew
God but in shadows, and as i^ were in glass, yet the secret skill they had in
the depth of his works, did prove a mani^est action against all Infidels and
A^he^s^s that deny there is one almighty and everlasting GOD, Creator of all
things.

Auidita. Greediness.
Four things greedy minds cannot perform. To 1. Abstain from things
^orbidden. 2. ^nioy things granted. 3. Use pi^tie. 4. Know a mean in getting.


The perfect description of a greedy or covetous mind, which like the Serpent
Hydaspis is so insatiate, as the more he drinks, the more he is a thirst,
and the more he desires, the farther is he from the end of his covetous
imaginations: yet having gotten in part what he craves his estate is so
miserable, as he greeueth to use that for the use of himself, which with long
care and travel he has gotten.

Amore. Love.
There are four degrees in Love. To 1. Talk. 2. Be conversant. 3. Taste. 4.
Possess.


In this division is comprehended whatsoever is in love, for the inward motion
of the mind which we commonly call fancy, must be discovered by the tongue,
which must be continued by conversation, otherwise the parties shall not be
privy to the mutual manners either of other, which is the che^fest interest
in affection: and their minds once united, follows the fruit of their
desires, which is not mad^ perfect till he peaceably possesses the good he
presently enjoys.

Auaritia. Covetousness.
Four things do spring from covetousness.

1. Rapyne. 2. Perjury. 3. Fraud. 4. Murder.
By the branches is easily discovered what the Tree is, and by such effects is
manifested a most wretched cause, so that this agrees with the saying of
Thales Mylesius, that Auaritia est radix omnium malorum.

Four things make a man covetous.

1. The fear of want. 2. The oppression of servitude. 3. The envy of others.
4. The abo^ndance of children.
It is remembered that Crassus the Roman, whose revenues were so great, as
being a private Ci^^izen, he was able to maintain ten Legions of Soldiers
for two years with meat and money, yet was so covetous as his extortion had
no end: and being demanded why he was so greedy to gain: answered, for
that he saw the misery of such as did want.

Four things do assuage covetous desires.

1. The abundance of riches. 2. Youth enriched with health. 3. Conversation
with liberal men. 4. And want of children.
As before he placed the number of children to be the cause of covetousness,
so he adde^h the want of children to be the means to mittigate such inordinate
desire: meaning hereby, that Nature careful of her seed sown by
propagation, dryueth a care into the minds of Parents to heap up wealth for
their children: and yet Antisthenes at the day of his death, made this prou^so
in his last will and Testament, that if his sons were wise and Philosophers,
they should not enjoy one penny of his goods, but if fools, they should
possess all his treasures.

Allidini. Sloth.
Four things procure sloth.

1. Obscure and darksome places. 2. Solitary quiet. 3. Displeasant fear. 4.
And weak cogitations.
Pythagoras among his obscure Aenigmaes, has this: Take heed thou sit not
upon a bushel: meaning that sloth and idleness were especially to be
eschewed, as vices most pernicious to a Commonwealth. For Plato rehearsing
certain particular causes of sedition and civil mutiny, alleges idleness
not to be one of the least, alluding to the saying of Seneca, that as labor
and travel appeaseth tumults, so sloth nourishes vprores and factions: to
avoid this vice, Hesiodus counsel is, to shut up the day with sweat, to
spend time rather in needelesse exercise then in idleness.

Auocato. Advocate.
Four things ought every just Advocate to observe.

1. To hear the adversary with patience. 2. To consider deeply of ye things
heard. 3. To prepare a right answer to the cause considered. 4. To conclude
by measuring the caus^ after his own case.
Aristides, the perfect iusticiarie of his time, was so impartial in hearing
his adversaries plea, that when one came to the harre and told him what evil
the Plaintiff had spoken against him, he made this answer, tell me not what
injuries he has done to my self, but what wrong he has done to the
defendant, for I stand here to minister justice, not to revenge.

Auditore. A hearer.
Four things are necessary for every one that hears any thing to take heed
of.

1. To hear him with silent patience that speaks. 2. To consider well of the
things heard. 3. To commit to memory what is good. 4. To put to oblivion
what is evil.
Here is the counsel of Plutarch verified, that wishes every man to have
two passages in at his ears, the one for good principles, which must be kept
as Pearls, the other for such frivolous matters as being carelessly heard,
ought to be soon forgotten.

Alfiero. A standard bearer.
These four conditions ought to adorn and beautify a standard bearer or
Ancient.

1. Nobleness of blood. 2. Love to his Country. 3. Courage of mind. 4.
Policy in war.
Themis^ocles the honor of his Country, and the fl^wer of Chivalry in his
time, who was both a valiant Soldier and a wise Philosopher, would not suffer
any to bear the standarde or Ancient in his time, that was not able to carry
ye Arms of his auncesters in his flag, and that had done some exployte before
in some battle of vtteraunce.

Amicitia. Freendship.
Four things do procure amity and freendshippe.

1. A benefit. 2. Familiarity. 3. Similitude of manners. 4. Eloquence.
Amongst all other causes of perfect freendship, the likeness of manners and
similitude of life is the cheifest, so that when the parts of the mind be
homogenes, of one uniform and mutual disposition, then commonly the
freendshippe is firm and endures long: whereas disparitie of manners, may for
a time mask under the color of amity, but at last proves brittle: for it
is a censure holden for an infallible principle. Dissimulum infida est amicitia.

Four sorts of men loose their friends wrongfully and without cause.

1. A rich man oppressed with poverty. 2. A mighty man deprived of his dignity.
3. A happy man thwarted with disgrace 4. An old man over burdened with years.
And these also are despyand forsaken of men.
Scipio the Affrican, after all his glorious victories, sequestrating himself
to a graunge place, being demand^d why he would not live any longer in the
Commonwealth, answered, for that flying from the injuries of Fortune, I mean
still to keep my friends: thinking that if he had been checked by any
dis-fauour of the Senate, he had presently made shipwreck of his old
companions. For Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.

There are four principal sorts of freen^^s different in conditions.

1. Fortune friends. 2. Cable friends. 3. Faithful friends. 4. And servile
friends.
The first depart at the frown of Fortune. The second vanishe by fragilitie.
The third are perpetual. The fourth continue so so long as they are bound by
servitude.
This division shows the difference between true and fained freendship, the
one being momentarie depending on the favor of Fortune, the other perpetual,
which stretches vsque ad Aras: such was the freendship of Damon and Pythias,
of Scipio and Laelius, of Tytus and Gysippus, of Pilades and Orestes, and
diverse others, that no adversity could diss^uer: where as Parrasites, such as
Terence and Plautus discouers in their Comedies, hang their freendshippe at
the Tables end, and their loyalty at the Caters basket.

Four sorts of men speedily get friends.

1. They which be liberal. 2. They which be mighty. 3. They which be
pleasant. 4. They which be well tongued and affable in speech.
Do thou covet says Diogenes the Cinick, to have multitude of friends:
then either seek for store of possessions, promotion, or else become a
flatterer.

Beneficio. A benefit.
The be four sorts of men that in despite of themselves have good turns and
benefits done them.

1. The debtor when he is freed from his debt. 2. The child when he is beaten
for his fault. 3. He which is troubled with ye Lytargie when he is waked from
sleep. 4. And he which in his lunacie is quieted with bonds.
Although as Epictetus says, there is nothing sweeter then moderate
correction, yet such is our nature drowned in self-love, as offend we neeuer
so deeply, yet we scorn not only to be corrected, but to be reprehended:
herein resembling infants and sucklings, y^ fear the rod more then offense:
but as they by such chastisement wexe m^^^ wary, so a good man by reprehension
becomes more wi^e.

Four things do induce a man to bestow a benefit.

1. Gain. 2. Fear. 3. Hope. 4. Love.
In a gift (says Aristotle in his Ethics,) thou must observe circumstaunces,
namely, 1. To whom thou do give. 2. Why thou do give. 3. How thou do
give. 4. And when thou do give. Otherwise thou may err in bestowing a
benefit: for if thou give for fear, as thinking so to please thine enemy: for
gain, as covetous of lu^re: for hope, either of the like, or of better, thy
gift is not worth the name of a benefit.

Beni inutili. Things good, yet unprofitable.
Four things are good, and yet do little prevail after a deed done.

1. Wit. 2. Consideration after the deed. 3. Meditation. 4. And sorrow.
Sero sapient Phriges, when Troy was sacked, the Citizens were wise: to shut
the stable door when the steed is stolen, is to wish for a shower of rain
when harvest i^ past: also when a fault is committed, it is good to enter into
the consideration of the folly, and to be sorrowful for the miss, yet they
little or nothing profit.

Brenita. Brevity.
Four things cannot be of any long continuance.

1. A contentious man. 2. A foolish Tyrant. 3. An v^iust possessor. 4. And a
prodigal spender.
Aristotle in his Physics sette^h down this principle. Nullum violentum est
lontinuum: and Socrates alleges this Axiom, every excess is both a vice and
momentary. Where is division, there says Zenocrates, is confusion. And Thales
Mylesius counted it a wonder of the world to see an old Tyrant.

Citta. A City.
Four Cities more the^ any o-other are situated by the sea.

1. Genoa. 2. Venice. 3. Constantinople 4. Pysa.
The first rich. The 2. abounding. The third full of merchandise. The 4.
famous for honorable Citizens.
Venice is seated in the Sea, six miles from any ^^rme Land, walled with the
Ocean, and environed with Rocks, a Dukedom both rich and mighty.

Four Cities are greater then the most.

1. Paris in France. 2. Mylane. In Italy. 3. Florence. In Italy. 4. Rome. In
Italy.
Four things do specially make a City famous.

1. Antiquity of building. 2. Nobility of Citizens. 3. Uictories won in
the field. 4. And observing leagues and promises.
Lacedaemonia, Thebes and Athens, the three lights of Greece, were famous for
these four points, being founded long before the rest, bringing forth many
worthy Philosophers and courageous Captains, as Epapinondas, Themistocles,
Alcibiades, and infinite others, which by their Prowess won many great and
notable battles, being so strickt in their promises, that they chose rather
to die, then to be false to their confederates.

Four things do defend a City.

1. Peace. 2. Wisdom. 3. Fear. 4. And justice.
Demosthenes being demanded what preserved Athens so long in a flourishing
estate, made this brief answer, the Citizens delight in peace and quiet,
the Orators are learned and wise, the Common people are fearful to
transgress the Laws, and the Magistrates delight to do justice.

Four things do make a City desert.

1. Intestine and civil war. 2. Restless envy. 3. Want of victualles. 4.
And justice blinded.
Four things do drive a man out of a City.

1. The wickedness of a tyrant. 2. Famine. 3. Prodigality. 4. And untimely
gifts.
If we read the Annual records that Historiographers have set down, as
true antiquaries of time, we shall find, that nothing has sooner ruinated and
subverted Cities, then cyuill wars and envy: for ambition creeping into the
minds of men through an envious humor that feeds their hearts, stirs them
by aspyring thoughts to strive for a sole supremacy, so the better to revenge:
as fell out between Ptolomie and Caesar, Sylla and Marius, Anthony and
Augustus, which breeding civil wars, did almost subvert the state of the
Romans.

Four things do make a City habitable, and to be frequented with Strangers.

1. The preservation of justice. 2. The bounty of ye Citizens. 3. Speedy
gain and return of commodities. 4. And abundance of victuals and
necessaries.
The Author in all his censures, sets still down justice as a chief pyller
in a Commonwealth: arguing by this repetition, that nothing is of-greater
force in a City, then to give every man his due, which Tullie sets down
for the perfect definition of that virtue, which (says he) contains in it all
other virtues.

Casa. A house.
Four things do often make a man to return to his house.

1. The love toward his Wife. 2. The pleasantness of his house. 3. The want
of companions. 4. And the adversity of time.
Scipio the Affrican, having suffered so long his affections to be led a
wrye, that he fell into love with his Concubine, and so placing her in a
Graunge place, absented himself from his wife, yet at last by secret sparks
of good will, which still remained in his heart, calling to mind his wives
virtuous disposition, returned home and forsook his follies.

Four things drives a man from his house.

1. Too much smoke. 2. A dropping roof. 3. A fylthie air. 4. And a brawling
woman.
Here pollitiquelie is used a figure called Clymax, or Gradatio, where
ascending from the less, he ends in the greater: for rehearsing diverse
enormities that are able to drive a man from his house, at last he concludes
with a brawling woman as the worst and greatest evil of al.

Conoscere. Knowledge.
Four things are impossible to be known or discerned.

1. The flight of a bird through the air. 2. The way of a ship through the
sea. 3. The passage of a Serpent over a stone. 4. And the way of a young man
in his youth.
Solomon in his Parables as having wisdom given him from above, noting that
the ways of a young m^n are slipperie, and so over shadowed with vanity as
they blind the sense: alludeth the knowledge of his follies to an
impossibility, proouing by this Aenigmaticall kind of phrase, that his
thoughts and (...) are builded upon inconstancy.

Four things are easy to be known.

1. A valiant man in battle. 2. A good Mariner in a tempest. 3. Good gold in
the furnace. 4. And a freende in adversity.
Amicus certus (says the Poet) in re incerta cernitur, mishappe is the true
^ouchstone of freendshyp, and adversity the trial of friends. Curtius had
not been known to be valiant, if he had not so worthily withstoode the Army
of Porsena: Arsidas had never been praised to Alexander, for a good Mariner,
if he had not been a good Pylot in necessi^ie: neither had Damon been
counted so faithful to Pythias, if he had not remained a pledge for his
freende with Dyonisius in Sycillia.

Carita. Charity.
Four things do proceed from charity.

1. Reverence toward God. 2. Love toward our neighbor. 3. Succor to the
oppressed. 4. And instruction to them that err.
The fruits of charity are the perfect fulfilling of the Law, for Saint
Paul says, that if he had faith, and sold all that he had to give to the
poor, and yet wanted love and charity, he were like a tynckling cymball: and
in these four branches of charity, is made a perfect division of the Law,
for he sets down our duty toward God, in giving him due reverence, and
our duty toward our neighbor, in loving, helping, and instructing him.

Costanza. Constancy.
Four things do induce constancy.

1. The f^are of shame. 2. The fear of punishment. 3. The fear^ of fame. 4.
And the fear of fraud.
Attylius Regulus was so constant in his promises, that he rather chose death
then any way to spotte his fame by fear either of punishment or misery.

Consigliare. A Counselor.
Four things are necessary for him yt gives counsel.

1. To hear the reasons of both parties. 2. To consider of that which he
hears with discretion. 3. To demand equal hier for his pains. 4. To give
counsel conformable to the Law.
To be partial says Seneca in giving of counsel, differs nothing in
preportion from treachery, for the one deceives under the pr^ten^e of aid,
and the other under the color of fre^ndship.

Four counsels are profitable to man.

1. To stand^ far from strife and brawles. 2. To prevent perils before they be
past. 3. To leave pleasures that are most desired. 4. And to make no choice of
delicate viands.
Est virtus placidis abstinuisse bonis: it is a great virtue says the Poet, to
abstain from things that are pleasant, and therefore seem good: for virtue
ever goes bare faced, but vice to allure with the more policy, hides her
impoysoned hooks with a s^ge^ed bayte.

Cortigiano. A Courtier.
Four things do appertain to a Courtier.

1. To hear with sapience. 2. To answer with prudence. 3. To be offensive to
no man. 4. And to profit the Citizen.
Baldessar in his Courtier has the like principles. For Gorsaga setting down
certain precepts, wishes that he be every way wise, both in hearing and
speaking, that he listen not to frivolous prattle, nor at any time utter
talk of no importance, that he be courteous and willing to please all, and
especially ready to please the Citizen, for from him rises either his praise
or infamy.

Four things procure a man to be a Courtier.

1. Abundance of riches. 2. Ambition and desire of honor. 3. Integrity and
quicknes of wit. 4. And y^ hope of reward by service.
Capitano. A Captain.
Four things are profitable for a Captain in the wars.

1. Treasure to make just pay to his Soldiers. 2. Store of meat and
munition. 3. Multitude of Soldiers. 4. And wisdom to know the condition of
the enemy.
We read in the Chronicles of the wars of the Turks, that amongst all the
orders in his Army, the Turk does use to give great pay to his Ianisaries:
by that means to make them both hardy and faithful. For in his wars
against Cassanus the Souldane, when he had taken him, and found in his
Treasure store of coin, and yet saw the mind of the man was such and so
miserable, as he would not make francke pay to his Soldiers, he shut him
up in a Chamber with all his treasure, and so starued him to death.

Four things do belong to a Captain in the wars.

1. How to set his soldiers in squadrons with greatest vantage against ye
enemy. 2. How to foresee the enemies intent. 3. To encourage the^ cheerfully
to fight. 4. And to lead his men bravely to the battle.
Phillip of Macaedon, being demanded why he was longer in subduing Thebes and
Athens then of all Greece besides, answered, for that their Captains were
Philosophers and Orators, able to persuade more with their eloquence, then he
was to command with his dignity: whereby he d^^th admonish, that one of the
principal points of a good Captain, is to exhort his soldiers with skill.

Four things ought every one that makes war to consider.

1. Of what power he is himself. 2. What forces the enemy is able to provide.
3. For what cause he takes the war in hand. 4. And what shall be the
success of the battle.
Foresight (says Epictetus) is the preuenter of repentance, and nothing is
more prejudicial in a Captain then to say (had I wist:) for unless the
forenamed circumstaunces be carefully considered, he may slyppe into sundry
enormities.

Condition humana. Humane condition.
Four things do bewray the condition of man.

1. His speech. 2. His secrecy. 3. The motion of his mind. 4. And his
exterior gestures.
Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: alluding to our old English proverb, what
the heart thinks, the tongue clacketh: meaning heerby, that the affections of
man are known by his speech, as sa^oring of wisdom or folly, of envy, as
loving to backbite: of wrath^ as uttering choleric terms and such like.

Comandare. To command.
Four things do ruinate him over whom they comma^nd.

1. Love. 2. Hate. 3. Fear. 4. Gaynes.
Ovid, although he wrote his works De Artea mandi, yet being willed by Corynna
to set down a perfe^^ definition of love. He said it was a passion that he
knew not from whence it sprung, what it was, nor to what end it tended: only
this by experience he was able to aver, that it was an affection that
commanded nothing but loss. Where hate and couetise of gains rules, says
Socrates, there look neither for charity nor honesty, for h^te springs
from envy, and covetousness from injustice.

Con^inat^. A banished man.
Four things are profitable for a banished man.

1. To consider the estate of them which are fallen. 2. To hope to better his
estate. 3. To spend caref^lly. 4. And to seek after gain moderately.
When Metellus was banished out of Rome, his friend Nastyca gave him this
friendly advertisement at his departure: think thou art not (quoth he) the
first that has tried his fortune: ever once hope to return, be not prodigal,
least riot breed want: nor too covetous, least thou purchase the hate of
Strangers.

Domand^re. To demand.
Four things are profitable for him to consider that demands.

1. What he is that demands. 2. Of whom he does d^^^^^d. 3. For what cause
he does dema^^d. 4. And what it is he does dem^^nd.
These circum^^au^ces of demanding, of giving, of receiving or performing any
duty, the Reader may best learn in Aristotle his Ethics, wh^re they are
discoursed of at large.

Dottore. A Teacher.
Four things do belong unto a Teacher.

1. In the day to look over the Lecture he has to read. 2. In the night by
meditation to call it to memory. 3. Privately to resolve his scholars in all
doubts. 4. To be a^fable with them.
Four things procure a Teacher to read well.

1. The multitude of Scholars. 2. Great reward for his pains. 3. The getting
of greater knowledge 4. And the hope to obtain fame and honor.
The ancient Philosophers, especially Aristotle, was wont never to deliver any
new principle in Peripateo, unless the night before he had thrice called it
to memory, by proouing pro et contra with himself, so to seek out the truth
of the Axiom: and for this his pains, as he got immortal renown, so he
purchased great rewards, not only at the hands of Alexander, but by other his
scholars of meaner calling: but so i^ the condition of time changed, as the
Teacher passes over his preceps without a^^ great premeditation, for that his
labor and industry is so slenderly rewarded.

Donna. A woman.
Four things do belong unto a woman.

1. Beauty of the face, and proportion of body. 2. Chastity of mind. 3.
Honesty of manners. 4. And a familiar curiousness.
Crates the Philosopher said, that unless virtue were added to beauty, how
^aire so ever the face were, a woman were most deformed: thincking the
interior perfection of the mind was of more force then the exterior
constitution of the body.

Four things are desired of women especially.

1. To have a fair young man to her husband. 2. To have ^^ny children. 3. To
be decked with co^tlie apparel. 4. And to have supremacy above others.
Plato in his A^drogina says, that of all the affects that most troubles and
disturbes the minds of Women, the desire of soueranitie is ye most vehement:
for so greatly they hat^ to be ouer-ruled, that Nynus the king of Babylon,
granting his wife whatsoever she would demand in his whole Empire, she chose
only to rule three days as supreme in the Monarchy.

Four things do greatly displease women.

1. That her husband should love any but herself. 2. That she be crossed with
his frowardness. 3. That her children want. 4. Or he taken away by untimely
death.
Although says Iuuenall in his Satyrs, women love to change, yet it is death
for them to allow their H^^bands such limits, and therefore the Poet calls
them inequall proportioners of duty.

Digiuno. Fasting.
Four things belong unto him that does fast.

1. To ea^^ with modesty. 2. To eschew sin. 3. To meditate of heaven. 4. To
give alms.
We see by this division, that fasting consists not in abstaining absolutely
from all kind of meats, for he wylleth to eat with measure, but in refraining
from sin, in applying his thoughts about heavenly cogitations, and to be
charitable: which indeed is the true fast.

Dolor. Grief.
Four things are grievous unto a man.

1. The wickedness of his Children. 2. The loss of his possessions. 3. The
promotion of his enemies. 4. And the fall of his friends.
There is nothing says Solomon that more greeueth a father, then to have a
foolish and unruly son, for it makes his head full of gray hairs, and
lets him from passing with quiet into his grave. Cato who was severe in his
actions, as he was half a Stoic, yet was said to sorrow at the happiness
of Caesar, and grieve at the fall of Pompey, the first his enemy, the second
his freende.

Dominio iniusto. Unjust rule.
There are four sorts of men that rule unjustly over others.

1. The usurer. 2. The deceiuer. 3. The proud man. 4. And y^ impudent.
Hardly besette are those Citizens, (says Socrates,) where the fool
ouer-ruleth the wise, the proud man the humble, where truth is servant to
falsehood, and money task-maister over honesty.

Four inconveniences do spring from unjust rule.

1. Deceitful reverence. 2. Mortal envy. 3. The hate of Superiors. 4. And
the punishment of successors.
Where we may note, that although he which rules unjustly, takes a pleasure
in such superiority, yet pestilent and pernicious enormities are the fruits
of such delight: for the reverence which they show him, is done more for fear
then for love, their duty is hate secretly, and their revenge is to become
envious to his honors.

Diletto. Delight.
Four things do breed great pleasure and delight.

1. A sweet voice. 2. A fair face. 3. Delicate meat. 4. And a clear day.
There is no such pleasing object to the eye as beauty, nor none breeds
greater pleasure to the ear, then an eloquent tongue with sweet
pronunciation. Alexander was never vanquished with any exterior delight, but
with seeing the beauty of the Amazon Queen, and Anthony took his felicity
in hearing the sweet voice of the Egiptian Cleopatra.

Four things do greatly please and delight a man.

1. A wise son. 2. The sight of riches. 3. Preferment to dignity. 4. And
revenge upon an enemy.
The wisdom of the Son says Ecclesiastes, greatly gladdeth the Father, and
makes his years without number: for nature tieth us with such a strickt
league, as nature is greater in descent then ascent, and greater is the
affection that comes from the father then from the Son.

Danari. Money.
Four sorts of men do get money.

1. Fraudulent persons. 2. Covetous men. 3. Wise and discreet men. 4. And they
which be provident and careful.
Four things are gotten without the help of money.

1. The despising of a man's life. 2. Foolishnes. 3. Poverty. 4. And sickness.
Aristotle in setting down his happy man says, be he never so virtuous, yet
he cannot be faelix without money and riches: but we see that misery comes
so by fate, as we need not the goods of Fortune to further it.

Difficulta. Difficulty.
Four things are passing hard and difficulte unto man.

1. To possess an other man's goods and to restore them. 2. To see villainy
offered him, and to hold his peace. 3. To receive wrong, and not to be
sorrowful. 4. To have things necessary, and not to taste of them.
The Stoics which were Apotho^ without passions, held opinion, that it was the
che^^e point of virtue, not to be moved with any affections, neither to be
gladded with prosperity, nor to be daunted with adversity, but to bear all
chances alike if he were injured: and therefore they made a combat with their
affections, counting nothing virtuous that was not difficult.

Dignita. Dignity.
Four things do advance a man unto dignity.

1. Wealth. 2. Reason. 3. Science. 4. And justice.
The ready way says Zenophon to preferment, is knowledge and virtue, for they
which climb unto dignity by other means, are unworthy such good fortune.

Desiderio. Desire.
Four things are greatly desired, and sought for of men.

1. Store of money. 2. Fullness of knowledge. 3. Continual quiet. 4. And
perpetual joy and mirth.
Plato being demanded what he most desired in the whole world, answered,
knowledge: whereof he was troubled with insas^etie, to obtain which, he
passed throughout all Greece and Egypt.

Dominare. To rule.
Four sorts of men are greatly desirous to ^eare rule.

1. The poor to get that is other men's. 2. The rich to defend and keep y^
they have got. 3. The iniuried to make revenge. 4. The good to defend the
City.
The first are mortal to citizens. The second may be suffered. The third
do often harm. The fourth do greatly benefit.
Aristotle in his division of the Commonwealth, appoints the democracy or
populer estate to be the worst of all governments, and therefore concludes,
they desire greatly to reign, as men factious and desirous of novelty.

Danno sensa rimedio. Loss without remedy.
Four things may be taken away from man which can never be restored.

1. Uirginitie corrupted. 2. Life lost. 3. Fame cracked. 4. And a member cut
off.
Byas the Philosopher, when by shipwrack^ he had lost all his goods, yet
boldly and merrily could say, Omnia mea, mecum porto: thinking that riches
lost, might be got again by learning. But Themistocles when he was by the
Ostracisme unjustly banished from Athens, said, I have lost that I shall never
recover, (fame) for the Graecians that are ill, will think I have deserved ill.

Dono senza danno. A gift without loss.
Four things a man may give without loss.

1. Knowledge when he instructs. 2. Fame when a man praises one. 3.
Reverence when a man shows courtesy. 4. And fair language.
There are two things says old Master Gower, that a man may be prodigal of
without offense: of his ^ap in doing reverence, of his tong^e in giving good
speeches: which two are freely given, greatly considered, and without any
loss or detriment.

Delitto. Sin or offense.
Four things are nourished in sin.

1. The offense when it is not felt. 2. To converse and company with him that
sins. 3. To escape unpunished. 4. And to profit by sin.
Saint Augustine has this golden sentence, that Consuetudo peccati tollit
sensum peccandi: the custom of sinning takes away the feeling of sin: so
that offenses without remorse are half incurable. To accompany with sinners,
to escape witho^t punishment for the fault, and to profit by the sweetness of
sin, draws men headlong into many miseries.

Diuulgare. To manifest.
Four things hurt being manifested.

1. An offense committed. 2. Ill gotten goods. 3. A man's own foolishnes. 4.
And riches under a Tyrant.
For a man having committed a fault, to detect himself, or to be the heralde
of his own follies, is a point of extreme madness, but to bewray his wealth
under the government of a Tyrant, is to give himself a pray to the oppressor.

Dio. God.
Four things are greatly acceptable unto God and unto men.

1. The concord of brethren. 2. The love of neighbors. 3. Quiet between man
and wi^e 4. The repentance of sinners.
David the holy Prophet, as inspired and wondering at the concord of brethren,
cries out with vehemency of spirit, Ecce quam bonum, et quam iucundum,
habitare fratres in vnum: comparing their love to dew that dropped on the Hill
of Hermon, and to the oil that ran down upon Aarons beard: for the sweet
consent and agreement in marriage, he adds a blessing, that their children
sit about their Table, and for the repentance of sinners, he says the
Angels makes joy in heaven.

Eccellenza d' Huomini.
Four excellent men in four sundry Nations.

1. Judas Maccabaeus in Judea. 2. Charles the great in Christendom. 3.
Saladyne amongst y^ Sarasines. 4. And Augustus Caesar amongst the Pagans.
Felicita. Felicity.
Four sorts of men are happy diversely.

1. He that dilligently serves God. 2. He that directs his actions after a
good course. 3. He that contemns the vanities of the world. 4. And he y^ by
an other man's mishap is learned to beware.
He means not here felicity as Aristotle does in his Ethics, by riches,
birth, parentage, beauty, or other gifts of nature and fortune, but he
accounts him happy that serves God, walks in his ways, and by other men's
harms can avoid the like mishap.

Four sorts of felicity do make men most unhappy and miserable.

1. The multitude of children. 2. Abundance of riches. 3. To rule a Province.
4. And to have many friends.
Although children be a blessing of God, yet so it often falls out, that the
number of them being many, it makes a man full of cares to provide things
necessary, and amongst many, it cannot be, but commonly some will prove
unfortunate, as of them, so of friends, for Pythagoras, amongst his
Aenigmaticall precepts, has this for one: Eat not with many hands. Meaning,
not to company with many friends, for necessity urges that some pro^ue
treacherous.

Figliuolo. A son.
Four bands tyeth the son to the father.

1. To reverence him. 2. To obey him. 3. Not to give him occasion of sorrow. 4.
And to relieve him when he is old.
Pliny in his Natural History says, that the young Storke, when he sees
the old is so weak and ouer-growen with years that he cannot ^lie, not only
provides victuaile for his nourishment, but to sollace, carries him about on
his back: which curtis^e, the Graecians called Antipelargein, keeping his
picture in their houses, to give thereby example and president of duty to
their children.

Feed. Faith.
Four things do issue and proceed from faith.

1. The certainty of things not seen. 2. The goodness of life. 3. The food
of the soul. 4. And the worshipping of God.
The effects and fruits of faith are sufficiently discoursed by S. Paul to
the Romans, and in the Epistle of S. James, to which places I refer the
courteous Reader.

Fanciullo. A child.
Four properties are in Children.

1. To be soon angry. 2. To be soon reconciled. 3. To forget quickly. 4.
And to play with their equals.
These properties of a child were good to be found in old folks, that
although they took occasion of offense, yet they might quickly forgive and
forget the fault. A young man that was about to marry, came to Pittacus one
of the seven Sages, to ask his counsel what manner of wif^ ^e should choose:
the Philosopher straight gave him this answer, go and play amongst children:
whether when the young man came, he found them unwilling of his company,
going to a play that they had, which was, every man choose his peer: by this
he was admonished to match with his equal.

Forza. Force.
To four good works good men are forced unto as it were by constraint.

1. To promote the virtuous. 2. To Punish offenders. 3. To honor virtue. 4.
And to relieve the oppressed.
Vbique in pretio habetur virtus, says Chilon the Lacedaemonian: virtue is
generally honored: for when Ovid was banished from Rome, and lived amongs^ the
barbarous Geeates, yet he was there loved for his learning, courtesy, and
good behavior: much more do good men seek to advance them that are virtuous.

Fatila. Labor or industry.
Four things cannot be obtained without labor and industry.

1. Excellent praise. 2. Great knowledge. 3. Wealth or goods. 4. And rule or
power.
The slothful man (says Cicero) sleeps in his own want, whereas Nihil est
tam durum quod non solertia vincat. Hercules had never been famous but for his
labors: Hector had never so long been a defense for the Troyans, had he not
been (patiens laboris,) able to endure labor and travel. It Is hard (was
Apelles the Painter wont to say) for him that will not labor, to excel in any
art.

Falondia. Eloquence.
Four things make a man eloquent.

1. Boldness. 2. Understanding. 3. Delight. 4. And use.
Demosthenes who was counted the most eloquent Orator that ever Greece
afforded, was a long time withholden from the bar for pleading, because he
was bashful, in so much that they never hoped of his success, till on a day
imboldened by the presence of his many friends, he proved the most eloquent
man of his time.

Gouare ad al^rui. To pleasure others.
Four things pleasure others more then themselves.

1. Birds in making their nests. 2. Bees in working of honey. 3. Oxen in
wearing the yoke. 4. And sheep in bearing wool.
Gola. Gluttony or the throat.
Four things are enemies to gluttony.

1. The carfulness of gayning. 2. The mortifying of the body. 3. To combat
with hunger. 4. And the desire of money.
Four things do make a man gluttonous.

1. To lie in a^ Inn. 2. To follow the Court. 3. To have great revenues. 4.
And to take continual ^ase.
The effects of gluttony are manifold, proceeding from sundry causes, and
breeding infinite enormities, which prove pernicious both to soul and body.
Wealth bredde it in Heliogabalus, Nero, and Caligula. ^ase in Lucullus:
following of the Court in Rodericus: but Socrates was so far from this vice,
that he would not salute him that was infamous for gluttony.

Gouernatore. A Governor.
Four things ought to be observed by a good Governor.

1. To use equality. 2. To maintain plenty. 3. To hear gently. 4. And to
preserve iustic^
Cicero was therefore called by the populer sort Pater Patriae: for because he
founded y^ Law in Rome which was called Lex Annonae for the provision of
victuals, always by policy aiming at plenty: and Antoninus the Emperor was
therefore called Pius, because so courteously he would here every man's
complaint.

Gnadaguo mentito. Gain falsified.
Four sorts of men say they gain more then they do.

1. A player of Comedies. 2. An Advocate. 3. A flatterer. 4. A Physician.
The Advocate by manifesting more gains then he gets, and so likewise the
Physician, think to procure their Clyants or Patients to more liberality.

Four sorts of men swear they gain less then they do.

1. The governor or ruler of an other man's goods. 2. The husbandman in reaping
his seed. 3. The Merchaunt by sale of his Merchandise. 4. The Dicer of y^
which he wins.
Tullie in his Officies, entreating exactlie of duties, allows not such
liberty either to Merchaunts, Farmers, or Rulers, for (says he) Honestas art
ponenda est vtilitati: truth and honesty ought to go before commodity.

Giudice. A Judge.
Four things belong unto a Judge.

1. To hear courteously. 2. To answer wisely. 3. To consider soberlie. 4.
To give judgment impartially
Four things do overthrow justice.

1. Love. 2. Hate. 3. Fear. 4. And gain.
Cambyses, noting how friends through love, briberie through gain, enemies
by hate, and dignity by fear did pervert judgment, taking one in the fault
of injustice, caused him to be fleyed quick, and his skin to be hunge up
over the seat of judgment: and then placed his son that was so tormented, in
his room, to the end that his fathers punishment might learn him to become
more wary.

Grauezze del' huomo. Heavy things unto man.
Four things are most heavy unto man.

1. To serve an ungrateful man. 2. To entreat and not be heard. 3. To do
well and not be rewarded. 4. And to look for that never happens.
Or To lie ^^cke. To be poor. To stand in suspense. To lie in prison.


There is no one thing more heavy nor burdenous unto man, then to bear the
ingratitude of a thanklesse person: or having deserved well, not to be justly
rewarded. The exile Themistocles suffered, grieved him not so much as the
unkindness of his Countrymen, who in requital of his so many gotten
victories, rewarded his valor with banishment.

Four things are more heavy to man above the rest.

1. To live with a foolish family. 2. To have store of wicked children. 3. To
consume that is gotten lauishly 4. To be ouer-ruled of an enemi^.
These things are heavy, in that they are either contrary to the nature or
disposition of man, for there is none so mean nor base, but would grudge to be
in subjection to him that he hates.

Giouane. A young man.
Four things ought a young man to do.

1. To seek after riches. 2. To delight in honor. 3. To procure freendship.
4. To abstain from things unlawful
Zenophon describing the duties of a young man, wills him to be sparing, and
an enemy to prodigality, which was noted in Alcibiades, who was wont to say,
that therefore he would be given to frugalitie in his youth, that in his age he
might be liberal. Epaminondas being but a child, offered sacrifice to the
Gods, that he might do nothing but that which was virtuous and honorable.

Four things young men cannot eschew.

1. The approaching of old age. 2. The loss of a freende. 3. Unfortunate
chances. 4. Nor the assault of death.
Time (as the old proverb is) tarrieth no man. Old age, as Tullie says in
his book De Senectute steleth upon us by degrees, and by necessity, that it
is assured to us by fate: for every day says Zeno, we wexe old, youth has no
privilege against fortune, and as soon comes the young Lamb to the
Butchers shambles as the old sheep.

Giouanetto. An unbridled youth.
Four things are often the faults of youth.

1. To abuse their patrimonies. 2. To despise correction. 3. To snare
themselves in vice. 4. To make no account of profit.
A certain inhabitant of the City of Pysa, being demanded why the state of
their City did so sore decay, fetching a deep sigh made this answer: our
young men are prodigal, our old men are too affectionate: we have no
discipline for offenses, nor no punishment for such as spend their years in
idleness.

Guerra. War.
Four dangerous effects proceed from war.

1. It makes a City desolate. 2. Breeds famine. 3. Forces the people to
depart. 4. And for punishment has poverty.
One going about to prove that generally there is vicissitudo omnium rerum,
argues thus: peace breeds plenty, plenty pride, pride wars, wars
poverty, poverty peace, and so forth: alleging that of conseque^^e many
discommodities do proceed from the Altar of Mars.

For four things it is lawful to make war.

1. For faith. 2. Justice. 3. Peace. 4. And liberty.
Such was the wars that Hanniball, attempted against the Romans, for after
that he gad given his faith to the Senate of Carthage that he would revenge
their injuries, he sealed his promise with his blood. Scipio, being demanded
why the Romans made such hot wars with the Numantines, answered, we seek
for peace at the walls of Numantia with the sword.

Huomo. A man.
Four things are dear unto men.

1. Carfulness to gain. 2. Sparing to preserve riches. 3. Pati^nce in
injuries. 4. And abstinence for offenses.
Plato being demanded by Dionisius the Tyrant of Sycillia, whereof he could
boast, in this quoth the Philosopher, that I can suffer injuries with patience.

Four things d^^ fortefie a man more then others.

1. Beauty of body. 2. Wisdom of mind. 3. Laudable fame. 4. And eloquence.
Nestor was a stay to the Graecians for his wisdom, Absolon was loved of all
Israel for his beauty: Alexander was guarded with the strength of his fame,
and Ulysses was desired of Agamemnon because he was eloquent.

Four things are very great in man in this present age.

1. The knowledge of a ma^s self. 2. Dissimulation in injuries. 3. To govern
well a family. 4. And rule in the hands of a woman.
The first precept that the seven Sages preferred as chief of their
principles to Apollo at Delphos, was N^^ce te ipsum, know thy self: which
whosoever (says Cleobulus) observes, neither is proud in prosperity nor
dispairing in adversity. Thales Milesius being demanded what was the point
of a wise man, to dissemble quoth he an injury.

Four things make a man perfect.

1. To worship God sincerely. 2. To love his neighbor heartily. 3. To do to
others as he would be done unto. 4. And to wish no worse to others then to
himself.
Alteri ne feceris, quod tibi fieri non vis: measure an other man's actions by
thine own desires.

Four sorts of men do displease both God and the world.

1. A poor man proud. 2. A rich man a liar. 3. An old man Lecherous. 4. And
one that sows discord between brethren.
The meaning or gloss upon this, I refer to the Proverbs of Solomon.

Ira. Anger.
Four things do grow of anger.

1. The travel of the mind. 2. Ignorance of a man's self. 3. Unjust dealing.
4. And an inequall sentence.
Ira breuis fur^r says Socrates, anger is a short madness which disquieteth the
mind as with a lunacie, it makes a man forget himself, to pass the bounds of
justice, and to do all things contrary to equity and reason.

Four things bring ^orth anger.

1. Contempt. 2. Uillanie. 3. Ingratitude. 4. And injustice.
Four things appease anger.

1. Sweet words. 2. Revenge. 3. Satis-faction. 4. And poverty or want.
A mild answer says the wiseman appeaseth ch^ller, and there is no greater
bridle to fury then courteous language: the worst salve for anger is revenge,
for it chalengeth no more by extremity. The surest reconciliation, says
Boccace, is satis-faction, for it glutteth anger with Law.

Inuidia. Envy.
Four things do spring from Envy.

1. The grief of the envious. 2. The ruin of the envious. 3. The division of
the people. 4. The destruction of y^ city.
Or thus 1. An afflicted life. 2. Calamity. 3. Surcuidrie. 4. And poverty.


Well and wisely says the Poet, Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis, the
envious man wexeth lean with the fatness of his neighbor, for he sees
nothing that prospers, but breeds his coffeehouse: all good success^ is
a torment to his mind, and his happiness consists in the unhappiness of
others.

Four things bring forth Envy.

1. The desire of honor. 2. The greedines of gain. 3. The felicity of
others. 4. And the hate toward our neighbor.
Had not Caesar been tickled with an insatiable desire of honor, he had never
so greatly envied Pompey. Had not Crassus been without measure in his
couetise, he had not so deeply envied Maetellus. The felicity of others, is
a spur to an envious person. For as Mantuan in his Eglogues auerreth, he
thinks his neighbors profit (though less) yet always greater then his own.

Vicinumque pecus grandius vber habet.
Four things do race out envy.

1. The privation of power. 2. Want. 3. The mortifying of the senses. 4. And
the desire of virtue.
They which envy other men's good fortunes, being aspyred, and grown to
preferment, and after abased: shame so at their fall, and at their own defect,
as they cease to envy, more for grief then good nature.

Infermo. A sick man.
Four things must a sick man do.

1. Obey the Physician. 2. Spend largely in things necessary 3. Have confidence
in the Physician. 4. And comfort himself with hope.
Alexander the great, being taken with a grievous sickness, had Letters sent
him to beware of Phillip his Physician, for he had agreed with Darius for a
sum of money to poison him: as Alexander had read the Letters, Phillip came
in with a potion to minister, which notwithstanding the former contents, he
drank, delivering the Letter while he was drincking to Phillip, such
confidence had that mighty Monarch in his Physician.

Ingratitudine. Ingratitude.
Four sorts of men do forget a good turn. 1. A young child. 2. A proud man
by promotion. 3. A pro^de man by natur^^ 4. And a prisoner freed from prison.
Pride is ^he very mother of Ingratitude, for Alexander never grew to be
unmindful of benefits, till he would be honored with Persian ceremonies, and
called the son of Jupiter.

Impossibilita.
Four things are impossible to promise.

1. Continual security on the se^. 2. Always to have a clear sky. 3.
Flowers in Winter. 4. And in the spring snow.
The conditions of the Sea and the Heavens, says Marrot in his Epigrams, are
like to Women's thoughts, ever wavering and inconstant: and therefore rightly
did the Poets faigne Venus to be borne of the Sea, since she, and all under her
influence are so uncertain.

Infelicita. Infelicitie.
Four sorts are unhappy and infelices.

1. He which is fallen under some deadly sin. 2. He which can do good and
does it not. 3. He which is ignorant and will not learn. 4. And he which can
instruct and will not teach.
The greatest unhappiness which falls to man in this world, is sin, for
that without repentance it is a deprivation of the favor of God. And in the
Gospel he commands him to be cast into utter darkness, that hid his talent
in the ground, and would put it to no use.

Insatiabilita. Insatietie.
Four things are insatiable and have never enough.

1. Fire. 2. Earth. 3. Hell. 4. A Woman.
Inurbanita. Inciuilitie.
Four things make a man uncivil.

1. The motions of anger. 2. The sting of want. 3. Cou^tousnesse. 4. And envy.
These affections ouer-ruling reason and the senses, make a man so far to
forgette himself, as he passes the bonds of humanity: Crassus grew so
covetous, that in his age he ^ecame half a Tymonist, and Manlius Nasica had
such delight in his Country tillage, that he so little frequented the company
of men, as he got the name of Inurbanus.

Inimicitia. Enmity.
Four things d^ bree enmity.

1. Dishonest spee^he. 2. Injuries. 3. Covetousness. 4. And disdain.
Disdain ^red the factions ^nmitie betw^^ne Sylla (...) M^^ius (...) ^p^eche
be^weene Tully and Anthony: (...) Ca^ely^e and the Counsel: Co(...) betw^^^^
Ag^^h^^les and Mys^^tus.

Ingan^^. De^^^te.
Four things deceive a man.

1. The l^^^ of wealth. 2. T^^ ^^ch wiue. 3. ^ugred words. 4. (...) of gain.
They of Lacedae^o^ia, when the wa^res were most ^ote ^^^^^wne them and the
Athenians, refused to admit Demo^^^enes for an Emb^ssadour, so greatly did
they fear to be dec^^ued by his elo^uence. Mydas was decei^^d with his golden
wi^h, and Alexander found the greates^ decei^e amidst his cupp^s.

Lussuria. Lechery.
Four especial effects of Lechery.

1. It de^^leth both body and soul. 2. It weakeneth the senses. 3. It wastes
the patrimony. 4. And hasteneth an old age.
Solomon in his book of Wisdom, does bitterly inueigh against this vice,
as the principal of all other deadly, in that this in one action offends
both Tables of the Law, and overthrows the welf^re of a man's own self,
which Demosthenes no doubt considered, when he said at the door of Lais the
harlot, Now (...) p^^nit^ntiam emere.

Four things do further Lechery.

1. Sweet wines. 2. Delicate meats. 3. Familiarity with women. 4. And
delight in ease.
Truly says the Poet, Et venus ^n vinis, ignis in igne fuit. Meaning that
the liquour of Bacchus, is like Oil to quench the flames of Venus, and that
glu^^^^y is half an efficient cause of lechery. Alexander was con^inent as
long as he was sober, and (...) the wars he never gave his mind to love, but
when he never so little ga^^ himself over to ease and banqueting, then he
found that Ephestion truly ^olde him, In otio amor.

Four things do assuage lechery.

1. The use of water. 2. The coldness of m^ates. 3. Absence from women. 4. And
continual l^bour.
Romulus for^^d any virgin to drink Wine as a liquour greatly prei^diciall
to modesty, and Pythagora^ who was famous for his abstinence, used ^nely water
and cold ^earbes knowing this proverb to be true, Sine Cerere et Baccho
frigit Venus, using continual labor as an Antidote against wanton affections:
which Ovid prescribes for a principle in his Remedio Amoris.

Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis Arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent et sine Luc^ faces.
Lymosina. Alms.
Four sort^ of alms.

1. To give to the poor. 2. To pardon him that offends. 3. To admonish him
that sins. 4. And to raise him from his error that is amiss.
Where we may note, that every good action which profits our neighbor, is as
it were Qu^dam species Elemosynae, a kind of alms.

Leggi^rezz^ apparente. Lightness so seeming.
Four things seem light, and yet are of great importance.

1. To honor every man in words. 2. To say the truth. 3. To offend no man. 4.
To accompany with good men.
Things which seem eas^e to be done, and yet in performaunce are of great
weight: for as Socrates says, alluding to that spoken in Esdras, there is
nothing greater then the truth: heerin says Pyttacus do we resemble the Gods,
if we endeavor to offend no man.

Lingua. A tongue.
Four things proceed from an evil tongue.

1. The seed of dissension. 2. The hurt of other men's fame. 3. Wicked
misconstruing. 4. And the instruction of evil.
For this cause did cr^^ked Aesope bring his Master tongues, as the worst
meat in all the market, meaning that there is no vice so bad which a wicked
tongue cannot utter, sowing strife dissension, and slander, procuring
murders, and infinite other mischeefes.

Liquore. Liquor or moisture.
Four kind of liquors are necesarie more then any other.

1. Water. 2. Wine. 3. Honey. 4. And oil.
Auicen in his Aphorisines says, that whatsoever is necessary is not
excessive: therefore h^ does appoint th^se four liquors as principal above
the rest, for that (...) Physic can be exercised if one of these should be
wanting.

Medico. A Physicion.
Four things do belong to a good Physician.

1. To search out the occasion of the disease. 2. To apply medi^in^ in time. 3.
To visit his Patient often. 4. To comfort the sick cunningly.
Hippocrates was of this opinion, that it was more cunning to search out the
nature of the disease, then after it was known to apply the Medicine: for
quoth he^, sooner does the eye discern the simple, then the imagination
conceive the sickness. It is reported that Galen was pleasant and merry of
disposition, which thing in a Physician is precious.

Martirio. Marterdome.
There be four sorts of martyrdom without sh^dding of blood.

1. Uirginitie in youth. 2. Abstinence in abundance. 3. Humility in
prosperity. 4. And patience in tribulation.
This word Martyr being a Greek word, signifies only a witness, as he is
counted a Martyr which seals his Christianity with his blood, thereby
witnessing the fi^menesse of his faith: so they which strive against the three
enemies which S. John speaks of, namely y^ pride of life, the lust of the
eye, and the concupiscence of the flesh, may be called M^rty^s, as witnessing
their clear consciences by the mortifi^ation of rebellious affections.

Me^cante. A Merchant.
Four things do belong to a Merchan^.

1. Discretion in bargaining. 2. Care in selling. 3. Sure of his promise. 4.
And affability w^^h his customer^.
Marito. A Husband.
Fo^^e thi^g^ ough^ a husband observe toward his wife.

1. To keep her at her work. 2. To make her stand in fear. 3. To cherish her
carefully. 4. And to clothe her comely.
Cato the ^ensor made a Law in Rome, that such wives as their h^sbandes found
idle or were stubborn, should have no re^^rence done them by their ch^^^ren
in public places: esteeming them unworthy any honor, that could not by
their virtues profit their household.

Moglie. A Wife.
Four things ought a wife to have care of for the love of her husband.

1. To love him above a^ men. 2. To seek the means o^ his credi^e. 3. To
comfort him in sorrows. 4. And to have care hers^lfe of his person.
Lodouicus Viues in his instruction of a Christian Woman, has so well han^led
these points, as I refer the courteous Reader to the consideration of his
learned works.

Morte. Death.
Four things are worse then death it self.

1. An old man to be poor. 2. He that is deprived of his senses. 3. A sinner
drowned in sin. 4. And a sick man holden in praise.
Calisthenes the Philosopher and freende of Alexander the great, chose rather
to drink poison that Lysimachus gave him, then live distressed in prison.
Death is the end of misery, and sweeter then beggerie in age, which is the
cheifest misery.

Four things kill a man before his time.

1. A fair wife dishonest. 2. The sting of melancholy. 3. Impoysoned meats.
4. And corrupted air.
The Melancholicke humor, or rather Melancholic constitution, says Auicen,
is so contrary to the vital spirits being cold and dry, that where it
makes any deep impression, it infers speedy death, by killing of the
natural heat the maintainer of life.

Mutabilita. Mutabilitie.
Four things are very mutable.

1. A man's will. 2. The wind. 3. Fortune in prosperity. 4. And the
countenance in action.
Natura hominum (says the Poet,) est nouitatis auida: men are desirous of
novelty, and their wills are so momentarie, as they change almost at the
sight of every object: whereunto alludeth our old English proverb.

Wynters wether, and women's thought.
And Gentlemen's purposes changes often.
Miracolo. A miracle.
There are four universal miracles.

1. That a Tyrant hated keeps a kingdom in subjection. 2. That in war the
less number has the victory. 3. That the poor take not the treasure from
the rich. 4. That most men stand wayling on deceit.
Cleobulus meruailed greatly how tyrants did raign^ amongst the multitude,
when virtuous Princes are feign to have guardes for their persons. Pythagoras
being demanded what strange things he had seen in his travel, recounted
this for one, that he saw fraud and guile attended on with many suitors.

Negotio. Business.
Four things are to be considered in every business.

1. Necessity. 2. Law. 3. Honesty. 4. And profit.
This is most learnedlie and largely handled by Tullie in his Officies.

Nascondere. To hyde.
There are four things cannot be hydden.

1. The cough. 2. Love. 3. Anger. 4. And sorrow.
These affect^ons are addicted to much impatience, and makes a man so
passionate, as they are almost impossible to be concealed.

Natura. Nature.
Four things do alter and change the nature of m^n.

1. Honor or preferment. 2. Extreme love. 3. Women's allurements. 4. And wine.
Honores mutant mores, honors changes manners, and the custom of life says
Plutarch, is alienated by dignity: for Nero who being the scholar of Seneca,
was most virtuous, no sooner came to ^he Empir^ but ^e pr^^ued most vi^ious.
Alexander the great, of himself was patient and continent, but once
ouercharged with Wine, he changed his nature, and became most furious and
luxurious.

Ostinati^^e. Obst^na^^e.
Four sorts of men are peremptorily obstinate.

1. A Tyra^t in retayning his government. 2. An Heretic in the wickedness of
hi^ ^ayth. 3. An accustomed (...) in his (...). 4. The possessour of an other
man's wealth.
The difference that the a^nci^nt Fath^rs do make between a Scismaticke and
an H^retick^, ^s, ^^at the Scismaticke ^oth err from the truth, but as it
were in suspense, for that ^e (...) and therefore easily to be recalled: but
the Heretic, as one blinded ^n his own conceit, obstinatlie and
peremptorily persisteth in his heresy, so that one of the Doctors of the
Church has this saying: Errare possum, hereticus esse nolo.

Offesa senza Giou^mento. Offense without profit.
Four things offend much and profit nothing.

1. Barraine lechery. 2. Hateful sorrow. 3. A vain thought. 4. And biting
envy.
Thales Mylesius was wont to say, that two kind of men were miserable in this
world: he that was pensive and sorrowful without redress, and he that
troubled his mind with thoughts that ret^rne to no effect.

Occhio. The eye.
Four things do delight the eye.

1. A fair countenance. 2. A pleasant color. 3. Exterior ornaments. 4. And
cleerenes of the sky.
Opinione d' hanere. Opinion or conceit in having.
Of four things a man has more store then he thinks.

1. Of enemies. 2. Of sins. 3. Of years. 4. And of debts.
The good Emperor Traian had this saying always in his mouth, that the
knowledge of friends and of enemies, was the hardest things to attain unto:
for in prosperity, the secret enemy is an open friend, and in adversity the
greatest friend often proves the sorest enemy.

Opere. Works.
Four kind of works men ought to use one to another.

1. To be charitable. 2. To be faithful. 3. To instruct the ignorant. 4. And
ever to honor old age.
Certain Lacedaemonian Ambassadors being sent to Athens, sitting in a
sumptuous place provided for them in the Theater to see certain plays,
espying an old man white headed to stand on his feet, one of them rose out of
his seat, and placed the aged man in his room, saying, the Athenians knew how
to give precepts, but not how to follow them.

Four works are most praise worthy.

1. To make peace. 2. To preserve justice. 3. To help the oppressed. 4. And to
aid a poor man in his business.
In Thebes when any private dissension grew betwixt neighbors and fr^en^s, he
that could set them in peace and unity, was honored with a garlande of
Olive, as a recompense of his travel.

Prudenza. Prudence.
Four things especially we are taught by prudence.

1. To remember things past. 2. To dispose things present. 3. To provide for
things to come. 4. And to suspe^d those which are in doubt
In these four is comprehended the perfect course of man's life: for says
Zenophon in his Occonomica, a man must remember things past, that what he has
done well he may immitate, and what ill, he may fear to commi^ the like: he
must set in order things present, to keep^ that he has gotten, and to
prevent penury, provide for the time that is to come.

Four things make a man wise.

1. Study. 2. Experience. 3. Nightly consideration. 4. And immitation of the
wise.
Four things belong to a wise man.

1. To live ordinatelie. 2. To get riches honestly. 3. To follow others
rightly. 4. And to moderate himself.
Learning and experience tells us, that an ordinate life, measured by the
true proportion of equity, cannot be found but in wise men: for to obseru^
the mean between two extremities, is a point of great prudence.

Four sorts of men have need of great wisdom.

1. The Preacher in his doctrine. 2. The Judge in his sentence. 3. The
Physician in his patient. 4. And ye rich man in his treasure.
There was none admitted in Athens to the calling of a Judge, before he was
old, that experience and many years might be a warrant of his wisdom: so
deceitful says Solon are the allurements of riches, that he had need of
great wisdom which is not abused with their vanities.

Padre. A father.
Four are the duties that a father owes to hi^ son.

1. To instruct him in the Sciences. 2. To learn him good manners. 3. To hold
him in obedience. 4. And to nourish him moderately.
So careful wa^ the Senate of Rome for the instruction of children, that such
fathers as were negligent in instructing them, were fined by the Censors in a
^^eat sum, and lost their freedom in the City. Cato Vticensis held his
son in such obedience, that he caused him to be banished Rome, for breaking a
pytcher which a maid carried full of water in her hand.

Prelato. A Prelate or Priest.
Four things do^ belong as necessary to a Priest.

1. Residence in hi^ Ministry. 2. Honesty in his manner^. 3. Care of his
flock. 4. And hospitality.
Paul writing unto Timothy, handles thi^ matter at large, to whose censure I
refer the courteous Reader.

Parlare. Speaking or speech.
Four things belong to him that has to speak.

1. To premeditate what he will say. 2. To consider well to whom he speaks. 3.
To note the time and place. 4. And to pronounce his words distinctlie.
When Phillip the Macaedonian sent Ambassadors to Athens, Demosthenes being
appointed by the consent of the Senate to answer them, was found the night
before in great consultation with himself: and being demanded why he was so
solitary, and so perplexed in his mind, know thou not, quoth he, I must
to morrow talk with the Ambassadors of Phillip?

Pace. Peace.
Four effects that proceed from peace.

1. It increases a City. 2. Breeds store of victual. 3. Heapeth up
riches. 4. And makes merry Citizens.
Tullie thought so well of peace, that he had often this saying in his mouth:
Iniustissima pax, iustissimo bello est anteferenda, that the most iniust peace,
was to be preferred before most just war: Zeno at his death being demanded
by his Scholars, what now he would crave of the Gods, this quoth he, that my
friends may live virtuously, and the Commonwealth may flourish with peace.

Four things are necessary for him that observes peace.

1. Not to defraude any man. 2. To use patience. 3. To maintain league. 4. And
in every thing to use justice.
Want of performance of justice by the Senators, made many and sundry breaches
in Rome, of peace breeding civil mutinies and discord, for those which were
wronged and iniuried, in the time of Catelyne proved his confederates.

Penuria. Penury or want.
Four sorts o^ men fall into penury.

1. The prodigal. 2. The glutton. 3. The old man. 4. And he that delights
in strife.
Dissension and discord is as a Moath that eats and consumes riches, and
prodigality is a vice that ruinateth Monarchies.

Pericolo. Perrill.
Four sorts of men put their companions in danger.

1. He that is in punishment. 2. He that is afflicted in his journey 3. He that
walks in dignity. 4. And he that loses a battle.
Cicero clyming by his wisdom and eloquence unto promotion, walking in the
slypperie path of dignity, no sooner fell in disgrace, but all those of his
alliance or affinity, were in great perrill and danger: insomuch that his
son in Law Dolobella, sequestered himself from Rome to avoid imminent
dangers.

Four things are perrilous.

1. To live under a Tyrant. 2. To trust in the wind. 3. To ^ight in war. 4.
And to company with a fool.
When one of the thirty Tyrants told Socrates, that it was dangerous for him
to macerat his body so much with fasting, nay quoth Socrates, but it is
dangerous for a man to live under a Tyrant. Diogenes seeing a Captain of
Alexanders talking with a foolish man, had him take heed: why is there any
danger quoth the Captain, yea quoth Diogenes, if thou company long with that
man.

Pouerta. Poverty.
Four Arts do impouerish a man.

1. Grammar. 2. Lodgicke. 3. Arithmeticke. 4. And Geometry.
By this, the Author means as I guess, that all liberal Arts decay, that
devotion toward learning is told, and that it is the poorest condition to be
a Scholar, all Arts failing but Divinity, Law, and Physic, the one
profiting the soul, the second the purse, the third the body.

Four things make a man poor.

1. A woman. 2. Gaming. 3. Ill company. 4. And strife.
Or thus 1. To stand idle. 2. Revenge. 3. Gluttony. 4. And to live bebeyond a
man's bounds.


These are four notable vices, which bring both health and wealth to
confusion.

Peccato. Sin.
Four sins in man most detestably wicked.

1. To kill a man's neighbor without cause. 2. To speak evil of any man. 3. To
defraude unjustly. 4. And to offer causeless injury.
Pregato. Prayer or entreaty.
Four things he ought to consider that is entreated.

1. What he is by whom he is entreated. 2. For what cause he is entreated. 3.
What shall follow if he do grant. 4. And what may happen if he do not grant.
Presenti. Presents or gifts.
Four things do presents procure.

1. They drive away the covetous. 2. They cover faults. 3. Increase nobility.
4. And choke an enemy.
Therefore did Lycurgus forbid any that bore office in the City, to take any
presents, because, quoth he, they cloak offenses and mittigate punishments.
When the Civil war was most hot between Caesar and Pompey, Pompey sent
presents unto Caesar, which when the Monarche saw, he uttered these words, now
that Pompey sees fortune fail him in the wars, he seeks to conquer his
enemy in bounty.

Perfectione. Perfection.
Four things do bring a work to perfection.

1. The knowledge of Arts. 2. The imitation of wise me^. 3. The keeping of
custom. 4. And a gracious pronuntiation.
Penitente. A repentant.
Four things are necessary to him that repents.

1. Confession of mouth. 2. Contrition of heart. 3. Satis-faction by works. 4.
And to continue in well doing.
The Pharisie in the Gospel had confession of mouth, but the Publicane had
contrition of heart: for not every one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven, but he says Christ that does the will of my
father, which is in heaven.

Prezzo inestimabile. Inestimable price.
Four things are so great as they cannot be valued.

1. Knowledge. 2. Health. 3. Manners. 4. And virtue.
Popolari. The Common people.
Four things do delight the Common people.

1. Want and defect of Arts. 2. Cheapenesse of victuailes. 3. The oppression
of Nobility. 4. And de^^re of novelty.
Here is made a right perfect and absolute description of the faults that
reign in the minds of the populer sorts: for not seeing into the profit that
ryseth to y^ Commonwealth by the knowledge of the liberal Sciences, they hold
learning and learned men in contempt, counting nothing necessary, but what is
mecanicall, whereof it is truly said: Scientia non habet immicum praeter
ignorantem: again, they brook not the Nobility, as impatient of superiors,
and as men wishing every Commonwealth were a Democracie, strive to be Lords
themselves, aiming at such desires by envy. Desirous they are of change, both
of Magistrates and of Laws, as contented with nothing but food and novelty.

Re. A king.
There are four things glorious in a King.

1. To rule his Subjects with fatherly care. 2. To get friends with his
deserts. 3. To be affable to suitors. 4. And to use justice with clemency.
These four things were found to be in ye good Emperor Tytus, for he was in
his government, tender over his subjects as the father over his children: so
that in the wars he preferred the life of one Roman, before the death of a
hundred enemies: he got him many friends by his virtues, and counted not that
day amongst the number of his years, wherein he had not given some benefit, or
granted some suit.

Ringiouenire. To wexe young.
Four things do wexe young in an old man.

1. The heart. 2. Uanitie. 3. The tongue. 4. And conc^piscence.
Religioso suddito. A religious subject.
There are four things belonging to a religious Subi^ct.

1. To attend upon his Office. 2. To obey the Bishops. 3. To flee idleness. 4.
And to give himself to prayer.
Rettore. A Ruler.
Four things are necessary in a Ruler.

1. Experience in affairs. 2. Love toward his subjects. 3. Constancy in his
actions. 4. And justice in every thing.
Codrus bare such love to his Subjects, that when it was set down by the
Oracle, that his men should be discomfited unless he were slain, he put
himself into the apparel of a base Soldier, and got him to the enemies
Camp, where quarrelling with one of the Scowtes, he was slain, and so
preferred death before the loss of his subjects.

Four things do belong to him that is a Ruler, and yet subject to an other.

1. To obey his superior in things Lawful. 2. To provide for the weal of the
Commonwealth. 3. To advance the good. 4. To beat down the wicked.
Such were the Tribunes and Triumuirs, the Questors, Cenzors, and Ediles in
Rome, which ruled among the people, and yet were all subject to the Senate,
wh^m they obey^d with all reverence: so by their ob^dience drawing the Common
people to the like submission: providing carefully in their several Offices
for the Commonwealth.

Robba. Wealth.
Four things take away a man's wealth upon the sudden.

1. Fire. 2. A Tyrant. 3. A tempest. 4. And an Army, or Enemy.
Antisthenes living in Athens, under the government of the thirty Tyrants, no
sooner became Auditor to Philosophy but he gave away all his wealth and
substance, and being demanded why he did so, made this answer, I had rather
be counted a Philosopher for contemning riches, then be thought unhappy in
having them taken away by Tyrants.

There are four things which depriues a man of his substance.

1. Water. 2. Gluttony. 3. Gaming. 4. And lechery.
Diogenes, seeing a byll of sale set on a gluttonous man's door, said, I
thought that this house would surfeit so long, that at last he would spue out
his Master, thinking that gluttony and superfluiti^ of fare, had wasted his
substance. We read in the Gospel, that the prodigal and wanton disposition
of the unruly Son, brought him to go naked and poor, wasted his
patrimony, and consumed all that wealth which his father had bestowed upon him.

Superbia. Pride.
Four things proceed from pride.

1. Ingratitude. 2. Oppression of our neighbor. 3. Ill speech. 4. And
dissension.
The proud man takes such conceit in himself, that he takes all good
turns that are done him, to come of duty, and therefore is ungrateful, not
sparing to sp^ake ill, or to oppress his neighbor, for that chalenging a
superiority above others in his mind, he thinks his actions are not to be
controlled.

There are four things which make a man proud.

1. Wealth. 2. Power. 3. Dignity. 4. And parentage.
Four things abates pride.

1. Poverty. 2. Oppression. 3. Old age. 4. And sickness.
Pride being (says Socrates,) an ouerweening of a man's self, is commonly a
fault in youth, which when consideration and experience has sifted and laid
in the balance, old age finds too light for his humor, and therefore
rejects it as a folly. Sickness quaileth, and brings those senses in
defect, which are ye very sinews and force of pride.

Speranza. Hope.
Four things proceed from hope.

1. Health of body. 2. Quiet of mind. 3. Comfort of labors. 4. And length of
life.
Let us always hope well (says Zenocrates) least if that fail, we prove
miserable: for the grief of our labor, toil, and industry is assuaged by
hope, which makes all endeavors, though never so dangerous, seem eas^e.

Seruire. To serve.
Four things do make a man to serve.

1. Fear. 2. Love of gain. 3. To be marked. 4. And ambition.
Servile minds that fear the frown of their Superiors, are glad to become
servant, by such obedi^nce and humility seeking to please: and so forceable
is the desire of gain, as it often times metamorphiseth a free mind into a
slavish condition, and therefore did Per^ennius serve Commodus the Emperor,
because he was ambitious, and aspired to the Empire.

Four things do app^rtaine to a Servant.

1. Carefuln^sse in s^ruice. 2. Willingn^sse to do what he is commanded. 3.
Affability in sp^ech. 4. And mirth joined with his labor.
Whereupon an old English disticke.

A servant that is diligent honest and good.
Must sing at his work like a bird in the wood.
Four things make a man servile.

1. A flattering and pleasant tongue. 2. Desire of gain. 3. To receive
presents. 4. And little understanding.
Pompey when he was about to be chosen Consul, sent pres^nts to Cato, which
he refusing, willed the Messenger to say ^o Pompey, that he should take again
his gift, for he would speak in his behalf as a free-man^ not as a servant,
alluding to the Fren^h proverb.

Chi d' al^rui preud,
Subject se reud.
Four things do belong to a handm^yde.

1. To have care over her mistress. 2. To be no carri^r of news. 3. To be
shamefast. 4. And to do her busin^s with diligen^s.
As before in the d^tie of a wif^, so I refer ^^is place ^o the censure of
Lodo^^cus Viues, in the instit^ti^n of a Christian Woman.

Soldato. A Soldier.
There are four things belonging to a Souldio^r.

1. Wit. 2. Courage. 3. Money. 4. And liberality.
Epaminondas the Theban Captain, was wont to wish that all Captains were
Philosophers, and al Soldiers learned: he appointed none to any great Office
that was not passing wise, and somewhat skillful in the liberal Sciences: and
of such courage he was, that fighting a battle to the uttermost, being
wounde^ to death, he would not out of the field, till news was brought him
that his soldiers had won the victory.

Sommessione. Submission^
Four sorts of men do well to hold other in submission 1. A king his
subjects. 2. A father his children. 3. Husbands their wives. 4. Masters their
scholars.


Stimolo all delitto. A prick unto sin.
There are fo^re th^^gs d^o prick a man forward to ^inne.

1. Anger. 2. Necessitie^ 3. Hate. 4. And covetousness.
Durum necessitatis te^^m, the sting of necessity is sore, and therefore it is
said to be without Law; as prescribed within no certain limmits. Necessity
forced the ^^dians to inue^t gaming. N^cessi^ie forced the inhabitants of
Thebes to break the league, otherwise they had been ruinated by famine.

Secretezza inutile. Secrecy unprofitable.
Th^re ^re ^oure thi^^s which do little profi^ being kept secret.

1. Rouenewes. 2. Power. 3. Knowledge. 4. And eloquence.
Appolonius Tianaeus a Pythagorian Philosopher, being demanded wherein a man
did both hinder himself and other: in hyding (quoth he) of knowledge, which
reason moved Plutarch greatly to inueigh against Neocles the brother of
Epycurus, for setting down to his disciples this principle, (hide thy life) as
counting him an enemy to man, that would obscure knowledge.

Senso. Sense.
Four things do sharpen the sense.

1. Desire to profit. 2. Necessary consideration. 3. Conference with wise me^.
4. And the occasion of a benefit.
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor being very old, and yet of very quick
memory, being demanded on a time how being so far in years his sense^
were fre^h, made this answer, as a knife i^ kept bright from rust by scowring,
so are the senses preserved by reading and conference.

There are four sense^ necessary above the rest to man.

1. Seeing. 2. Hearing. 3. Touching. 4. And tasting.
Four things do greatly dull the senses.

1. Delight in women. 2. Cruel adversity. 3. Oppression through famine 4. And
too much prosperity.
Plato admitted no Auditour in his Academie, but such as while they were his
scholars would abstain from women: for he was wont to say, that the greatest
enemy to the m^morie, was venerie. Adversity so troubles the head, which is
the seat of the senses, with cares, as by continual r^minating of thoughts,
it wearieth out the senses with irksomeness. And prosperity so puffs up
the mind with pride, that it makes a man not oneli^ to defect in his senses,
but even to forget himself.

Scienza. Knowledge.
There are four things which first brought in knowledge.

1. The love of vain glory. 2. Delight to read. 3. Desire to gain. 4. And
Divine inspiration.
Tys reported that the Liberal Sciences were first drawn into form by Hermes
Tresmegistus, who^ therefore the Poets tyteled with the name of Mercury,
calling him the Messenger of the Gods, meaning by that Aenigmatical fiction,
that he attained to such knowledge by some divine inspiration.

Sauio. A wise man.
Four things sound not well in the mouth of a wiseman.

1. To extol baze things. 2. Not to praise that is praise worthy. 3. To
contrary in unknown things him that is skillful. 4. And to strive with his
neighbor for things impertinent.
Erasmus in his Chiliads calls this foolish strife between Neighbors, Pro
lana Caprina rixare, to strive for Goats hair, to make a question of that
which gotten or lost, redoundeth to small profit or disprofit.

Sanita. Health.
Four things are hurtful unto health.

1. Inordinate use of women. 2. Superfluity of meats. 3. Too much cold. 4.
And too much labor.
Although we are commanded by the learned Physicians, to accustom our bodies
to labor, and that Tully in his Epistles to his freende Atticus, and his
freeman Tyro, wills them for their health to use exercise, yet excess in
every thing being a vice, causes too much labor greatly to weaken the body.

Stato. State.
By four things a man may come to good estate.

1. By doing well. 2. By using loyalty. 3. By saying truth. 4. By thinking
no vile things.
Agathocles being a Potters son, and preferred to the dignity of a king,
being demanded merrily by one of his friends, by what means he aspired to
such preferment, answered, by thinking honorably, and speaking the truth.

Temperanza. Temperaunce.
Of four things Temperance does admonish vs^ 1. To cut off superfluity. 2.
To bridle desires. 3. To abstain from unlawful things. 4. And to banish al
vain delights.


Socrates was a Philosopher of so great temperaunce^ that going into the
market, and seeing many things there of great price, said, O God, how many
things be there that I need not.

Traditore. A Traitor.
Four things are to be noted in a tra^tour.

1. Most sweet honey in his mouth to deceive. 2. Deadly gall in his heart to
betray. 3. A feigned laughter in his countenance to entrap. 4. A mortal effect
in a fained action.
Synon, as Virgil makes mention in his Aeneiodos, when he went about to betray
the City of Troy, had sorrow in his tongue, and treason in his heart: Judas
smyled and kissed Christ when he betrayed him: Amo Proditione^ (says Phillip,)
not proditorem, the Traitor may be flattered, not loved: looked to, but not
trusted.

Terra. The earth.
There are four things which the earth grudgeth to bear.

1. A slave that has rule. 2. A fool that is rich. 3. A woman that is odious,
and yet married. 4. And a s^ruant that is he^or to her Mistress.
Of this read more in the Prouerb^ of Solomon, and the book of Wisdom.

Tedio. Tediousnes.
Four things are very tedious and toylesome.

1. Rain in the day time. 2. Too much talk. 3. Wind in the spring. 4. And
affliction with labor.
Aristotle hearing a babbling fellow tell a long tale, and being demanded how
he liked it, went presently and laid him down upon his bed, giving the^ to
understand by this, that it was yrkesome and tedious.

Tyranne. A Tyrant.
Four things does a Tyrant always.

1. He destroys the good. 2. He drives away poor men. 3. He aduaunceth the
wicked. 4. And suppresseth virtue.
Heliogabalus after he was possessed of the Empire, sought straight the
overthrow of such as were virtuous, and preferred to dignity, bawdes,
gluttons, and such like.

Four things do oppress a Tyrant.

1. Want of v^^tuales. 2. Too much oppre^sion. 3. To attempt war. 4. And to
abandon justice.
Four Tyrants have been more cruel then any other.

1. Herod. 2. Attyla. 3. Nero. 4. Esselynus.
Four things deceive a Tyrant, in thinking he has y^ which he hat^ not.

1. The favor of the people. 2. Nobility of fame. 3. Abundance of riches. 4.
A^^ will to rule.
A Tyrant causes four effects.

1. He causes dissension amongst the Citizens. 2. Oppresses the^ which are
wise. 3. Spoyleth the rich. 4. And pulls down the mighty.
Four things hinder the rule of a Tyrant.

1. Concord of Citizens. 2. Store of rich men. 3. The fore^^ght of the wise.
4. And the courage of the mighty.
Four things do increase with the life of a Tyrant.

1. The severity of his actions. 2. The styng of pride. 3. The affliction of
his subjects. 4. And the disdain of his nobles.
Four customs usual in a Tyrant.

1. To be headlong in cruel actions. 2. To be impatient in hearing. 3. To will
that all things come from him. 4. To be reprehended of no man.
Four things are profitable for the subject of a tyrant.

1. To honor the mighty. 2. Not to o^fend any man. 3. To speak little. 4.
And live solitary.
Vtili^a. Profit.
Four things are profitable before the deed.

1. To examine the beginning. 2. To consider the midst. 3. To foresee the end.
4. And to ask counsel of a wise man.
In all the actions of human life, says Periander, if thou foresee what
thou take in hand, thou shall not greatly err, ( principiis obsta,) stop
at the beginning, and there consider what it is thou do attempt, least time
being let slip, thou find she is balde behind. Amongst the dark precepts of
Pythagoras, this was one ( Dimidium plus t^to,) the half is more then the
whole: meaning heerby, that he which well weighs the ^^rst half of his
action, has done more then if he performed all, inconsidered. Remember the
end (says the wiseman) and thou shall never do amiss. For the final
events foreseen, hardli^ are any deeds bitten with repentance.

Vecchiezza. Old age.
Four things do spring from old age.

1. The defect of the senses. 2. Cruel covetousness. 3. Want of strength. 4.
And vain ostentation.
There is no sin but wears away by time, covetousness only excepted for
adultery cease, when Nature ^ayleth, Gluttony abateth by the weakness of y^
stomach, Wrath and Envy are the fruits of choler, and therefore not
predominant in old age, but Covetousness never forsakes a man, but sleeps
with him in his grave.

Four things old men do.

1. Give wholesome counsel. 2. Reach coldly to him which demands. 3. Praise
things past. 4. And accuse things and time present.
Old men, (says Sir Iefferie Chawcer,) are then in their right vain, when
they have In diebus illis in their mouth: telling what passed long ago, what
wars they have seen, what charity, what cheapenes of victuals, always
blaming the time present, though never so fruitful.

Four things do belong unto old men.

1. To speak profitablie. 2. To counsel. 3. To set enemies at concord. 4.
And to instruct them which are ignorant.
Zeno the Stoic being wexen old, was demanded of certain Lacedaemonian
Ambassadors now that he had given over his Scholle^s, what he did practice in
his age. I now (quoth he) give good counsel, and seek to pacif^e
dissentions.

Vergogua. Shame.
Four things are the efficients of shame.

1. The increase of want. 2. To receive a journey. 3. To entreat others. 4.
And to be driven from the multitude.
There is nothing that makes a man more ashamed^ then when he has ^eene rich
to be oppressed with want, and to crave that of others, which before time his
ability has served him to given which Alcibiades found true in his
banishment, for seeing one of his Countrymen in necessity, and he not able to
relieve him, he ^^ghed and said, I am ashamed that I have lived thus long.

Four things drive away shame.

1. Little knowledge. 2. Heaping up of riches. 3. Excessive power. 4. And pride
in Science.
The fool (says Ecclesiastes) so delights in his folly, as he regards
not shame, and he that is miserable says Erostratus, pref^rreth gains before
hones^ie, and is not ashamed to get by what sinister means so ever.

Four sorts of men must not be shame fast.

1. Players. 2. Co^on^rs. 3. Flatterers. 4. And ^eggers.
Vdit^. Hearing.
Four things do delight the hearing.

1. A sweet voice. 2. An eloquent tongue. 3. A pleasant murmur. 4. And an
honest suit.
Traian the Emperor took such a delight in hearing the goods suits and
complaints of his subjects, that it is reported of him, he never denied any
man's suit that was lawful and honest.

Vitio. A vice.
Four vices are more heinous then any other.

1. To deny God. 2. To betray our Country. 3. Wilful murder. 4. And to
deceive a man's companion.
So grievous a vice is this detestable sin of Atheism, especially when a
Christian through obstinacy denies his God, as it is not to be named amongst
men. Sultan Solomon, having the I Will of Mely^ta betrayed into his hands by a
Christian, called Byzellius, to show how he did esteem of him that betrayed
his Country, no sooner had the Traitor in his possession, but he ^^eyed him
quick, as a man vn^^t for the company of men.

Four things do cover vices.

1. Bounty in spending. 2. Affability in speech. 3. Honesty in manners. 4.
And subtlety in works.
They which be vicious and rich, says Epicte^^s, cover their faults with
their treasure. There is nothing says Clitobulus, that more eclipseth the
sight, then the color of gold and courteous language, for long was it ere the
conspiracies of Catelyne could be discovered, he was so plausible a man among
the Romans. Cicero in his Philippica, against Anthony has these words:
had thou not covered thy gluttonies with hospitality, and thy riot with
giving to the poor, long ere this had thy vicious life been manifested unto
the people.

Four punishments follow the adulterers vice. Either 1. Etreame poverty. 2.
Sudden death. 3. Shame before a Judge. 4. And loss of a member.


Quatuor impurus paenis plectetur adulter.
Aut hic pauper erit aut hic subito morietur.
Aut cadit in causam qua debet iudice vinci,
Aut aliquod membrum casu vel crimine perdet.
Verita. Truth.
Four things do manifest the truth.

1. Sight. 2. Touching. 3. A true witness. 4. And tasting.
Although we commonly prefer sight for the sure^t sense, yet Aristotle in his
Book De sensibili et sensato, says, that of all the senses, it easeliest and
soonest is deceived, by the mea^es of the disparitie, and appearance of sundry
objects, or having the intermedium proportioned with too long a space.

Four things darken truth.

1. Fear. 2. Love. 3. Hate. 4. Gain.
Vita. Life.
Four things do prolong a man's life.

1. To live soberlie. 2. To dwell with friends. 3. A wholesome situation. 4. A
quiet and a merry mind.
Nestor, who as Homer and other Historiographers do report, lived three ages,
being demanded by Agamemnon what was the causes of his so long life,
answered, the first or primarie cause was the decrees of the Gods, the second,
frugalitie in diet, want of care and of melancholy. If you will die old,
(says Hermogenes, live not in Law-places, eschew delicates, and spend thy idle
time in honest and merry company.

Vso. Use.
Four things cannot be well attained unto without use.

1. The knowledge of Grammar. 2. To write fayrer. 3. To preach well. 4. And to
make verses.
FINIS.

