THE HISTORY OF Orlando Furioso One of the twelve Pieres of France.

As it was played before the Queens Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by John Danter for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his
shop nere the Royal Exchange.

THE HISTORY OF Orlando Furioso One of the twelve Pieres of France.
Enter Marsillus the Emperor of Africa, and Angelica his Daughter, the
Soldane, the King of Cuba, Mandrecard Brandemart, Orlando, County Sacrepant,
with others. MARSILLVS. VIctorious Princes summond to appear
Within the Continent of Africa,
From seauenfold Nylus to Taprobany,
Where fair Apollo darting forth his light
Plays on the Seas.
From Gadis Islands where stowt Hercules,
Imblasde his trophies on two posts of brass,
To Tanais whose swift declining floods,
Inuirons rich Europa to the North,
All fetched from out your Courts by beauty to this Coast,
To seek and sue for fair Angelica.
Since none but one must have this happy prize,
At which you all have leueld long your thoughts;
Set each man forth his passions how he can,
And let her Censure make the happiest man.

SOVLDAN. The fairest flower that glories Africa,
Whose beauty Phoebus dares not dash with showers,
Over whose Clymate never hung a Cloud,
But smiling Titan lights the Horyzon:
Egypt is mine and there I hold my State,
Seated in Cairye and in Babylon;
From thence the matchless beauty of Angelica,
Whose hew as bright as are those silver Doves,
That wanton Venus manth upon her fist,
Forced me to cross and cut th'atlanticke Seas,
To ouersearch the fearful Ocean,
Where I ariud to eternize with my Lance,
The matchles beauty of fair Angelica.
Nor Tilt, nor Tournay, but my Spear and shield,
Resounding on their Crests and sturdy Helmes
Topt high with Plumes, like Mars his Burgonet,
Inchasing on their Curats with my blade,
That none so fair, as fair Angelica.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffize for me.

RODAMANT. Cuba my seat, a Region so inricht,
With favors sparkling from the smiling heavens,
As those that seeks for traffic to my Coast,
Accounted like that wealthy Paradise,
From whence flows Gyhon and swift Euphrates:
The earth within her bowels has inwrapt,
As in the massy storehowse of the world,
Millions of gold as bright as was the shower,
That wanton Jove sent down to Danae:
Marching from thence to manage Arms abroad,
I past the triple parted Regiment,
That froward Saturn gave unto his sons,
Erecting Statues of my Chiualry,
Such and so brave as never Hercules,
Vowed for the love of lovely Iole:
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffize for me.

MANDRECARDE. And I my Lord am Mandrecarde of Mexico,
Whose Clymate fayrer than Tyberius,
Seated beyond the Sea of Trypoly,
And richer than the plot Hesperides,
Or that same I Will wherein Ulysses love,
Luld in her lap the young Telegone,
That did but Venus tread a dainty step,
So would she like the land of Mexico,
As Paphos and brave Cypres set aside,
With me sweet lovely Venus would abide.
From thence mounted upon a Spanish Bark,
Such as transported Jason to the fleece:
Come from the South, I furrowd Neptunes Seas,
Northeast as far as is the frosen Rhene,
Leaving fair Voya crossed up Danuby,
As hie as Saba whose inhaunsing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartares and the Russians:
There did I act as many brave attempts,
As did Pirothousfor his Proserpine.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffize for me.

BRANDEMART. The bordring Islands seated here in ken,
Whose shores are sprinkled with rich Orient Pearl,
More bright of hew than were the Margarets,
That Caesar found in wealthy Albion,
The sands of Tagus all of burnisht gold,
Made Thetis never prowder on the Clifts,
That ouerpiere the bright and golden shore,
Than do the rubbish of my Country Seas:
And what I dare, let say the Portingale,
And Spaniard tell, who mand with mighty Fleetes,
Came (...) to their King.
Filling our seas with stately Argosies,
Caluars and Magars hulkes of burden great,
Which Brandemart rebated from his coast,
And sent them home ballast with little wealth
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love (my Lord) let that suffice for me.

Orl: Lords of the South, and Princes of esteem,
Viceroyes unto the State of Africa:
I am no King, yet am I princely borne,
Descended from the royal house of France,
And nephew to the mighty Charlemaine,
Surnamde Orlando the County Palatine.
Swift Fame that sounded to our Western seas
The matchles beauty of Angelica,
Fairer than was the Nymph of Mercury,
Who when bright Phoebus mounteth up his coach
And tracts Aurora in her silver steps,
And sprinkles from the folding of her lap,
White lillies, roses and sweet violets.
Yet thus believe me, Princes of the South,
Although my Countries love deerer than pearl,
Or mines of gold might well have kept me back;
The sweet conuersing with my King and friends,
(Left all for love) might well have kept me back;
The Seas by Neptune hoysed to the heavens,
Whose dangerous flawes might well have kept me back;
The savage Mores and Anthropagei
Whose lands I past might well have kept me back;
The doubt of entertainment in the Court
When I arriude might well have kept me back:
But so the fame of fair Angelica,
Stamped in my thoughts the figure of her love,
As neither Country, King, or Seas, or Cannibals,
Could by dispairing keep Orlando back.
I list not boast in acts of chivalry,
(An humor never fitting with my mind)
But come there forth the proudest champion
That has suspicion in the Palatine,
And with my trusty sword Durandell
Single, I Will register upon his helm,
What I dare do for fair Angelica.
But leaving these, such glories as they be;
I love my Lord.
Angelica her self shall speak for me.

Mar: Daughter thou hearst what love has here alleadgd,
How all these Kings by beauty summond here,
Puts in their pleas for hope of Diadem,
Of noble deeds, of wealth and chivalry,
All hoping to possess Angelica.
Since fathers will may hap to aim amiss,
(For parents thoughts in love often step awrie)
Choose thou the man who best contenteth thee,
And he shall wear the Affricke Crown next me.
For trust me Daughter, like of whom thou please,
Thou satisfide, my thoughts shall be at ease.

Ang: Kings of the South, Viceroyes of Africa,
Since Fathers will hangs on his Daughters choice,
And I as erst Princess Andromache,
Seated amidst the crew of Priams sons,
Have liberty to choose where best I love;
Must freely say, for fancy has no fraud,
That far unworthies Angelica
Of such as deigne to grace her with their loves.
The Souldan with his seat in Babylon,
The Prince of Cuba and of Mexico,
Whose welthie crowns might win a woman's will;
Young Brandemard master of all the Isles,
Where Neptune planted has his treasury:
The worst of these men of so high import,
As may command a greater Dame than I.
But Fortune or some deep inspiring fate,
Venus or else the bastard brat of Mars,
Whose bow commands the motions of the mind,
Has sent proud love to enter such a plea,
As nonsutes all your Princely evidence,
And flat commands that maugre Majesty,
I choose Orlando, County Palatine.

To: How likes Marsillus of his daughters choice?

Mar: As fits Marsillus of his daughters spouse.

To: Highly thou wrongst us, King of Africa,
To brave thy neighbor Princes with disgrace,
To tie thy honor to thy daughters thoughts,
Whose choice is like that Greekish giglots love,
That left her Lord Prince Menelaus,
And with a swain made escape away to Troy.
What is Orlando but a straggling mate,
Banished for some offense by Charlemaine,
Skipt from his country as Anchises son,
And means as he did to the Carthage Queen,
To pay her ruth and ruin for her love.

Orl: Injurious Cuba, ill it fits thy gree
To wrong a stranger with discurtesie.
Were not the sacred presence of Angelica
Preuailes with me (as Venus smiles with Mars)
To set a Super sedeas of my wrath,
Soon should I teach thee what it were to brave.

Man: And French man were not against the law of arms
In place of parley for to draw a sword,
Untaught companion I would learn you know
What duty longs to such a Prince as he.

Orl: Then as did Hector fore Achilles Tent,
Trotting his Courser softly on the plains,
Proudly darde forth the stoutest youth of Greece:
So who stands hiest in his own conceit,
And thinks his courage can perform the most,
Let him but throw his gauntlet on the ground,
And I will pawn my honor to his gage,
He shall ere night be met and combatted.

Mar: Shame you not Princes at this bad agree,
To wrong a stranger with discurtesie.
Believe me Lords, my daughter has made choice,
And mauger him that thinks him most agreeud,
She shall enjoy the County Palatine.

Bran: But would these Princes follow my advise
And enter arms as did the Greeks against Troy;
Nor he nor thou should have Angelica.

Rod: Let him be thought a dastard to his death.
That will not sell the trauells he has past,
Dearer than for a woman's fooleries.
What says the mighty Mandricard?

Man: I vow to hie me home to Mexico,
To troop my self with such a crew of men,
As shall so fill the downs of Africa
Like to the plains of watrie Thessalie,
When as an Easternegale whistling aloft
Had ouerspred the ground with Grasshoppers:
Then see Marsillus if the Palatine
Can keep his Love from falling to our lots,
Or thou can keep thy Country free from spoil.

Mar: Why think you Lords with hautie menaces
To dare me out within my Palace gates?
Or hope you to make conquest by constraint
Of that which never could be got by love?
Pass from my Court, make have out of my land
Stay not within the bounds Marsillus holds;
Least little brooking these unfitting braues,
My cholar ouer-slip the law of Arms,
And I inflict revenge on such abuse.

Rod: I Will beard and brave thee in thy proper town,
And here inskonce my self despite of thee,
And hold thee play till Mandricard return.
What says the mighty Souldan of Egypt?

Sol: That when Prince Menelaus with all his mates,
Had ten years held their siege in Asia,
Folding their wrothes in cinders of fair Troy:
Yet for their arms grew by conceit of love,
Their Trophies was but conquest of a girl:
Then trust me Lords I Will never manage arms,
For women's loves that are so quickly lost.

Bran: Tush my Lords why ^^and you upon terms
Let us to our Skonce, and you my Lord to Mexico.

Exeunt Kings. Orl: I sirs, inskonce ye how you can, see what we dare,
And thereon set your rest.

Exeunt Omnes. Manent Sacrepant and his man. Sac: Boast not too much Marsillus
in thy self,
Nor of contentment in Angelica;
For Sacrepant must have Angelica,
And with her Sacrepant must have the Crown:
By hook or crook I must and will have both.
Ah sweet Revenge incense their angry minds,
Till all these Princes weltring in their bloods,
The Crown do fall to County Sacrepant.
Sweet are the thoughts that smother from conceit:
For when I come and set me down to rest,
My chair presents a throne of Majesty:
And when I set my bonnet on my head,
Me thinks I fit my forhead for a Crown:
And when I take my trunchion in my fist,
A Scepter then comes tumbling in my thoughts.
My dreams are Princely, all of Diademes,
Honor: me thinks the title is too base.
Mighty, glorious and excellent:
I these my glorious Genius sound within my mouth
These please the care, and with a sweet applause,
Makes me in terms coequall with the Gods.
Then these Sacrepant, and none but these.
And these or else make hazard of thy life.
Let it suffice, I will conceal the rest.
Sir.

Man. My Lord.

Sacrep: My Lord. How basely was this Slave brought up?
That knows no titles fit for dignity,
To grace his Master with Hyperboles.
My Lord. Why the basest Baron of fair Africa,
Deserves as much: yet County Sacrepant,
Must he a swain salute with name of Lord.
Sir, what thinks the Emperor of my colors,
Because in field I wear both blue and red at once?

Man. They deem my Lord, your Honor lives at peace,
As one that's newter in these mutinies,
And couets to rest equal friends to both:
Neither envious to Prince Mandricard,
Nor wishing ill unto Marsillus,
That you may safely pass where ere you please,
With friendly salutations from them both.

Sac: I, so they guess, but level far awrie;
For if they knew the secrets of my thoughts,
Mine Emblem sorteth to another sense.
I wear not these as one resolud to peace,
But blue and red as enemy to both.
Blue, as hating King Marsillus;
And red, as in revenge to Mandricard:
Foe unto both, friend only to my self,
And to the crown, for that's the golden mark,
Which makes my thoughts dream on a Diadem
(...) all men presage I shall be King:
(...) to me for peace,
(...) of his cap ten mile of,
Two things more and then I cannot mis the crown.

Man: O what be those my good Lord.

Sacr: First must I get the love of fair Angelica.
Now am I full of amorous conceits,
Not that I doubt to have what I desire,
But how I might best with mine honor woo,
Write, or entreat: fie that fitteth not,
Send by Ambassadors: no that's too base.
Flatly command I that's for Sacrepant:
Say thou art Sacrepant and art in love
And who in Affricke dare say the County nay.
O Angelica, fairer then Chloris when in all her pride
Bright Mayas son intrapther in the net,
Wherewith Vulcan entangled the God of war.

Man: Your honor is so far in contemplation of Angelica,
As you have forgot the second in attaining to the crown.

Sac: That's to be done by poison, prowess, or any means of treachery to put
to death the traitrous Orlando. But who is this comes here. Stand close.


Enter Orgalio Orlandos Page. Org: I am sent on imbassage to the right mighty
and magnificent: alias, the right proud and pontifical the County Sacrepant.
For Marsillus and Orlando knowing him to be as full of prowess as policy, and
fearing least in leaning to the other faction, he might greatly prejudice
them, they seek first to hold the candle before the devil: and knowing him to
be a Thrasonicall mad-cap, they have sent me a Gnathonicall companion, to give
him lettice fit for his lips. Now sir, knowing his astronomical humors, as one
that gazeth so high at the stars, as he never looks on the pauement in the
streets. But whist, Lupus est in fabula.


Sac: Sir, thou that ruminatest to thy self a catalogue of privy
conspiracies, what art thou?


Org: God save your Majesty?


Sac: My Majesty, come hither my well nutrimented Knave, whom take me to be?


Org: The mighty Mandricard of Mexico.


Sacr: I hold these salutations as omynous, for saluting me by that which I am
not, he presageth what I shall be; for so did the Lacedaemonians by Agathocles,
who of a base potter, wore the Kingly Diadem, but why deemest thou me to be the
mighty Mandricard of Mexico?


Org: Marie sir.


Sacr: Stay there, were thou never in France.


Org: Yes, if it please your Majesty.


Sac: So it seems for there they salute their king by the name of Sir,
Mounsier, but forward.


Org: Such sparks of peerlesse Majesty,
From those looks flames like lightning from the East
As either Mandricard, or else some greater Prince.

Sac: Methinks these salutations makes my thoghts To be heroical. But say to
whom art thou sent?


Org: To the County Sacrepant.


Sacr: Why I am he.


Org: It pleases your Majesty to jest.


Sacr: What ere I seem, I tell thee I am he.


Org: Then may it please your honor: the Emperor Marsillus together with his
daughter Angelica and Orlando entreats your Excellency to dine with them.


Sacr: Is Angelica there?


Org: There my good Lord.


Sacr: Sir.


Man: My Lord.


Sacr: Villain, Angelica sends for me.
See that thou entertain that happy messenger.
And bring him in with thee.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Orlando the Duke of Aquitaine, the County Rossilion with
soldiers. Orl: Princes of France, the sparkling light of fame,
Whose glories brighter than the burnisht gates,
From whence Latonas lordly son does march,
When mounted on his coach tinseld with flames,
He triumphs in the beauty of the heavens.
This is the place where Rodamant lies hid:
Here lies he like the thief of Thessaly,
Which scuds abroad, and searches for his pray;
And being gotten, straight he gallops home,
As one that dares not break a spear in field.
But trust me Princes I have girt his fort,
And I will sack it, or on this Castle wall,
I Will write my resolution with my blood. Therefore drum sound a parle.

Sound a Parle, and one comes upon the walls. Sol: Who is that troubles our
sleeps?

Orl: Why sluggard, see thou not Lycaons son
The hardy plough-swaine unto mighty Jove,
Has tracde his silver furrows in the heavens,
And turning home his ouer-watched teeme,
Gives leave unto Apollos Chariot.
I tell thee sluggard, sleep is far unfit
For such as still have hammering in their heads,
But only hope of honor and revenge.
These called me forth to rouse thy master up.
Tell him from me, false coward as he is,
That Orlando the County Palatine,
Is come this morning with a band of French,
To play him hunts-vp with a point of war.
I Will be his minstrell with my drum and fife:
Bid him come forth, and dance it if he dare,
Let Fortune throw her favors where she list.

Sol: Frenchman between half sleeping and awake
Although the mystie veil straind over Cynthia,
Hinders my sight from nothing all thy crew:
Yet for I know thee and thy straggling grooms
Can in conceit build Castles in the Sky:
But in your actions like the stammering Greek,
Which breathes his courage bootlesse in the air.
I wish thee well Orlando: get thee gone,
Say that a Centynell did suffer thee:
For if the Round or Court of Guard should hear
Thou or thy men were braying at the walls,
Charles wealth the wealth of all his Western mines,
Found in the mountains of Transalpine France,
Might not pay ransom to the King for thee.

Orl: Brave Centynell if nature has inchast,
Asympathie of courage to thy tale,
And like the champion of Andromache,
Thou or thy master dare came out the gates,
Maugre the watch, the round, or Court of guard,
I will attend to abide the coward here.
If not, but still the crauin sleeps secure,
Pitching his guard within a trench of stones;
Tell him his walls shall serve him for no proof,
But as the son of Saturn in his wrath
Pasht all the mountains at Typheus head,
And topsie turuie turned the bottom up,
So shall the Castle of proud Rodamant:
And so brave Lords of France, lets to the fight.

Exeunt omnes. Alarums. Rodamant and Brandemart fly, Enter Orlando with his
coat. Orl: The Fox is scapde, but here is his case:
I mist him nere, it was time for him to trudge.
How now my Lord of Aquitaine?

Aquit: My Lord, the Court of guard is put unto the sword,
And all the watch that thought themselves so sure;
So that not one within the Castle breaths.

Orl: Come then, lets post amain to find out Rodamant,
And then in triumph march unto Marsillus.

Exeunt Enter Medor and Angelica An: I marvel Medor what my (...)
To enter league with County Sacrepant?

Med: Madam, the king your fathers wise enough,
He knows the County (like to Cassius)
Sits sadly dumping, aiming Caesar's death,
Yet crying Ave to his Majesty.
But Madame mark a while, and you shall see,
Your Father shake him off from secrecy.

Ang: So much I guess, for when he wild I should
Give entertainment to the doting Earl,
His speech was ended with a frowning smile.

Med: Madame, see where he comes; I Will be gone.
Exit Medor.
Enter Sacrepant and his man. Sacr: How fares my fair Angelica?

Ang: Well that my Lord so friendly is in league (As honor will him with
Marsillus.


Sac: Angelica shall I have a word or two with thee

Ang: What pleases my Lord for to command.

Sac: Then know my love, I cannot paint my grief
Nor tell a tale of Venus and her son,
Reporting such a Catalogue of toys.
It fits not Sacrepant to be effeminate,
Only guie leave my fair Angelica,
To say the County is in love with thee.

Ang: Pardon my Lord, my loves are ouer-past,
So firmly is Orlando printed in my thoughts,
As (...) left no place for any else.

Sac: Why ouer-weening Damsel, see thou not,
Thy lawless love unto this straggling mate.
Has filled our Afric Regions full of blood,
And will thou still persevere in thy love?
Tush leave the Palatine, and go with me.

Ang: Brave County know where sacred Love unites,
The knot of Gordion at the shrine of Jove,
Was never half so hard or intricate,
As be the bands which lovely Venus ties.
Sweet is my love: and for I love my Lord,
Seek not unless as Alexander did,
To cut the plough-swaines traces with thy sword,
Or slice the slender fillets of my life:
Or else my Lord, Orlando must be mine.

Sac: Stand I on love? Stoop I to Venus lure,
That never yet did fear the God of war?
Shall men report that County Sacrepant
Held lovers pains for pining passions?
Shall such a Siren offer me more wrong,
Than they did to the Prince of Ithaca?
No: as he his cares, so County stop thine eye.
Go to your needle (Lady) and your clouts.
Go to such milk-sops as are fit for love:
I will employ my busy brains for war,

Ang: Let not my Lords denial breed offense,
Love does allow her favors but to one,
Nor can there sit within the sacred shrine
Of Venus, more than one installed heart.
Orlando is the Gentleman I love,
And more than he may not enjoy my love.

Sac: Damsel be gone, fancy has taken leave;
Where I took hurt there have I heald my self,
As those that with Achilles lance were wounded,
Fetched help at self same pointed spear.
Beauty began brave, and beauty has repulse:
And Beauty get ye gone to your Orlando.

Exit Angelica. Man. My Lord: has love amated him whose thoughts
Have ever been heroycall and brave?
Stand you in dumpes like to the Mirmydon,
Trapt in the tresses of Polixena:
Who amid the glory of his chivalry,
Sat daunted with a maid of Asia.

Sac: Think thou my thoghts are lunacies of love?
No, they are brands fierd in Plutoes forge,
Where sits Tsiphone tempring in flames
Those torches that do set on fire Revenge,
I lovd the Dame, but bravd by her repulse,
Hate calls me on to quittance all my ills:
Which first must come by offering prejudice
Unto Orlando her beloved Love.

Man: O how may that be brought to pass my Lord?

Sacr: Thus. Thou see that Medor and Angelica
Are still so secret in their private walks,
As that they trace the shadie lawndes,
And thickest shadowed groves;
Which well may breed suspicion of some love.
Now than the French no Nation under heaven
Is sooner tutcht with stings of iealozie.

Man. And what of that my Lord?

Sac: Hard by for solace in a secret Grove,
The County once a day fails not to walk:
There solemnly he ruminates his love.
Upon those shrubs that compass in the spring,
And on those trees that border in those walks,
I Will slily have engravn on every bark
The names of Medor and Angelica.
Hard by I Will have some roundelayes hung up.
Wherein shall be some posies of their loves,
Fraughted so full of fiery passions,
As that the County shall perceive by proof,
Medor has won his fair Angelica.

Man. Is this all my Lord?

Sacr: No. For thou like to a shepherd shall be Cloathd,
With staff and bottle like some country swain,
That tends his flocks seeding upon these downs,
There see thou buzze into the Counties eats,
That thou have often seen within these woods
Base Medor sporting with Angelica.
And when he hears a shepherds simple tale,
He will not think it is faind.
Then either a madding mood will end his love,
Or worse betyde him through fond iealozie.

Man. Excellent. My Lord, see how I will play the Shepherd.

Sac: And mark thou how I play the caruer,
Therefore be gone, and make the ready straight.

Exit his man. Sacrepant hangs up the Roundelayes on the trees, and then goes
out, and his man enters like a shepherd. Shep: Thus all alone and like a
shepherds swain,
As Paris (when Oenon lovd him well)
Forgot he was the son of Priamus,
All clad in gray sat piping on a reed;
So I transformed to this Country shape,
Haunting these groves to work my masters will,
To plague the Palatine with iealozie,
And to conceit him with some deep extreme.
Here comes the man unto his wonted walk.
Enter Orlando and his Page Orgalio.
Orl: Orgalio, go see a Centernell be placde,
And bid the soldiers keep a Court of guard,
So to hold watch till secret here alone,
I meditate upon the thoughts of love.

Org: I will my Lord.
Exit Orgalio.
Orl: Fair Queen of love, thou mistres of delight,
Thou gladsome lamp that waitst on Phoebes train,
Spredding thy kindness through the iarring Orbs,
That in their union praise thy lasting powers.
Thou that have staid the fiery Phlegons course,
And made the Coachman of the glorious waine
To droop, in view of Daphnes excellence.
Fair pride of morn, sweet beauty of the Eeuen,
Look on Orlando languishing in love.
Sweet solitary groves, whereas the Nymphs
With pleasance laugh to see the Satyrs play;
Witness Orlandos faith unto his love.
Tread she these lawnds, kind Flora boast thy pride;
Seek she for shades, spread Cedars for her sake,
Fair Flora make her couch amidst thy flowers,
Sweet Crystal springs, wash ye with roses,
When she longs to drink. Ah, thought my heaven;
Ah heaven that knows my thought.
Smile joy, in her that my content has wrought.

Shep: The heaven of love is but a pleasant hell,
Where none but foolish wife imprisned dwell.

Orl: Orlando, what contrarious thoghts be these,
That flock with doubtful motions in thy mind?
Heaven smiles, and trees do boast their summers pride:
What? Venus writes her triumphs here beside.

She: Yet when thine eye has seen, they heart shall rue
The tragic chance that shortly shall ensue.

Orlando reads. Orl: Angelica. Ah sweet and heavenly name,
Life to my life, and essence to my joy.
But soft this Gordion knot together co-unites
A Medor partner in her peerlesse love.
Unkind: and will she bend her thoughts to change?
Her name, her writing? Ah foolish and unkind.
No name of hers; unless the brooks relent
To hear her name, and Rhodanus vouchsafe
To raise his moystned locks from out the reeds,
And flow with calm along his turning bounds:
No name of hers, unless Zephyrus blow
Her dignities along Ardenia woods;
Where all the world for wonders do await.
And yet her name; for why Angelica:
But mixed with Medor, not Angelica.
Only by me was lovd Angelica,
Only for me must live Angelica.
I find her drift, perhaps the modest pledge
Of my content, has with a secret smile
And sweet disguise restraind her fancy thus,
Figuring Orlando under Medors name:
Fine drift (fair Nymph) Orlando hopes no less.

He spies the Roundelayes. Yet more are Muses masking in these trees,
Framing their ditties in conceited lines,
Making a Goddess in despite of me,
That have no other but Angelica.
Shep: Poor haples man, these thoughts contain the hell,


Orlando reads this roundelay. Angelica is Lady of his heart,
Angelica is substance of his joy,
Angelica is medcine of his smart,
Angelica has healed his annoy.
Orl: Ah false Angelica. What have we more?

Another. Let groves, let rocks, let woods, let watrie springs,
The Cedar, Cypress, Laurel, and the Pine,
Joy in the notes of love that Medor sings,
Of those sweet looks Angelica of thine.
Then Medor in Angelica take delight,
Early, at morn, at noone, at even and night.
Orl: What dares Medor court my Venus?
What may Orlando deem?
Aetna forsake the bounds of Sicily,
For now in me thy restless flames appear,
Refusd, contemnd, disdaind: what worse than these?
Orgalio.

Org: My Lord.

Orl: Boy, view these trees carved with true love knots,
The inscription Medor and Angelica:
And read these verses hung up of their loves.
Now tell me boy, what do thou think?

Org: By my troth my Lord, I think Angelica is a woman.


Orl: And what of that?


Org: Therefore unconstant, mutable, having their loves hanging in their
ey-lids; that as they are got with a look, so they are lost again with a
wink. But here is a Shepherd, it may be he can tell us news.


Orl: What messenger has Ate sent abroad,
With idle looks to listen my laments.
Sir, who wronged happy Nature so,
To spoil these trees with this Angelica?
Yet in her name (Orlando) they are blessed.

Shep: I am a shepherd swain, thou wandering Knight,
That watch my flocks, not one that follow love.

Orl: As follow love? why dare thou dispraise my heaven,
Or once disgrace or prejudice her name?
Is not Angelica the Queen of love,
Decked with the compound wreath of Adons flowrs
She is.
Then speak thou peasant, what is he that dares
Attempt to court my Queen of love.
Or I shall send thy soul to Charons charge.

Sh: Brave knight since fear of death inforceth still
In greater minds submission and relent:
Know that this Medor whose unhappy name
Is mixed with the fair Angelicas,
Is even that Medor that inioyes her love.
You cave bears witness of their kind content,
Yon meadows talk the actions of their joy.
Our Shepherds in their songs of solace sing,
Angelica does none but Medor love.

Orl: Angelica does none but Medor love?
Shall Medor then possess Orlandos love?
Dainty and gladsome beams of my delight,
Delicious brows, why smiles your heaven for those
That wandering make you prove Orlandos foes:
Lend me your plaints, you sweet Arcadian Nimphs,
That wont to wail your new departed loves:
Thou weeping flood, leave Orpheus wail for me,
And Titans Neeces gather all in one
Those fluent springs of your lamenting tears,
And let them flow along my faintfull looks.

Shep: Now is the fire late smothered in suspect,
Kindled and burns within his angry breast.
Now have I done the will of Sacrepant.

Orl: Foemineum servile genus, crudele, superbum:
Discurteous women, Natures fairest ill,
The woe of man, that first created curse;
Base female sex, sprung from black Ates loins,
Proud, disdainful, cruel and unjust:
Whose words are shaded with enchanting wills,
Worse than Medusa, mateth all our minds,
And in their hearts sits shameless treachery
Turning a truthles vile circumference.
O could my fury paint their furies forth,
For hels no hell compared to their hearts,
Too simple devils to conceal their arts.
Borne to be plagues unto the thoughts of men,
Brought for eternal pestilence to the world.
O Femmenelle in genio de toute malle sede,
Comete, vulge, mute, fachilmente,
Contrario, zero, propria de la feed;
O infelice, miserate, creed,
Importuna, superbia, dispetoze:
Preua de more, de feed, de consilia,
Timmorare, crudele, ineque, ingrate,
Par pestelenze eternal monde nate.
Villain, what art thou that followest me?

Org: Alas my Lord, I am your servant Orgalio


Orl: (...) thou art Medor that ranst away with Angelica.


Org: No by my troth my Lord, I am Orgalio, ask all these people else.


Orl: Art thou Orgalio? tell me where Medor is.


Org: My Lord look where he sits.


Orl: What, sits he here, and braues me too?


Shep: No truly Sir, I am not he.


Orl: Yes villain.


He draws him in by the leg. Org: Help, help, my Lord of Aquitaine.


Enter Duke of Aquitaine, and soldiers. Org: O my Lord of Aquitaine the Count
Orlando is run mad, and taking of a shepherd by the heels, rends him as one
would tear a Lark. See where he comes with a leg on his neck.


Enter Orlando with a leg. Orl: Villain, provide me straight a Lions skin,
Thou see I now am mighty Hercules:
Look where is my massy club upon my neck.
I must to hell, to seek for Medor and Angelica,
Or else I dye.
You that are the rest, get you quickly away,
Provide ye horses all of burnisht gold,
Saddles of cork because I Will have them light,
For Charlemaine the Great is up in arms.
And Arthur with a crew of Britons comes
To seek for Medor and Angelica.

So he beats them all in before him. Manet Orgalio Enter Marsillus. Org: Ah
my Lord Orlando.


Mar: Orlando, what of Orlando?


Org: He my Lord runs madding through the woods, Like mad Orestes in his
greatest rage.

Step but aside into the bordring grove,
There shall you see engraven on every tree,
The lawless love of Medor and Angelica.
O see my Lord, not any shrub but bears
The cursed stamp that wrought the Counties rage
If thou be mighty King Marsillus,
For whom the County would adventure life:
Revenge it on the false Angelica.

Mar: Trust me Orgalio, Theseus in his rage,
Did never more revenge his wronged Hyppolitus,
Than I will on the false Angelica.
Go to my Court, and drag me Medor forth
Tear from his breast the daring villains heart,
Next take that base and damnd adulteress,
(I scorn to title her with daughters name:)
Put her in rags, and like some shepherdess,
Exile her from my kingdom presently,
Delay not good Orgalio, see it done.
Exit Orgalio. Enter a soldier with Mandricard disguised How now my friend,
what fellow have thou there?

Soul: He says my Lord that he is servant unto Mandricard.

Mar: To Mandricard?
It fits me not to sway the Diadem,
Or rule the wealthy Realms of Barbary,
To stain my thoughts with any cowardice.
Thy master bravde me to my teeth,
He backed the Prince of Cuba for my foe,
For which not he nor his shall escape my hands.
No soldier, think me resolute as he.

Man: It greeues me much that Princes disagree,
Since black repentance follows afterward.
But leaving that, pardon me gracious Lord.

Mar: For thou intreatst and newly art arrivd,
And yet thy sword is not imbrewd in blood,
Upon conditions I will pardon thee;
That thou shall never tell thy master Mandricard,
Nor any fellow soldier of the camp,
That King Marsillus licenst thee depart:
He shall not think I am so much his friend,
That he or one of his shall escape my hand.

Man: I swear my Lord, and vow to keep my word.

Mar: Then take my banderoll of red,
Mine, and none but mine shall honor thee,
And safe conduct thee to port Catthagene.

Man: But say my Lord, if Mandricard were here
What favor should he find or life or death?

Mar: I tell thee friend, it fits not for a King
To prize his wrath before his courtesy.
Were Mandricard the King of Mexico
In prison here, and cravde but liberty;
So little hate hangs in Marsillus breast,
As one entreaty should quite race it out.
But this concerns not thee, therefore farewell.
Exit Marsillus.
Man: Thanks and good fortune fall to such a king, thee
As couets to be counted courteous.
Blush Mandricard, the honor of thy foe disgraceth
Thou wrongest him that wishes thee but well
Thou bring store of men from Mexico
To battle him that scorns to iniure thee,
Pawning his colors for thy warrantize.
Back to thy ships, and hie thee to thy home,
Bouge not a foot to aid Prince Rodomant,
But friendly gratulate these favors found,
And mediate on naught but to be friends.
Exit
Enter Orlando attired like a madman. Orl: Woods, trees, leaves; leaves,
trees, woods: tria sequuntur tria. Ho Minerua, salve, God morrow how do you to
day? Tell me sweet Goddess, will Jove send Mercury to Calipso to let me go.
Will he? why then he is a Gentleman eueriehaire a the head on him. But ho
Orgalio, where art thou boy?


Org: Here my Lord, did you call me?


Orl: No, nor name thee.


Org: Then God be with you.


Orgalio proffers to go in. Orl: Nay pree thee good Orgalio stay, Can thou
not tell me what to say?


Org: No by my troth.


Orl: O this it is, Angelica is dead.


Org: Why then she shall be buried.


Orl: But my Angelica is dead.


Org: Why it may be so.


Orl: But she is dead and buried.


Org: I, I think so.


Orl: Nothing but I think so, and it may be so.


He beats him. Org: What do ye mean my Lord?


Orl: Why shall I tell you that my Love is dead, and can ye not weep for her.


Org: Yes yes my Lord I will.


Orl: Well do so then. Orgalio.


Org: My Lord.


Orl: Angelica is dead. Orgalio cries. Ah, poor slave, so, cry no more now.


Org: Nay I have quickly done.


Orl: Orgalio.


Org: My Lord.


Orl: Medors Angelica is dead.


Orgalio cries, and Orlando beats him again Org: Why do ye beat me my Lord?


Orl: Why slave, will thou weep for Medors Anlica, thou must laugh for her.


Org: Laugh? yes, I Will laugh all day and you will.


Orl. Orgalio.


Org: My Lord.


Orl: Medors Angelica is dead.


Org: Ha ha ha ha.


Orl: So, it is well now.


Org: Nay this is easier than the other was.


Orl: Now away, seek the herb Moly, for I must to hell, to seek for Medor and
Angelica.


Org: I know not the herb Moly in faith.


Orl: Come I Will lead ye to it by the ears.


Org: It Is here my Lord, it is here.


Orl: It Is indeed, now to Charon, bid him dress his boat, for he had never such
a passenger.


Org: Shall I tell him your name?

Exit.
Orl: No, then he will be afraid, and not be at home.


Enter two Clownes. Tho: Sir Rafe, and thoult go with me I Will let thee see
the brauest mad man that ever thou sawst.


Rafe. Sir Tom: I believe it was he that was at our town a sunday, I Will tell
thee what he did sir: he came to our house, when all our folks were gone to
Church, and there was no body at home but I, and I was turning of the spit,
and he comes in, and bad me fetch him some drink. Now I went and fetched him
some, and ere I came again, by my troth he ran away with the rost-meate spit
and all, and so we had nothing but porredge to dinner.


Thomas. By my troth that was brave, but sirrah he did so course the boys last
sunday: and if ye call him madman, heel run after you, and tickle your ribs so
with his flap of leather that he has as it passes.


They spy Orlando. Rafe Oh Tom look where he is, call him madman.


Tom. Madman, madman.


Rafe: Madman, madman.


Orl: What say thou villain? He beats them. So now you shall be both my
Soldiers.


Tom: Your soldiers, we shall have a mad Captain then.


Orl: You must fight against Medor.


Raf: Yes let me alone with him for a bloody nose.


Orl: Come then and I Will give you weapons strait,


Exeunt omnes. Enter Angelica like a poor woman. An: Thus causeles banished
from thy native home,
Here sit Angelica and rest a while,
For to bewail the fortunes of thy love.

Enter Rodamant and Brandemart with Soldiers. Roda: This way she went, and far
she cannot be.

Brand: See where she is my Lord, speak as if you knew her not.

To: Fair shepherdess for so thy sitting seems,
Or Nymph for less thy beauty cannot be:
What feed you sheep upon these downs?

Ange: Daughter I am unto a bordering Swain,
That tend my flocks within these shady groves.

Roda. Fond gyrle thou lie, thou art Angelica.

Brand: I thou art she that wronged the Palatine.

Ange: For I am known albeit I am disguisde,
Yet dare I turn the lie into thy throat,
Since thou reportst I wronged the Palatine.

Brand: Nay then thou shall be used according to thy deserts, come bring her to
our Tents.


Roda: But stay what Drum is this?

Enter Orlando with a Drum, and soldiers with spits and dripping-pans. Br: Now
see Angelica the fruits of all your love.

Orl: Soldiers, this is the City of great Babylon,
Where proud Darius was rebated from,
Play but the men and I will lay my head,
We Will sack and raze it ere the sun be set.

Clown: Yea and scratch it too,
March fair fellow drying pan.

Orl: Orgalio, know thou the cause of my laughter?


Org: No by my troth, nor no wiseman else.


Orl: Why sir to think that if the enemy were fled ere we come, we will not
leave one of our own soldiers alive, for we two will kill them with our fists.


Rafe: Fo come lets go home again, heel set Probatum est upon my headpeece
anon.


Orl: No, no, thou shall not be hurt, nor thee, Back soldiers, look where
the enemy is.


Tom: Captain, they have a woman amongst them.


Orl: And what of that?


Tom: Why strike you down the men, and then let me alone to thrust in the
woman.


Orl: No I am challenged the single fight,
Syrra, ift you challenge me the combat.

Brand: Frantic companion, lunatic and wood,
Get thee hence, or else I vow by heaven,
Thy madness shall not privilege thy life.

Orl: I tell thee villain Medor wronged me so,
Since thou art come his Champion to the field,
I Will learn thee know I am the Palatine.

Alarm: They fight, Orlando kills Brandemart, and all the rest fly but
Angelica. Org: Look my Lord here is one killed.


Orl: Who killed him?


Org: You my Lord I think.


Orl: I? No, no, I see who killed him.

He goes to Angelica and knows her not. Come hither gentle sir, whose
prowess has performde such an act, think not the courteous Palatine will
hinder that thine Honor has atchieude, Orgalio fetch me a sword, that
presently this squire may be dubd a Knight.


Ange: Thanks gentle Fortune that sendes me such good hap,
Rather to die by him I love so dear,
Than live and see my Lord thus lunaticke.

Org: Here my Lord.


Orl: If thou be come of Lancelots worthy line welcome thou art,
Kneel down sir Knight, rise up sir Knight,
Here take this sword, and hie thee to the fight.
Exit Angelica. Now tell me Orgalio, what do thou think,
Will not his Knight prove a valiant Squire?

Org: He cannot choose being of your making


Orl: But where is Angelica now?


Org: Faith I cannot tell.


Orl: Villain find her out,
Or else the torments that Ixion feels,
The rolling stone, the tubs of the Belides,
Villain will thou find her out.

Org: Alas my Lord, I know not where she is.

Orl: Run to Charlemaine, spare for no cost,
Tell him Orlando sent for Angelica.

Org: Faith I Will fetch you such an Angelica as you never saw before.

Exit Orgalio.
Orl: As though that Sagittarius in his pride,
Could take brave Laeda from stout Jupiter?
And yet forsooth Medor, base Medor durst
Attempt to reave Orlando of his love.
Sir, you that are the messenger of Jove,
You that can sweep it through the milk white path
That leads unto the Senate house of Mars.
Fetch me my shield temperd of purest steel,
My helm forgd by the Cyclops for Anchises son,
And see if I dare not combat for Angelica.

Enter Orgalio with the Clown dressed like Angelica. Org: Come away, and take
heed you laugh not.


Cl: No I warrant you, but I think I had best go back and shave my beard.


Org: Tush, that will not be seen.


Cl: Well you will give me the half crown ye promised me.


Org: Doubt not of that man.


Cl: Sir, did not see me serve the fellow a fine trick, when we came over
the market place.


Org: why, how was that?


Cl: Why he comes to me, and said; Gentlewoman, wilt please you take a pint or
a quart. No Gentlewoman said I, but your friend and Doritie.


Org: Excellent: come see where my Lord is.
My Lord, here is Angelica.

Orl: Mas thou say true, it is she indeed;
How fares the fair Angelica?

Cl: Well I thank you heartily.


Orl: Why art thou not that same Angelica,
Whose hiew as bright as fair Erythea
That darkes Canopus with her silver hiew?

Cl: Yes forsooth.


Orl: Are not these the beauteous checkes,
Wherein the Lillies and the native Rose
Sits equal suited with a blushing red?

Cl: He makes a garden plot in my face.

Orl: Are not my dear those radient eyes,
Whereout proud Phoebus flasheth out his beams?

Cl: Yes, yes, with squibs and crackers braueiy.


Orl: You are Angelica?


Cl: Yes marry am I.


Orl: Where Is your sweet heart Medor?


Cl: Orgalio, give me eighteen pence, and let me go.


Orl: Speak strumpet, speak.


Cl: Marry sir he is drinking a pint or a quart.


Orl: Why strumpet, worse than Mars his trothlesse love.
Falser than faithles Cresida: strumpet thou shall not escape.

Cl: Come, come, you do not use me like a gentlewoman; and if I be not for you
I am for another.


Orl: Are you, that will I try.
He beats him out.

Exeunt omnes Enter the twelve Peers of France, with drum and trumpets. Og:
Brave Peers of France, since we have past the bounds,
Whereby the wrangling billows seeks for straites
To war with Tellus, and her sruitsull mines:
Since we have furrowd through those wandering tides
Of Tyrrhene seas, and made our galleys dance
Upon the Hyperborian billows crests,
That braues with streams the watrie Occident:
And found the rich and wealthy Indian clime,
Sought to by greedy minds for hurtful gold.
Now let us seek to venge the Lamp of France,
That lately was eclipsed in Angelica.
Now let us seek Orlando forth our Peer,
Though from his former wits lately estrangd,
Yet famous in our favors as before.
And since by chance we all encountered be
Let seek revenge on her that wrought his wrong.

Names. But being thus arrivd in place unknown,
Who shall direct our course unto the Court,
Where brave Marsillus keeps his royal State.

Enter Marsillus and Mandricard like Palmers. Og: Lo here, two Indian Palmers
hard at hand
Who can perhaps resolve our hidden doubts.
Palmers, God speed.

Mar: Lordings, we greet you well.

Og: Where lies Marsillus Court, friend can thou tell.

Mar: His Court is his camp, the Prince is now
in arms.

Turpin. In arms? What Is he that dares annoy so great a King.

Man: Such as both love and fury does confound,
Fierce Sacrepant, incenst with strange desires,
Wars on Marsillus, and Rodamant being dead,
Has levied all his men, and traitor-like
Assailes his Lord, and loving sovereign.
And Mandricard who late has been in arms,
To prosecute revenge against Marsillus,
Is now through favors past become his friend.
Thus stands the state of matchles India.

Og: Palmer, I like thy brave and breef discourse,
And could thou bring us to the Princes camp,
We would acknowledge friendship at thy hands.

Mar: Ye stranger Lords, why seek ye out Marsillus?

Og: In hope that he whose Empire is so large,
Will make both mind and Monarchy agree.

Mar: Whence are you Lords, and what request you here?

Names. Aquestion ouer-hautie for thy weed,
Fit for the King himself for to propound.

Man: O sir, know that under simple weeds
The Gods have maskt, then deem not with disdain
To answer to this Palmers question,
Whose coat includes perhaps as great as yours.

Og: Hautie their words, their persons full of state,
Though habit be but mean, their minds excel.
Well Palmers know that Princes are in India arrivd
Yea even those western princely peers of France,
That through the world adventures undertake,
To find Orlando late incenst with rage.
Then Palmers since you know our styles and state,
Advise us where your King Marsillus is.

Mar: Lordings of France, here is Marsillus,
That bids you welcome into India,
And will in person bring you to his camp.

Og: Marsillus, and thus disguisd?

Mar: Even Marsillus, and thus disguisd.
But what request these Princes at my hand?

Turpin. We sue for law and justice at thy hand,
We seek Angelica thy daughter out;
That wanton maid, that has eclipst the joy
Of royal France, and made Orlando mad.

Mar: My daughter Lords, why she is exilde,
And her grieud father is content to lose
The pleasance of his age to countnance law.

Oli: Not only exile shall await Angelica,
But death and bitter death shall follow her,
Then yield us right Marsillus, or our swords
Shall make thee fear to wrong the Pieres of France.

Mar: Words cannot daunt me Princes be as surde,
But law and justice shall ouerrule in this,
And I will bury fathers name and love,
The haples maid bannisht from out my Land,
Wanders about in woods and ways unknown,
Her if ye find with fury persecute,
I now disdain the name to be her Father,
Lords of France what would you more of me.

Oger: Marsillus we commend thy Princely mind,
And will report thy justice through the world,
Come Peers of France lets seek Angelica,
Left for a spoil to our revenging thoughts.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Orlando like a Poet. Orl: Orgalio, is not my love like
those purple colored swans,
That gallop by the Coach of Cynthia.

Org: Yes marry is she my Lord.

Orl: Is not her face siluerd like that milke-white shape,
When love came dancing downeto Semele.

Org: It is my Lord.
Then go thy ways and clime up to the Clouds,
And tell Apollo that Orlando sits,
Making of verses for Angelica.
And if he do deny to send me down
The shirt which Deianyra sent to Hercules,
To make me brave upon my wedding day;
Tell him I Will pass the Alps, and up to Meroe,
(I know he knows that watrie lakish hill)
And pull the harp out of the minstrelis hands,
And pawn it unto lovely Proserpine,
That she may fetch the fair Angelica.

Org: But my Lord Apollo is a sleep and will not hear me,

Orl: Then tell him he is a sleepy knave:

But sir let no body trouble me, for I must lie down a while and talk with
the stars.


Enter Fiddler. Org: What old acquaintance well met.


Fiddler. Ho you would have me play Angelica again, would ye not?


Org: Not, but I can tell thee where thou may earne two or three shillings
this morning, even with the turning of a hand.


Fiddler: Two or three shillinges, tush thou wot cossen me thou, but and thou
can tell where I may earne a groate, I Will give thee six pence for thy pains.


Org: Then play a fit of mirth to my Lord.


Fid: Why he is mad still is he not.


Org: No, no, come play.


Fiddler. At which side does he use to give his reward.


Org: Why of any side.


Fiddler. Does he not use to throw the chamber pot sometimes? Twould grieve me
he should wet my fiddle strings.


Org: Tush I warrant thee.


He plays and sings any odd toy, and Orlando wakes. Orl: Who is this, Shan
Cuttelero? heartily welcome, Shan Cuttelero.


Fiddler. No sir, you should have said Shan the Fidideldero.


Orl: What, have thou brought me my sword?


He takes away his fiddle. Fiddler. A sword? No no sir, that's my fiddle.


Orl: But do thou think the temper to be good And will it hold, when thus and
thus we Medor do assail?


He strikes and beats him with the fiddle. Fiddler. Lord sir, you will break my
living.
You told me your master was not mad.

Orl: Tell me, why have thou mard my sword?
The pummells well, the blade is curtald short.
Villain why have thou made it so,

Fiddler. O Lord Sir, will you answer this?

He breaks it about his head. Exit Fiddler. Enter Melissa with a glass of
Wine. Orl. Orgalio who is this?


Orga. Faith my Lord some old witch I think.


Mel. O that my Lord would but conceit my tale.
Then would I speak and hope to find redress.

Orl: Fair Polixena, the pride of Illion,
Fear not Achilles ouer-madding boy,
Pyrrus shall not, etc.
Sounes Orgalio, why suffer thou this old trot to come so nigh me?

Orga: come, come, stand by, your breath stinkes.

Orl: What, be all the Trogians fled,
Then give me some drink.

Mel: Here Palatine drink, and ever be thou better for this draught.

Orl: What here the paltrie bottle that Darius quaft,
He drinks, and she charms him with her wand, and lies down to sleep. Else
would I set my mouth to Tygres streams,
And drink up ouerflowing Euphrates,
My eyes are heavy, and I needs must sleep.
Melissa strikes with her wande, and the Satyrs enter with music and play
round about him, which done, they stay, he awaketh and speaks.

What shows are these that fill mine eyes
With view of such regard as heaven admires,
To see my slumbring dreams,
Skies are fulfild with lamps of lasting joy,
That boast the pride of haught Latonas son,
He lightneth all the candles of the night.
Nymosene has kissed the kingly Jove,
And entertaind a feast within my brains,
Making her daughter solace on my brow,
Me thinks I feel how Cinthya tunes conceits
Of sad repent, and meloweth those desires
Which phrensies scares had ripened in my head.
Ate I Will kiss thy restless cheek a while,
And suffer vile repent to bide control,

He lies down again. Mel: O vos Silvani, Satyri, Faunique, Deaque,
Nymphae Hamadriades, Driades, Persaeque potentes,
O vos qui colttes lacusque laeosque profundos,
Infernasque domus, and nigra palatia Ditis:
Tuque Demogorgon qui noctis fata gubernas,
Qui regis infernum, solemque, solumque, coelumque,
Exaudite preces, filiasque aufert^ ^icantes,
In caput Orlandi coelestes spargite lympus,
Spargite, quis misere reuocetur raptator vmbras
Orlando infoelix anima.

Then let the music play before him, and so go forth. Orl: What sights, what
shows, what fearful shapes are these?
More dreadful then appeard to Hecuba,
When fall of Troy was figured in her sleep.
Juno me thought sent down from heaven by love.
Came swiftly sweeping through the gloomy air
And calling Fame the Satyrs and the nymphs,
She gave them viols full of heavenly dew,
With that mounted on her parti-colored coach
Being drawn with peacockes proudly through the air,
She flew with Iris to the sphere of love.
What fearful thoughts arise upon this show?
What desert grove is this? How thus disguisde?
Where is Orgalio?

Orgal: Heremy Lord.

Orl: Sirah, how came I thus disguisde,
Like made Orestes quaintly thus disguisd?

Orl: Like mad Orestes, nay my Lord, you may boldly justify the comparison,
for Orestes was never so mad in his life as you were.


Orl: What was I mad? What fury has enchanted me?

Mel: A fury sure worse than Megera was,
That reft her son from trusty Pilades.

Orl: Why, what art thou, some Sybel or some goddess, freely speak?

Mel: Time not affoords to tell each circumstance?
But thrice has Cynthia changde her hiew
Since thou infected with a lunasie,
Have gadded up and down these lands and groves
Performing strange and ruthful stratagemes,
All for the love of fair Angelica,
Whom thou with Medor did suppose plaide false,
But Sacrepant had graven these rundelaies,
To sting thee with infecting jealousy;
The swain that told thee of their often converse,
Was servant unto County Sacrepant,
And trust me Orlando, Angelica though true to thee,
Is banished from the court,
And Sacrepnat this day bids battle to Marsillius
The armies ready are to give assail,
And on a hill that ouerpeeres them both,
Stands all the worthy matchles peers of France
Who are in quest to seek Orlando out.
Muse not at this, for I have told thee true,
I am she that cured thy disease,
Here take these weapons given thee by the fates,
And hie thee County to the battle straight.

Or: Thanks sacred Gods for thy helping hand
Thither will I hie to be reuengd.
Alarmes.
Exit.
Enter Sacrepant crowned, and pursuing Marsillus and Mandrecard. Sacre:
Viceroyes you are dead,
For Sacrepant already crowned a king,
Heaues up his sword to have your diadems.

Mar: Traitor, not dead, or any wit dismaide,
For dear we prize the smallest drop of blood.

Enter Orlando with a scarf before his face. Orl: Stay Princes, base not your
selves to cumbat such a dog.
Mount on your coursers, follow those that fly,
And let your conquering swoordes be tainted in their bloods
Pass ye, for him he shall be combatted.

Exit Kings. Sac: Why what art thou that brauest me thus?

Orl: I am thou see a mercenarie soldier
Homely, yet of such haughty thoughts;
As noght can serve to quench the aspiring thoghtes
That burns as do the fires of Cicely,
Unless I win that princely diadem,
That seems so ill upon thy cowards head.

Sac. Coward. To arms sir boy, I will not brook these braues,
If Mars himself even from his fiery throne,
Came armde with all his furnitures of war.
They fight. Oh villain, thou have slain a prince.

Orl: Then may thou think that Mars himself
Came down to veil thy plumes, and heave thee from thy pomp.
Proud that thou art, I recke not of thy gree,
But I will have the conquest of my sword,
Which is the glory of thy diadem.

Sac: These words bewraie thou art no base born moore,
But by descent sprung from some royal line,
Then freely tell me what is thy name.

Orl: Nay first let me know thine?

Sac: Then know that thou have slain Prince
Sacrepant.

Orl: Sacrepant. Then let me at thy dying day entreat,
By that same sphere wherein thy soul shall rest,
If love deny not passage to thy ghost,
Thou tell me whether thou wrongdst Angelica or no.

Sac: O that's the sting that pricks my conscience
Oh that's the hell my thoughts abhor to think,
I tell thee knight, for thou do seem no less,
That I ingravde the rundelaies on the trees,
And hung the sedulet of poor Medors love,
Intending so to breed debate,
Between Orlando and Angelica,
O thus I wronged Orlando and Angelica.
Now tell me what shall I call thy name.

Orl: Then dead is the fatal author of my ill,
Base villain, vassal, unworthy of a crown,
Know that the man that struck the fatal stroke,
Is Orlando the County Palatine,
Whom fortune sent to quittance all my wrongs
Thou foild and slain, it now behoues me straight
To hie me fast to massacre thy men,
And so farewell thou devil in shape of man.
Exit.
Sac: Has Demogorgon ruler of the fates,
Set such a balefull period on my life,
As none might end the days of Sacrepant,
But mighty Orlando rival of my love,
Now holds the fatal murderers of men,
The sharpened knife ready to cut my thread,
Ending the scene of all my tragedy,
This day, this hour, this minute ends the days
Of him that liude worthy old Nestors age.
Phoebus put on thy fable suited wreath,
Cladde all thy spheres in dark and mourning weeds.
Parcht be the earth to drink up every spring,
Let corn and trees be blasted from above,
Heaven turn to brass, and earth to wedge of steel
The world to cinders, Mars come thundering down,
And never sheath thy swift revenging swoorde,
Till like the deluge in Dewcalions days,
The higgest mountains swim in streams of blood.
Heaven, earth, men, beasts, and every living thing
Consume and end with county Sacrepant.

he dies. Enter Marsillus, Mandrecard, and twelve peers with Angelica. Mar.
Fought is the field, and Sacrepant is slain,
With such a massacre of all his men,
As Mars descending in his purple robe,
Vows with Bellona in whole heaps of blood
To banquet all the demie gods of war.

Mandr. See where he lies slaughtered without the camp,
And by a simple swain, a mercenarie,
Who bravely took the combat to himself,
Might I but know the man that did the deed,
I would my Lord eternize him with fame.

Oger: Leaving the factious county to his death,
Command my Lord his body be conuaid
Unto some place as likes your Highness best,
See Marsillus poasting thorough Africa,
We have found this straggling girl Angelica,
Who for she wronged her love Orlando
Chiefest of the Western peers,
Conuersing with so mean a man as Medor was,
We will have her punished by the laws of France,
To end her burning lust in flames of fire.

Mar. Beshrew you lordings but you do your worst.
Fire, famine, and as cruel death,
As fell to Neros mother in his rage.

Angelica. Father, if I may dare to call thee so,
And Lords of France come from the Western seas.
In quest to find mighty Orlando out,
Yet ere I die let me have leave to say,
Angelica held ever in her thoughts,
Most dear the love of County Palatine:
What wretch has wronged us with suspect of love,
I know not I, nor can accuse the man:
But by the heavens whereto my soul shall fly,
Angelica did never wrong Orlando.
I speak not this as one that cares to live,
For why, my thoughts are fully malecontent,
And I conjure you by your Chivalry,
You quit Orlandos wrong upon Angelica.

Enter Orlando with a scarf before his face. Oliver: Strumpet fear not, for
by fair Mayas son,
This day thy soul shall vanish up in fire,
As Semele when Juno wild the trull,
To entertain the glory of her love.

Orl: Frenchman, for so thy quaint array imports,
Be thou a Piere, or be thou Charlemaine,
Or had thou Hector or Achilles heart,
Or never daunted thoughts of Hercules,
That did in courage far surpass them all,
I tell thee sir, thou lie in thy throat,
The greatest brave transalpine France can brook,
In saying that sacred Angelica,
Did offer wrong unto the Palatine:
I am a common mercenary soldier,
Yet for I see my Princess is abusd
By new come straglers from a foreign coast,
I dare the proudest of these western Lords
To crack a blade in trial of her right.

Mam: Why foolish hardy daring simple groom,
Follower of fond conceited Phaeton:
Know thou to whom thou speakst?

Mar: Brave soldier (for so much thy courage
These men are princes, dipped within the blood (says)
Of Kings most royal, seated in the West,
Unfit to accept a challenge at your hand.
Yet thanks that thou would in thy Lords defense
Fight for my daughter, but her guilt is known.

Ang: I, rest thee soldier, Angelica is false,
False, for she has no trial of her right:
Soldier, let me die for the miss of all.
Were thou as stout as is proud Theseus,
In vain thy blade should offer my defense:
For why, these be the champions of the world,
Twelve Peers of France that never yet were foild.

Orl: How Madam, the twelve Peers of France?
Why let them be twelve devils of hell:
What I have said I Will pawn my sword
To seal it on the shield of him that dares
Malgrado of his honor combat me.

Oliver. Marry sir, that dare I.

Orl: Yar a welcome man sir.

Turpin. Chastise the groom (Oliver) and learn him know,
We are not like the boys of Africa.

Orl: Hear you sir: You that so peremptorily bad him fight,
Prepare your weapons for your turn is next,
It Is not one Champion that can discourage me,
Come are ye ready.
He fights first with one, and then with another, and ouercomes them both. So
stand aside, and Maddam if my fortune last it out,
I Will guard you (...) with twelve Pieres of France.

Og: Oh (...) how can thou stand and see a slave
Disgrace the house of France: Syrra prepare you,
For angry (...) sits on my sword to be reuengd.

Orl: Well said Frenchman, you have made a goodly oration: But you had best to
use your sword better, lest I beswinge you.


They fight a good while and then breath. Og: How so ere disguisd in base or
Indian shape,
Oger can well discern thee by thy blows,
For either thou art Orlando or the devil.

Orl: Then to assure you that I am no devil,
Here Is your friend and companion Orlando.

Oger: And none can be more glad than Oger is
That he has found his Cosen in his sense.

Oli: When as I felt his blows upon my shield,
My teeth did chatter and my thoughts conceiude,
Who might this be if not the Pallatine.

Turpin: So had I said, but that report did tell,
My Lord was troubled with a lunacie.

Orl: So was I Lordinges: but give me leave a while,
Humbly as Mars did to his Paramour,
So to submit to fair Angelica.
Pardon thy Lord, fair saint Angelica,
Whose love stealing by steps into extremes,
Grew by suspicion to a causeles lunacie.

Angelica: O no my Lord, but pardon my amiss,
For had not Orlando lovde Angelica
Nere had my Lord fallen into these extremes,
Which we will parle private to our selves:
Nere was the Queen of Cypres half so glad,
As is Angelica to see her Lord,
Her dear Orlando settled in his sense.

Orlando: Thanks my sweet love.
But why stands the Prince of Africa,
And Mandrecarde the King of Mexico,
So deep in dumps when all rejoice beside:
First know my Lord, I slaughtred Sacrepant,
I am the man that did the slave to death,
Who frankely there did make confesion,
That he ingravde the Roundelaies on the trees,
And hung the schedules of poor Medors love,
Entending by suspect to breed debate,
Deeply twixt me and fair Angelica:
His hope had hap but we had all the harm,
And now Revenge leaping from out the seat,
Of him that may command stern Nemesis,
Has powrde those treasons justly on his head.
What says my gracious Lord to this?

Marsillus: I stand amazde, deep ouerdrencht with joy,
To hear and see this unexpected end,
So well I rest content ye Pieres of France,
Since it is provde Angelica is clear,
Her and my Crown I freely will bestow,
Upon Orlando the County Palatine.

Orl: Thanks my good Lord, and now my friends of France,
From (...), be merry, we will hasten home,
So soon as King (...) will consent,
To let his daughter (...) with us to France,
Mean while we will richly rigge up all our Fleet,
More brave than was that gallant Grecian keele,
That brought away the Colchyan fleece of gold.
Our Sails of sendall spread into the wind,
Our ropes and tacklings all of finest silk,
Fetched from the native loomes of laboring worms,
The pride of Barbary, and the glorious wealth,
That is transported by the Western bounds:
Our stems cut out of gleming Iuorie,
Our planks and sides framde out of Cypress wood,
That bears the name of Cyparissus change,
To burst the billows of the Ocean Sea,
Where Phoebus dips his amber-tresses often,
And kisses Thetis in the days decline,
That Neptune proud shall call his Trytons forth,
To cover all the Ocean with a calm:
So rich shall be the rubbish of our barks,
Taken here for ballas to the ports of France,
That Charles himself shall wonder at the sight.
Thus Lordings when our bankettings be done,
And Orlando espowsed to Angelica,
We Will furrow through the moving Ocean,
And cherely frolic with great Charlemaine.

FINIS.

