MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS, UPON SEVEN CONSOLATORIE PSALMS OF DAVID:
NAMELY, The 23. The 27. The 30. The 34. The 84. The 103. The 116.


By Sir RICHARD BAKER Knight.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for F. Eglesfield, and are to be sold by Henry
Twiford at the sign of the Bear over against the middle Temple gate, in
Fleetstreet, 1640.

A CATALOGVE OF THE SEVERAL Treatises written by this Author.
NAMELY, MEditations and Disquisitions upon the Lords Prayer. Meditations and
Disquisitions upon the 1 Psalm. Meditations and Disquisitions upon the seven
Penitential Psalms. Meditations and Disquisitions upon seven Consolatorie
Psalms. Also a Poem of his entitled Cato Variegatus, or Cato's moral
Disticks va^ied.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM Lord CRAVEN, Baron of Hamstead, etc.
MOST HONORED LORD,
I Shall perhaps move Envy to say, Quae te tam laeta tulerunt s^ecula? but for
my self, I am bound to say it, who have received from your Lordship, indeed a
great Favor, the remission of a great Debt; for which notwithstanding I
account my self to stand obliged still, though in a less profitable, yet in a
more binding Obligation, to be your perpetual servant. I am called upon by
Gratefulness, to erect some Monument in honor of your Bounty; and a more
lasting Monument, I could not think of, within the compass of my poor
abilities, then to Dedicate these Psalms of David, to the memory of your
Name: for though your own Heroic virtue have made you a Monument of the same
metal that Fames Trumpet is made, which is likely, and worthy to last long;
yet this perhaps, may prove Monumentum Fama perennius; a Monument that will
continue your memory, when Fame it self shall be buried in oblivion. But how
long soever it shall continue, yet not so long as my Devotion to be, as my
Desire to be accounted to be.

Your Lordships humble, and obliged servant, Richard Baker.

Imprimatur,

Tho: Wykes, R. P. Episc. Land. Sacell. Domest.
September. 11. 1639.
THE TWENTY THIRD PSALM OF DAVID.








of mine enemies; Thou anoyntest my head with Oil; my cup runs over.



MEDITATIONS UPON THE XXIII. PSALM OF DAVID.
IS it not a grievous fall, that The Lord is my shepherd; as though I were but
a sheep? and yet perhaps no Fall in this at all: For, what was I, when I was
at best, but the Lords sheep? Depending wholly upon him for all I had: No
clothes to cover my nakedness, but of his making: no food to satisfy my
hunger, but of his providing: and oh that I had continued his sheep still, for
then though weak, I should have been innocent, though feeble, I should have
been harmless; Where by taking (O miserable mistaking) the Serpent for a
shepherd, I became of an innocent Sheep, a ravening Wolf, and should have so
continued, at least a perpetual strayer: if my true shepherd (O the
wonderful bowels of compassion) had not left the Ninety nine in the
Wilderness to seek after me, and had not found me out, and brought me back
again into his Fold; that if there be joy in Heaven, that the lost sheep is
found, there ought to be much more joy in Earth, that the lost sheep can say;
The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want?

But how can I truly say; The Lord is my shepherd; seeing he has turned me
over, sheep and lambs and all, to Saint Peter to be our shepherd? Can he
turn me over to another, and yet himself retain a property in me still? But
is it not that there is a Hierarchy of shepherds? Saint Peter and his
successors, but Ministerial shepherds; God himself the shepherd Paramount;
Psalm. 77.20
He ledd his people like sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron: He but used
the service of Moses and Aaron; himself was the shepherd still; it was he
that led them. And is it not said of Kings too, that they are (...), Shepherds
of the people? and perhaps David speaks here, as he was a King: for though a
King be a shepherd in relation to his Subjects; yet he is but a sheep in
relation to God: for relation in all created things, makes quidlibet ex
quolibet; a sheep of a shepherd, and a shepherd of a sheep, till we come at
God, and there Relation cease; for God being summum bonum, unum and idem, can
take no disparagement by any relation, we are all sheep to him; David and
Kings; Saint Peter and all; All feign to say; The Lord is my shepherd; or
else, can never truly say; I shall not want.

It is a great happiness for sheep to have a good shepherd, but a greater
happiness to have him both good and able; many shepherds are the one, and not
the other; few are both; indeed none are both; None able to secure from want,
but only the shepherd, who is Elohim Saddai; God All-sufficient. Kings no
doubt are able shepherds, but yet not able to secure from want; for we see
them oftentimes to be in want themselves: Saint Peter an able shepherd, yet
not so able, as to secure from want; for who knows not what want he was in
himself, when time was? We shall never be sheep secure from want, till we
come to say; The Lord is my shepherd; and then we may justly infer: We
shall not want.

Indeed God is a shepherd, as able as he is good, and as good as he is able.
For he leads me into green pastures. Not only he has green pastures to
lead me into, which shows his Ability; but he leads me into them, which
shows his Goodness. He leads me not into pastures that are withered and
dry, that would distaste me before I taste them: but he leads me into Green
pastures, as well to please my eye with the verdure, as my stomach with the
herbage; and inviting me as it were to eat, by setting out the meat in the
best color. A meat though never so good, yet if it look not handsomely, it
dulls the appetite: but when besides the goodness, it has also a good look;
This gives the appetite another edge, and makes a joy before enjoying. But yet
the goodness is not altogether in the greenness. Alas, Green is but a
color, and colors are but deceitful things, they might be green leaves; or
they might be green flags, or rushes: and what good were to me in such a
greenness? No my soul, the goodness is in being green Pastures, for now
they perform as much as they promise; and as in being green, they were a
comfort to me as soon as I saw them; so in being green pastures, they are a
refreshing to me now, as soon as I taste them. As they are pleasant to look
on, so they are wholesome to feed on: As they are sweet to be tasted, so they
are easy to be digested; that I am now me thinks in a kind of Paradise, and
seem not to want any thing, unless perhaps a little water, with which now and
then to wash my mouth, at most to take sometimes a sippe: for though sheep be
no great drinkers; and though their pastures being green, and full of sap,
make drink the less needful, yet some drink they must have besides; and now
see the great goodness of this Shepherd, and what just cause there is to
depend upon his Providence: for he lets not his sheep want this neither; but
he leads them besides still waters; Not waters that roar and make a noise,
enough to fright a fearful sheep: but waters still and quiet, that though
they drink but little, yet they may drink that little without fear. And may
I not justly say now; The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want?

And yet perhaps there will be want for all this; for is it enough, that he
lead them into green pastures, and besides still waters? May he not lead
them in, and presently take them out again, before their bellyes be half
full; and so in stead of making them happy, make them more miserable? set them
in a longing with the sight, and then frustrate them of their expectation? No
my soul; The measure of this Shepherds goodness, is more then so; He not
only leads them into green pastures, but he makes them to lie down in
them; He leads them not in, to post over their meat, as if they were to eat
a Passover, and to take it in Transitu, as dogs drink Nylus; but, he makes
them to lie down in green pastures, that they may eat their fill, and feed at
leisure; and when they have done, lie down and take their ease, that their
After-reckoning may be as pleasing as their Repast; and that they may be free
from being solliciti de crastino, for taking care to provide for tomorrow,
seeing they have a Market of provision round about them, or rather their meat
ready dressed to their hands for many days to come. O my soul, thus are the
godly provided for, by the Lord their Shepherd; and though their pastures may
seem withered, and dry in the eyes of the world; yet to them, they are green,
and pleasing, and give more gladness to their hearts; then theirs whose Corn
and Wine, most abundantly increases. And now, O my soul, is it not time now
to say Grace, and to acknowledge a thankfulness for this plenty of my meat,
and drink? and can I say a shortet Grace then this; The Lord is my shepherd;
I shall not want?

And yet perhaps there will be want for all this; for if God be a Shepherd,
will he not sheare his sheep? and if he sheare me; will he not leave me bare
and naked? and how then can I say; I shall not want? God indeed is a Shepherd,
that will sheare his sheep; but he will Tondere, not Deglubere; He will take
off our old clothes, but it is to make way for new; and he takes them off, in
a time, when we may well spare them; indeed in a time, when it is better for us
to be without them: and therefore, neither is his shearing any cause, but I may
say still; The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.

And yet I say still, there will perhaps be want for all this: For is it
enough to have food, and raiment? Is it enough to have ease and plenty? Alas!
all these do but serve for the body; there is no provision here for the soul:
and if the soul be not provided for; all the rest, is but the care of Martha,
troubled about many things, and none of them needful. But he that told Martha
of her error, is it like he will commit the like error himself? No my soul,
his principal care is of the soul; for he restores my soul: but as he made
me far more worth then the body? for God is not as man, to take care of
things out of fancy, or upon mistaking: but he takes care of things according
as he values them, and values them according as they are worth; Numquid cura
Deo de Bobis, Does God take care of Oxen? Indeed the Soul, in comparison of
the Body; is of far more value, then the worth of an Ox, in comparison of a
man. O that we could be so wise, as to know the true value, and worth of the
soul! and to take care of things according to their values! we should then
certainly be more careful of the soul, less careful of the body then we
are: and be more sensible of that saying of Christ; What availes it a man, to
gain the whole world, and to lose his soul? It may be allowed perhaps to
men, to provide first for the body, so they would provide most for the soul,
as God does here: but to provide first and most, for the body; and last, and
least for the soul, as most men do; that I say not, all for the body, and
nothing for the soul, as some men do; This must needs be extremely against
all good order: seeing it is so directly against Gods order.

But to what is it that God restores my soul? It must be to something that my
soul had before, and has not now: and so it is: He restores it, to its
original purity, that was now grown foul, and black with sin: for alas,
what good were it, to have green pastures, and a black soul! He restores it,
to its natural temper in affections, that was grown distempered with violence
of Passions: for alas what good were it, to have still waters, and turbulent
spirits! He restores it indeed to life, that was grown before, in a manner
quite dead, and who could restore my soul to life, but he only that is the
good Shepherd, and gave his life for his sheep, which no shepherd ever did
but He? Saint Peter laid down his life, but he gave not his life; for he
would perhaps have kept it, if he might: and he laid it not down neither, as a
shepherd for his sheep, but as a sheep rather for his shepherd: but this
Shepherd gave his life for his sheep: Gave it, quia oportuit indeed, because
it was necessary he should give it; but yet, quia voluit too, because he would
give it; for if it had not been voluntary, it could not have been
acceptable; and if not acceptable, never certainly have served for a Ransom;
and if not Ransomming, no Restoring.

But is it not said, The Shepherd was smitten, and the sheep were scattered?
and what was his smyting, but the Giving his life? and had he not done better
to have kept his life, then leaving it, to leave his sheep to scattering? O my
soul, though they were scattered for a time, yet it was but to be gathered
together again with the greater joy: for though he left his life, yet he left
not his sheep: but had a care of them, even in death; for he had power to lay
down his life, and power to take it up again: and as he laid it down for his
sheep Ransom, so he took it up for their justification.

Every shepherd knows that sheep are subject to many infirmities, and knows
many infirmities to which they are subject; and therefore is never without his
Box of Tar, as the best remedy in cases of danger; but if the danger pass
his Tarre-boxe, and touch upon the life; he then gives them over, and lets
nature work: but the Lord is a Shepherd of another nature, above the power of
Nature; He restores the soul, when the life is in danger; he has ways of
curing, which no shepherd knows of but himself; and if other helps fail, he
need but to say, Velo, sis sanus; I will, Be thou whole: and without any
Tarre-boxe, it is a present remedy. And may I not now justly say; The Lord is
my shepherd; I shall not want?

And yet perhaps there will be want for all this: for is it enough, that he
restore my soul, and then leave me? What is it to restore my soul, but to put
it in statu quo prius, in the state it was made at first; which, was after the
Image of God in holiness, and righteousness? and if I could not continue in
this state, when made in it, how shall I continue in it, when restored to it?
He will therefore supply this want too: for having restored my soul in
righteousness; He will lead me in the paths of righteousness: that though
left to my self, I took a wrong guide, and went astray; yet when he leads
me, that is the way it self; I may be sure, I cannot possibly go out of the
way.

But alas, O Lord, these paths of righteousness, have a long time so little
been frequented, that all prints of a path, are almost clean worn out; that
it is a hard matter now but to find where the paths lie, and if we can find
them, yet they are so narrow, and so full of rubbes; that without special
assistance, it is an impossible thing, not to Fall, or go astray. Even some
Angels, and those no mean ones, were not able to go right in these paths of
righteousness; but for want of leading, went awry, and perished. O therefore,
Thou the great Shepherd of my soul, as thou art pleased of thy grace to lead
me into them; so vouchsafe with thy Grace to lead me in them: for though in
themselves they be paths of righteousness; yet to me, they will be but
paths of error, if thou vouchsafe not, as well to lead me in them, as into
them. O the comfortable paths of righteousness; the very paths in which Enoch
walked with God, and which walked in as they should be, will bring us to a
better Paradise, then that of our first Parents. For if God lead us in these
paths; these paths will lead us to the place, where the Goats shall be put on
the left hand, and the sheep be taken on the right, that now I am certainly
come to the highest cause of my glorying to say; The Lord is my shepherd, I
shall not want: for at his right hand is the fullness of Joy forevermore.

But why is it, that this great Shepherd will do these great things for me?
Is it because he finds me to be a sounder sheep, and to have fewer blemishes
upon me then some other? Alas no; for I am nothing but blemishes, and
unsoundnesse all over; but, He will do it for his Names sake; For seeing he
has taken upon him the Name of a good shepherd, he will discharge his part,
what ever his sheep be: It is not their being bad sheep, that can make him
leave being a good shepherd, but he will be good, and maintain the credit of
his Name, in spite of all their badnesse: and though no benefit come to them
of it, yet there shall glory accrue to him by it, and his Name shall
nevertheless be magnified, and extolled.

But now, O my soul, though I can say, I shall not want: yet can I say, I
shall not fear? For is not Fear an inseparable companion of Mortality? and
can I then choose but fear, that know my self to be mortal, and know also
what the condition is of being mortal? Not only that I may dye, but that I
must dye: and not only must one day, but may this day; Alas, this very minute!
I fear indeed when I consider my own frailty: but when I consider that the
Lord is my Shepherd, I then am armed against all fear, against this fear of
death it self: He that makes me to walk in Green pastures, and in paths of
righteousness, and keeps me from want: he also leads me by the hand, as I
walk, and keeps me from fear: Yea, thou I walk in the Though I be brought
to never so great extremity: though brought as low as the Valley of death,
though brought as near to Death, as the shadow to the body; though brought to
walk as a ghost amongst the dead, yet I will fear no evil. The shadow of
death may perhaps be far enough from it, for all our life, is but the shadow
of death: but the Valley of the shadow must needs be close to death, as being
the very entrance to it; yet if I were brought to this door of death, if
brought within the door, and compassed about with Death; yet for all this, for
all that can be said, or done, I will fear no evil. Will you not? will you
not fear evil, when the evil is so eminent, and the danger so great? Is the
face of Death no more terrible, but that you dare look upon it, without fear?
Though it be the reproach of the wicked, to fear where there is no cause of
fear, yet not to fear where there is cause, can be no commendation in the
godly. And why then will David speak thus, more like a desperate man, then one
that were well advised? No doubt, David will give good reason for that he
speaks; As it were desperatnesse, not to fear, where there is Imminent
danger: So it were cowardice to fear, where there is eminent comfort: Lay then
the comfort to the danger, and you will easily excuse David, for fearing no
evil. You have seen the Danger, now hear the Comfort: The Lord my shepherd
is with me; For he is never absent from his flock: his rod, and his staff,
they comfort me: and may they not justly comfort me, when with them he is able
to recover a sheep, though falling down the steepest Praecipyce, or though
already in the Wolfes mouth, or in the paws of the Lion. Indeed, if I had not
my Shepherd with me; Or if my Shepherd had not his instruments with him, I
might justly then be in fear of evil; but what evil can I fear now, when I
have my Shepherd, and my Shepherd his Instruments; his rod, and his staff;
Both Instruments of comfort; and not only of comfort, but of encouragement;
both Instruments of preserving.

But is it well understood, what his Rod, and his Staff mean? For, they may
as well be instruments of correcting, as defending: and if of defending, there
is then just cause they should be comforts: but if of correcting, what comforts
can they be? for what comfort can it be, to be corrected? O my soul, great
comfort to me, that know the nature of this Shepherd, as I do: for do not I
know, that whom he loves, he corrects; and therefore whom he corrects, it is a
certain Argument that he loves? Indeed, if the Rod and the Staff, were in
the hands of an enemy; I should then fear them, as instruments for my evil;
but being in his hands that is my Shepherd; now they are but as my own
weapons put into an abler hand, that can better manage them for my good, then I
could do my self. Could Moses with his rod fetch water out of a Rock, and
shall not God with his rod, bring comfort out of trouble? Could Jacob with his
staff pass over Jordan, and return enriched with herds of cattle, and
shall not Gods staff make me pass over the Jordan of this world, and bring
me home with troops of joy? Shall not his rod, though it wound me, comfort
me; when I know he wounds, but to the end he may apply a Plaster? Shall not
his staff, though it beat me, comfort me; when it is but to beat the dust out
of me, that am nothing but dust? But most of all, must not his rod needs
comfort me, when it is his rod, that makes me lie down in green pastures?
Must not his staff needs comfort me, when it is his staff, that keeps me
right in the paths of righteousness? Oh sweet Rod, how can I choose but kiss
thee! Dear staff, but embrace thee! seeing it is long of you, that his green
pastures, and his paths of righteousness do me any good; for they would
certainly do me hurt; his green pastures would pamper up my flesh too much;
his paths of righteousness would puff up my spirits too much; If his Rod,
and his Staff were not used as Moderatours. And if you think this strange,
that the paths of righteousness should puff up the spirits: Remember Saint
Paul, to whom there was given a thorn in the flesh, lest his walking in the
paths of righteousness, should puff him up. But if the rod, and the staff,
in these senses, may not be sufficient comfort to take away all cause of fear;
at least, there shall come forth a Rod, out of the stem of Jesse: (indeed to
David in particular, a special comfort) that will certainly be sufficient
against all fear, though I walk in the Valley of the shadow of death; for
this Rod, as a Mountain shall fill up all Valleys; and as the substance, shall
fulfill all shadow; and as the true life, shall swallow up Death in victory.
And is there not a staff that will do as much? the staff upon which Jacob
leaned, when he was a dying? when he was indeed in the Valley of the shadow of
Death? O my soul, having this Staff of Jacob to lean upon; this Rod of the
stem of Jesse to be my comfort; I shall make my self unworthy of protection,
if I should fear any evil, though I walk in the valley of the shadow of
death. For why should I fear Death, which is but the parting of the soul from
the body, seeing I cannot come to God with them both at once, but they must
first be parted one from another? My soul cannot come to the light of life,
if my body be not first in the shadow of death: indeed but in the shadow, for
the substance of death can never take hold upon it, if my soul be gone before
to take possession of the Light. O then vouchsafe, O God, to bring my soul
first, and after it, my body out of the shadow of Death, into the light of
Life; and then I shall have cause, just cause to say, and to glory in saying;
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.

But if it be doubted still, how it can be, that Gods rod, and his staff,
should be comforts to the godly, then mark the issue, and see what follows
upon his Rod, and his Staff; Thou preparest a Table before me, in the
presence For this is a sure rule with God, that his chastening always ends in
cherishing; if he strike with his Rod, and perhaps breaks the head with his
Staff; he gives Oil presently to anoint it, and to make it whole again. If
he make me to keep Fasting-day to day, he allows me a feast for it to
morrow, and then my cup shall run over.

Hitherto God has vouchsafed to be a Shepherd, and David has been his
sheep; Now God will be a Conqueror, and David shall be a King. Now God as a
Conqueror will bestow favors on his friends, and disgraces upon his enemies,
and therefore now the Scene alters: where it was before in the field, it is now
within doors; and where David before spoke in the third Person, he speaks now
in the second; Thou preparest a Table before me; and this is to feast his
friends: In the presence of mine enemies; and this is to confound his enemies.
To prepare a Table before him, is it self a favor: but the greatness of the
favor is in this, that a Table is prepared before him, in the presence of his
Enemies. For as there is no such joy of prosperity to the godly, as when their
enemies see the prosperity they are in; it being a kind of revenge, that God
takes upon their enemies, in their behalf: so there is no such Tragedy to the
wicked, as to be made spectatours of the prosperity of the godly; it being the
greatest affront, that can be to their expectation, to see them advanced, whom
they both hated, and despised. Could Haman have had a greater affliction, then
to see Mordecai advanced, and himself forced to be an instrument in his
advancing? Videbunt quem transfixerunt, They shall see him, whom they pierced,
shall be one of the miseries, and perhaps one of the greatest in Hell it self.

And now is David a King, and as a King, has Honor and Plenty; Thou
anoyntest my head with oil, This is his Honor; My cup runs over, This is
his Plenty: that where he said before; The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not
want: he may as justly say now; The Lord is my rewarder; I shall abound.

But is it not that in the Person of David here, there is a Reference to Christ
himself; seeing it is all verefied in him, that is spoken here? He that
hungered so long, till Satan thought he could have eaten stones, has now a
Table prepared before him; a Table where the godly shall sit, and eat with him
in his Kingdom. He that had enemies insulting over him; has now all his
enemies made his footstool; Sin and Death, Satan and his members, lie
prostrate under him: He that had his Head pricked with thorns, has now his
Head anointed with Oil: with the oil of gladness above his fellows. He
that thirsted, and could get but Vinegar to drink, has now such plenty, that
his cup runs over: All power is given him, both in Heaven and Earth. At
least in the person of David, there will be relation to all the godly: Now
Lazarus that could not get so much as crummes from Dives his Table, shall have
a Table himself prepared before him: Now Dives that fared deliciously every
day, shall be glad to stand waiting at Lazarus Table, for a drop of water:
that the godly may well be content to be in penury awhile, seeing they shall
have a Table ere long prepared before them: They may well be content to let
their Enemies be masters awhile, seeing they shall have them ere long to be
wayters upon them: They may well be content to hang down their heads for
awhile, seeing their heads ere long shall be anointed with Oil: They may well
be content to have hard measure for a time, seeing the time will be shortly,
that their Cup shall run over. And now, O my soul, will not all this serve
to comfort thee, in this vale of misery? Art thou so besotted on things
present, as to have no consideration, to make no valuation of things to come,
and to come so shortly? so shortly all, that they are put in the Present tense,
as if they were come already?

But if David cannot overruled thee as a King, let him at least persuade thee
as a Prophet; for now you shall have him a Prophet, and a Votarie, and this is
his Prophecy; Surely, Mercy, and goodness, shall follow me, all the days of
my life: and this is his Vow; I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

But is David's Prophecy like to be true? will Mercy, and Goodness, follow
him all the days of his life? O my soul, it was true in David, it shall be
true in all the godly: for whom God loves, he loves to the end; and Mercy,
and Goodness, shall follow them all the days of their life: Mercy, to
commiserate; and Goodness to relieve: Mercy to bear with infirmities, and
Goodness to supply wants: Mercy to be an assistant in Adversity, and
Goodness to be a Governesse in Prosperity. Alas! O Lord, if thy Mercy should
not follow me, thy Justice would: if thy Goodness should not follow me, thy
Vengeance would; and then one that were no Prophet, might easily foretell the
miserable estate I should be in: as now that Mercy and Goodness follow me;
one that is no Prophet may easily tell the happy condition I shall be in.
Although this perhaps be not so much a Prophecy, as a Faith in David, at least
a Prophecy which all the godly may make to themselves by Faith, to be assured
of the mercy and goodness of God; and not to follow them for a time, and then
give over, but to follow them all the days of their life. But what? no longer
then all the days of their life, and then leave them? No my soul, but all the
days of that life, that shall never leave them. O the comfortable doctrine of
Faith! far more comfortable then Heathen Philosophy ever knew; for that went
no further, then Ante obitum nemo; as though no man could be happy till his
death; where by this it appears that men may be happy while they live: for if
a man be then happy, when the mercy and goodness of God follow him, as
certainly a greater happiness there cannot be: then seeing they surely follow
the godly, all the days of their life; surely a godly man is happy while he
lives. But then the surenesse is long of the mercy, and not of the man: for it
seems he would go far enough from it, if Mercy did not follow him: but now
that he is followed by Mercy and Goodness, he cannot go so fast from them,
but they will overtake him, and make him happy. O merciful God, so frame my
heart, that I may not fly from thy Mercy, and put it to follow me; at least
let it so follow me, that it may overtake me: for then I shall have the
happiness to be able to keep my vow, that I will dwell in thy house for
ever: but rather I shall have the favor, as an effect of thy Mercy, that I
shall dwell in thy house for ever. For if this be a Vow, it is a strange one,
where all the benefit is to him that makes the Vow, and none at all to whom it
is made, for what is it to God, whither I dwell in his house or no? such Vowers
God may have enough. O my soul, to vow to dwell in Gods house, is to vow to be
his servant; and to be his servant, is to serve him in holiness, and
righteousness, all the days of our life; and though this service be no
benefit to God, as indeed no more is any thing I can do, for my goodness
extends not to him: yet the Vow to be his servant being well performed, will
be more acceptable to him, then if I should vow as Jepthe did, to sacrifice
his only Daughter.

But we need not stand to justify David's Vow: for it seems not so much a Vow
of David to God; as a favor of God to David, that when his mercy has followed
him all the days of his life, he will take him afterward to live with
himself; and though his body for a time be cast out of doors, yet his soul
shall presently be received into his house, there to dwell with him and his
Angels; not as a servant, but as son; seeing none but sons abide in the
house for ever. Which in the person of David, is no less the Portion, and may
be as well the comfort of all the godly, and is but the expressing of that in a
higher strain; which was said at first in a lower style; The Lord is my
shepherd: I shall not want.

THE TWENTY SEVENTH PSALM OF DAVID.
1 THe Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

2 When the wicked; even mine enemies, and my foes, came upon me, to eat up my
flesh; they stumbled, and fell.

3 Though an host should encampe against me; my heart shall not fear; though
war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

4 One thing have I desired of the Lord; that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life; to behold the beauty
of the Lord; and to inquire in his holy Temple.

5 For in the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his Pavillion; in the
secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon a Rock.

6 And now shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me;
therefore will I offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy: I will sing; yea, I
will sing praises unto the Lord.

7 Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer
me.

8 When thou saydst; seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee; thy face Lord,
will I seek.

9 Hyde not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger: Thou
have been my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

10 When my father, and my mother forsake me; then the Lord will take me up.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine
enemies.

12 Deliver me not over to the will of mine enemies; for false witnesses are
risen up against me; and such as breathe out cruelty.

13 I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in
the land of the living.

14 Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
heart; wait I say, on the Lord.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE XXVII. PSALM OF DAVID.
LIght which makes all things visible, alas, if I should trust to the Sun for
light, I should be left in darkness, every day, at least at night: but God is
a Sun that never sets: he is Light himself, he is Light it self: and
therefore it is good trusting to God for Light: for so I shall be sure, neither
day nor night, to be left in darkness. O thou great Creator of Light; Thou
Light of all creatures, vouchsafe to shine upon me, and to lighten my
darkness, that neither any Objects of terror may make me to tremble; nor any
Thresholds of error may make me to stumble, but that I may walk securely in
the confidence of this; The Lord is my Light: for of what then, of whom now,
should I be afraid?

But, is it enough that God be my Light? what if I my self be blind? what
good then will his Light do me? It is true; and therefore David stays not
here; but, Deus illuminatio mea; God is my Enlightening too. He is both my
Light, and my sight: my Light, by which to see; and my sight, with which to see
my Light, to make walls, and thresholds visible; and my sight, to make me able
to avoid them. If it were not for Light, I should be always in the dark; if
it were not for sight, I should be dark my self: No illumination without
both: and never both, but only from God. There is one indeed, who has gotten
him a Name, to be called Lucifer; as though it were he, that brought us Light:
when God knows but for him, we should have had no darkness: yet he pretends
to both; both to Light, and to enlightening: but alas, his light is but
imposture; his enlightening, but illusion: for as he can transform himself
into an Angel of light; so he can transform the light it self, and make it
seem light, when it is indeed dark: and therefore his light can never make
Walls and Thresholds to be truly visible: and as little can his enlightening,
make us able to avoid them. For this was tried in our first Parents, who upon
his Enlightening, had their eyes opened indeed, but opened to see Good and
Evil; not to distinguish good from evil, and therefore could not enable them,
cannot us, to avoid the evil. But as they, that follow his light, do stumble
and fall at the Threshold of error; so they that are led by his enlightening,
do run their heads against the Walls of impiety; No avoiding of Walls and
Thresholds; No shunning the snares of Satan, the illusions of this Lucifer,
but only by saying, if truly saying; Deus illuminatio mea, God is my
enlightening; and then we may safely infer, of what; of whom should I be
afraid?

Indeed David might well say; Deus illuminatio mea; God is my Enlightening:
Seeing God had enlightened him, not only to see, but to be a Seer, which is a
Prophet: but what is this to us, who are far from any such enlightening, to
see as Prophets? O my soul, it is enough for us; that Christ is the great
Seer, in whose Light, we shall see light: and though David were of the Jews,
and we be of the Gentiles; yet as Christ was the glory of his people Israel:
so he is a Light, to lighten the Gentiles: and therefore Deus illuminatio mea,
God is my enlightening; as fit for us to say, as it was for David.

But does Gods enlightening serve only for a safeguard against Walls and
Thresholds? Alas! the light of the Sun, and the enlightening of Nature would
serve to do this: and what need we then to seek any other? O my soul, there
are spiritual Walls, and Thresholds, which no Sun can make us see, which
Nature her self is not able to see; only Gods enlightening, has the
influence to do it. There is a Wall of sin, the Partition Wall between God
and us: the Wall that bars us from having access to God: and this Wall, the
natural man sees not, neither can see: Illumination only makes it visible.
There is a Threshold of pride in the heart of man; a swelling of self-love,
that lies in the way we are to pass, and is a cause of stumbling if not
avoided: and this Threshold the natural man sees not, neither can see; only
Gods illumination makes able to see it. And many other Walls and Thresholds
there are, which without Illumination can never be seen; and not seen, can
never be avoided; and not avoided, are cause of falling into endless
perdition. And as Illumination makes us to see these lights of Terror, so it
makes us to see also sights of Comfort; It makes us see Death lie dead before
us, and swallowed up in Victory; It makes us see the powers of Hell astonished,
as not able to endure the luster of this Light: It makes us see the doors of
Heaven open, into which by virtue of this Light we have means to enter: It
makes us see him that is invisible, God himself that is our enlightening, in
whose Presence, is the fullness of Joy for evermore; and of whom then, of what
now should I be afraid?

These indeed be comfortable sights, but what comfort for me to see them, if I
be not sure I shall enjoy them? and how can I be any more sure to enjoy them,
then the Angels that fell? For they had Illumination, in a greater measure
then I can hope to have it; and yet for all their Illumination, they stumbled
at the Threshold of Pride: and ran their heads against the Wall of sin, and
utterly lost; Alas have lost for ever, all benefit, of all these comfortable
sights. All this is true, and therefore David stays not here neither; but Deus
illuminatio mea, and salus mea; God is my enlightening, and my salvation too,
and this he was not to the Angels that fell: he left them at Illumination,
never conducted them to salvation; for if he had done this, their Illumination
had never been turned into darkness; either they had not stumbled at all. or
at least not so stumbled, as to fall. If God were only my illumination, I
should by that light go to Video meliora proboque, but should presently follow
it with Deteriora sequor: but when he is my salvation too; this makes me break
off at Deteriora sequor: and where God was heard to say; Perditio tua ex te O
Israel, Thy destruction is from thy self, O Israel: Now to hear him say, Ego
autem salus tua, but I am thy salvation. If my illumination reflected upon my
self, to make me seem bright in my own eyes, as though I had something which
I had not received, then indeed I should be in the case of the Angels that
fell; for so did they: but now that my illumination reflects upon God: and
makes me see all goodness to be originally in him, none in my self, but what
he is pleased to impart, or impute unto me; Now Illumination becomes a step to
salvation, and as they are free indeed whom the Spirit frees; so they are safe
indeed, whom God saves; and of what then, of whom now, should I be afraid?

But though God be my salvation: yet this perhaps may be only in the life to
come, and if it be no more but so, I may do ill enough in this present life,
for all his salvation in the next; and have I not cause then to be afraid? To
free thee therefore of this scruple; David stays not here neither; but, God is
my salvation, and the strength of my life too; Not only of my life to come,
which will be strong of it self, but of my present life, which has no
strength but in him. Or rather seeing godliness has the promise of both
life's, both of this life, and the life to come, the first shall be first
served; and then if God be the strength of my present life, there shall be in
it no present weakness: and if no weakness, there need be no fear; and of
what then; of whom now, should I be afraid?

But though Gods strength be sufficient to defend me, if I had no enemies: Or
if I were to fight but a single combat, yet can it be sufficient to preserve
me, when an Army of enemies assaults me at once? and can I choose but fear,
when I know my self unable to resist? O my soul, take heed thou be not in the
number of those, to whom it was said; What fear ye, O ye of little faith?
For what can an Army do, against the arm of God? What can all Might do,
against him that is Almighty? Have my enemies any strength, but what they have
from God? And can they have any strength from him, against me, when he
employes his strength against them for me? No my soul; though an host encampe
against me; though war be made upon me; yet as long as God is the strength
of my life, it is neither their multitude, nor their malice that can hurt me;
but rather their very malice is the means, their multitude cannot hurt me, for
Malice hinders Illumination, and makes them, they cannot see their way; that
when they came upon me, and thought they had me sure enough; even then I was
sure enough from their having: For he that is the strength of my life, had
laid a block in their way, which for want of Illumination, they saw not, at
which they stumbled, and fell.

But yet, it is a grievous thing to have Caniballs for ones enemies, and such
my enemies seem to be: They seek not more to destroy me, then devour me:
They came upon me to eat up my flesh, as if I had been their shambles; It is
not enough they could kill me, but they could find in their hearts to eat me:
They are not satisfied with procuring my death, if they be not themselves
actours in it: It is not enough for them to have my blood, unless their own
hands be imbrued in it: Indeed there is no such dainty dish to a malicious
stomach, as the flesh of an enemy; it goes down without chewing, and they
swallow it up whole like Cormorants. But though Malice have a ravenous stomach,
yet she has but slow disgestion; though her teeth be sharp, yet her feet are
lame, at least apt to stumble, and this made well for David, for when his
enemies came upon him, to eat up his flesh, because they came upon the feet of
malice, they stumbled and fell. A man may stumble, and yet not fall, but to
stumble, and fall withal, is the proper stumbling of the wicked, and
especially of the maliciously wicked: and such, it seems was the stumbling of
David's enemies, because his enemies were such; and such I doubt not shall be
the stumbling of my enemies, because mine are such: and of what then, of whom
now, should I be afraid?

But to the end I may have some exercise for my illumination, that it stand not
idle; and may have some testimony for my salvation, that it grow not
doubtful; There is one This beholding of Gods beauty, will be a continual
exercise for my Illumination; and this enquiring in Gods holy Temple, will give
me assurance of my salvation.

It were very hard, if David making but one request to God, that God should
deny him? for has he not bidden us to ask, and we should have? and could
David ask less, then to ask but one thing? No my soul: God denied it not to
David, nor will deny it to thee, nor to any other that shall ask it in Faith:
and specially if he ask it to so good an end as David does here; to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his holy Temple.

But seeing David would make but one request to God, why would he not make a
greater? for alas, what a poor request is this, to desire to dwell in Gods
house? and what to do? but only to see? and to see what? but only a Beauty,
a fading thing, at most but to enquire; and what is enquiring? but only to
hear news; a vain fancy; and what cause in any of these why David should
make it his request to God? But mark, O my soul, what goes with it; Take
altogether; to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his holy
Temple: And now tell me, if there be, tell me if there can be any greater
request to be made? any greater cause to be earnest about it? For though
worldly beauty be a fading thing, yet the Beauty of the Lord shall continue,
when the world it self shall fade away; and though enquiring after news be a
vain fancy, yet to enquire in Gods Temple, is the way to learn, there is no
new thing under the Sun; and there it was that Solomon learned, that all is
vanity. Indeed this one thing that David desires, is in effect, that Unum
necessarium that Christ speaks of in the Gospel; which Mary made choice of
there, as David does here; and I may say, it is that precious Jewel, which the
rich Merchant sold all he had to buy, and had his bargain commended by Christ
himself. O how happy were we, if we could bound our desires within the
compass of things necesserie: for all our misery grows from this, that our
desires have no certain dwelling, but wander and range about from one object
to another, like vagabonds from place to place; and no help there will be for
it, till our desire arrive at that which is the best: for as long as there is
any better to be had, the Desire will never leave desiring; and where is that
best to be had, but in him only, that is only good: in him indeed that is the
only good: and seeing there can be no happiness till the Desire be settled;
and the Desire will never be settled, till we come at God; therefore no means
so likely to make us happy, as to dwell in Gods house; for there we are sure
we shall be with him; and once with him, never have desire to any thing besides
him.

There are other houses, which in worldly considerations, and to worldly
minds, may seem as convenient, and perhaps be more profitable to dwell in,
then this house of God: but that which makes me so desirous to dwell here,
rather then any where else, is partly for the prospect, that I may behold the
beauty of the Lord; and partly for instruction, that I may enquire in his holy
Temple. For there is not such a Prospect again in the world as this; Not on
the Mount, where Christ was showed all the Kingdoms of the earth, and the
glory of them: Nor such another place for instruction as here; Not all the
Schools of Philosophers; Not all the Oracles of the Heathen, in any degree to
be compared with it.

And what then is this beauty of God, which David is so desirous to behold?
what this house of God, in which he desires to dwell? There is a beauty of God
in his creatures, most glorious indeed, and most worthy of beholding: but yet
this needs no dwelling in Gods house to see it; we may see it as well,
dwelling any where else; but there is a beauty of God in himself, a beauty
which if once we see, we shall never be willing to take our eyes off; a beauty
which the more we see, the more we shall see cause to desire to see it; a
Beauty, which without special illumination, neither the eyes of men are able
to behold; nor the tongues of Angels to express; and this Beauty is no where
to be seen, but in Gods house; and not there neither, but by dwelling in it:
It is not for every one that comes in as a stranger, to see this Beauty, they
must be dwellers in it; continual, and constant frequenters of it, or they are
never like to be admitted to behold it. There is indeed, in all the creatures
of God, in some more eminently, a certain tincture of this Beauty, and is
perhaps that which deceives us in the estimating of our happiness; because we
take tincture for substance, and fix our selves upon that which is made but
only for a passage. For tinctures though they please for a time, yet they
soon wear out and decay: no solidnesse, nor durablenesse, but in the
substance it self, and no substance of beauty, but only in God: and therefore
the truest happiness, indeed all true happiness, in only the beholding of
this Beauty. And if any man doubt of this, because seeing, is but the
satisfaction of one sense; and happiness gives satisfaction at least to all
the senses: Let him then hear, what David in another place says; Videte and
gustate, quam suavis est Dominus: See, and taste, how sweet the Lord is: For in
this Seeing, not only the Tasting, but all the senses are united, at least the
pleasures of all the senses are comprised: and the rather, if we consider that
Beholding has a pre-eminence above Seeing: for where seeing may be in
Transitu only; Beholding implies a permanencie, and a fixing our eyes upon it;
and such is the Seeing, that is the Essential sense of happiness.

And what then is this house of God, in which David desires to dwell? has God
any other house then Heaven? and would David dwell in Heaven, whilst he is
dwelling upon Earth? will nothing serve his turn, but to ask God for
impossibilities? Indeed Heaven is Gods Throne, but Heaven and Earth both, are
full of the Majesty of his glory: and therefore God has a House on earth too;
a House dedicate to the honor of his Name; and David justly makes his Prayer
for this House, because indeed it is the house of Prayer, and no Rent paid for
dwelling in it, but only Prayer: O then make me able, O God, to pay thee this
Rent, and I shall never doubt of continuing thy tenant in this House, to behold
thy Beauty, and to inquire in thy holy Temple.

But why should David make it a suite to God, to dwell in his House, seeing God
leaves the doors open, that every one may come and dwell in it that will? O my
soul, it is not simply to dwell in it, but so to dwell in it, that he may see
Gods beauty; and this cannot be seen without illumination; and no
illumination, but of Gods donation. For indeed this dwelling, is a spiritual
living, a donative only in Gods gift: and justly therefore David makes it his
suite, to have his Induction, but an Induction only while we live here; no
perfect possession till another life: but he that seeks not his induction
here; must never look for possession hereafter.

As to behold the beauty of God, is one great benefit of dwelling in Gods
house; so it is another no less to inquire in his holy Temple: as that
beholding, gives a satisfaction to our eyes; so this inquiry to our minds.
When David saw the prosperity of the wicked; he was so amazed, that he knew
not what to make of it, till he entered into Gods holy Temple, and inquired: and
there he presently learned, what Gods meaning is in it, and why he suffers it
to be so. What knowledge so necessary, as the knowledge of sin? yet Saint
Paul confesses he had not known what sin is, but for the Law: and where is
the Law to be learned, but enquiring in Gods holy Temple? and indeed if there
be any scruple of conscience, if any doubtfulnesse of mind, if any difficulty
of question concerning either God or our selves; either the life present, or
the life to come, by enquiring in Gods holy Temple, it is presently cleared,
and resolved: for there are the Oracles kept, which serve to instruct, to
teach, to reprove, that the man of God may be perfect in every good work.

And amongst all the great mysteries which are learned by enquiring in Gods
holy Temple; this is one of special comfort to me, that when I am in trouble,
if his house that I dwell in, be not sufficient to defend me; he will hide me
in his own Pavillion: in the secret of his Tabernacle will he hide me; he
will set me upon a rock: that one way or other, he will be sure; and I may be
sure, he will set me in safety,

But how can God hide me in his Pavillion, which lies open to all men; and
where every man may enter, and find me? He will then rather then fail, hide me
in the secret of his Tabernacle; which is shut against all men, and where none
enters but himself. But yet his Tabernacle may be burnt with fire; may be
blown up with powder; blown down with wind: and what safety then, in the
secret of his Tabernacle? He will then, if that fail, set me upon a Rock,
and a Rock is subject to none of these, that so at least, neither fire, nor
sword, nor tempest of wind, may prevail against me. Or is it, that being once
admitted to dwell in Gods house; I shall have, not only the protection of a
servant; for his Tegere, is Protegere; but the advancement also of a Favorite
to be set upon a Rock: for this, as it is a safety, is no less an honor. Or
is it, that lest mine enemies should think it were done for fear of them,
that he hydes me; he will set me upon a Rock, as it were in defyance: and
though some may be so bold to enter the secret of his Tabernacle; yet none will
be so desperate, to venture upon a Rock, against which, all they can do, is
but to dash themselves in pieces, and to hasten their own ruin.

And now, O my soul, how can thou doubt of thy being in safety, having the
three great fortresses of God for thy defense: his general providence, which
is his Pavillion: then, his special Mercy, which is the secret of his
Tabernacle: then, the Mediation of Christ, who is the Rock; upon which, when
thou art set, neither the raging of the Sea, nor the blustering of the wind,
need to affright thee; for though they roar against thee, yet they cannot hurt
thee; and of whom then, of what now should I be afraid?

For being set upon this Rock; My head shall Though my feet may be in the
water, yet my head shall be above water; I shall be in no danger, though
perhaps in some trouble; and in no trouble neither, but such as while my head
is lifted up, I may freely laugh at, and despise; and the rather, for that
though my enemies be so many, as to be round about me; yet they are so mean,
as to be all below me; not mean in themselves, but mean through him, that
has lifted up my head above them. If mine enemies were but low, it were no
great matter to be higher then they: but to have my head lifted up above them,
who carry their heads so high, as to think none their equals; this must needs
be, as well to me a cause of joy; as in thee, O God, an effect of power. In thy
lifting up my head, I regard not so much the honor, as the relation to my
enemies; for whether it be lifted up little, or much, it is all one to me, so
long as it be above my enemies, their pitch is my proportion: for the mark of
my aim, is not superiority, but security; not to shine in other men's eyes,
but not to have mine own put out.

There may be many causes of joy to a man in trouble, but none so great as
this, to have his head lifted up above his enemies: for though to take revenge
of an enemy, be the delight only of a cruel nature; yet to be able to take
revenge, is a joy to the mildest nature, but yet a joy that must be made a
sacrifice, not to grow insolent, and proud upon it; but as to receive the power
with humility, so to use it with mildness, and most of all, to ascribe the
glory, to whom it belongs.

There was a time, O God, when thou did lift up mine enemies heads above me;
and even then I offered thee a sacrifice too; but it was a sorrowful
sacrifice, a sacrifice of sorrow; but when thou shall lift up my head above
mine enemies, I will then offer thee a joyful sacrifice, a sacrifice of joy:
and it shall not be a silent joy, as though I sought to smother it, by which
no glory would come unto thee; but it shall be a singing joy, and the song
shall be of thy praises, as showing me to joy more, in thy lifting me up; then
in my being lift up; more for thy glory, then for my own advancement, but sing
I shall for both; I shall sing, to express my joy, and I shall sing to extol
thy Praises.

But why is David so suddenly turned from singing to crying, that he should
fall so presently to say; Hear me, O Lord, when I cry with my voice? Is it,
that he finds God, not well pleased with his singing; and therefore means to
try, what he can do with crying? Or is it, that he thinks himself better at
expressing sorrow then joy, and therefore hopes his crying may be heard, though
his singing be not? Or is it indeed, that singing, and crying both, are little
enough to make a sacrifice to God? Alas! they are both of them too little, to
make an acceptable sacrifice, without Gods mercy: and therefore David trusts
not to them alone, but is glad to join Gods mercy with them; Have mercy also
upon me, O God, and answer me. It is a great mercy in God to hear us, but a
greater mercy to answer us; and therefore to require his answer, requires a
more special invocation of his mercy; and the rather, in hope to have a
merciful answer: for alas, if he should answer, and not in mercy, such an
answer would be worse then silence.

But how can I doubt of Gods answering me, when I speak to him; who have my
self answered him, when he spoke to me? For when thou saydst; Seek ye my
face; my heart and for my heart to say it, is more then for my voice to cry it:
for no crying of the voice, makes so loud a sound in the ears of God; as the
saying of the heart; that to use the terms properly, I might rather say; I cry
it with my heart, and but say it with my voice.

But is this all the answer I shall have from God, that I should seek his
face? Alas! O Lord, thy great Favorite Moses, could never obtain more then to
see thy Back-parts, and how then can I hope to see thy face? and if I cannot
hope to see it, why would thou have me spend time to seek it? But is it not
all one, in the phrase of the Law, to seek Gods face; as in the phrase of the
Gospel, to seek Gods kingdom? and therefore as God says here; seek ye my
face: so Christ says there; seek Gods kingdom: at least if they be not both
one; they are both sought one way; both sought by following Gods Commandments,
for his Commandments, if we follow them well, will both bring us to his
kingdom, and to see his face.

Or is it not perhaps in a plain literal sense, that to seek Gods face, is
in our Prayers, and Meditations, to settle, and fix the eyes of our minds
wholly upon God; and as it were, to look him in the face: wherein, oh what
infinite odds there is between the Angels and us, for magnifying of God: for
they behold his Face, and can see it visibly, where all that we can do toward
it, is only by the strength of imagination, which God knows is but weak;
very weak in us, weak in it self, and weaker for want of intention; but if
we could see his Face as the Angels do; O my soul, we should see in it, not
only infinite causes for magnifying his Name; but infinite sweetness for
pleasing our own senses. For if the beauty of a carnal face, be so admirable,
so pleasing, as that no earthly thing may be compared to it; what ecstasy of
admiration! what transcendencie of pleasure must needs be in the beauty of a
spiritual Face! and specially that face, in which the fullness of all Beauty
resideth bodily! And have I not cause then to seek this Face? O merciful God,
grant me so to seek it, that I may find it: for though this be not the place
for finding it, yet this is the place for seeking it: and he that seeks it
not here; he that seeks it not now, is never like to find it in another place,
never like to find it hereafter.

But why am I so hasty, to promise God to seek his Face, as though it were in
my own power to seek it at my pleasure? Alas! how can I choose but promise
it, when God requires it; and how can I think, when he requires it, but that
he will enable me; at least, not hinder me to perform it? and yet I promise
not performance, but Will: and Will I suppose I may safely promise, seeing Will
is present with me, and can never be absent from me.

But when I seek thy face, vouchsafe, O and what light to seek it by, but the
light of thy Countenance? and what light of thy Countenance, if thou hide away
thy face? To bid me to seek thy Face, and then to hide thy Face from me, were
a kind of derision; and I hope, O God, thou will not use me so unkindly; set me
about a work scarce possible to be done, and then take from me all possible
means of doing it? Alas! O Lord, all the encouragement I have to seek it, is
the hope I have thou will not hide it: O therefore, Hide not thy face from me,
O God: for if thou hide thy Face from me, what can I think, but that thou art
angry? and if indeed thou be angry, yet use me at least as a servant; Put me
not away in thine anger: for though I have committed many heinous faults
against thee, yet may I not repent, and amend them all, if thou but please, not
to be so hasty with me? what though my sins have made thee angry, will thou therefore presently turn me away? will no less punishment, serve to
appease thy displeasure, but to turn me presently out of service? may thou
not in so doing, do that in anger, which thou will have cause perhaps to be
sorry for afterward? will thou not leave thy self unprovided of servants to
wait upon thee? For where are any such servants to be found, that some time or
other, will not give thee cause to be angry? If thou entertain Stars to
serve thee; is there not impuritie in the Stars? If entertain Angels to
serve thee; Did thou not find folly in the Angels? Have thou not promised to
consider man, that he is but dust; and shall anger make thee to forget that
Promise? Has not Mercy the highest seat in thine Arc; and shall anger be
able to put her from her seat? Thou have been my helper heretofore, and why
did thou help me, but because I needed thy assistance? and may I not with
thy assistance now return from my evil way; if thou be pleased not to be so
hasty to turn me away? By thy helping me then, thou did express thy loving
me then; and why then should I fear, thou will now forsake me? for whom thou
love, thou love to the end; Not to the end, and then ends; but to the end,
that shall never end. Shall the Heathen have cause, have color of cause, to
upbraid thee with inconstancy; that whom thou helpest at one time, thou
forsakest at another? Or can thou turn me away in anger; and then help me
in mercy, when thou have done? Can thou so soon change from Mercy to Anger;
and from Anger again to Mercy; that we should never know in what temper to
find thee? No my soul, far be it from thee to have such thoughts: but the
truth is, Gods ways are not discerned, not discernable by us, they are past
our finding out: We know nothing at any time, what it is he does; less, why;
and least of all, how he does it: Both the substance, and the circumstance of
all his actions, is to us an Abyssus; we know nothing of all his ways but
this, that all his ways are Mercy, and Truth; nothing of his condition, but
this, that in him, there is no change, nor shadow of change.

subject to change, is not that hope more like to succeed, which hopes for a
change, then that which hopes for a continuance?

But seeing the way of thy tenderness, is Do thou, O God, teach me thy way,
and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies. Teach me thy way, how
it can stand with tenderness to thy children, to suffer them to be afflicted,
when thou suffer the wicked to live in prosperity? To make Martyrs of thy
servants, when the wicked flourish, and live at ease? How it can stand with thy
tenderness, to take away thy servants, in the midst of their days;
oftentimes in the beginning, when thou suffer the wicked of the world, to
run out the full races of long lives? Why thou leadest the godly in paths of
temptations, when thou leadest the wicked in paths of security? But if these
ways of thine, be too hard for me to learn; or if thy pleasure be not to
reveal them as yet; at least, O God, Lead me in a plain path, because of
mine enemies: If it were not for mine enemies, I would never make this suite
unto thee; but would leave it to thee, to lead me in what paths thou please:
but having the eyes of so many enemies upon me; if thou should lead me now,
in a rugged path, where I might chance to stumble, or fall; would not my
enemies triumph at it, as at a victory? for they mark ever step I take, to
watch what advantage they can find against me; and if they should find me
tripping never so little, I were sure to be made the Anvile of their malice, to
be beaten upon, without either pity or compassion. But how great soever their
malice be; I know they can do nothing without leave; Thou only, O God, have
an absolute power over me; My enemies, none, but by thy permission: and I hope,
thou will retain thy power in thine own hands; at least, not make my enemies,
thy deligates. To thy will I willingly Deliver me not over, to the will of my
enemies: for thy will, when most severe, is yet with compassion; but their
will, when most gentle, is always with cruelty: And I speak not this upon a
bare suspicion; but I have evident proofs for what I say; For, falfe witnesses
are risen up against me; and such as breath out cruelty. I desired indeed to
be led in a plain path; to the end I might walk upright, both before God and
men; that so I might give my enemies no cause of offense; do nothing whereof I
might be justly accused: but alas, what good has my integrity done me? for
so great is my enemies malice against me; that when they cannot charge me
truly, they accuse me falsely: and because they would not be seen in it
themselves, they suborne witnesses: and because one witness would not be
sufficient, Many; and lest their witnesses should be apt to relent; they have
gotten such, as breath out cruelty; such as make cruelty their living, and
trade I may say, in no wares but cruel. Though I have a thousand witnesses of
my innocence; my own conscience; yet these witnesses will not be heard in
the Courts of the world: Alas no, I know one, an innocent indeed, who had
greater witnesses then these, the witnesses of his pious and wonderful, and
wonderful pious works; yet neither would these be taken for witnesses of his
innocence; but in the Courts of the world, he was condemned as guilty.

O my soul, I had utterly fainted under this burden, if it had not been for
one thing; If I The only hope of this, has kept me from fainting: and how
could it choose? being a Cordial made up of three sovereign Ingredients; a
hope to see; and to see the goodness of God; and the goodness of God in the
land of the living: three such Ingredients, that he must be one of a very faint
heart, whom such a Cordial will not keep from fainting.

But what ingredient of comfort, is a hope to see? for do I not see now, as
well as I am like to do hereafter? were not our first Parents eyes opened in
Paradise; and can we hope to see better, then they saw there? and do not our
eyes stand as open as theirs still? O my soul, the opening of their eyes then,
has made us see the worse ever since: we see now, but as in a Glass, rather
appearances of things, then things themselves; we see nothing now but colors,
and colors are deceitful, and no trusting to them: the light I hope for, is
to see, as I am seen; a sight not subject to either dimnesse, or dazeling: a
sight that discerns not only colors, but substances; and is not the hope of
such a sight, a comfortable Ingredient to keep from fainting?

But yet what good is it, to see goodness? for we see many good things, which
yet we are never the better for seeing: But is it not true here, Videte and
gustate? for such our seeing shall be: Vidchimus and gustavimus; our seeing
shall be a tasting; our tasting, an enjoying; and enjoying is not properly of
any thing, but in which there is joy; and where there is joy, must there not
needs be comfort?

But yet what more goodness of God can we hope to see hereafter, then now?
for can there be a greater goodness of God to be seen then this, that he
makes the Sun to shine, the rain to fall, upon both just and unjust? We see
indeed now a great goodness of God: but we see it mingled with much badnesse
of men; and may I not say with some badnesse of his too? for is there any evil
in the City, and God has not done it? but the goodness of God which I hope
to see, is a goodness like to garbled spice, without any mixture at all of
refuse stuff amongst it: a goodness not mingled with either evil of men, or
evil to men; but pure and Impermixt as God himself is. The goodness of God
which we see now, is a goodness in effects; but there is a goodness in God,
which is as the cause: Not as having goodness, but as being goodness: Not
only as imparting it self to us, but as communicating it self with us; and
this goodness we shall then see, though now we cannot. Have Philosophers
conceived, that if virtue could be seen with the eyes, Mirabiles excitaret
amores sui; It would stir up in us a wonderful love; and will not the
goodness of God, when seen with our eyes, stir up in our hearts, a
wonderful joy? and is not the hope of such a joy a strong Cordial to keep
from fainting?

But why in the land of the living? for is not the world in which we now live,
the land of the living? Are there not, in the water, living fishes? in the
Air, living Birds? On the Earth, living Trees, living Beasts, living Men? and
what can be thought of, more then these, to make a Land of the living? Alas!
what Land of the living is this, in which there are more dead then living; more
under ground, then are above it: where the earth is fuller of graves then
houses; where life lies trembling under the hand of Death, and where Death has
power to tyrannize over life? No my soul, there only is the Land of the
living, where there are none but the living; where there is a Church not
Militant, but Triumphant, a Church indeed, but no Churchyard, because none
dead, nor none that can dye: where life is not passive; nor Death active: where
Life sits crowned; and where Death is swallowed up in victory. And now make up
a Compound of these Ingredients: Take first, a Hope of seeing, which is
enjoying: then the goodness of God, not a quality, but a substance: then the
Land of the living, where there is no dying: and now say, if such a Cordial
must not needs be strong, of necessity be effectual, to keep from fainting?
O therefore my soul, be sure to provide thee good store of this Cordial,
that if at any time thou be oppressed, with either multitude, or malice; if at
any time false witnesses be risen up against thee; if enemies at any time come
upon thee, to eat up thy flesh; thou may have this Cordial in a readiness,
and be able to say; Do the worst you can, I fear you not; for I believe to
see the goodness of God in the Land of the living. This not only will keep
thee from fainting, but will fill thy spirits, with ecstasy of joy: for it is
grounded upon a principle of comfort, delivered by Saint Paul; The afflictions
of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed: And what is
this glory, but to see the goodness of God? and where to be revealed, but in
the Land of the living?

But all this yet, is but the hope of a Cordial; at most, but a Cordial of
hope: but when will the Cordial it self, that is hoped for, be had? May I
not stay so long waiting for it, that I may be weary with waiting, and faint
with weariness? and then the Cordial will come too late? No my soul, Wait
on the for as none is so worthy to be waited on, as God; so nothing is so
worthy to be waited for, as this Cordial: and never fear weariness by long
waiting for it, so long as thou waitest upon God for it: for, God that gives
power to the Cordial, to keep thee from fainting, will give power to thy
waiting, to keep it from weariness. Only be sure to have a good heart, and
God will not fail to supply it with spirits: Do thou but only bring wood to
the Sacrifice, and God will send fire from Heaven to kindle it.

But how happens it, that David should give so good counsel to others, and yet
follow it so ill himself? for he confesses of himself in another place;
that he is dejected, and bowed down; and can it stand with courage, to be
dejected? But is it not, that to be dejected, is a Passive infirmity, to be
courageous, an Active virtue; and there is no contradiction, to be Passively
weak, and Actively strong, both at once. Or is it not indeed rather, that when
he confesses himsele to be dejected, he looks upon his sin; and sin will
deject any, that has but eyes, and is able to see it; but when he counsels to
be courageous, he looks upon God; and God is ready to give strength to any,
that has but a heart, and is able to take it. As therefore I said before, so I
say again; Wait on the Lord: which can never be too much taught, because
never enough be learned; never be too much said, because never be enough done.

THE THIRTIETH PSALM OF DAVID.
1 I Will extol thee, O Lord; for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my
foes to rejoice over me.

2 O Lord, my God, I cried unto thee; and thou have healed me.

3 O Lord, thou have brought up my soul from the grave; thou have kept me
alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

4 Sing unto the Lord, all ye Saints of his; and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.

5 For his anger endures but a moment; weeping may endure for a night; but joy
comes in the morning.

6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

7 Lord by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong; Thou did
hide thy face, and I was troubled.

8 I cried unto thee, O Lord; and unto the Lord, I made supplication.

9 What profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the pit? shall the
dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

10 Hear, O Lord; have mercy upon me; Lord be thou my helper.

11 Thou have turned for me, my mourning into dancing: Thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

12 To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent; O
Lord, my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE XXX. PSALM OF DAVID.
IT seems to be a course in Nature, David's Psalms are commonly thus; Have
mercy upon me, O God: hear my prayer, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger:
or some such form of Hosanna: but in this Psalm, contrary to his custom, he
makes his Exordium of an Allelujah: I will extol thee, O God: And why is this
done? is it out of Devotion, that he might get before hand, and begin with God
in Praises, before God should begin with him in Benefits? O my soul, the
showers of Gods blessings are so continually poured down upon us, that it is
impossible we should ever get before hand with God in Allelujahs. Although
therefore he begin with an Allelujah, yet it is because God has prevented him
in his Hosanna: He will extol God, but it is because God has lifted him up:
Gods praise indeed is put in the Present Tense, but it is because his benefit
is in the Preterperfect Tense: I will extol thee, O God; for thou have lifted
me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.

But if David will extol God; how will he do it? for to do it unworthily, it
were better to be left undone, and who is able to extol God worthily? He will
therefore perhaps call all the creatures of God to assist him, and say; Praise
the Lord, all ye his Angels; Praise him all his Hosts; praise ye him Sun and
Moon; praise him all ye stars of light: Let every thing that has breath,
praise the Lord. But if it be expected he must extol him himself; and not
look for help from others; He will then extol him in his exaltation, and
say; Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: Or, he will extol him in his
own humility, by kneeling, and falling down before him: he will extol him
in his singularity, and say; There is no other God in heaven, or in earth, but
only, thou O God: or he will extol him in his plurality, and say; Thou, O
God, art wonderful in thy Being; Three Persons, and one God, blessed for ever.
And if to extol him with sayings will not serve, he will then extol him with
works, that men seeing his good works, may glorify our Father which is in
heaven. And if neither words nor works will be sufficient; hoe will then
extol him with his silence, and his wonder: leaving that for Thought which
cannot be expressed: and leaving that for astonishment which cannot be conceived.

But why is it that David will thus extol God? Is it, that he may return a
thankfulness answerable to the benefit: return it in the same kind, and
answer it, as it were in its own language? He will therefore extol God, which
is a kind of lifting God up: because God has lifted him up, which is a kind of
extolling of him. For as our extolling of God, is the highest work of our
thankfulness; so Gods lifting us up, is the greatest benefit of his goodness.
We are thankful to God, and ought to be, for his other benefits, even for
casting us down: but we use not to extol him, but for lifting us up: For
naturally indeed, we are all of us desirous to be lifted up; to be set aloft,
and to be high in the world: for this pleases the eyes, that they may see the
more, and pleases the whole body, that it may the more be seen: but this is
not the lifting up that David means; but to be lifted up out of danger; and
out of the reach of the arm of his enemies. O my soul, let this be thy
comfort, that although thy enemies be many, and great, yet they are not more
thy enemies, then they are Gods slaves; and can go no further, then the length
of their chain, which is seldom so long to reach to triumphing. Satan was a
bitter enemy to Job, and had certainly defeated him utterly, if God had not
held him short in his chain; and though link after link, he eetched out his
chain to a great length, yet he could never make it reach so far, as to a
Triumph. For it is not properly a Triumph, but when Dux Duci arma detrahit;
When one General disarmes another: and this could never be done to Job; for he
kept on his Armor still; his Helmet of Faith; and his Breast Plate of
Righteousness, he never let it go off from him: that there could be no cause
for Satan to triumph. Men commonly are not satisfied, unless themselves can
triumph over their enemies: but it is enough for me, O Lord, that thou suffer
not my enemies to triumph over me: for I aim not at glory, but at safety; I
might then aim at glory, if I were the assailant: but now that I am only the
assailed; what can I more desire then safety, and to be out of the reach of
all my enemies? and such safety, without any glory, may well give contentment,
seeing of all the miseries that can befall a man in this wretched world; there
is none greater, none so great, as to fall into the hands of enemies, whose
Malice, like the fire of Hell, is commonly unquenchable. Let a friend strike
me, and it shall be a Balm to my head; but to be stricken by an enemy, who
can endure it? The striking of a friend is out of love, and intends amendment;
but the blows of an enemy are out of malice, and tend to ruin. It troubles
me not, that my enemies rejoice, so their rejoicing have no relation to me:
It troubled not Samson so much, to have his eyes put out, as to be brought out
before his enemies, to be the laughing stock for them to rejoice at.

But why will David speak thus; Thou have not made my enemies to rejoice over
me: as though it were God, that made our enemies to rejoice over us, and not
their own spitefulness and malice? Is it, that permission is in God a kind of
action; and therefore he may justly be said to do that, which he suffers to be
done? Or is it, that in his anger, he makes our enemies the Executioners of his
justice: and punishes our neglect of rejoicing in him, with giving them power
to rejoice over us? and so their rejoicing, is not more in us, his judgment;
then it is in them his act and operation.

But what enemies do we talk of, all this while? worldly minds have no fear,
but of worldly enemies; and from such, perhaps worldly friends may free them:
but the spiritual man fears rather spiritual enemies; and who can free them
from such, but only thou, O God, that art the God of spirits? O merciful God,
let not spiritual enemies have the victory over me; and I make no great
reckoning of other enemies triumphing: Alas! I know that worldly enemies can
never triumph over me, if spiritual enemies get not first the victory.

And now, O my soul, if God have done this for me, have lifted me up above
these enemies, above these enemies of both kinds, have I not a double cause to
extol him for it, and to praise his Name? And yet I may say, I extol him not
more for doing it, then for his readiness of doing it; For I cried unto him,
and he healed me: I no sooner cried, but he heard me; he no sooner heard me,
but he healed me; My suite was no sooner made, then granted; My disease as
soon cured, as discovered; he kept me not languishing, by drawing out his
cure in length; but he applied a present remedy, and prevented Hope with have.
As therefore I extolled him before for his love, in lifting me up above my
enemies; so I must extol him now for his compassion, in being moved to do it,
for my only crying to him; I used no intercessour, but my own voice, and he
healed me; and for God to be moved with the cry of a wretched sinner; and so to
be moved, as presently to heal him; Is it not a just cause to extol him, and
say; O the wonderful bowels of compassion that are in God?

of the Soul? and from this low place, was David lifted up, as ye may hear
himself say; Thou, O Lord have brought up my soul from the grave; Thou have
kept me alive, that I should not go down into the pit. But is not this a
strange speech in David, as though there were a grave of the Soul, as there is
of the Body? for if there be not, how then is it true, that God has brought up
his soul from the Grave? Is it perhaps, that he calls it the Soul, which is
but the cementing of the Body, and life together? or that he calls it the Grave
of the Soul, when it is in the lowest estate of vivifying the Body? What ever
it be, it shows a great mercy in God, and a great power of that mercy, to
raise him up, that was brought so low, and to keep him from falling into the
Pit, that was fallen already to the pits brinke. The truth is, that as sin is
the death of the Soul, so continuance in sin, is the grave of the Soul; and
in this Grave of continuance, did David's soul lie a long time: (Alas! the
shortest time, in this case is long) till God by his quickening Spirit, restored
him again to the life of Grace; that he had just cause to say; Thou, O Lord,
have brought up my soul from the grave, and have kept me alive, that I should
not go down into the Pit. Oh how many there are that have bodies walking
above ground, when their souls are lying in the Grave? that are lusty and
strong in the natural life; when in the spiritual life, they are dead and
buried? yet so long as they lie not buried above four days, so long as they
continue not in sin so long, till it have brought the Soul into an absolute
corruption; there is example in Lazarus, and where there is Example, there is
hope, they may be raised again to life, and be kept from falling into the Pit
of perdition. And now, O my soul, though God have not lifted thee up to as
high a place; yet seeing he has lifted thee up from as low a place, as he did
David: have thou not as just cause as he to say; I will extol thee, O God; for
thou have lifted me up, and have not suffered my enemies, sin, and death, to
triumph over me. And here I find my self so oppressed with joy, that I am not
able to express it without assistance; and what assistance can I look for,
but from the Saints of God? O therefore sing unto the Lord, all ye saints of
his; give thanks unto him at the remembrance of his Holiness. It is not
enough to praise him, if ye do not sing his praises; for it must be done with
cheerfulness, and exultation; and it is not enough to sing, if ye do not
praise him; for your joy must be in him, and for him: in his goodness, and for
his glory.

If it were to sing of another thing, I should require the whole Quire of Gods
creatures, to join in the singing; but now, that it is to sing of Gods
holiness; what should profane voices do in the Consort? None but Saints are
fit to sing of holiness, and specially of Gods holiness; but most specially
with songs of holiness. O therefore sing to the Lord, all ye saints of his;
and let your songs, be more of his praises, then of your own thankfulness:
and let your thankfulness, not be so much for the benefits which you have
received; as for the holiness with which they are bestowed: for God gives not
his benefits, as the world uses to do, out of any corrupt affection, or with
any corrupt intention; but there is a holiness in his giving, as well as in
his gifts; and seeing the Cherubins, and Seraphins do continually cry to God;
Holy, Holy, Holy: You that are his Saints may well afford to sing to God, at
the remembrance of his holiness.

But what holiness can there be in Anger? for his anger endures but a moment;
and even anger it self, is in God a holiness; It is none of the things that
are natural, and permanent in God; It is but forced upon him by the violence
of sin; and as forced as it is, it stays not with him; it is but as a wind
that passes; Dum oritur moritur; It dies in the birth; Nothing lives, and is
permanent in God, but only his favor, and his love, and therefore, Though
weeping may endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning. And seeing our
life is of this condition, that heaviness sometimes must as well be had as
joy; it is happy for us, they are so disposed, that heaviness comes but in the
Evening, when we may sleep it out; and when our senses are apt to be tied up
from feeling it: but joy comes in the Morning; when all our senses are waking
to entertain it. What is the Evening, but the end of the day? and what is the
Evening of our life, but the end of our days? and in this Evening indeed there
is commonly heaviness; weeping for parting of friends that have lived
together: but this heaviness is removed as soon as morning comes; for what is
the Morning, but when the Sun rises again? and what is our Morning, but
when we shall rise again? and as when this morning comes, there will be a day
that shall have no more Evening; so when this joy comes, all tears shall be
wiped from our eyes, and there shall be no more weeping. Indeed all our great
joys have ever come in the morning: It was a Joy that came in the morning, at
the Birth of Christ; It was a Joy that came in the morning, at the Resurrection
of Christ; It was a Joy that came in the morning, at the Descending of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles; and these Joys were then so great, that they have
made us Feasts ever since: (Our Christmasse, our Easter, and our Whitsontide:)
yet these Joys had their heaviness preceding: the Joy of Christ's birth, had
the heaviness of his Mothers slight; the Joy of Christ's Resurrection, had the
heaviness for his Passion: the Joy of the Descending of the Holy Ghost, the
heaviness for Christ's departing: but these heavinesses were so presently
followed with joys, that it has made this Aphorism be found true still;
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. And now, O
my soul, what need it trouble thee, to have heaviness in the Evening, so long
as thou art sure to have joy in the morning? What need it trouble thee to be
weeping for a time, when thou art sure of rejoicing, when time shall be no more?

Hitherto I have been busy about singing Gods praises, for lifting me up,
which has been his work; Now I must leave singing, and come to saying, to
speak of my own work; And I said in my prosperity, I shall never but alas,
if my singing were no I shall never be moved? Is there any Mountain so strong,
that it cannot be moved? and if no Mountain, how any man? but this is the
insolent language of prosperity, to give over crying to God, and fall a
boasting of it self. Alas! Prosperity has neither good tongue, nor good
eyes; as it made David say, he should never be moved; so it made him think it
enough, that God by his favor had made his Mountain strong; but as for the
maintaining it strong, to arrogate that to himself: when God knows, if once
we leave depending upon God, and arrogate any thing to our selves, our
Mountain will soon be turned into a Valley, and our strength will go from
us, as it did from Samson, when his hair was cut off; and this makes David say
now; Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled: for as it is the favor of
God, that makes our Mountain strong; and our Mountain being strong, we are
kept from trouble: so it is the hiding of Gods face, that makes our moutaine
weak; and our mountain being weak, we are presently troubled; but rather
indeed, if God do not as well maintain our mountain strong, as make it
strong, we shall quickly bring our Mountain to a Molehill; we shall quickly
either fall our selves from our Mountain; or have our mountain to fall upon
us.

We see the Earth has no comfort but in the Sun; and therefore if the Sun
be removed, the Earth presently puts on Blacks; is pincht with cold, and
covered with darkness: That which the Sun is to the Earth; thy Face, O God,
is to me, and what marvel then, when thou hidest thy face; if I be left, as a
disconsolate Earth, in trouble and mourning? God uses not to hide his face
from any that depend upon him; and therefore as long as I put my trust and
confidence in him, he was to me as a strong Mountain; I enjoyed his favor, and
the light of his Countenance; but as soon as I left depending upon him, and
trusted to my own strength, my Mountain was suddenly turned into a Valley;
and I was left alas in a vale of misery. O therefore, my soul,
notwithstanding any prosperity whatsoever; Do thou depend upon God for thy
Mountain, both for making it strong, and for maintaing it strong, and never
be moved to say, thou shall never be moved; for to be immovable, is a
privilege of God himself, and of God alone, and is not communicable to any
creature. It is a false saying in any estate to say; I shall never be moved;
but in prosperity, falsest of all: for he that is in prosperity, stands in a
slipperie place, and such a place is not capable of stabilitie. What is
prosperity but an earthy thing? and can any thing that is earthy be secure
from moving, when the body of the Earth it self is moved? O my soul, the
consideration of this; Alas! the feeling of this has made me leave, both
singing, and saying, and fall to my crying again: I cried to thee, O Lord; and
unto the Lord I made supplication: David tell God of his crying to him, and
say; I cried to thee, O Lord; as though God knew it not, without his telling
it? No doubt, God knew of his crying, for how else did he hear it? and of his
supplication; for how else could he grant it? and therefore it seems, he
tells it not so much to God, as to us; that we may take notice, with what
sacrifices God is pleased. For as there are diverse sacrifices that are
acceptable to God: so each of them, in the due time, is the fittest, and most
acceptable: singing, fittest after a benefit obtained; and crying, fittest for
obtaining a benefit: Allelujahs fittest, when we are in triumph: Hosanna's,
fittest when we are in distress. And therefore being at the present, in peril
of his life; and delivered as it were into the hands of Death; the sacrifice he
offers now, is a supplication; which yet seems not so much a supplication, as
an Expostulation; What profit is there in my blood, when I go down into the
pit? shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth? If I go down
into the Pit, shall I not be turned into dust? and is dust good for any thing,
but to be food for the Serpent? May I not do thee better service above ground,
then under it? Alas! I shall be there but in the company of Worms, poor silly
things, that are not capable of knowing thee: I am here, in the society of
reasonable creatures, with whom I may join in extolling thy Praises. Have thou
not breathed into me the breath of life, and will thou draw in thy breath so
quickly again, and leave me but dust, as thou foundest me at first? Though
the service I can do thee be not great, yet it is more then dust can do: Has
dust a tongue, or a voice, or any instruments of life, for the declaring of thy
truth? and why then will thou make a divorce of parts, which thou have joined
together of purpose, for that purpose? If I desired life for any end of my
own, thou had just cause then, to make an end of my life; but now that I
desire it, to do thee service, why will thou diminish the number of thy
servants, and not leave enough for the service thou have to do? Can any number
be sufficient to praise thee? Can there ever be mouths enough to declare thy
Truth? and may not I make one, a sinful one I know; but yet one in the number,
if thou but please to spare me for descending into the Pit? But what Pit? I
mean not the Pit, where the Apostate Angels are; I know they descended not,
but fell; and I know the Pit they fell into, is a Pit of blasphemy: the Pit I
fear descending into, is but a Pit of silence, and yet in one thing, is worse
then theirs; for they in their Pit, retain their substance still; but I in
this, shall lose my very Being; at least, the quantitas continua of my body,
shall be turned into the quantitas Discreta of dust: and the frame compacted
of all the Elements dissolved; I shall remain nothing, but as it were a few
crummes of Earth; and what can Earth do, when it is not assisted with fire and
water? O therefore, Hear, O Lord; and have mercy upon me, Lord, be thou my
helper: for if thou lend me not thine ear, how can I hope thou will show me
mercy? and if thou have not mercy upon me, how can I hope thou will be my
helper? Hear me, O God, while I am in a place, where I may be heard; for if
once I be descended into the Pit, I shall quite then be out of all hearing.
Have mercy upon me, while I am capable of mercy; for if once I be turned into
dust, what mercy can I look for? Be thou my helper, O God, now that I am in a
state to be helped; for if my blood in which my life consists be once shed;
what good then will thy help do me? I place Gods mercy in the midst here,
because it must serve to both the other; both to make God to hear me, and to
make him to help me: and Gods mercy can do both; it can make him to hear me,
though I were silent; and can make him to help me, though I were dust. But
though Gods mercy can do it, am I sure it will do it? O my soul, his mercy
has done it already: for it is the work of his mercy, that He has turned my
mourning into dancing, that he has put off my sackcloth, and girded me with
gladness. O wonderful conversion; the very same miracle, I may say, that
Christ wrought at the Marriage in Cana, for to turn Mourning into Dancing;
what is it, but to turn water into Wine? To have turned my mourning, but into
comfort, had been a great work, and a great favor: but to turn my mourning
into dancing; the extremity of sorrow, into extremity of joy; who could do
this, but thou only, O God; with whom, as no Miracles are wonders; so no
extremities are limits. Mourning is not properly, but for one that is dead: and
indeed so near being dead was I, that I might well be said to mourn for my
own death: not unlike the Swan; if it be true, that she sings her own
Elegy: and now to have my mourning turned into dancing; the drooping act for
Death, be turned into the most lively act of Life: what is it, but the Miracle,
as it were, of Resurrection, and Ascension both at once? at least, from the
lowest stayre of misery, to be raised to the highest of happiness: and not
Gradatim, by degrees and steps, but per saltum, by a motion more swift, than
the Fiery Chariot, that carried up Elias into Heaven: and so the change not
more wonderful, then the suddenness; Mourning turned into Dancing, a
wonderful change; and done, as it were, in the turning of a hand, as
wonderful a suddenness.

And now to make me fit for Dancing; Thou have put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness: for indeed, if I had kept on my sackcloth still; I
should have made but a heavy Dauncer; but now, that my sackcloth is off, and I
am girded with gladness; I shall leap as light, as Abraham did, to see thy
day.

I put on sackcloth when I was a Mourner; but now that I am to be a Dauncer, I
am girded with gladness: and if I mourned before, to think of Gods anger; may I
not justly dance now, to think of his favor? If I put on sackcloth before,
as sorrowing for my sin; may I not justly now be girded with gladness, as
rejoicing in my Savior? For though it be Gods mercy, that has done this for
me, yet it is his mercy in Christ my Savior: without whom, his mercy alone
would never have done it: He would never have put off my sackcloth, and girded
me with gladness, but for his sake, and through his means, that was anointed
with the Oil of gladness above his fellows. My sackcloth was but a loose
garment about me, which might easily be put off at pleasure, but my gladness
is girt about me, to be fast and sure, and cannot leave me, though it would;
at least, none shall be able to take it from me.

And now, though this be spoken here in the case of David, yet it may be
conceived as in Type for all the godly: if they mourn, and lie in sackcloth
now; yet they shall ere long be girded with Gladness, and dance for joy; but
what Dancing? Not like that of Herodias Daughter; for which Herod allowed her
to ask half his Kingdom; but like that of David before the Arc; for which
God without asking, will give us a whole Kingdom. And when shall the time be?
Alas! it cannot be long: For they shall not go out of Egypt into Canaan, as
the old Israelites did, by the tedious passages of a troublesome Wilderness;
but their Mourning shall be turned into Dancing: a conversion as sudden, as
when Moses his Leprous hand was turned to be sound again, by putting it only
in his bosom.

But to what end is it, that God has done Belshazzar, in revelling and
feasting: but there is no such matter: he has done it to this end, that my
glory may sing praise unto him, and not be silent: to this end, that not only
I may praise him, but may sing his praises; and not only that I, but that my
glory may sing them; and alas what glory have I? does not all glory belong to
God? Indeed so it is, my glory then sings his Praises, when I ascribe to him
all praise and glory; my glory then sings his praises, when I praise him with
all I have to glory in, with all the faculties and powers of my soul and body;
those especially in which I was made after his Image, for this is my Glory.

If this then be the end that God intends, shall I be so ungrateful, to
cross his intentions? if he have given me a Tongue, and a Voice to serve
him; shall I hold my peace, and be silent in his service? if he have turned my
Mourning into Dancing; shall I be sullen, and slow to sing his Praises? Alas!
my Dancing can never be kindly without Music; and what music so fit for it,
as singing? and what singing so fit, as to the Ditty of his Praises? O my
soul, seeing God has procured thee liberty to Dance, thou may well afford
to find the music: and yet neither my Dancing shall hearken to the music,
nor my singing shall look toward the Dancing; but my Singing and my Dancing
both, shall be addressed, and directed to God alone. Shall my heart be so set
upon my joy, as to make me forget the Author of my joy? No, O God, my joy has
so sure a foundation, that I can never be unmindfull of the Founder: I will
give thanks to thee, O Lord, my God, for ever. Not for a time which will
cease; Not as long as the Sun and Moon endure, which shall not always
endure; not as long as I have breath in my body; No my soul, but as long as
thou thy self have Being; which being breathed into me by God, shall never
cease; shall always endure; shall be forever.

When I extolled God, I had relation to his Omnipotency: when I sung his
Praises, to his Mercy; and now that I give him thanks for ever, to his
Eternity: that now I may conclude, and say; O Almighty, most Merciful, and
ever-living God; to thee be ascribed all Honor, Praise, and Glory, world
without end.

THE THIRTY FOVRTH PSALM OF DAVID.
1 I Will bless the Lord at all times; his Praise shall continually be in my
mouth.

2 My soul shall make her boast in the Lord; The humble shall hear thereof,
and be glad.

3 O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and delivered me from all my fears.

5 They looked unto him, and were lightened; and their faces were not ashamed.

6 The poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him from all his
troubles.

7 The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him; and
delivers them.

8 O taste, and see how good the Lord is; Blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

9 O fear the Lord, ye his Saints; for there is no want to them that fear
him.

10 The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall not want any good thing.

11 Come ye children; hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

12 What man is he that desires life; and loves many days, that he may see
good?

13 Keep thy tongue from evil; and thy lips from speaking guile.

14 Depart from evil and do good: seek peace, and pursue it.

15 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; and his ears are open to
their cry.

16 The face of the Lord, is against them that do evil; to cut off their
remembrance from the earth.

17 The righteous cry, and the Lord hears: and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

18 The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit.

19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivers him out
of them all.

20 He keeps all his bones; not one of them is broken.

21 Evil shall slay the wicked; and they that hate the righteous, shall be
desolate.

22 The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants; and none of them that trust
in him shall be desolate.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE XXXIV. PSALM OF DAVID.
ALas! what a Vow is this that David makes here? a Vow which he is sure before
hand, he cannot keep: for is it possible for any man to bless God at all
times? Is there not a time of pain and misery, in which Jobs Wife persuaded
him to curse God and dye? and can cursing of God, stand with blessing of God? O
my soul, I take not my measure of blessing God from the last of that wicked
Woman; it is not pain; it is not misery; it is not extremity of pain, or
misery, that shall make me to break my Vow in blessing of God: but if it be
thought so great a matter to bless God inmisery; I will stretch my Vow yet
further, for I will bless him for misery: and I may truly say, if it were not
for pain, and misery; I should want one special Motive for blessing of God.

But yet there is a time of sleep, which is a tribute due to Nature; and is it
possible to pay the tribute of sleep to Nature, and the tribute of blessing to
God, both at once? If then sleep be of necessity so oftentimes, how can
blessing of God be performed at all times? O my soul, when our waking is
terminated with blessing of God; that blessing is in force till we wake again:
for as in what place the tree falls, there it lies: so in what state the
Soul goes to rest, in that state it rests: If my soul say to God; I will
lay me down to sleep, for it is Thou, Lord, only that sustainest me; my
soul shall have it returned from God; Thus the Lord gives his beloved sleep.

But if thus perhaps be made good the continuance of Blessing God: yet in what
consists the work of blessing him? Is it only in Thought, or only in a good
intention? No my soul; his praise shall continually be in my mouth: for
though the heart indeed be the Fountain of blessing him: yet out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; and therefore it shall not be
cloystered up in the Cells of silence, but it shall have vent, and be brought
into the light; that if it be not said, that men seeing my good works, it may
at least be said, that men hearing my good words, may glorify our Father which
is in Heaven. But do I not by this, fall again upon my old difficulty? for
if it seemed impossible before to bless God at all times, may it not justly
seem as impossible now, that his Praise should continually be in my mouth? It
may perhaps be true of the Angels, in whose mouths we know of nothing there
is continually, but Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath: but to be verefied
of the mouths of men, seems a thing impossible; for is there not a necessity
of speaking many things, besides Gods praises? yet nothing must be spoken, but
either his Praise, or to his praise, or else we break our Vow. And how then
is this Riddle to be expounded? Is it not as Saint Paul expounds it: Whither
ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do else; let all be done to the praise,
and glory of God. And if all we do, may be done to the praise of God, then
certainly all we speak, may be spoken to the praise of God: and indeed,
seeing he never cease to send forth continually his blessings; with what
reason can we cease to set forth continually his Praises?

But when I make this Vow to bless God at all times; I make it not presuming
upon any ability in my self: Alas! I know my own weakness, and how unready
I am to any goodness; but my soul makes her boast in the Lord: power to
perform it; that He who has begun the work, will also finish it; and being
so good an Architect, as he is, will not lay a foundation, but will as well
also set on the Roof. If I should boast in my self, I should do wrong to
God: but if I boast not in God, I do wrong to my self: seeing God is a
strength to none, but to them that make him their strength; and none make him
their strength, but they that make their boast of him. It is a hard matter to
bring Boasting, and Humility, to meet together in one subject, between which
there is so natural an Antipathie: yet here it is done: for this I may say is
the humble boasting; where a vain man may glory without vainglory, where a
weak Agent may presume without presumption: Not like the boasting of the
Pharisee, so hateful in the eyes of God, so offensive in the ears of the
humble: For the Humble can hear this boasting, and be glad, which they would
never do; if it were not conformable to the rules of Humility. Can any
boasting be greater then to say; I can do all things? yet in this boasting,
there is humility, when I add; In him that comfort me. For though God
like not of boasting; yet he likes of this boasting, which arrogates nothing to
our selves, but ascribes all to him: and seeing my soul boasts her felfe of
God, I doubt not, but as the humble hear it, and be glad; so God sees it, and
is pleased, and accepts my Boasting as a sacrifice of Humility.

But to what end is it that my Boasting tends? Is it to set forth my own
worthiness, and to vaunt of my abilities? Is it to tread in the steps of
Lucifer, or to walk in the way of the Pharisee? God forbid, the humble then
would not be glad to hear my boasting: No my soul, it is to magnify the
Lord; O therefore for alas what am I to magnify his Name my self alone, if I
have not company to help me? All I can do, and all the humble can do, is but
to say; Not unto us, Not unto us, O Lord, but to thy Name give the glory; which
is rather a vilifying of our selves, then a magnifying of him: they must be
creatures of a better metal that can serve, and yet cannot serve to magnify
him as they should: and it is not the work of a few: all the Millions of
millions, in Heaven, and Earth, have enough to do, and more then enough, to
exalt his Name: O therefore, ye Blessed Spirits of heaven; do you magnify
the Lord, but take me with you in your company, that though I add nothing to
the weight of the work; yet I may add one to the number of the worke-men in
magnifying his Name. We that are dwellers on the Earth, can exalt his Name no
higher then the Heavens, and there you that be Inhabitants of Heaven must take
it, and exalt it higher; and so between us all, we shall make a shift to
exalt him to his true Elevation, for his Glory is above the Heavens. But if
perhaps you think scorn of our company, as being men of polluted lips, and
therefore not worthy to be of your Consort; yet the humble will make a consort
by themselves, and will not, indeed cannot be kept from exalting his Name: for
our Humility, is his Exaltation; and then we raise him up to the height of
his Throne, when we cast our selves down, as low as his Footstool: that it is
but a diverse expressing of the same thing in substance, whither we say; Let us
exalt the Name of the Lord; Or let us fall down, and kneel, before the Lord
our Maker.

David is not wont to use Exclamations, but upon special occasion: if he use
one here, and say; O magnify the Lord; we may know that to magnify his Name,
is a thing of great importance: indeed so great, that all things besides it, at
least all things without it, are nothing but vanity. O then all you that be
exalted in Heaven, and all you that be humble in the earth; and lest any be
left out where all are too few; O all ye works of the Lord; bless ye the
Lord; Praise him, and magnify him For I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and
delivered me from all my fears: To seek, and upon seeking to be heard, is a
great favor: but to be heard, and upon hearing to be delivered from all
fears, is a favor that deserves Magnifying in the highest degree.

But why is it that I sought him? is it not because I had lost him before? and
why should I seek to get him again, and would not keep him, when I had him?
O my soul, Carendo magis quam fruendo; We know the goodness of things, more
by wanting them, then by enjoying them, though I could not see what happiness
it was to have him; yet I see what misery it is to want him: and yet in this I
account my self happy, that I have sought him while he was within hearing: for
alas, if I had stayed from seeking him, till he had been out of hearing; What
hope could I have had; of ever recovering him?

But O the tender mercies of God, that has not suffered me to put off, my
seeking him so long: for, O my soul, it is no less his mercy that I seek
him, then that he hears me; my desire is not more to have him, then his to
be had; for how else could he have heard me as soon as I sought him, but
that he stood listening, as it were, when I would seek him? and he heard me
not as one that were indifferent whither he head me or no; but he gave me
audience with no less Intention to grant my suit, then attention to know it;
for hear the success of my seeking him; see the fruit of his hearing me; He
delivered me from all my fears; To have delivered me from all my troubles,
had been a great favor; but a far greater, to deliver me from all my
fears; for where that, would have but freed me from present evil; This
secures me from evil to come; that now I enjoy not only Tranquillity, but
security: a privilege only of the godly: The wicked may be free from
trouble, but can they be free from fear? No, God knows, though they be not in
trouble like other men, yet they live in more fear then other men; Guiltiness
of mind, or mind of the world never suffers them to be secure; though they be
free sometimes from the fit of an Ague, yet they are never without a grudging:
and (if I may use the expression of Poets) though they feel not always the
Whippe of Tysiphone, yet they feel always her terrors; and seeing the Lord
has done this for me, has delivered me from all my fears; have I not cause,
just cause to magnify him, and exalt his Name?

But is Gods mercy confined only to me, and not extended as well to others?
Yes, my soul, Deus omnibus idem; God is good to all: Looked unto him, and were
lightened. But should it not be rather said; God looked to them, and they were
lightened, then to say; They looked to God, and were lightened? For God is
Light, and when the Light looks to us, we are sure to be lightened: but we
that are darkness may look to the Light, and yet continue in darkness still?
but is it not, that the influence of Gods favor descends upon the godly in a
kind of correspondence to their service: if they cry, they shall be heard: if
they mourn, they shall be comforted; if they humble themselves, they shall be
exalted; so here, because they looked to God, they were lightened. Indeed Light
is the proper inheritance of the godly, as being the children of light; which
though they cannot deserve, yet they may expect; and have they not reason then
to look to him, in whom it is, and from whom it must come? They little deserve
to be lightened, that will not look to him that is their light: If it may be
had for a look, and they will not do that; they worthily deserve to be kept
in darkness. It is true, all would be lightened, but all take not the right
course; they look not the right way: There are some that look to the stars
to be lightened, because the stars indeed are glorious bodies, and give
light to the world; and these are such as attribute all to Chance, and Fortune:
and there are some, and these the worst some, that look to Lucifer to be
lightened, because they think he bears not his name for naught; and these are
such as light them Candles of impiety, and by impiety: but these are
delusions, and impostures: the way to be truly lightened indeed, is to look
to God: for he is the Father of Lights: and as there is nothing with him; so
there comes nothing from him, but only Light. O then, my soul, look to God,
and he will lighten thee; look to him with the eye of Faith, and the light of
his Countenance shall shine upon thee.

But though the children of the world be wiser in their Generation, then the
children of Light; yet in this, the godly are the wiser: for they looked to
God, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed: But may we not say
then, the more shame for them? for is it not true which is said, that nothing
belongs to us, but confusion, and shame of face? may we not be ashamed to show
our faces to God, being so foul, and filthy as they are, seeing he endures
nothing that is unclean? O my soul, as they that looked to the Brazen Serpent
were presently healed; so they that look to God, are presently lightened: for
though looking to the material Sun, be a cause to stayne, and tanne the
face: yet looking to the Sun of Righteousness is a means to cleanse it, and
make it amiable: and why then should they be ashamed? Is it any shame to show
our sores to our Physician? or any shame to show our faults to our Confessor?
No more is it any shame to show our faces to God, though never so foul, and so
full of staynes, seeing he is the true Physician that only can cure us; He
the true Confessor that only can absolve us.

But who are they that were lightened? Perhaps Pauci quos aequus amavit: some
few that were in his favor; perhaps rich men that could offer him Hecatombes,
and plentiful sacrifices: No my soul; The poor man cried, and he heard him:
and saved him out of all his troubles:

But though the poor man cried, are we sure he cried to God? he might cry
out of sense of his misery; and what were this to move God to hear? O my
soul, any crying of the godly, is a Music with which God is pleased, or at
least is moved: if it be a crying out of sense of misery, God is moved with
it in his mercy, if a crying out of Devotion; God is pleased with it in his
Justice. O then my soul, rather never cry, then not cry to God: for by crying
to him, thou gettest, I may say, two strings to thy bow: both his Mercy, and
his Justice: and were it not folly to leave out one, where thou may have
both? But though we know not what the poor man's crying was, yet we see what
Gods hearing was: for hearing him, he saved him from all his troubles: and who
would not cry, to be so heard? The world may think it a strange course in the
poor man, to cry to God to deliver him from his troubles, being so far off
from him: but how far was he from him, when he heard him? If he were so
near to him, that he might hear him, he could not be so far from him, but
he might help him. O my soul, let the world think their pleasure; let them
study, and plot, and cast about how to bring their purposes to pass; Do thou
cry to God to deliver thee from thy troubles; for if thou cry, thou may be
sure he will hear thee; and if he hear, thou needst not doubt but he will
help thee. But yet mistake not the meaning, when it is said, that God saved
him from all his troubles; as though, because he was a poor man, that
therefore he was presently made rich: Or if he were in pain, that he had
presently ease: for God goes not always the ordinary way of Physicians, to
cure cold Diseases with hot Medicines; his ways of deliverance are oftentimes
spiritual; and so Job might be said to be delivered from all his troubles,
when God gave him patience to endure his troubles; but specially Lazarus might
be said to be delivered from his troubles, when he was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom.

for the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. We little think we have a continual guard about us, and
less we think that we have a whole Camp for our guard; but least of all,
that it is a Camp of Angels: oh how safe should we think our selves, if this
were so! O my soul, this is so, and yet we think our selves not safe enough:
and may it not then be justly said; What doubt ye of, O ye of jittle faith?
But how can we think there be Angels to guard us; when we scarce think
there be any Angels? for if there be, they must be creatures of God: and then
certainly creatures of a most excellent nature: and would Moses then have left
them out, in his Catalogue of Creatures, where he reckons them all up? Indeed
for this very reason, because they are Creatures of a most excellent Nature,
has Moses left them out: for he speaks but of material Creatures, in this
material world; of which number, the Angels are none. But we may think
perhaps there are none, because we can see none: as though we could see a
thing that is invisible? shall we therefore think we have no souls, because
we cannot see our souls? We live now by Faith, and not by sight, and
therefore can neither see souls nor Angels; we shall then see both, when we
shall live by sight, and not by Faith. Alas! if we believe no more then we see,
we seem not to live by Faith neither, for Faith believes that which it cannot
see: Oh therefore my soul, to make it appear thou live, and that thou
live by Faith; let this be an Article of thy Creed, that the Angels encampe
and pitch their Tents about thee: that if at any time thou be assaulted, if
assaulted by enemies, if by an Army of enemies, thou may have recourse to the
confidence of this Guard, and never tremble for any Alarm: seeing there are
more with us, then are against us.

But how can the godly think they have a Guard about them, when it is for
Princes only to have a Guard; and the godly for the most part are but private
men? O my soul, this is a Guard that attends no less the poorest man, then
the greatest Prince, and attends him with as much carfulness, as if he were a
Prince.

But if there be Angels to defend the godly, why do they not defend them? why
do they suffer them to be so molested, so afflicted as they are? for who are
in such troubles, who groan under such afflictions as the godly? and would
this be so, if that were so? would they be so oppressed, if they had Angels to
relieve them? O my soul, thou little considerest the infinite benefits that
the godly rereceive by the ministry of Angels. If perhaps they suffer
troubles of the body, do they not escape far greater of the soul? If they
endure perhaps some momentarie afflictions, do they not avoid afflictions that
would be everlasting? Is there not an Army of malignant spirits to assault
them, and could they be safe from tearing in pieces; if there were not a camp
of Angels to assist them? But though the Angels be a guard to the whole man,
both body and soul; yet being creatures spiritual and invisible; they are
chiefly a guard to the invisible and spiritual part, which is the soul. The
body they know must go to the earth, and therefore though a part, is the least
part of their care: It is the Soul they chiefly wait upon, because it is the
soul they chiefly wait for: for they stand waiting for the soul, when it
shall leave the body, that they may take it, and carry it into Abraham's bosom:
for till then they break not up their Camp.

And now, O my soul, seeing the Angels are so beneficial, and so good unto
us; Oh taste, for by the goodness we find in the Angels, we may take a taste of
the goodness that is in God: if it be a great goodness in the Angels to
encampe about us: how great is his goodness that gives it them in charge? for
the Angels would not do it, if God did not command them: Alas! they could not
do it, if God did not enable them. Oh then, taste and see, how good the Lord
is; Not how good the Angels are, though they be good, and exceeding good in
their kind, as Ministers: yet what is this to the goodness of God, who is the
Fountain of goodness to the Angels themselves?

O then, Taste, and see how good the Lord is: for taste him we may, but we can
but taste him while we live here, we shall not have a full comprehension of
him, till we come to see, as we are seen, when we shall need no more
encamping of Angels round about us.

O then, Taste and see how good the Lord is; but how can we taste him that is
not bodily? how see him that is not visible? Not him indeed, but his goodness:
and not his goodness, neither in its self, but in its effects; and not in its
effects neither, as they shall be, but as they are, which God knows, is but a
small part of that they shall be.

O then, Taste, and see how good the Lord is: if you would but taste him, you
would never take pleasure in other meat: if you would but see him, you would
never delight in other object: O my soul, if thou could but taste the
sweetness; if but see the goodness that is in God, it would make thee fall
into a greater ecstasy, than that of Saint Peter at the sight of Christ's glory
in the Mount: at least it would weane thee from all the pleasures, that the
taste, or the sight, can minister to thee in this vain world; for alas, what
are the pleasures of the taste, to the sweetness that is in God, but as bitter
Aloes, to the sweetest honey? What are the delights that pass by the senses,
to the delight in God, that passes all understanding? May I not justly say
now: Blessed is the man that trusts in him: for he that trusts in God, and
he only, is like to be admitted to taste the sweetness, and to see the
goodnasse that is in God: which only are the things that can make us blessed.
What is it to trust in God, but to depend wholly upon him, and to put all our
confidence in him? To trust in the world, is to lean upon a broken reed; to
trust in our selves, is to lean upon a shadow; only to trust in God, is the
true Terra firma, where the Angels pitch their Tents; and where if we fix our
selves, the gates of Hell can never prevail against us. What preserved Jonas
in the Whales belly? What, Daniel in the Lions den; but only their trust in
God? O then my soul, do thou also trust in God, and he will be the same God
to thee, the same safeguard in thy dangers, as he was to Jonas and to Daniel.
But yet let thy trusting in him be such as that thou presume not: for there are
certain bounds that must not be passed: It is as dangerous to go too far in
trusting in him, as to be too short: and as it is Faith, that puts us on for
coming too short, so it is Fear that keeps us off from going too far: O
therefore Fear the Verily a strong Motive to make us fear God; seeing he
that fears him shall want nothing. And yet the Motive not so strong, but the
reason as apparent, for the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and
Wisdom I may say is the godly man's Purviour: and what marvel then if he
want nothing that has so cunning a Purveiour as Wisdom, to keep him from
want: but then it must be from want of things that are good: for to want other
things, is no disparagement to Wisdoms pourveyance. O that men would
understand how to distinguish between things that are truly good indeed, and
things that but only seem good! we should then have a better world then we
have, and men would never complain of want, when they have but too much: never
be so earnest for supply of things, that truly considered, are but merely
superfluous. If therefore one that fears God be in any want, we may know that
the thing he wants is not good: for if it were good, he should not want it: it
may perhaps be good in it self, but not good for him, and if not good for him,
he cannot be truly said to want it, because indeed he were better be without
it.

But is Fear a thing of such force to supply our wants? One would rather
think that boldness and courage should supply them? No my soul, for what
creature so courageous Yet the young lions do lack, and suffer hunger:
whether they be young Lions as depending upon the provision of their Parents;
or young in the strength of their youth, that can provide for themselves; yet
they sometimes lack and suffer hunger: for indeed strength of body, is not the
best Purveiour: No my soul, nothing but wisdom makes the true purveyance,
and no wisdom without the fear of the Lord; and therefore none but they that
fear the Lord can be free from want.

But is not this a fearful doctrine, that either we must fear, or else we
must want? were it not as good to want, as to have our wants supplied by fear?
Is not the Remedy worse then the Disease? Alas! this is but the objection of
Children; either Children in years, or Children in understanding, who know not
what Fear it is I mean: and therefore Come ye children, and hearken to me:
I will It is not a Fear, that you need be afraid of; it is a fear, that will
free you from all other fears; it is a fear that is Active; where all other
fears are Passive: It is a Fear that works in love, and who would not love
such a Fear? It is a Fear that is joined with Joy: a Fear, not to offend:
but a Joy, for not offending: It is a Fear, not so much of Gods justice, as of
his Mercy: for there is mercy with him that he may be feared: It is not a
Fear that will shorten your life, but be a means to prolong it: but then it
must not be a bare speculative fear, but you must put it in practice: and
these may be the rules: Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips Long life
was once promised before, to them that honor their Parents; and here it is
promised again to them that love their Neighbors; for these Rules are as the
whole body of moral Philosophy, and are therefore delivered in six parts,
like the six Commandments of the second Table; which only concern our duty
to Neighbors: and in all of them the quality of chief Predominance, and
which keeps then all in tune, is Fear; Keep thy tongue from evil, for fear
of the evil that may ensue: and thy lips from speaking guile, for fear lest
thy guile be discovered to thy shame. Depart from evil; for fear of
infecting: and do good, for fear of repenting: Seek peace, for fear of
wanting it; and pursue it, for fear of losing it. The two first Precepts are
the duty of words, for words must first be regulated, before works can be
actuated; and they are both Negative; Keep thy tongue from evil: and thy lips
from speaking guile: for it is not required of the tongue to be Eloquent; or of
the lips to deliver Oracles: It is enough in the tongue, if it be not
irreverent to superiors, nor detracting from equals: It is enough in the
lips, if they be not charms to deceive, nor Equivocations to delude.

The other Precepts are the duty of works, and they are four; where the
Precepts of words were but two; because we must be more in works, then in
words: and they are all Affirmative: for it is against the nature of a work,
to be in the Negative: for so working should be no better then idleness: the
two former are general, as general as Good and Evil; that if we meet with
any thing that is Evil, our part is to Depart: for there is no demurring upon
Evil; No dallying with baytes: lest staying, we be stayed, as Eve was:
Therefore depart from evil. If we meet with any thing that is good; our work
is, to fall a working; for virtue consists in action, and is not so proper to
be talked of, as to be done: we never read of any reward for good words
only; but all reward is only for good works: Because thou have done this;
says God to Abraham: Therefore do good. The two last Precepts are special;
whither we call them special, as being particular, or as being excellent, for
so is Peace: It is the legacy that was left us by Christ: and who would lose
Christ's Legacy, for want of seeking it? Therefore seek Peace, and pursue it:
but not pursue Peace, for this were to make war upon peace, but pursue the
seeking of Peace: for though it be said; seek, and ye shall find; yet it is
not said how long we must seek before we shall find: if therefore seeking
Peace, you find it not at first, pursue the seeking it, and you shall find it
at last. Agree with thine Adversary while thou art in the way; This is to
seek peace: Leave thine offering at the Altar, and go first, and be
reconciled: This is to pursue it, Or perhaps the counsel that Saint Paul gives
to Timothy, may express it plainer: Be instant in season, and out of season:
to be instant in season, is to seek peace: to be instant out of season, is to
pursue it. Indeed if a man desire long life, and to see good days; he must
have a special care of peace: whither it be peace in the humors, or peace in
the Passions; whither Peace with God, or peace with men: they are all
prolongers of life; and life is never shortened or disquieted, but for want of
peace in one of these, and therefore that you may not be to seek of long
life; seek peace, and pursue it.

And now, O my soul, is there not great cause, that the fear of the Lord
should animate all our words and works, when so great a Majesty, as the eye
of God is looking upon them? when so sacred an Auditorie, as the For the eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous; and his ears are open to their cry; and
can any man be so without shame, as to be without fear, when he is the
spectacle which God is pleased to look upon? the speaker which he vouchsafes
to hearken to? But, O my soul, as it cannot but make thee fear, so it cannot
but make thee joy; for what greater honor, then to be the object of Gods eyes
and ears? What though the world regard thee not, as long as God regards thee?
What are the eyes and ears of the world, but eyes and ears of scorn, or else
of envy: of scorn, when in adversity, and of envy in prosperity? but the
eyes of the Lord, are righteous eyes, and are therefore upon the righteous: his
ears, are ears of compassion, and therefore are open to their cry. But are
not the Eyes of the Lord, as well upon the wicked? and what privilege then is
this to the Righteous? No my soul, his Eyes are upon the Righteous, but they
are against the wicked; and not only his eyes, but his whole Face is against
them, to cut off their remembrance O my soul, as thou considerest with joy,
the great force that is in righteousness, which draws the eyes, and opens the
ears of God: so consider with trembling, the great force that is in sin,
which not only turns away his Eyes, and stops his Ears, but makes him to
bend his whole Face in fury; that if his favors of looking upon us, and
hearkening to us, cannot win us to fear him out of love: at least the
bending his Face against us in anger, may force us to fear him out of terror:
for he bends not his Face to make a show only, as though he did but set a face
upon it; but it is to cut off the very remembrance of them that do evil from
the Earth.

But may not the wicked erect Tombs and Monuments, that will preserve their
remembrance for many Ages: perhaps as long as the Earth shall endure? and how
then is their remembrance cut off from the Earth? but from what Earth? is it
not meant from the Land of the living? that in this may be seen the different
condition, between the godly and the wicked; for as it is said here, that the
remembrance of the wicked shall be cut off from the Earth; so it is said in
another place of the godly, that they shall be had in everlasting remembrance:
and where is any everlasting remembrance to be had, but in the Land of the
living? Indeed to have their remembrance cut off in this Earth, is not worthy
of Gods threatening: It is the cutting off from the Land of the living, which is
the blotting them out of the Book of life; that is a work worthy of Gods
setting his Face against them, and this may well be called a cutting off; not
only because it shall come suddenly upon them, but because they are never like
to be heard; Alas! never like to be heard of any more, which can never be the
condition of the godly, for they can never be so out of remembrance, but that
they shall be always heard of God: For the righteous cry;

But how is it like to be true, that the godly shall never be forgotten, when
they seem to be forgotten already while they live? for how else should it
happen, that they are more in trouble, in more trouble than other men, but that
God has cast them out of his remembrance? O my soul, their very being in
trouble, is a certain argument that God remembers them: if he had not
remembered Job, and his righteousness, he would never have given Satan so much
leave as he did to trouble him. For indeed, though troubles be judgments to
the wicked; and are as the first blows to cut off their remembrance from the
earth, yet they are but trials to the godly, and do but serve to make their
remembrance be the fresher. Do we not see how Trees are nipt with frost and
cold, and not so much as a leaf left hanging upon them, scarce so much as life
remaining in them? but is it not to renew in them the fresher springing, and to
make way for fruits in a greater plenty? and such are the troubles of the
godly, they end in deliverance; and though they be bitter for the present, yet
they make the joys afterward to taste the sweeter. And what marvel, if God
hear the cry of the righteous, being so nigh unto them as he is? For the Lord
is nigh unto them, that are of a broken Not broken with envy, as many are: Not
broken with despair, as some are; but broken with sense of their sin, as the
righteous are; for this only is the broken heart, to which God is nigh: and
he is not nigh it, in vain: No my soul, it is good having God to be our
neighbor; for he saves all them to whom he is nigh; He saves all them that
be of a contrite, and humble heart: the lower they are in their own eyes, the
higher they are in his: and when their heart is broken with sense of their
sin, he makes it whole again with supply Many are the afflictions of the
righteous; but the Lord delivers them out of all. For the righteous have many
enemies, and therefore must needs have many troubles; but their troubles are
not troublesome, because they have the Lord for their deliverer; if it be
sickness, he makes their bed, in their sickness: If it be hunger, he fills
the hungry with good things, when he sends the rich empty away: if it be
Death it self; Domini, Domini sunt exitus mortis; the issues of Death are all
in Gods hands: and all this while, though their heart be broken, yet their
bones are whole still: They may have thorns in the flesh, but not a bone of
theirs is broken: for one of David in this, have an eye perhaps upon Christ, of
whom indeed there was not a Bone broken; yet what is spoken of the Head, may
not incongruously be applied to the Members: and in the soundness of Christ's
bones, the bones of the godly are kept from breaking. But the troubles of the
wicked are of another nature; for, Evil shall slay the wicked; Their hearts
perhaps are broken too, but because they are not broken with sense of their
sin, but with spite and malice to the Righteous, there shall be none to make
them whole, but their own evil, shall be their own destruction; and having
none to deliver them, they shall be left desolate, and without all hope of
help. But shall not the wicked then have this good by being desolate, that as
they have none to help them, so they have none to hurt them? Alas! it needs
not, they do it fast enough themselves; for Sin is a recoyling Poison; it
turns violently back upon them that commit it: and it may be truly said of
every wicked man, that he is Felo de se, a Murderer of himself. Though
Righteousness of it self, does not save the Righteous, but they need a
Savior besides; yet wickedness of it self destroys the wicked, they need no
other Destroyer: Perditio tua ex te, O Israel; Thy destrustion is from thy
self, O Israel.

And, O my soul, what great Examples there are to verefie this saying; They
that hate the righteous, shall be desolate. When Cain hated the righteous Abel,
was he not thereupon made desolate, and became a Vagabond, forsaken both of God
and man? but in a higher degree; when the wicked Jews hated Christ the
righteous, was there not a Voice heard as of Angels, saying; Migremus hinc: Let
us depart from this place? and thereupon left them desolate, without Prince, or
Prophet; without Temple, or Altar, to this day? You may say perhaps, that Cain
might easily be made desolate, having killed his brother in a time, when there
was no more in the whole world, but that one Family: but how can the wicked
be made desolate now, when Totus mundus in maligno est positus; When all the
world is full of them; and no Beasts so herd together as they do? But is it
not, that Desolatenesse consists not so much in want of company, as in want of
comfort: was Job the less desolate for having company, of whom to say;
Miserable comforters are ye all? much less shall the wicked be the less
desolate for having company of whom to say; Miserable Tormentours are ye all:
for alas, all their company, shall be either Companions in their torments, or
Companions their tormentours: which can never be the case of the godly: for
though they be not so perfect, not to have their faults, yet they are so happy,
not to have them imputed: for being Gods servants, He will redeem them:
though they be taken captive, yet he will not suffer them to continue
Captives: but rather then not redeem them, he will give his only Son to be
their ransom.

But yet how can the godly choose but be Desolate, when the whole world scarce
affords enough to make a company? and where then can company be had to keep them
from being desolate? O my soul, they have Angels to pitch their Tents about
them, while they live here, and hereafter they shall come to be Citizens in
the New Jerusalem, where they shall have company enough: Priests, and
Patriarks; Prophets, and Apostles; Martyrs, and Confessors; blessed Virgins,
and chiefly the Blessed Virgin; but above all, where they shall see the Blessed
face of God; whose only sight is able; whose sight is only able to keep from
being desolate: and then at least I shall be as able to perform my Vow, as
now I am ready to make it: I will bless the Lord at all times; his Praise
shall continually be in my mouth.

THE EIGHTY FOVRTH PSALM OF DAVID.
1 HOw amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

2 My soul longs; yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My heart,
and my flesh, cries out for the living God.

3 Yea, the Sparrow has found an house; and the Swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young: even thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King, and
my God.

4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be still praising thee.

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; and in whose heart are thy
ways.

6 Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a Well: the rain also
fills the pooles.

7 They go from strength, to strength; every one of them in Syon appears
before God.

8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer; Give ear, O God of Jacob.

9 Behold, O God, our shield; and look upon the face of thine Anointed.

10 For a day in thy Courts, is better then a thousand: I had rather be a door
keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

11 For the Lord God is a Sun and a shield; The Lord will give grace and
glory; No good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly.

12 O Lord of Hosts; Blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE LXXXIV. PSALM OF DAVID.
WHen we cannot express the David here; because he cannot express
sufficiently how amiable the Tabernacles of the Lord are; he therefore falls
to wondering, and helps himself with a question: How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? But is not David's wondering it self wonderful,
that the Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts should be so wonderfully amiable? Is
it not a wonder they should be amiable at all? For are not his Tabernacles,
Tents of War? and is there any thing in War that can be amiable? If he had
said; How terrible are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts; his wonder had been
with some congruitie: for the Lord of Hosts is terrible in all his works: but
to say, How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts; seem to imply a
contradiction: for though they may be amiable, as they are Tabernacles; yet
they must needs be terrible, as they are Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts: and
when this Terriblenesse has made an abatement in their Amiablenesse: What
place will be left for wonder, to give cause to say; How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? But if he had said; How terrible are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts; though it might have been wonderful in the
degree, yet it could not be wonderful in the kind: for what wonder is it, if
the Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts be terrible? but when he says; How
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts; this is not only wonderful in
the degree; but in the kind, much more. For what can be more wonderful, then
that being Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts, they should be amiable, and so
amiable, as to be wondered at? But is it not, that God is in himself so
amiable, that all things of His, even his Terrors themselves are amiable: his
Tabernacles and his Tents; his Sword, and his Spear; his Darts, and his
Arrows; all amiable: Terrible no doubt to his Enemies; but amiable, wonderful
amiable to all that love and fear him: and great reason they should be so;
seeing they are all in their defense, and for their safeguard: though they be
Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts to the wicked, yet they are Courts of the
Prince of peace to the godly: and this makes my soul to For I desire indeed to
be a Courtier, yet not as I am now; God knows I am very unfit for it: but
because Gods Courts are such, they make any one fit, that but comes into them:
they receive not men fit, but make them fit; and he that was before, but a
shrub in Baca; as soon as he comes into the Courts of the Lord, is presently
made a Cedar in Lebanon.

Indeed, if his Tabernacles be so wonderful amiable; they must needs be as
wonderful attractive, for there is no such Adamant as Amiablenesse: Nothing
that so powerfully attracts, and draws all hearts unto it. And to know the
measure of their Amiablenesse, by the power of their Attracting, you need but
look upon my soul: For, my soul longs, and even faints for the Courts of
the Lord: which it would never do, if it were not for their wonderful
amiablenesse, that attracts, and draws it by a kind of violence, indeed by a
kind violence unto them.

Every Amiablenesse is not so great to make a longing: Nor every longing so
great, to make a fainting: Nor every fainting so great, to make the soul to
faint: Oh then consider, how great this Amiablenesse is, which makes my soul
not only to long, but to faint with longing? And blame me not for fainting, as
though it were my own fault, that would not restrain my longing: for seeing
his Tabernacles are of infinite amiablenesse, they must needs work in me an
infinite delighting; and that delighting, an infinite longing: and what
restraint can there be of that which is infinite? No alas, my fainting is but
answerable to my longing, and my longing but answerable to the Amiablenesse: If
I had the offer made me, which was made to Christ, to enjoy all the Kingdoms
of the Earth, but with condition to want the Courts of the Lord; this want
would bring to my soul a greater grief, then that enjoying, would give it
contentment: for seeing his Tabernacles are so amiable, where he is Lord of
Hosts; how amiable must they needs be, where he is Prince of Peace? and Prince
of Peace he is in his Courts, though in his Camp he be Lord of Hosts.

And that you may know it is not the weakness of my soul, that it faints with
longing: (for indeed weak spirits are apt to faint upon every light occasion)
but that it is the very operation of the wonderful attractive power, that is
in the amiablenesse of his Courts: see my Heart, and my Flesh also, how they
are drawn to long after the Lord, which they would never do, if it were not
for some wonderful amiablenesse that is in him: for you may well think, it
must be an Adamant of a wonderful attractive power, that can draw these heavy
I rons of my heart, and my flesh unto it: for indeed, though my Soul have a
longing for the Courts of the Lord, yet my Body perhaps could be content to
want them; there are Courts in the world, that might please my Body as well;
perhaps better then these, but God forbid: God forbid I should be one, to have
my soul and body divided while they are united, to have my soul run one
way, and my body another: No, I am none of those; but as soon as my soul
longed for the Courts of the Lord; My heart, and my flesh fell a longing for
the living God: As my Soul longed for the Place, so my heart, and my flesh,
for the Person: for my heart, and my flesh, are of a duller apprehension; they
must have a present Enjoying of that they long for, or they cannot be
satisfied: but my soul is of a cleerer sight, and knows if it can but come to
the place where he is, it shall be sure withal, to enjoy his presence, and
with his presence, his Person. The Soul indeed is a spiritual substance, and
therefore it is natural to the soul, to long after spiritual things; but the
flesh is an earthly substance, and therefore it is natural to the flesh, to
long after earthly things: and as long as these two are linked in the Body
together, they will always be working upon one another, always seeking to
draw each other to their party: and if the Soul can draw the flesh, to go
her spiritual way, then all is well: it is as it should be: but if the Flesh
draw the Soul to go her earthly way, then all is out of order; there will be
no longing for the Courts of the Lord, for they are spiritual, and are never
longed for, but where the Soul is predominant, and has the leading. And this
is the order in David's longing: first his Soul begins to long for the Courts
of the Lord; and this is yet but a single cord: but then comes in, the Heart,
and the Flesh too; and make it a Cord of three, that is impossible to be
broken. Indeed the Courts of the Lord are so exceeding amiable, that it is
impossible, but every soul must needs long after them: but yet every soul
considers not what belongs to this longing: but as Balaam longed to dye the
death of the Righteous, yet was loath to live the life of the Righteous; so
there are many that long for the Courts of the Lord, but are loath to live the
life of such Courtiers. They that be in Kings houses, wear silk, and soft
raiment, because so it is fit for the honor of the place; and they that will
be in the Courts of the Lord, must likewise wear raiment, that is fit for the
holiness of the place: they must be clothed with the soft raiment of
meekness, and humility; they must put on the robe of Righteousness, and the
garment of Sincerity; or because they are Courts of the Lord of Hosts: their
clothing must rather be in Armor, as Saint Paul expresses it; they must take
the shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit; and
if they come thus Clothed, and thus Armed, they may justly then be said, to
long for the Courts of the Lord: but if they wear not these garmens, their
longing will prove but a false conception, and they shall hear it said:
Friend, what make thou here, without a Wedding garment?

If my God were, as the Gods of the Heathen, that have bodies, but live not;
that have ears, but hear not; my heart, and my flesh, would then never cry
after him, that could not hear them: but now that he is a living God, and has
ears to hear; how can they now forbear to cry after him, that cannot be
without him? for alas, if he should leave them, what would become of them?
what would my heart be, but as a dead corpse; and what would my flesh be, but as
the Coffin?

Thou affordest, O Lord, thy meanest creatures, The Sparrow has found an
house; and the Swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay her young: and
will thou not afford me to enjoy thine Altars, the only places of rest and
pleasure to my soul? Alas! O Lord, if thou will not afford me thine Altars,
for places of pleasure; at least afford them to me for places of Devotion; that
if I cannot make them a Nest for my young ones; my humble Meditations, and my
penitent submissions; at least I may offer upon them, the sacrifices of Prayer,
of praise, and Thanksgiving.

I knew before by thy Courts, thou were a King; and now I know by thine Altars,
thou art a God; that confidently now I can say; O Lord of Hosts, my King, and
my God: that if I feared thee before, as Lord of Hosts; I honor thee more now
as my King: and adore thee more yet as my God; which as they are to thee, the
tender of my dutifulness; so they are no less to me, the means of my
blessedness: For blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will still be
praising thee.

But alas, how happens this? There were Tabernacles before, as belonging to a
Lord; and Courts, as belonging to a King; and Altars, as belonging to a God:
and now to be but a House, as belonging to a private man? and so all this great
Rising to end in a Fall? No, my soul, it is no Fall: it is an aggregation
rather of all the other; for where his Tabernacles did but serve to show his
Power: his Courts but to show his Majesty, his Altars, but to show his Deity;
his House serves to show them all: for in his House there will be still
praising him: and his Praise and Glory is the sum of all. Or is it, that to
dwell in Gods house, is a kind of appropriating him to our selves, seeing his
Tabernacles, and his Courts, lie open to strangers; his House, open to none but
his servants: and seeing in the neerenesse to God, and conversing with him,
consists all true blessedness; therefore, Blessed are they that dwell in his
House. But how dwell in it? Not to look in sometimes, as we pass by; or to
stay in it a time, as we do at an Inn; but to be constant abiders in it day
and night, as to which we have devoted our selves, and vowed our service.

But it may be doubted, when David says; Blessed are they that dwell in Gods
house: What Dwelling it is he means; whither dwelling in it, as Tenants, or as
servants? for if as Tenants, it is like there is some Rent to be paid, and
there is small Blessedness in paying of Rent: It would be a more blessed
thing, if they could dwell in his House, and pay him no Rent. If as servants,
it is like there is some work to be done, and there is small blessedness in
working: It would be a more blessed thing, if they could be his servants, and
do no work, and how then comes any Blessedness in, by dwelling in his House?
Indeed take it either way, let them dwell in his House as tenants, or as
servants, and they shall be Blessed: let them have Rent to pay, as Tenants;
let them have work to do, as servants, and yet they shall be blessed: and
that which may seem most strange, the Rent, and the Work which seem to
hinder their blessedness, is the very thing that makes them be blessed: for
they are both but one thing, both but praising of God; and praising of God is
the only thing, that whether they be Tenants, or Servants; whether Bond, or
Free, will make them be Blessed.

And yet there is a Dwelling that has not yet been thought of; a Dwelling
indeed that makes the true Blessedness: and it is, to dwell in Gods house,
neither as Tenants, nor yet as servants, but as sons: for neither Tenants nor
Servants, abide in the house for ever, only the Son abides for ever: and
therefore though the House of God seem a meaner Title, then his Tabernacles,
and his Courts; yet to us, it is the more comfortable title, seeing it makes us
to be sons, which neither his Tabernacles, nor his Courts can do.

But how appears it to be true, that they who dwell in Gods house, will
always be praising him? seeing it is but seldom seen, that servants be so
forward to praise their Masters? O my soul, it is not so much the good
dispositions of the servants; as the infinite worthiness of the Master, that
makes them to praise him: for when they see the admirable O economie of his
Government, when they see how sweetly he disposes all things in weight and
measure, when they find him to use them more like children, then servants; what
heart can be so ungrateful as not to praise him? and seeing by dwelling in
Gods House, they see these things continually; therefore they that dwell in his
House, will always be praising him.

But is it not a strange reason of Blessedness, to say they are blessed,
because they are still praising him? to be praised themselves, might perhaps be
some blessedness: but what blessedness can it be to praise another? Indeed if
that other, were but such another as our selves, it could be none: but when
that other is such, as that there is not such another, or rather not another at
all, to praise such a one, certainly must needs be blessedness, or there can
be none; and such a one is God: for alas what are we, but that in him we
live, and move, and have our Being: He only is All in All. O my soul, if it
were not for praising of God, there had never been Created such a thing as
Praise: at least we may justly say, that God, and Praise, are as truly
Relatives, as any that are found in either Art, or Nature.

You may say then, It is like to be an easy matter to be Blessed, if there
go no more to Blessedness, but praising of God. Mark therefore how David
speaks; They will be still praising him. It is not enough to praise him; it
must be a praising him still, before it will make a Blessedness, and though
to praise God be an easy matter; yet to praise him still, will be found a
busy work; indeed to flesh and blood a miserable work; for if I be still
praising him, what time shall I have for any pleasure? O my soul, if thou make
it not thy pleasure, thy chief, thy only pleasure to be praising him; thou
art not like in have to come to Blessedness. And marvel not that David
speaks thus under the Law; When Saint Paul under the Gospel says as much:
Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do else; let all be done to the
glory, and praise of God. And indeed, how can I doubt of attaining to
Blessedness by praising of God; when it is praising of God; that makes the
Angels in heaven Blessed? for the seeing of God, would never make them blessed,
if seeing him, they did not praise him: and praising him would never make them
blessed, if they did not praise him continually; crying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Sabbath: for as we praise God here on Earth, with saying, O Lord God of
Hosts; because here, he fights for us against our enemies; so we shall
praise him in heaven with saying, O Lord God of Sabbath, because there he will
give us rest from our enemies.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in God: and in whose heart his ways are.
For though our praising of God, being our own work must needs be too weak to
make a blessedness; yet when our strength is in God, this makes it his work,
and then our blessedness has a sure foundation. When we trust to our own
strength for Blessedness, we are often deceived, indeed as often as always;
but when our strength is in God, we may rest secure; our blessedness is upon a
Rock, and cannot be shaken. But then Gods ways must be in our hearts: for
what way has his strength to the heart, if his ways be not in the heart:
That Is their place, if we look for strength from him. Are we not in a
continual fight against Sin; and have we any strength to fight, but only in
him? and will he take it well to be placed in a Wing? No my soul, he will
strengthen us no longer then he is placed in the heart of the Battle: That Is
his place, if we look to be strengthened in him.

It is not enough that Gods ways be known, if they be not walked in; nor
walked in, if not embraced: and it is not enough to embrace them with the
arms, which is oftentimes feigned, and but only complimentall; they must be
embraced, with the two arms of the heart; Integrity, and Sincerity:
Integrity will embrace them all; Sincerity will embrace no other. Though Gods
ways be many, yet they must all go into one Heart; if any be left out, the
rest will not tarry; though they must be in singleness of heart, yet they must
not be single in the heart; They are fruits that grow in clusters, not one by
one.

There are many that have Gods ways in their mouths, can talk holily, and
make Sermons of godliness, though they be no Preachers; but because they draw
near to God with their lips, and their hearts, are far from him; they are
like to have but the Pharisees entertainment, not so well justified as the
Publican. There are many that have Gods ways in their hands, they give alms
plentifully, they distribute their bread to the Poor liberally; but because
their left hand knows what their right hand does; they have their reward
already. They that have Gods ways in their hearts, they only are in the right
way to blessedness, and no rubbes of the world can turn them out of the way.
For when Gods ways are in the heart together, they lend assistance to For
passing through the Valley of Baca, they make it a Well; the rain also fills
the pooles, That which seemed an impediment turns to a furtherance; at least,
no misery can be so great no estate so barren, but a godly heart can make it a
Well; out of which to draw forth water of comfort; either water to cleanse, and
make it a way to Repentance, or water to cool, and make it a way to Patience;
or water to moysten, and make it a way of growing in grace; and if the Well
happen to be dry, and afford no water from below; yet the rain shall fill
their pooles, and supply them with water from above; If natural forces be not
sufficient; there shall be supernatural graces added to assist them: that
though troubles of the world seem rubs in the way to blessedness: yet in
truth they are none, they hinder not arriving at the mark we aim at; they
hinder us not from being made Members of Syon; they hinder us not from
approaching the presence of God: No my soul, they are rather helps; for by
this means, we go from strength to strength; from strength of Patience, to
strength of Hope; from strength of Hope, to strength of Faith; from strength of
Faith, to strength of Vision; and then will be accomplished that which David
speaks here; Blessed is the man, whose strength is in God; and in whose heart
his ways are.

If my strength were not in God, I should not dare to call upon him, being Lord
of Hosts: but now that my strength is in him, and that I know he is Lord of
Hosts for me, and not against me: a Shield to me, a Sword only to my enemies:
now I have confidence to say: O Lord God of Hosts, hear my prayer: give ear,
for as I doubt not but he will hear me, though he be Lord of Hosts: so I
have much more confidenne, he will give ear unto me, being the God of Jacob:
for he has made a Covenant with Jacob, and with his posterity for ever: that
he will be their God, and they shall be his people: of which number, it is my
happiness that I am one; not after the flesh, which profits nothing, but
according to Faith, the only thing that makes the true Israelite.

But yet what good will it do me, that God hear my prayer, and give ear unto
it, if he be still averse, and turn away his Face? O therefore, Behold, O
Lord, our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed: For I shall never
come to look upon thy Face, if thou vouchsafe not first, to look upon mine:
if thou afford me not as well the benefit of thine Eyes, to look upon me, as
the favor of thine Ears to hear me; I shall be left only, to a bare
expectation, but never come to the happiness of Fruition; but when thou
vouchsafest to look upon my face; that look of thine, has an influence of
all true blessedness, and makes me find what a happiness it is, to have the
God of Jacob for my shield.

But it should seem that this Prayer belongs only to David, or at least to
Kings, who like David are the Lords anointed, and what is it then to us that
are private persons? It is true indeed, that Kings are the Lords anointed in a
special manner: but yet every child of God is his anointed too; for why else
is it said of Christ, that he was anointed with the oil of gladness, above
his fellows; if it be not that his fellows, meaning the children of God, be
anointed too? Anointed no doubt with the oil of Grace; but to be anointed
with the oil of gladness, is the very thing I pray for here: the very thing,
that makes me long so much for the Courts of the Lord: For one day It is not
so much the length of time, as the measure of joy that makes the blessedness:
Or is it, that one day which shall never end; as the day is in Gods Courts, is
better than a thousand which have an end, as all the days of this world are.
If he had said, one day in his Courts, is as good as a thousand; though this
had been a mighty odds, yet it had bin but a thousand to one, there had at
least been some proportion: but when he says; One day in his Courts, is beter
than a thousand; this seems to exceed all possibility of comparison, and
leaves no place for any proportion. Indeed one day in his Courts, gives seisin
of Eternity, where a Thousand that are spent any where else, are but steps of
Mortality. If I be but one day in his Courts, I shall see that which will be
a joy unto me, all the days of my life: where if I be a thousand in any other
Courts; I shall see nothing but vanity, and vexation of spirit, that which
will grieve me to think of, as often as I remember it. And as it is true in
respect of Time; so it is no less true in respect of Place: For, I had rather
be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness. But is it such a disparagement to be a Doore-keeper? What was the
Angel with the flaming Sword, but the Doore-keeper of Paradise? and is there
not a conceit, that Saint Peter is the Doore-keeper of Heaven? Which though it
be a vain conceit, yet it may lead us to this congruous interpretation of
David's speech, to conceive as if he said, that he had rather be Saint Peter in
the house of God, then be Annas, or Caiphas, in the Court of Herod. Indeed in
the sense that Christ is a Door; David may well be content to be a
Doore-keeper: and though in Gods House, there be many Mansions; yet seeing all
of them are glorious, even the Doore-keepers place is not without its glory.
But if you think the Office to be mean: consider then whose Officer he is:
for even a Doore-keeper is an officer in Gods house; and God never displaceth
his Officers, unless it be to advance them to a higher: Where in the Courts of
Princes, the greatest Officers are oftentimes displaced; turned off often with
disgrace. However it be, it shows not only the great glory of Gods House, but
the great humility of David's heart; and that he is not of the ambitious humor
of the Mother of Zebedees sons, whom no place would serve for her sons, but
to have one of them sit at his Right hand, the other at his left. O gracious
God, grant me but a Doore-keepers place in thy house, and I will never aspire
after any higher room: Not that I desire, to let in, and keep out whom I
please, but that I may thereby have liberty to walk in thy house, and to enjoy
thy Presence, in whose presence is the fullness of Joy for evermore. What are
the Tents of wickedness, but like Caves that have no light, and like Vineyards
that have no Fences? and is there any comparison to be made between such
Tents; and the meanest place in the House of God, where God not only affords
Light, but is Himself the Light; Not only is a Defendour, but the Defense it
self? For the Lord is a Sun and shield; the Lord will give grace and glory.
I had heard In sole posuit Tabernaculum suum: God has placed his Tabernacle in
the Sun; But I never knew he was himself a Sun till now: but what Sun?
Not the Sun that is but the child of light, but the Sun who is the Father
of Lights: Not the Sun that was not, till three days after it was light; but
the Sun that was before ever any light was made; Not the Sun which the
Heathen commit Idolatry in worshipping; but the Sun whom it is Idolatry not
to worship. Oh that the Heathen would all worship this Sun: it should not
then be said; Plures adorant Solemn orientem, quam occidentem: That more worship
the Sun rising, then setting: for this Sun once Risen, never sets again;
once shining, is never any more Ecclipsed. Oh then vouchsafe, O God, if thou be
a Sun, to lighten my darkness; if a shield, to protect my weakness: if thou
be a Sun, warm my soul with the beams of Devotion; if a shield, defend my
soul from the blows of Temptation: if thou be a Sun, O shine upon me, with
the light of thy Countenance; if a Shield, O stand between me, and the
assaults of Satan; for alas, O Lord, I am darkness, and weakness, the Anvile
of temptations, the very Butt of Satan, if thou be not a Sun, and a Shield
unto me. O my soul, God will do more then this; He will give grace and
glory: Grace to be a Shield unto us, and Glory to be a Sun unto us; He will
give Grace to prevent us, and Glory to follow us: Grace, to walk uprightly;
and Glory, if walking uprightly: Grace for a foundation to Glory, and Glory for
a Crown to Grace: and if these things be not enough, he will do more yet:
Do thou but walk uprightly, and what good things soever there are in Gods
gift, they shall all be given thee: for No good thing will God withold from
them that live uprightly.

But how is this true, when God oftentimes withholds Riches, and Honors, and
health of body from men, though they walk never so uprightly? We may therefore
know, that honors, and riches, and bodily strength, are none of Gods good
things: they are of the number of things indifferent, which God bestows
promiscuously upon the just, and unjust, as the rain to fall, and the Sun to
shine: The good things of God, are chiefly Peace of conscience, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, in this life; Fruition of Gods Presence, and Vision of his blessed
Face, in the next: and these good things God never bestows upon the wicked,
never withholds from the godly; and are all cast up in one sum, where it is
said, Beati mundo cord, quoniam ipsi videbunt Deum: Blessed are the pure of
Heart, (and such are only they that walk uprightly) for they shall see God.
But is walking uprightly such a matter with God, that it should be so rewarded?
Is it not more pleasing to God to see us go stooping, then walking upright;
seeing stooping is the gate of Humility; then which, there is nothing to God
more pleasing? It is no doubt a hard matter, to stoop, and go upright, both
at once; yet both must be done, and both indeed are done, are done at once by
every one that is godly; but when I say, they are done both at once, I mean
not of the body: I know two such postures in the Body both at once, are
impossible: but the Soul can do it, the Soul can stoop, and go upright,
both at once; for then does the Soul walk upright before God, when it stoopes
in humility before God and men.

And what remains now for David to do, but to bring in the conclusion upon
the Premises, seeing the Lord of Hosts, though his Name be dreadful, yet his
Nature is lovely, seeing he is a Sun to cherish, and a Shield to Defend;
seeing he gives Grace and Glory, and withholds no good thing from them that
walk uprightly; Therefore blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

And what remains now for us to do, but to receive this Conclusion of David,
as an absolute Demonstration: and thereupon to walk uprightly, and to put our
whole trust and confidence in God, through the merits of his Son Christ Jesus;
for then we are sure, we are in a sure way, of attaining to Blessedness, to
Eternal blessedness: that after this, we may leave our wondering, yet continue
our Admiring; How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts!

THE HUNDRED AND THIRD PSALM OF DAVID.
1 Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy Name.

2 Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all his benefits.

3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who heals all thy infirmities.

4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowns thee with loving
kindness, and tender mercies.

5 Who satisfies thy mouth with good things; and renueth thy youth like the
Eagles.

6 The Lord executes Righteousness, and Judgment, for all that are oppressed.

7 He made known his ways unto Moses; his Acts to the children of Israel.

8 The Lord is merciful and gracious; slow to anger, and full of compassion.

9 He will not always chide; neither will he keep his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to
our iniquities.

11 For as high as the heaven is above the earth; so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him.

12 As far as the East, is from the West; so far has he removed our
transgressions from us.

13 Like as a father pittieth his children; so the Lord pittieth them that
fear him.

14 For he considers whereof we are framed; he remembers that we are but dust.

15 As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

16 For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting, to everlasting, toward them
that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children.

18 To such as keep his Covenant; and remember his Commandments to do them.

19 The Lord has prepared his Throne in heaven; and his kingdom rules over
all.

20 Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength: that do his
Commandments; hearkening unto the voice of his Word.

21 Bless the Lord, all ye his Hosts; Ye Ministers of his, that do his
pleasure.

22 Bless the Lord all his works, in all places of his Dominion: Bless the
Lord, O my soul.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE CIII. PSALM OF DAVID.
Bless the Lord, O my abilities, and wilt never be able to go through with
this great work thy self alone. If to Bless the Lord, were no more but to
say, Lord, Lord, like to them that cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord: then my tongue alone would be sufficient for it, and I should not
need to trouble any other about it: but to Bless the Lord is an eminent work,
and requires not only Many, but very able Agents to perform it; and therefore
my Soul, when thou go about it, go not alone; but, Take with thee, all
that is within me; all the forces in my whole Magazine, whether it be my
Heart, or my Spirits; whether my Will, or my Affections; whether my
Understanding, or my Memory; take them all with thee, and Bless the Lord.

And of them all, make use first of my Memory: Forget not all his Benefits:
for to remember his Benefits, is indeed a principal part of Blessing him. And
the sooner thou go about it, the better thou art likely to perform it: for
forgetfulness is a thing, that grows soon upon us, and nothing sooner then
forgetting of benefits: our Memories, are very apt to retain Injuries, but
very unapt for retaining of Benefits: For as long as we remember a Benefit, we
seem to stand upon the rack of an Obligation to requite it: and who is not
willing to come off a Rack, by any means he can; and then rather by forgetting
a Benefit, then by requiting it? and perhaps we think it a kind of payment,
if we can but forget we owe it. But O my Soul consider, that God expects no
Retaliation of us; he looks for no requiting at our hands; Alas! He knows we
are not able: He takes it in good part, if but only we remember his Benefits;
and should we not be most ungrateful, they being so great, and so many as
they are, if we should not afford him so much as the remembering them? But as to
forget all his benefits, were a wonderful forgetfulness; so to forget none at
all, were as wonderful a Memory: for what memory can be so vast, not to
forget some, when they be so many? Indeed so many, that they cannot be numbered.
And what then, O my Soul, will thou do in this case? if thou can not choose
but forget some of his Benefits, yet forget not all his Benefits; if thou can
not remember all, at least remember some: Forget not, It is he that forgiveth
Remember but these, and they will always minister matter enough to keep thee
in work for blessing his Name. For, to forgive all my sins, O my grievous,
my manifold sins, that I know not whether they be more, or more grievous:
whether their Number, or their Greatness be the greater; is it not a benefit
that may justly claim a prime place in my memory? If it were but only to be
favorable in punishing my sins, it were a benefit worth remembering; but to
blot my sins clean out, and absolutely to forgive them, and that freely,
without any desert of mine; Alas, without any possibility of deserving; This
is a Benefit that no Lethargy can forget, indeed a benefit that deserves
remembering in the highest degree. And yet perhaps, to forgive all my sins,
not a greater benefit, then to heal all my infirmities; (This being the chief
work of his Grace, as that of his Mercy) for seeing my sins, many of them,
and upon the matter, all of them, be sins of infirmity: (for even
wilfulness, and presumption, are of infirmity) by healing my infirmities, he
prevents me of sinning: and is it not, as great a benefit, to keep me from
committing sins, as to forgive my sins, when I have committed them? But, O
my soul, meddle not with this high point of Heraldrie, to discuss, which is
the greater of Gods Mercy, or his Grace: They are both an Abyssus: it is work
enough for thee, and for all that is within me, to Bless him for both: and for
both indeed thou have just cause to Bless him, seeing it is by the virtue of
both, that thou art able to Bless him. If it were not for his Mercy, thou
would want the material cause of blessing him, if it were not for his Grace,
the efficient: but now that there is a concurrence of both together; Now that
both he forgiveth all thy sins in his Mercy, and heals all thy infirmities
by his Grace; Now, O my soul, what would it argue but extreme ungratefulness,
far exceeding a forgetfulness, both in thee, and all that is within me, if
thou should not Bless his Name? For, O my soul, consider the multitude of
infirmities, to which thou art subject; thou have many suggestions of the
flesh: and thou art apt to consent, and yield unto them, and strivest not
against them by earnest Prayer, and holy Meditations; This is an infirmity. In
thy prayers to God; thy thoughts are often wandering, and thou think of other
matters, far unworthy of that great Majesty to whom thou prayest: or if not
so, yet thou art quickly weary, thy spirits are drowsy in it, and thou had
rather be doing of something else: This is an infirmity. And indeed thou have
infirmities in all thy senses. In thy seeing, thou can see a moate in thy
brothers eye, and can not see a beam in thine own eye. In thy smelling,
thou think Suavis odor lucri ex re qualibet; that the savor of gain is
sweet from whence so ere it rise. In thy Hearing; Thou art gladder to hear
profane, and idle discourses, then such as be serious, and holy: These are
infirmities: and, O my soul, if I should cut thee up into as many parts, as an
Anatomist, and examine the infirmities of every part; should I not have cause,
just cause to cry out with Saint Paul, O wretch that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin? Who shall heal me of all these infirmities? for
whether we call them sins, and then God forgives them; or call them
Infirmities, and then he heales them: they are to us, all one benefit; in God,
all one kindness; that as either of them is well worth remembering; so for both
of them, we have just cause to bless him, and to praise his Name.

But, O my soul, as thou remembrest these things; that both he forgiveth all
thy sins, and heals all thy infirmities: so remember also their consequences
too; for upon these, there are great matters depending, as worthy to be
remembered, as the things themselves. For alas my soul, thou were by sin come
to be Mortal; and the sentence of Morte morieris, was past upon thee: but now,
by forgiving thy sins, this sentence is reversed: by healing thy infirmities,
thy life is Redeemed; it is taken out of the hands of the Destroyer, and put
into the hands of a Redeemer; and a Redeemer not only from Captivity, but
from destruction: for Captivity takes away but only thy liberty, but
destruction would take away thy very Being: and can it be thou should not
keep that in memory, which is it self the cause, that thou have a Memory?
for what memory could thou have, if thou had not a Being? and what Being
could thou have, if thou were destroyed? and destroyed thou should be, if
thou were not Redeemed; and Redeemed thou can not be, unless thy sins be
forgiven. This no doubt, is a consequence never to be forgotten; and yet
perhaps there is a consequence behind, of greater consequence then this: For
this (my soul) gives thy life but only a duration; but there is a consequence
a coming, that will give it an exaltation: For, he crowns thee with loving
kindness, and with tender mercies. To be madk a King, is an eminent favor:
but to be made a King from being a Captive, where not only the Quo is so
considerable, but the Unde more; this is indeed a supereminent favor, and
hardly capable of expressing. And this is thy case, for where before thou had
fetters upon thy feet, thou have now a Crown upon thy head: and not a Crown
gotten by violence, and worn with fear: but He crowns thee with loving
kindness, and tender mercies. His kindness would have made a Crown good
enough for thy wearing; but his loving kindness, makes it a Crown worthy of
his giving. And if there be doubt, that his mercies alone may not be ready
enough, to bestow this Crown upon thee; yet of the readiness of his tender
mercies, there can be no doubt: there can indeed be no doubt, seeing his loving
kindness, and his tender mercies, are the Crown it self, which he bestows.
For, O my soul, when I speak of a Crown, thou must not fancy to thy self,
such a Crown as Kings of the earth wear: For Christ professed plainly, that
his Kingdom is not of this world, and therefore neither must thine be: but
consider the extent of Gods loving kindness, and of his tender mercies, and
thou will find a better Crown laid up for thee; then all the Kingdoms of the
Earth put together, can afford. O gracious God, grant me the Crown of thy
loving kindness, and tender mercies; and all other Crowns I willingly lay
down at the foot of thy Throne, with the four and twenty Elders: This only
is the Crown to which my soul aspires, for only this Crown makes sin, and
Death to be my subjects; Rebellious sin, that can never be brought into
subjection, but only by this Crown, O God, of thy loving kindness, and
tender mercies. These indeed are Consequences most worthy to be remembered, but
yet perhaps not apt to be remembered, for are they not of too high a strain?
and what the understanding does not well apprehend, the memory does not easily
retain: He will therefore descend to Benefits of a lower He satisfies thy
mouth with good things; and renues thy youth like the Eagles. This no doubt is
apt to be remembered, because it falls within the compass of sense, for who is
not sensible of good things, and specially when they be good things for the
mouth? for, all the labor of man, is for the mouth: All that the hands work
for, and all that the feet toil about, is all but for the mouth: so long as we
may have green Pastures, and still Waters; so long as we may have meat and
drinks, not only to satisfy hunger, but to please the palate, we care not
greatly for any thing else. But, O my soul, these are not the good things that
are here meant; and yet even this perhaps were worth the caring for, if it
might continue: but alas, the days will come, when I shall say, I have no
pleasure in them: the time will come, when my mouth will lose its taste; and
what good then will these good things of the mouth do me? No, my soul, no
fear here of old age; no fear of defect by reason of years: For, thy youth
shall be renewed like the Eagles; There shall be no loosening here of the
silver Cord, no breaking of the golden Bowl; but as the Eagle by mewing her
feathers, renues her youth: So thou (my soul) by mewing thy feathers, which is
by casting off this frail Tabernacle of thy flesh, shall perpetually be kept
by the powerful hand of God, in a state of vigor. Indeed the life we live
now, is the greatest part no life; for Childhood is scarce come to it, and Old
age is almost past it; no time properly remaining to life, but only the short
time of youth: but the life that God has in store for them that fear him; not
only shall be always, but shall be always Youth, and no defect of Age shall
be able to take hold upon it.

But may we not now begin anew, and conceive rather, that when David calls upon
his soul to bless the Lord; and not to forget all his benefits: He means,
he would have it to remember all his benefits; and therefore he presently falls
to reckon them all up himself; not singula generum, but genera singulorum; Not
all in particular, but the general Heads, under which, all the Particulars are
comprehended. And he begins with forgiving of sins, because this is the
Foundation, this is that which reconciles us to God, and which makes us capable
of all his other benefits. But alas, what good will his forgiving my sins do
me, if he stay there, and go no further? for shall I not be committing of new
sins continually; and so God shall be always forgiving, and never the
near? Never the near, unless he be always forgiving. To help this
therefore, his next benefit, is the healing all my infirmities: for this takes
away that aptness to sin, to which we are all of us by nature so prone and
subject. But alas, what good will both these benefits do me, if he yet stay
here, and go no further? seeing I am now a captive, and already condemned to
dye the death? for should not my case be like to theirs, who upon the scaffold
ask the King forgiveness, and when he forgives them, yet they are put to
death nevertheless. His next For he Redeemeth thy life from destruction: He
not only frees thee from captivity, but preserves thee from perishing. But
alas, what good yet will all these do me, if he should yet stay here, and go
no further? for when my sins be forgiven; when my infirmities healed; when my
life redeemed; yet what am I more by all this, then as it were an Abrasa tabula
at most, what have I more to take joy in, then every other ordinary creature?
He will now therefore Coronidem imponere; give a benefit that shall perfect
all: For, He crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender mercies;
Whatsoever is within the compass of his loving kindness; whatsoever within
the extent of his tender Mercies; he will not only make thee capable of it,
but will freely bestow it all upon thee. And who can deny, but this now is a
perfect Inventorie of all the benefits, for which the soul has cause to
bless the Lord: to bless him in respect of it self; though there are other
benefits indeed to the body, for which the soul must bless him too; for alas,
the body is not able, not able of it self without the soul, and they are
soon reckoned; for they may be reduced to these two; Sustentation, and
Renovation: For he satisfies thy mouth with good things; and thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles; as much as to say, Thou shall have the happiness of
the Epicure, and of the Stoic both at once; at least, there shall be no fear
of hunger and thirst: No drooping with Age, nor ruins of Time.

And now, O my soul, let not my being in trouble, and oppressed with sorrows;
make thee doubt of the truth of these things; for besides The Lord executes
Righteousness, and Judgment, for all that are oppressed: Righteousness to
them, and Judgment for them: For as it is righteous with God, that his
servants who are here oppressed, should hereafter be comforted, and be made
partakers of all these benefits: so it is his Judgment to the wicked, who are
their oppressors, that they should feel hereafter, the full measure of Gods
wratth, as it were in their revenge. And this Righteousness, and this
Judgment, he not only deliberateth, and determines; he not only promises
to the godly, and threatens to the wicked, and then leaves them undone: but he
is perfect in all his ways; he is truly Real, and puts them most assuredly
in execution: at least, he executes them Per se, or Per alium: either by
himself, or by his Angels: For indeed this part of his Judgment, which is
inflicting of punishment, is not properly in God Opus suum: and therefore no
marvel if he leave it, to be done by Angels, as he did at Sodom: but though
the Ministry be theirs, yet the Execution is His: all the power is only from
him.

And although the executing his Righteousness, and his Judgment, be inter
Arcana sua; things hidden from us; at which we may stand amazed, but can never
understand them: yet he has oftentimes revealed them to his servants the
Prophets, and specially to his servant Moses; For he made known his ways unto
For when Moses went up to the Mount Sinai, and tarried there with God, the
space of forty days; we may well think that God in that time, revealed many
secrets to him: and particularly made known his ways, not only his ways in
which he would have us to walk; but his ways in which he walks himself:
and the course he holds in the Oeconomie, and government of worldly affairs;
why he suffers the wicked to prosper, and why the godly to be oppressed. These
ways of his, he made known to Moses; to the children of Israel, only his
Acts: He showed them his Wonders upon Pharaoh, and that was his Judgment: and
he showed them his wonderful favors to themselves in the Wilderness, and
that was his righteousness; but he showed them not his way, and the course he
held in them: They saw only the Events of things, they saw not the reasons of
them, as Moses did; no more do we: nor is it fit we should: It is enough for
us, enough for our comfort, that we know this of God in general; That he is
merciful and gracious; Not that any slownesse is in God, but his slownesse is
his Patience, and his Patience is out of compassion: for alas, if God were as
ready to anger, as we are ready to provoke him to anger we had long ere this,
been turned to dust, and utterly consumed.

O my soul, here are four properties spoken of to be in God; and are all so
necessary, that we could not miss one of them. If he were not merciful, we
could hope for no pardon; and if he were no more but merciful, we could hope
for no more but pardon; but when besides his being merciful, he is also
gracious; this gives us a further hope, a hope of a Donative: and then it will
not be, what we are worthy to receive, but what it is fit for him to give. If
he were not slow to anger, we could expect no patience; and if he were but
only slow to anger, we could expect no more but patience; but when besides his
slownesse to anger, he is also full of compassion; This makes us expect, he
will be the good Samaritane, and not only bind up our wounds, but take care
also for our further curing. What though he chide, and be angry for a time: It
is but our being patient awhile with him, as he a long time has been For he
will not be always chiding; neither will he keep his anger for ever: No my
soul, consider the rule of Nature; that Nullum violentum est diuturnum: and
you will find it true in the God of Nature: Mercy, and Compassion, are kindly,
and natural in God, and therefore these will continue, and never leave him:
but chiding, and anger, are things, I may say, violent, and not natural in
him; and therefore it cannot be that these should last, or continue long with
him. Certainly it is as unpleasing to God to chide, as it is to us to be
chidden; and so little he likes of Anger, that he riddes his hands of it as
fast as he can: he is not so slow in coming to it, but he is as quick in
getting from it: for chiding is a bar to Mercy, and Anger an impediment to
Compassion: and nothing is so distasteful to God, as that any block should lie
in the way of his Mercy, or that the liberty of his Compassion should have any
cause of restraint: and then we may be sure, he will not himself lay a block
in the way with chiding, nor be a cause to restrain his Compassion, by keeping
his Anger. And we may the better be persuaded of this, in that which is to
come, by taking notice of that which is past: For, He has not dealt Though he
have chidden, yet he has not stricken: or if he have stricken, yet his
blows have not been great, not so great to do us any hurt, for there is
mercy in his very Anger; and though we keep our selves within no bounds of
sinning, yet he keeps his Anger within the bounds of Mercy. Alas! O Lord, if
thou should deal with me after my sins; as I have used no measure in my
sinning; so thou should use no measure in my punishing, and what then could I
expect to befall me, but utterly to perish?

But why is it that God has not dealt with us after our sins? Is it not
because he has dealt with another after our sins? Another who took our
sins upon him: of whom it is said, that God chastened him in his fierce
wrath: and why did he chasten him, but for our sins? O gracious God, Thou art
too just to take revenge twice for the same faults: and therefore having turned
thy fierce wrath upon him, Thou will not turn it upon us too: but having
rewarded him according to our iniquities, thou will now reward us according to
his Merits. O Dear Jesus, let not thy painful sufferings be made frustrate
by my sinful doings: but so mediate between God and my sins, that he may
turn away his angry Countenance from me, and look upon me only with the eye
of his Mercy. And, O my soul, how can thou doubt of this, when As high as
the and who would wish for a greater mercy to be in God, then this? But yet
the distance between Earth and Heaven, though great, and indeed very admirable
great, is but a limited distance: and is there then a limitation, and a
boundary of Gods mercy? May I not as truly say, as low as Hell, is beneath the
Earth; so great is my sin in the sight of God? and how then am I sure, that
Gods mercy is any greater then my sins? and if not greater, how can it pardon
them? O my soul, though the height of Heaven be limited, yet Gods mercy has
no limitation, for his Mercy is above all his Works, and therefore above
Heaven the work of his hands. Or if he seem to set a limitation to Gods
mercy, is it not perhaps, because there is some sin that is not capable of
his Mercy? for sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, either in
this world, or in the world to come. But, O my soul, though Gods mercy be
without limitation, yet let it not make thee the bolder to sin: for though it
be so great, yet it is so great to none, but to them that fear him: for to
them that fear him not, it is not so great; Alas! it is not great at all:
Alas! it will be none at all; but if thou fear him, and to fear him, is to
fear to sin: then thy sin can never be so great, but that Gods mercy,
which is as high as Heaven, will bring thee to be admitted into the kingdom
of Heaven.

But if you think this distance of height, from Earth to Heaven, not
sufficiently to express the greatness of Gods mercy; then take the distance
of length, from East to West: For as far as the East is from the West; so
far that if the East, and the West, can never come to meet together; no more
shall our sins be ever able to come against us in the sight of God. But
alas, this gives not so good satisfaction as the other: for though the distance
from East to West, be vast indeed to us; as to which our sight cannot reach,
though we should use all the Perspective glasses of the world: yet what is
this to God, who can as easily see from East to West, as if they were hard by,
and close together? But is it not that all Gods mercy to us, is only in
Christ: and may we not then conceive, that these Distances are represented by
the manner of Christ's hanging upon the Cross; where his Feet, and his Head,
seem to point from Earth to Heaven; and the stretching out his hands, seems
to point from East to West? But though Relation to Christ be not the ground of
these expressions; yet it cannot be doubted, but that they sufficiently
express the greatness of Gods mercy; seeing they are the greatest distances,
that humane apprehension is capable to conceive.

But if you be not satisfied with these expressings from Distances of place;
then take an expressing from the affection of Nature: For as a Father pittieth
his children; so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. And now let any that is
a Father, examine his own Bowels, how much he pitties his children, and then
say; If Gods pity to them that fear him, be not in a very high degree.
Certainly if any Name, could express a greater pity, then the name of a
Father, Christ would never have taught us to use this Name in making our
prayers. And who could be so fit to make this comparison as David, who gave a
testimony of it in himself, by making his moan; O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom; would God I had dyed for thee; O Absalom, my son, my
son: that now it seems, Gods pity is matched; and this example reaches
home, to express the greatness of Gods pity to the full: No my soul, it is
too short yet: for though the pity of a Father may reach to be willing to dye
for his Child, yet Gods pity reaches further; not only to be willing to dye,
but to dye indeed: and not only for a Child, but for his Enemies; for when we
were enemies, even then did Christ very God dye for us: that Gods pity holds
the supremacy still, and cannot indeed be matched; alas, it cannot be expressed
by any thing that is in man.

But though there may be comparison in the tenderness of their pitties, yet in
the ability there can be none; for a Father pitties oftentimes a child, when
he cannot help him: but Gods pity, is always active and powerful, and never
without releeving: that though it be commonly said; It is better to be envied,
then pitied: yet here it is not so: but it is a far happier thing, to be
pitied of God, then to be envied of men.

But whom is it that God pitties? only them that fear him; and indeed Fear
is a thing that deserves to be pitied: for it makes the joints to tremble, and
puts the spirits in amazement. But O my soul, it is not such a Fear that is
here meant; but this Fear is all one, I may say with love, and differs but in
the Object: for looking upon Gods Justice we fear him: and looking upon his
Mercy we love him: although we love him for his Justice too, and we fear
him for his Mercy too: for as there is Mercy with him, that he may be
feared; so there is Justice with him that he may be loved.

But why is it, that God pitties them that fear him? Indeed he has cause
enough to For he considers of what we are framed; He remembers that we are
but dust: and alas, what is there in dust to help it self, if God in mercy
take not pity upon it? When God looks down upon us, and sees how foul we
are grown, whom he Created clean: has he not cause to fall a chiding, and
to be angry, yet when he considers of what we are framed, and that we are but
dust; this is some cause again, to make him leave his chiding, and not to
keep his anger for ever; that we may truly say, Our miseries are our
happiness: for if it be our misery, that we are framed of so mean a matter
as Dust; It is our happiness, that we have the meannesse of our matter, for
God to take into his consideration, and perhaps this was it; at least one
circumstance that made so ill for the Angels that fell, that God could find no
excuse of their sin in their matter; the more he considered of what they
were framed, the more he found he had cause to be angry; and therefore no
marvel, if his anger to them continue for ever.

But this is every ones case to be framed of Dust; and why then should God
pity some, more then others, seeing they be equally of Dust, All? Is it not,
that he is the less angry indeed, for that they are but Dust; but yet he
pitties them not, for being Dust; but for being Dust, and fearing him: for if
they fear him not, he never pitties them, but lets them go on in their Pride,
at least in their security, and make what they can of their Dust: for they
reckon upon great matters from their Dust, and think they can improve it to a
great height: but alas, what can they make of it, but to come to be grass, at
most to get up to be a flower, a poor fading thing, that whether bosom: Alas,
it is scarce thought worthy to have a place upon the dunghill. And indeed what
could more be looked for of Dust? being so light a thing as it is; that if the
wind but pass over it; if you but blow upon it, it is presently scattered and
gone; and the place where it was, will know it no more. And such is Man: his
flourishing is but as a Flower, as quickly withered as a Flower, and as soon
cropped off from his stalk as a Flower: and alas, what good is in a flourishing,
that ends in a withering? What happiness in pleasures that have no
continuance? O my soul, if thou were thy self a transitory thing, and were
not to continue; thou might justly then look after transitory pleasures,
and such as have no continuance: but seeing thou art a substance perpetual,
and immortal: O therefore look after pleasures like thy self; pleasures that
may last, and never come to the last, that may last and be durable: and not
leave thee to the misery of Fuit Ilium, and ingens gloria teucrorum: for
Fuisse foelicem miserrimum est: To have been happy, and not to be; to have
flourished, and now to be withered, is the greatest misery in the world. And
the greater, for that once plucked off from his stalk; Once taken from the
Earth, the Earth will never know him any more; Alas, it will scarce take
notice, that ever such a one there was; and the specie neither; not in
Individuo; some perhaps as of a man; None, as of this man: or rather, some, as
of a Name; None, as of a man. Or is it rather, that Man turned once to Dust,
his place will know him no more; for how should it know one from another, when
they are all so like? How know Dives from Lazarus, when they have both the same
face? seeing Death has but one copy to draw all her pictures by. Or is it
rather that Man once turned to Dust, is blown about with every wind, from
place to place; and what knows the place, when Dust falls upon it; whether it
be the Dust of a Prince, or of a Peasant; whether of a Man, or of a Beast? And
must not Man then be needs very miserable; when Time, and place, the two best
helps of life do both forsake him? for what help can he have of Time, when
his days are but as Grass? What help of Place, when his place denies him, and
will not know him? But O how vain a thing is Man, to forget not only the very
matter of which he is made, but the very condition under which he is made: and
so to forget it, that God must be feign to remember him of it: but much the
vainer, that being remembered of it never so often, yet he regards it never the
more, but contenting himself to be fading grass, at most a fading flower;
never seeks to improve his Dust, to that true solidnesse, which nothing but
the fear of God is able to procure, nothing but the pity in God is able to
effect.

But now at last, if neither the Distances of Place, nor the Affection of
Nature can make you sufficiently conceive the greatness of Gods mercy: then
take an expressing in plain terms; and this will certainly make you conceive
it: For his mercy is from everlasting, It is from everlasting, for it began to
be before the Foundations of the world were laid: and it is to everlasting; for
it will continue to be, when the Frame of the World shall be dissolved: that
now, O my soul, there can be no fear of the greatness of Gods mercy: all
the fear now, is of thine own fear: for although Et natis natorum, and qui
nascentur ab illis: to thy whole Posterity: O my soul, what an Inheritance is
this, to purchase to our children? at least if it be not an absolute
Inheritance; yet it is so sure an Entayle, that nothing but the want of fearing
God, can cut it off.

And indeed, why else has God prepared Yet his kingdom rules over all: Over
All, both Man, and Beast; both the Godly, and the Wicked; both blessed Angels,
and damned Spirits; and because his Kingdom rules over all, therefore All
shall serve him, and shall serve him indeed with fear, yet there shall be a
difference, for the godly shall serve him with fear and joy, where the wicked
shall serve him with fear and trembling.

And now, seeing God has prepared his Throne in heaven; Therefore, O ye his
Angels, inhabitants of Heaven, that obey his Commandments by the freedom of
your will; Do you begin first, and praise his Name: for you excel in
strength, and are best able to do it. And seeing his Kingdom rules overall:
Therefore all ye his Hosts, his other Creatures that obey his Commandment too,
though not by will, yet by instinct: Do you second the Angels in praising his
Name. And then thou my soul, that partakest of both the Natures; Do thou
also, and with thee also, the Souls of all the godly join with them in his
Praises: that so at least there may be a Consort of Three, to Bless and
Praise him, who is a Trinity in Unity; Three Persons and one God, to be
Blessed, and praised, for ever, and ever; But to be blessed and praised, as by
all the persons of his Kingdom, so in all the places of his Dominion: which
are Heaven, and Earth, and Hell: a Triplicitie too: for even Hell is a place
within his Dominion: And for praising him in Heaven, the Angels will be sure
enough to look to that: and for praising him in Hell, let the wicked and the
damned spirits look to that at their peril: but for praising him on Earth;
Thou my soul, and the souls of all the godly will undertake to do that, at
least will pray continually to him that sits upon the Throne, to be enabled
to do it: and when all these shall fail, or lest they should fail, when
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, when Time and Place shall be no more: yet
his Praise shall be continued still, by his own Works, which are his Glory,
and his Power; his Infiniteness, and his Eternity; but above all, which is
above all his Works, the Works of his infinite, and Everlasting Mercy.

THE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH PSALM OF DAVID.
1 I Love the Lord: because he has heard my voice, and my supplication.

2 Because he has inclined his ear unto me; therefore will I call upon him,
as long as I live.

3 The sorrows of death compassed me; and the pains of hell got hold upon
me: I found trouble and sorrow.

4 Then called I upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my
soul.

5 The Lord is gracious, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.

6 The Lord preserves the simple; I was brought low, and he helped me.

7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

8 For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

9 I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

10 I believed, therefore have I spoken; I was greatly afflicted.

11 I said in my have; All men are liars.

12 What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits toward me?

13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord; in the presence of all his people.

15 Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

16 O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant and the son of thy
handmaid; thou have loosed my bonds.

17 I will offer to thee, the sacrifice of thanksgiving; and will call upon
the Name of the Lord.

18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all his people.

19 In the Courts of the Lords House: in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem;
praise ye the Lord.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE CXVI. PSALM OF DAVID.
BUt how can David say I will love the Lord: as though it were in his own
power to love whom he list? Indeed nothing is so voluntary as love, that it
seems to be the extremity of the will: for then we are said to love a thing,
when the will is inclined, and violently bent upon it: and yet I know not how,
there seems nothing more constrained then love; for we oftentimes love a
thing, which we would feign we could forbear to love; but that we are drawn
to love it, by a kind of violence in the object: and therefore David may well
say; I will love the Lord: seeing both the causes of love are here met, a
propension in the Will, and an excellency in the Object.

Man indeed is naturally a loving Creature, but does not always place his love
aright: his love is then best placed, when it is placed upon the best Object;
and what is that best Object, but God? If he place it upon Beauty, that fades:
If upon Riches, they perish: If upon Honor, that vanishes: If upon life, that
wastes: but all these are in God, not only in Eminency, but in Continuance:
In him is Beauty that never fades: in him Riches that never perish; in him
Honor that never vanishes; in him life, that never wastes; and therefore as
the truest object of love, as the dearest object of my love; I will love the
Lord.

But though all these Eminencies be in God, yet they would be no cause for man
to love him, if they had not a relation to man: for what cause of love? where
there can be expected no effects of love: but seeing there is in them, not
only a Relation, but a Propension; not only they are ready to be imparted,
but are imparted with readiness; what man is he that will forbear to say,
that can forbear to say; I love the Lord? And if all men will forbear to say
it, yet I will say it: For he has heard my voice, and my supplication. No
doubt a just cause, or rather (indeed to a natural man) the only cause for
loving of God. For of fearing him, of praising him, of worshipping him, of
magnifying him, there are other causes; but of loving him, no cause so proper
as his loving of us: and the Benefits which he bestows upon us. For, love is
so reciprocal a thing, that we should hardly love God himself, but for his
Love to us; at least for our opinion of his love to us; and we should hardly
have an opinion of his love, if we had not a feeling of his Benefits: For what
love can we think is borne us by them, that are able to do us good, and do
it not? but when we have a feeling of their benefits, and find they do us
good; then we are easily persuaded of their love; and being so persuaded, who
can choose but say, as David does here; I love the Lord for he has heard my
voice, and my supplication?

But do we love God, but for his Benefits only? and if it were not for his
Benefits, should we not love him? Indeed to love God as we ought, is not to
love him for ought, but for himself only, without any consideration had at
all of his Benefits: but such lovers we are of our own good, that we should
scarce love our selves, but for the good, we are ready to do our selves: and
if we love God in the like degree, we think it perhaps to be love enough for
him. But, O my soul, this is just the Devils love; I mean such love, as the
Devil thought to be in Job; Does Job love God for naught? He hoped he did not,
though he knew he should; and therefore was never in quiet, till it might be
tried; and if he had found it so, he would quickly have made Job leave loving
of God, and fall to loving of him. But the hedge which God had set about Job,
was not a hedge of prosperity as Satan supposed, but a hedge of Grace, and
therefore with all his fiery trials, he could never get other words from Job
but such as these; Shall we receive good at Gods hands, and shall we not
receive evil? Yes, O Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I love thee: Thus
Job did, and thus should we do: but God knows, there is not such a man again
as Job was upon the face of the earth. For alas, we are commonly but of the
Classis or form, of which Saint John speaks; We love God, because God loved
us first: and it were well if we would do but so: how much soever Satan
slights it, and seeks to disgrace it. Or is it perhaps, that David speaks in
the curiosity of this distinction, that we do not Amare Deum, but for his
Benefits: but we may Diligere Deum, without any consideration of his Benefits
had at all; and in this sense, a natural man may Amare Deum: but none but the
spiritual man, Diligere Deum. But, O my soul, do thou endeavor to be of Jobs
form; to love God without distinction; and whether he hear thy voice, or
hear it not; whether he grant thy supplication, or grant it not, yet to love
him, and to love with Amando, and with Diligendo; and with any another Devotion
of love, that can be expressed, or conceived. For it is indeed no true love of
God, if we love him for any thing, but for himself; if we love our selves,
but only for him: as it seems both Moses, and Saint Paul did, who for the
love of God, left all care of themselves, and were contented to have been (if
they might have been) even Anathema's.

But is this such a Benefit to us, that GOD hears us? Is his hearing our
voice, such an argument of his love? Alas! he may hear us, and we never the
better: he may hear our voice, and yet his love to us perhaps but little, for
who will not give a man the hearing, though he love him not at all? With men
perhaps it may be so, but not with God; for his hearing is not only
voluntary, but reserved; Non omnibus dormit: his Ears are not open to every
ones cry; indeed to hear us, is in God so great a favor, that he may well be
counted his Favorite, whom he vouchsafes to hear: and the rather, for that
his hearing is always operative, and with a purpose of helping; that if he
hear my voice, I may be sure, he means to grant my supplication; or rather
perhaps in David's manner of expressing, in Gods manner of proceeding, to hear
my voice, is no less in effect, then to grant my supplication.

And now because he has inclined his ear to hear me; I will therefore call
upon him, as long as I live: that if it be expected I should call upon any
other; it must be when I am dead; for as long as I live, I have vowed to call
upon God. But will this be well done? May I not in so doing, do more then I
shall have thanks for perhaps for my labor? Is this the requital that God
shall have for his kindness in hearing me, that now he shall have a customer
of me, and never be in quiet, for my continual running to him, and calling
upon him? Does God get any thing by my calling upon him, that I should make it
a Vow, as though in calling upon him, I did him a pleasure? O my Soul, that
God might indeed have a customer of me in praying: although I confess I should
not be so bold to call upon him so continually, if his own commanding me, did
not make it a Duty: for has not God bid me to call upon him when I am in
trouble? and is there any time that I am not in trouble, as long as I live in
this vale of misery? and then can there be any time as long as I live, that I
must not call upon him? For shall God bid me, and shall I not do it? shall God
incline his Ear, and stand listening to hear, and shall I hold my peace for
the nonce, that he may have nothing to hear? Or shall I wave calling upon God,
who I know both can, and will hear me; and call upon some other, who I know
not whether they can or no? Is Prayer worth any thing if it be not in Faith?
and can there be Faith, where there is uncertaintie? O my Soul, this is a
great secret, which we should perhaps have never known, if God himself had
not revealed it to us: that to call upon him, is not a trouble to him, but a
pleasure; not in us a presumption, but a duty: though it be our suite, yet it
is his service: it is indeed both our suite and service: and though his glory
be not the more by it, yet his glory is the more manifested by it; and as he is
a jealous God, so of nothing so much as of his glory, his glory he will not
communicate with any other, any thing else perhaps, but not his glory: and this
is all the glory he can have from us, that we acknowledge our own weakness,
and his Power; that we call upon him, not only as one that is able to help
us, but as the only One that is able to help us, for else we satisfy not his
jealousy: and if it be a true rule in Philosophy; Frustra fit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora: It is no less true in Divinity: It is in vain to
call upon any other for relief but God alone; if God alone be able, and
willing to relieve us. Either therefore we must say, that God is not able, or
not willing to help us; or else confess it at least a great vanity to call
for help to any other.

But if Gods benefits be the Motive to love him: why are not his afflictions as
well a Motive, not to love him? For is there any evil in the City, and God
has not done it? No my soul, the reason is not like: his benefits are all
gratuitous, and come gratis from him: his Afflictions are as it were violent,
and come forcibly from him: his Afflictions are punishments, or chastisements
duly deserved: but his Benefits are not Wages, or Rewards that are justly
merited: and therefore we cannot so justly say, that crosses and afflictions
are cast upon us by God, as that they are drawn upon us by our own sin: for
sorrows and pains, are as the Echoes I may say of sin: and according as
this calls, so they answer: if sins be but light, there is like to be heard,
but a light reflexe of sorrows; but if they be crying sins, heinous, and
loud: what marvel if the Echoes be answerable, and that the sorrows of
Death compass us about, and the pains of Hell take hold upon us?

But if it be doubted, by what means afflictions and crosses do happen to us,
yet it cannot be doubted by what means they must be removed from us: seeing
there is none able to roll away the Gravestone of our sins, but only God:
and therefore no means to remove afflictions, but only his Mercy: and no
means of this means, but to call upon him. Do Physicians use to come to a
Patient, unless they be called? and why then should we look that God the
great Physician of our souls, should come to help us, if we call not upon
him? Upon him, O my soul, and upon no other: for of his Power and Will to
help me, I cannot doubt, of others I may: For, the and can I doubt of his
power, that has delivered me from these? Or can I think of any other, that
could deliver me from these, but only he? Could any deliver me from the
sorrows of Death, but he only who triumphed over Death? Could any free me
from the pains of Hell, but he only who put Hell it self to pain, and cast
Death and Hell into the Lake of fire? and shall I call upon any other to
deliver me, but upon him only, who I am well assured is able to deliver me? No
my soul, but to leave no time, for calling upon any other; I will call upon
God, as long as I live: Not for a day, or a month, but all the days of my
life; even as long as I live. And how long will that be? Alas! how long can it
be; seeing the sorrows of Death have already compassed me about; and the
pains of hell have taken hold upon me? For what are the sorrows of Death,
but sorrows like those of Rachel, that would not be comforted, because they
were not? What are the pains of Hell, but pains caused by guiltiness of sin
that deserves Hell? Pains not more in sense of torment, then despair of
remedy? What is it for the sorrows of death to compass me about, but as it
were to besiege me? and was it ever known, where they once besieged, that ever
they did raise their siege? Was it ever known, where the pains of Hell did
once take hold, that ever they did let go their hold? and alas, in this
extremity of distress, in this gulf of despair, what hope could David
possibly have, that ever he should be delivered? O my soul, the hope of
Abraham: In spe contra spem credidit: He believed against all credibilitie;
He hoped against all possibility; against all possibility indeed in the
course of nature; against all credibilitie in the eye of Reason; and therefore
he makes his moan to one above the reach, both of Nature and Reason; O Lord, I
beseech thee, deliver my soul: a short Prayer for so great a suite; and yet as
short as it was, it prevailed, that if we wondered before at the power of God,
we may wonder now at the power of Prayer, that can prevail with God, for
obtaining of that, which in Nature is impossible, and to Reason seems
incredible.

There are many short Prayers recorded in the Scriptures, of which we may note
especially three: This of David here; O Lord deliver my soul: and that of the
Publican in the Gospel; Lord be merciful to me a sinner: and that of the
Thief upon the Cross; Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom:
All three short, yet all three Prevalent; that we may know, it is not the
multiplicitie of words, or the length of Prayers that prevails with God; but
the fervencie of spirit, and the devotion of the heart. Yet lest it should be
taken as a restraint of longer prayers; and specially, lest it should be a
scandal to the Prayer which Christ taught us, and is much longer: we may
observe withal, that each of these prayers, is but of one Petition in Christ's
Prayer: For to say, O Lord, deliver my soul, is no more, nor fully so much, as
to say, Deliver us from evil: and to say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, is
no more, nor fully so much, as to say; Forgive us our trespasses: and to say,
Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom; is no more, nor so
much, as to say, Thy kindome come.

But seeing David with his short Prayer, prevailed with God, to deliver his
soul: why should I despair of the like success of my prayers, to be
delivered from my troubles? O my soul, I should not despair of the like
success, as David had, if I could but pray with the like spirit as David did:
O therefore, thou great God, that did inspire David's heart with a spirit of
zeal: which made his prayers not only acceptable, but effectual: vouchsafe
also to kindle in my heart, a fire of Devotion, that my prayers may ascend unto
thee, like the sacrifice of Abell: so acceptable, that they may be accepted; so
accepted, that they may be effectual: and may make me able to sing this
Allelujah of David: I will love the Lord; for he has heard my voice, and my
supplication.

And now, O my soul, me thinks I see the Lord, as it were inclining his ear
unto me; and I seem to feel an access of force in my confidence the Lord is
gracious, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful: He is gracious in hearing;
He is righteous in judging; he is merciful in Pardoning; and how then can I
doubt of his will to help me? He is righteous to reward according to deserts;
He is gracious to Reward above deserts; Yea, he is merciful to reward without
deserts; and how then can I doubt of his Will to help me? He is gracious,
and this shows his bounty; he is righteous, and this shows his Justice; Yea,
he is merciful, and this shows his love, and how then can I doubt of his Will
to help me? If he were not gracious, I could not hope he would hear me: If
he were not righteous, I could not depend upon his Promise; If he were not
Merciful, I could not expect his Pardon; but now that he is gracious, and
righteous, yea, and merciful too, how can I doubt of his Will to help me?

But are there no others that are gracious, and righteous, and merciful, as
well as He? Are not the Saints, and Angels in Heaven? They are so no doubt,
but not as well as he; God forbid, we should once have such a thought; They
are Gracious, and Righteous, and Merciful by participation only; and only by
having, as it were, some beams imparted to them: but to be gracious, as the
Fountain of Grace; to be Righteous, as the Sun of Righteousness: to be
Merciful, as the Author of Mercy; there is none, there is none at all,
neither Saint nor Angel that is so, but only God; and therefore of Gods Power
and Will to help me; of his, and of his only, I can only be assured. And if
I err in simplicity, yet the Lord preserves the simple: he takes Uzzah have
been preserved: but in matters obscure, and not plainly revealed, there to
serve God in simplicity of heart; this falls within the compass of Gods
mercy: and such he takes into his Protection. He gives them perhaps some
resentment of their errors by worldly crosses, but yet he denies them not his
assistance; and this I can speak of my own experience; For, I was brought
low, and yet he helped me: I was brought low, and in trouble, by the just
provocation of my sins; but because I sinned not in presumption, but in
simplicity, at least by infirmity; the Lord has had mercy on me, and
preserved me. Or, I was brought low, and he helped me: for then is the time
of help, when we are brought low: and therefore God who does all things in due
time; when I was brought low, then he helped me. Wherefore, O my soul, let it
never trouble thee, how low soever thou be brought; for when thy state is at
the lowest, then is Gods assistance at the nearest; that we may truly say, Gods
ways, are not as the ways of the world: for in the world, when a man is once
brought low, he is commonly trampled upon; and nothing is heard then, but down
with him, down to the ground: but with God, it is otherwise; for his property
is to raise up them that fall, and when they are brought low, then to help
them. That it is no such hard case for a man to be brought low; may I not
rather say, his case is happy? for is it not better to be brought low, and have
God to help him, then to be set aloft, and left to help himself? At least, O
my Body; this may be a comfort to thee: for thou art sure to be brought low,
as low as the Grave, which is low indeed: yet there thou may rest in hope;
for even there, the Lord will not leave to help thee.

Or is it that he was brought low, was humbled in spirit, to seem vile in his
own eyes; and then God helped him? For God resists the proud; but gives
grace to the humble.

O my soul, return to thy rest; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee: Now my soul, let it be no longer said; Why art thou so heavy, and why
art thou disquieted within me? For the Lord has exceeded the bounds of
mercifulness, with his bountifulness: Not only in mercy he has forgiven my
sins, but as if my sins had been Merits, he has made me also to taste of
his bounty. He has dealt indeed most bountifully with thee, for where thou
did make suite but for one thing, he has granted thee three: Thou did
ask but to have my soul delivered; and he has delivered mine eyes, and my
feet besides: and with a deliverance in each of them, the greatest that could
be: for what greater deliverance to my soul, then to be delivered from Death?
What greater deliverance to mine eyes, then to be delivered from tears? What,
to my feet then to be delivered from falling? that if now, O my soul, thou
return not to thy rest, thou will show thy self to be most insatiable:
seeing thou have not only more then thou did ask, but as much indeed as was
possible to be asked.

But can my soul dye? and if not, what bounty is it then to deliver my soul
from that to which it is not subject? The soul indeed, though immortal, has
yet her ways of dying: It is one kind of death to the soul, to be parted
from the body, but the truest kind is to be parted from God: and from both
these kinds of death, he has delivered my soul: From the first, by
delivering me from a dangerous sickness, that threatened a dissolution of my
soul and body: from the other, by delivering me from the guilt of sin, that
threatened a separation from the favor of God; and are not these, bounties to
give my soul just cause of returning to her rest? It is true, it is the
imperfection of life, that it is subject to sickness, and sickness draws
mortality after it: but this imperfection is not here; for he has delivered
my soul from death; and what is this, but to have perfect health? yet it is
the imperfection of health, that it is subject to crosses, and crosses are a
cause of tears: but neither has this imperfection any place here, for he has
delivered mine eyes from tears; and what is this, but to have perfect Joy? yet
it is the imperfection of joy, that it uses not to continue; as it is said of
the prosperity of the wicked: They are set in slipperie places, and are apt to
fall: but neither is this imperfection found here; for he has delivered my
feet from falling: and what is this but to be assured of continuance? If then
thou have such health, such joy, such stabilitie; Health, not subject to
sickness; Joy, not capable of sorrow; Stabilitie, not obnoxious to falling:
How can thou, O my soul; how can thou choose but pacify thy unquietness,
and return to thy rest? But alas, the rest thou can return to now, is but a
type of that true Rest, when thou shall rest from thy labors; and when thy
works that now go with thee, shall then follow thee. Thou have now but one
day of Rest for six days of labor; but then thou shall have an eternal
Sabbath, without any days of labor to disquiet it.

But though this rest cannot now be had, whilst thou dwell in a restless
body, and thy body in a restless world: yet there is a Rest that is worth the
having; and may only, my soul, be called Thy Rest: the rest which consists in
the peace of conscience: and to this rest thou may well return, seeing not
only thou art at peace with God, as being justified by his Grace; but thou art
in his favor also, as having dealt so bountifully with thee. And when thou
returnest to this rest; to the end thou may have some exercise to thy rest,
that thy resting make thee not restiffe, I will walk For now that my feet are
delivered from falling, how can I better employ them, then in walking? were
they delivered from falling, to the end they should stand still and be idle?
No my soul, but to encourage me to walk: and where is so good walking, as in
the land of the living? Alas! what walking is it in the Winter, when all things
seem dead, when the very grass lies buried under ground, and scarce any thing
that has life in it, to be seen? but then is the pleasant walking, when
Nature spreads her green Carpet to walk upon, and then it is a Land of the
living, when the Trees show they live, by bringing forth, if not fruits, at
least leaves: when the Valleys show they live, by bringing forth, if not sweet
flowers to delight the smell, at least fresh grass to please the eyes. But is
this the walking in the Land of the living, that David means? O my soul, to
walk in the Land of the living, is to walk in the paths of Righteousness:
for there is no such death to the soul as sin; no such cause of tears to
the eyes, as guiltiness of Conscience; No such falling of the feet, as to fall
from God: and therefore to say the truth, the Soul can never return to its
rest, if we walk not withal in the paths of righteousness: and we cannot
well say, whether this Rest be a cause of the walk; or the walking, be a
cause of the resting: but this we may say, they are certainly companions one
to the other, which is in effect but this; that Justification can never be
without Sanctification; Peace of conscience, and godliness of life, can never
be one without the other. Or is it perhaps, that David means that Land of the
living; where Enoch and Elias are living, with the living God? but if he mean
so, how can he speak so confidently, I will walk in the Land of the living;
as though he could come to walk there by his own strength, or at his own
pleasure? He therefore gives his reason: I believed, and therefore I spoke:
for the voice of Faith is strong, and speaks with confidence; and because in
Faith he believed, that he shall come, to walk in the Land of the living;
therefore with confidence he speaks it; I will walk in the land of the
living: and perhaps to signify, that he shall not walk there against his
will: but that he endeavors, and uses the best means he can, that he may
walk there. For indeed if we endeavor not to walk here, with Enoch and Elias
in the paths of righteousness, we shall never come to walk with God in the
Land of the living.

But though I had spoken thus, and thus confidently; yet I found my self in
trouble, and affliction still, which made me say in my have; All men are liars.
In my have indeed, for I

It seems, that to give the lie, was not so heinous an offense in David's time,
as it is in these days, for else how durst he have spoken such words, that all
men are liars: which is no less, then to give the lie to the whole world? And
yet, no man I think, will challenge him for saying so; no more then challenge
S. John for saying, that All men are sinners. And indeed, how should any man
avoid being a liar, seeing the very being Man, is it self a lie? Not only a
Vanity, and put in the balance is less then vanity: but a very lie, promising
great matters, and is able to do just nothing, as Christ says; Without me,
ye can do nothing: and so Christ seems to come in, as it were, to be David's
second; and to make his word good, that all men be liars. And now let the world
do its worst, and take the lie how it will; for David having Christ of his
side, will always be able to make his part good against all the world, for
Christ has overcome the world.

But though all men may be said to be liars, yet not all men in all things: for
then David himself should be a liar in this: but all men perhaps in something
or other, at sometime or other, in some kind or other; Absolute truth not found
in any man, but in that man only, who was not man only; for if he had been
but so, it had not perhaps been found in him neither, seeing absolute Truth
and Deity, are as Relatives never found to be asunder.

But in what thing is it, that all men should be liars? Indeed in this for one;
to think that God regards not, nor loves not them, whom he suffers to be
afflicted: for we may rather think he loves them most, whom he suffers to be
most afflicted: and we may truly say, he would never have suffered his servant
Job, to be afflicted so exceeding cruelly, if he had not loved him exceeding
tenderly; For there is nothing lost by suffering afflictions; No my soul, they
do but serve to make up the greater weight of glory, when it shall be revealed.

But let his afflictions be what they can be, yet I will always acknowledge,
they can never be in any degree so great as his benefits: and oh, that I could
think of something, that I for shall I receive so great, so infinite benefits
from him; and shall I render nothing to him, by way of gratefulness? But alas,
what have I to render? all my rendering to him, will be but taking more from
him: for all I can do, is but to take the cup of salvation, and call upon his
Name; Can ye drink of the cup, of which I shall drink? Indeed he drank of
the Cup of Tribulation, to the end that we might take the Cup of Salvation;
but then in taking it, we must call upon his Name; upon his Name, and upon no
others; for else we shall make it a cup of Condemnation, seeing there is no
Name under Heaven, in which we may be saved, but only the Name of Jesus.

Yet it may be some rendering to the Lord, if I pay my Vows; and do, as it
were, my Penance openly; I will therefore pay my vows to But might he not pay
his Vows as well in his Closet, between God and himself, as to do it
publicly? No my soul, it serves not his turn; indeed not Gods turn, but he
must pay them in the presence of all his people; yet not to the end he should
be applauded for a just Payer; for though he pay them, yet he can never pay
them to the full; but to the end that men seeing his good works, may glorify
God by his example; and the rather perhaps, for that David was a King; and the
Kings example prevails much with the people, to make them pay their vows to
God: but most of all, that by this means, David's Piety may not be barren; but
may make a Breed of Piety in the people also: which may be one mystical
reason, why it was counted a Curse in Israel, to be barren; for he that pays
not his Vows to God, in the presence of his people, may well be said to be
barren in Israel; seeing he begets no children to God, by his Example. And
perhaps also, the Vows which David means here, was the doing of some mean
things, unfit in show for the dignity of a King; as when it was thought a base
thing in him to Dance before the Arc; he then vowed he would be baser yet:
and in this case, to pay his Vows before the people, becomes a matter of
necessity: for as there is no honor to a man, whilst he is by himself alone;
so there is no shame to a man, but before people: and therefore to show that he
is not ashamed to do any thing how mean soever, so it may tend to the
glorifying of God; He will pay his vows in the presence of all his people:
And he will do it, though it cost him his life, for if he dye for it, he
knows, that Precious in the sight of the Lord,

But that which is precious, is commonly desired: and does God then desire the
death of his Saints? He desires, no doubt, that death of his Saints, which is
to dye to sin: but for any other death of his Saints, it is therefore said to
be precious in his sight, because he lays it up with the greater
carfulness. And for this it is, there are such several Mansions in Gods
House, that to them whose death is precious in his sight, he may assign the
most glorious Mansions. This indeed is the reward of Martyrdom, and the
encouragement of Martyrs, though their sufferings be most insufferable, their
tortures most intolerable; yet this makes amends for all; that Precious in the
sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints: for if it be so great a
happiness, to be acceptable in his sight; how great a happiness must it be,
to be precious in his sight? When God at the Creation, looked upon all his
works; it is said, he saw them to be all exceeding good: but it is not said,
that any of them were Precious in his sight, and how then comes Death, to be
precious in his sight, that was none of his works, but is a destroyer of his
works? Is it possible that a thing which destroys his creatures, should have
a Title of more value in his sight, then his creatures themselves? O my soul,
this is one of the Miracles of his Saints, and perhaps one of those which
Christ meant, when he said to his Apostles, that greater Miracles then he did,
they should do themselves: for what greater Miracle than this, that Death
which of it self is a thing most vile in the sight of God, yet once embraced
by his Saints, as it were by their touch only, becomes precious in his sight?
and to alter a thing from being vile to be precious; is it not a greater
Miracle, then to turn Water into Wine? Indeed so it is, Death does not
damnifie his Saints, but his Saints do dignifie Death: Death takes nothing
away from his Saints happiness, but his Saints add luster to Deaths
vileness: and it is happy for Death, that ever it met with any of Gods Saints;
for there was no way for it else in the world, to be ever had in any account.
But why say I, in the world? for it is of no account in the world for all this:
It is but only in the sight of God; but indeed this only, is All in All; for
to be precious in Gods sight, is more to be prized then the world it self. For
when the World shall pass away, and all the glory of it be laid in the dust;
then shall Trophyes be erected for the death of his Saints: and when all
Monuments of the world shall be utterly defaced, and all Records quite rased
out; yet the death of his Saints shall stand Registered still, in fair Red
letters in the Calendar of Heaven: for if there be glory laid up for them that
dye in the Lord; much more shall they be glorified, that dye for the Lord.

I have wondered oftentimes, why God will suffer his Saints to dye; I mean
not the death natural; for I know, Statutum est omnibus semel mori: but the
Death that is by violence, and with torture: for who could endure to see them
he loves, so cruelly handled? but now I see the reason of it; For, Precious in
the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints: and what marvel then, if he
suffer his Saints to dye: when by dying they are wrought, and made fit Jewels
to be set in his Cavinet: for as God has a Bottle which he fills up with the
tears of his Saints; so I may say, he has a Cabinet which he decks up with
the deaths of his Saints: and O my soul, if thou could but comprehend, what
a glory it is to serve for a Jewel in the decking up of Gods Cabinet; thou
would never wonder why he suffers his Saints to be put to death, though with
never so great torments: for it is but the same which Saint Paul says: The
afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed.

But if you will have a Glass to view the Extent of this pretiousnesse; and
plainly to see, how precious in the sight of God, the death of his Saints is;
then look upon the revenge that is taken for it: for there is nothing that God
takes so much to heart; and of which he takes so sharp revenge, as the death
of his Saints: to touch them, is to touch the Apple of his eye: and if the
punishment of Cain be not thought sufficient, to make it appear; at least the
complaint of Christ against Jerusalem, will be sufficient: O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem; Thou that killest the Prophets: and it is thought by some, that the
destruction of Jerusalem was the rather hastened, to revenge the death of
James, who was called the Just: but how soever, this we know, it was therefore
executed, to revenge the death of Jesus, who was truly the Just: and may we not
well take notice, that the death was exceeding precious; when the revenge that
was taken, was so exceeding furious? But why speak I of Death, when I may yet
do God good service in life: and if the death of his Saints be precious in his
sight, certainly the life of his servants is not unregarded; For whether we
dye, we dye to the Lord; or whether we live, we live to the Lord: and though
in this life, we cannot expect the reward of Saints; yet in this life we may
claim the respect of servants: and in this I claim an interest my self; for
truly, O Lord, I am thy servant: and oh that I could serve thee so truly, that
I might hear thee say; Euge bone serve: For we are all very ready to profess
our selves thy servants; but very unready to do the service of our profession:
and specially in these times, when Servant is grown to be a word of
complyment, rather than of truth; that to say, I am thy servant, is all one as
to say, I am an Hypocrite: But, O Lord, let it not be found so in me; not be
thought so of me, for I am thy servant by a double right: (and oh that I could
do thee double service) as thou art the Lord of life, and as I am the son of
thy Handmaid: Not of Hagar, but of Sarah: not of the Bondwoman, but of the
Free; and therefore I serve thee not in Fear, but in Love: or therefore in
fear, because in love: and then is service best done, when it is done in love:
and in love indeed I am bound to serve thee; For, thou have loosed my bonds:
the Bonds of death which compassed me about, by delivering me from a dangerous
sickness, and restoring me to health: or in a higher kind; Thou have loosed my
Bonds, by freeing me from being a Captive, to be a Servant; and which is more,
from being a servant to be a son: and more then this yet, from being a son
of thy Handmaid, to be a son of thy self: and therefore indeed a son of
thy self, because a son of thy Handmaid: for what is thy Handmaid, but thy
Church? and he that is not borne of this Handmaid, though he may have the
general benefit of a servant, sustenance and protection, yet he can never
have the special benefits of a son, freedom, and inheritance.

Or thou have loosed my bonds; Thou have freed me from the heavy yoke of the
Ceremonies of the Law; and have Enfranchised me with the glorious liberty of
the Gospel: that where before, thou did require the sacrifice of Servants,
which was the blood of Beasts; now thou acceptest the sacrifice of sons,
which is I will therefore offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and
call upon thy Name: For Prayer and Thanksgiving make both but one Sacrifice:
and seeing all sacrifice is due only to thee; therefore to thee only I will
offer both my Thanksgiving, and my Prayer. I could not make Thankes-giving a
Sacrifice, if Prayer did not begin it: I could not make Prayer a Sacrifice, if
Thanksgiving did not finish it. If there should be Thankes-giving, and no
Prayer, the Sacrifice would want a foot: if Prayer, and no Thanksgiving, it
would want a Head: for as the Basis is Prayer; so the Coronis is thanksgiving.
Although perhaps Thanksgiving be but the Act, and Thankfulness the Habit:
and it is the Habit that makes the Sacrifice, because it must be, Juge
sacrificium, A continual Sacrifice: which the Act cannot be. And if there had
been a word to express the Habit of praying, as Thankfulness does of
Thanksgiving: perhaps Saint Paul would have used it, where he says, Pray
continually, for who can doubt but he means the Habit of praying, and not the
Act? and where he says; In all things give thanks; (...): It intends perhaps
but this; In all things be thankful.

And what then shall the Thankfulness, or the Thanksgiving be, that I will
offer to God for a sacrifice? O my soul, it shall be an acknowledging of his
benefits, and of his only benefits; it shall be a proclaiming him to be my
Patron, and my only Patron; It shall be an extolling him for his Mercy in
forgiving my sins; for his graciousnesse in healing all my infirmities; for
his compassion, in Redeeming my soul from destruction, and for his bounty in
crowning me with loving kindness and tender mercies: it shall be indeed a
Vowing to him the whole service of all the faculties of my soul and body. And
not to be done in a corner, as though I were not willing it should be known;
nor before some few people only, as though I were loath too many should see
it; but I will pay my vows to him in that young and old, rich, and poor,
high, and low, may all be witnesses of my thankfulness; This, for the persons
before whom it shall be done: and then for the place in which it shall be done;
it shall be done in the courts of the Lords house: if any in the midst of thee,
O Jerusalem: that the Fame of it may be spread, that the sound of it may
equally go forth into all parts of the world; that as all thy people shall be
beholders of my thankfulness, so all the world shall be admirers of thy
goodness; and as there is in Heaven an Allelujah of thy Saints; so there shall
be in Earth an Allelujah of thy Servants; of which Number; of both which
numbers, my hope is to be one; and that I may be sure to be one, O my soul,
praise thou the Lord: and because my own praising, will be but a very small
service; therefore mend it my soul, by calling upon others, and saying; Praise
ye the Lord.

FINIS.

