MAMILLIA.

The second part of the triumph of Pallas: WHEREIN WITH PERPETVAL fame the
constancy of Gentlewomen is canonised, and the unjust blasphemies of women's
supposed fickleness (breathed out by diverse injurious persons) by manifest
examples clearly infringed.

BY ROBERT GREEN Master of Arts, in Cambridge.

LONDON Printed by Th. C. for William Ponsonbie. 1593.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND HIS ESPECIAL friends, Robert Lee and Roger
Portington Esquires, Robert Green wishes health, wealth, and prosperity.
THe Philosopher Hermes (right worshipful) being demanded why continually he
carried the stone Celonites about with him, answered, least happily he might
become unthankful. Meaning hereby that ingratitude is such a loathsome vice in
a liberal mind, and such a monstrous offense so repugnant to nature, that the
forfeit of such a fault can be no less than the extremity of death can
afoord. For the nature of the stone is presently to deprive him of life which
is infected with ingratitude. Which saying of Hermes thoroughly considered, and
calling to mind the innumerable benefits and infinite good turns which I have
received at your worships hands, finding my ability far unfit to requite such
courtesy, I was driven into a doubtful Dilemma, whether excusing my self by
disabilitie I should incur the suspicion of ingratitude, or in offering such
simple stuff my insufficiency could afford, I should be counted impudent.
Staying thus in suspense, I shaked off the shakles with calling to remembrance
the saying of a poor Painter in Sienna, who offering a simple picture to
Charles the second, being a present far unfit for such a Potentate, demanded
how he durst offer such a base gift to so princely a personage. I feared not
(quoth he) in that I knew he was our Emperor, knowing that it was kingly to
accept of a gift though never so simple, and the sign of a worthy mind to
think as well of the poor man's myte as of the rich man's treasure. Artaxerxes
received thankfully the handful of water offered to him by a poor pesant,
Cyrus was presented with a Pomgranat, and Jupiter himself vouchsafed of the
grain of wheat which the poor Pismier offered to him for a new years gift.
Pricked forward (right worshipful) with these examples, I was the more bold to
present this unworthy work as a witness of my unfeigned good will and
affection, assuming so upon your worships wonted courtesies, as I assure my
self you will accept of this my toy be it never such a trifle, and vouchsafe of
my good will though the gift be never so simple: Promising that if hereafter
either my wit or skill shall be able to yield any better fruit, I will
offer it at your worshippes shrine, that all the world may know you are the two
Saints to whom in heart I owe most dutiful devotion. Hoping in the mean time
that you will accept more of my will than of the work, and of my meaning more
than of the matter, I commit your worshippes to the Almighty. From my Study
in Clarehall the vij. of Iulie.

Yours Worships bounden to command, ROBERT GREEN.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS, HEALTH.
ALexander the great (Gentlemen) commanding a certain Embroderer to work him
a most curious carpet, who in deed was so unskillful in his science, as his
work amongst mean men could carry small credit, stayed almost two years
ere the work was performed, and at last presenting that imperfect piece to his
Majesty, Alexander smiled at the folly of the man which would enterprise such
a curious work having so small cunning: and being demanded of his Lords, how
he liked of the carpet, answered, that how bad so ever the work were, he must
needs think it passing curious, because it was so long in working. I fear
Gentlemen to incur the like forfeite with the Embroderer because I have
committed the like offense, for both I shall be appeached of folly for
presuming so far without skill, and condemned of sloth, in that I have been
breeding a Mouse while others would have brought forth an Elephant. And also I
shall fear, if Gentlemen speak well of my work, that they jest with
Alexander, and though they know my want of wit and lack of skill to merit
dispraise, yet they will Ironice say all is well, because it has been so long
in penning. Well (Gentlemen) let Momus mock, and Zoilus envy, let Parasites
flatter, and Sicophants smile, yea, let the savage Satyr himself, whose
cynicall censure is more severe than need, frown at his, pleasure, I hope
honest Gentlemen will make account of Mamillia for her modest constancy,
although she has not the Pumistone of learning to pollish her words with
superficial eloquence: and so (Gentlemen) shrowding her under your courteous
protection, hoping you will think well of my toy, I bid you farewell.

Robert Green.

RICHARD STAPLETON GENTLEMAN, TO THE CVRTEOVS and Courtly Ladies of England.
YE peerless Dames of Pallas crew,
and Britain Ladies all
Addicted to Dianas train
your sacred Nymphs I call,
And vestall virgins whose renoune
shrynes up your lasting name,
Yea all the crew of womankinde,
come hear your passing fame
Displaide abroad with golden trumpe,
which sounds out so shrill,
As that your praise in learned prose,
shall all Europa fill.
See here with sugared happy style,
as in a perfect glass,
He figureth forth how Venus troop,
in loyal faith surpass
The martial brood of Mars his train,
decyphering to their face,
That Pallas Ladies for their faith,
do daunt them with disgrace.
With pen he paints your constancy,
with pen he here displaies,
Your faith, your troath, your loyalty,
and what imports your praise.
And champion like he challenge makes,
with Lady Pallas shield,
To stand in arms against your foes
in open camped field.
He first calls out Euripides
which your reproach assignde,
And challenge makes to Mantuan,
which so blasphemde your kind.
He iars likewise with Iuuenall,
and mazeth Martial quight,
He does profess himself a foe
to all that owe you spite,
And plainly proves by reasons rule
that every Authors clause,
Which rashly railes of womankinde,
comes more of spite than cause.
Since then you peerless Britain Dames,
your Champion here in place
Sounds forth your praise, defends your right,
defies your foes in face:
Repaie such guerdon for his pain,
as he deserves to have,
I mean to shrowde Mamillia safe,
it is that the Author crave,
Your wits and wills, your tongue and talk,
against all those to use,
Which shall like biting Momus brood
his book or him abuse.
RICHARD STAPLETON Gentleman.

MAMILLIA. The Triumph of Pallas.
AFter that Pharicles under the profession of a Pilgrim was parted from the
coasts of Italy, his secret and sudden departure caused all the citizens of
Padua to conjecture diversely of the cause of his journey, but especially it
drove such a doubt into the sorrowful heart of Mamillia, and stroke such a
dump into the musing mind of her father Gonsaga, as it was hard to guess
whether Mamillia conceived greater grief for the unkind departure of her new
betrothed friend, or her father sorrow, in that he gave his consent of so chary
chaffre to so churlish a chapman: But whether it were, no doubt their care was
greater than their well meaning minds in any respect had deserved, and by so
much the more their sorrow increased, by how much the report of Pharicles
supposed Pilgrimage was to his great reproach daily bruted abroad the City:
Gonsaga supposing Pharicles discredit considering the late contract, to breed
his daughters utter infamy. For the Citizens gave their verdit of the
Gentleman's journey as their fond affection had persuaded them to think either
well or ill of his person: his friends supposing the best, said, that he meant
to spend his time in travel until the next spring, wherein he meant to
co^summate the marriage his foes contrariwise coniecturing the worst, said that
his pompous prodigality and rich attire, were the two blazing stars and
careful comets which did always prognosticate some such event in tract of
time should happen, and that his sumptuous expenses had so rackt his revenues,
wasted his patrimony, and brought his wealth to such a low ebb, as being
fallen into an english consumption, there remained no hope of his health,
unless he meant for debt to take his Innes in S. Patricks purgatory. But
these dry blows could draw no blood, this wavering wind could shake no corn,
neither could those spightfull reports of his protested foes any jot move
Mamillia to think evil of her professed friend, and by so much the less, in
that she knew his revenues were able to maintain a greater port than ever he
carried in Padua. But as thus her panting heart wauered between fear and hope,
it was for certainty told her and her father by a secret friend, that
Pharicles was either married or betroathed to her cousin Publia, and the sting
of conscience so combred his guilty mind for committing this troathlesse
treachery, that the shame of so hapless a fact caused him to take this
unhappy journey. This tale not fully finished, Mamillia stood upon thorns
cast beyond the moon, and coniectured that which neither the tale did import,
nor Pharicles himself imagine: but the less she was to be blamed, because the
more perfect love, as the sooner it is drencht with the misling showers of
distrust, and this direful distrust is such a hellish foe to the heavy mind,
that it suffers the passionate person to take no rest till manifest trial has
raced out this foolish frenzy, which Mamillia tried true: for combred thus
with the clog of care, she conveyed her self covertly into her closet, where
surcharged with the sorrow of this noisome news, she burst forth into bitter
tears and balefull terms to this effect.

With what greater plague quoth she, can either the unjust gods or cruel
destinies wreck their wrath and exreme rigor upon any man, than whiles he
safely flotes in the seas of prosperity, to ouerwhelme him with the raging
waves of adversity, than amidst the happy gale of good luck, to daunt him
with the storms of disaster fortune, than to repay his bliss with bale, his
joy with annoy, and his happy felicity with most hapless and distressed
misery? And yet there is no sore so ill, but it seems more sower being
remediless, than if it might be cured with cunning, nor no wound so deep, but
it is thought more dangerous being incurable, than if either nature or art had
provided a salve to heal it, nor no misfortune so great but it seems more
grievous if there be left no hope that the present misery may in time be
requited with prosperity. For where the conserve of hopes is wanting to
comfort the distressed heart, there the corasiue of despair does so fret
asunder the molested mind as it makes the perplexed person to pine in
perpetual calamity.

All which alas I see performed by proof in me most miserable creature,
which alate safely harbored in the haven of happiness, and so fostered up by
fortune as she seemed to will that I did wish, am now so daunted with the
despite of sinister mishap, and so crossed with the rigorous repulse of
frowning fortune by the disloyal dealing of flattering Pharicles, as my weal
to woe, my happiness to heaviness, yea all my joy and delight is turned to
extreme sorrow and despite: and by so much the more this my grief is
intolerable, by how much the more there remains the hope of redress. For
alaste, too late it is to recall the stone already cast, to beat the bush the
bird being flowen, to break the bargain the bands being sealed, and to
reclaim affection where both law and love has fettered fancy with
constraint, and as hard it is for thee poor Mamillia to hope to win
Pharicles again to thy lure he being already seized on his desired pray, yea,
so fast tied to his tackling with thy cousin Publia, as no means but death can
break the bargain, no the knot is so knit, that if Pharicles himself did
will what thou did wish, and would prove as lewd unto her as light unto thee,
yet he strives against the stream, and seeks to bear sail both against
wind and weather: for as he was assured unto thee by promise, so he is
betrothed unto her by performance: as he was linked unto thee (as thou
supposedst) in the perfect league of amity, so he is (for certain) coupled
unto her in the perfect law of matrimony.

O ungrateful and perjured Pharicles, has the constant state of thy Mamillia
procured thy inconstancy? has her troath made the treacherous? has her love
made thee disloyal? will thou disgresse so far from nature, and resist the
law of nurture, as to repay faith with flattery, sincere affection with
fained fancy, and good will with hate? have thou no more care of thy credit
but to crack it with inconstancy? nor no more regard to thy solemn oath than
to foil it with perjury? Why was nature so fond under so fine a shell to hide
so rotten a kernel, under such golden feathers such rank flesh, under the
shape of a Lamb the substance of a Tigre, under so sweet a face so sower a
mind, to match so currsh conditions under so courteous a countenance, so
perfect a person with such imperfect qualities, so fine a feature with such
filthy flattery?

Why but Mamillia can these sorrowful exclamations cure thy malady, or can
the rubbing of thy wound procure thine ease? nay rather remember the old
proverb, not so common as true, past cure, past care, without remedy without
remembrance? Will thou prove so fond to set that at thy heart which Pharicles
sets at his heel, to weep for him which wailes not for thee: to sorrow for his
amity which laughes at thy misery? No no, cast away care, let the
remembrance of his treachery mittigate the fire of thy fancy, like not where
thou art not loved, nor love not where thou finds such inconstancy: as he
has made a change, so make thou a new choice, for since he has falsified his
faith without cause, thou art free from thy promise without care: yea as he
has laid his love upon Publia, so lay thou thy liking upon some other
gentleman which both for his person and parentage may deserve as well to be
loved as he to be liked, and in so doing shall thou content thy parents,
procure thine own ease, and pay Pharicles his debt in the same coin.

Why Mamillia art thou mad, or is fancy turned into frenzy? Shall the
cowardice of the Kistrel make the Faulcon fearful? Shall the dread of the
Lamb make the Lion a dastard? Shall the lewdness of Pharicles procure thy
lightness, or his inconstancy make thee wavering? His new desire in choice
make thee delight in change? Shall I say his fault make thee offend, his want
of virtue force thee yield to vanity? If he by committing perjury be a
discredit unto men, will thou by falsifying thy promise be an utter infamy to
women? No the Gods forbid. For since Pharicles first won me, either he
himself or none shall wear me, and although he has cracked his credit,
violated his oath-falsified his faith, and broke his protested promise, yet his
inconstancy shall never make me to waver, nor his fleeting fancy shall not
diminish mine affection. But in despite both of him and fortune, I will be his
in dust and ashes. Y^^ ^uen that unfaithful Pharicles shall be the saint at
whose sh^^^e I mean to do my devotion until my hapless heart through
extreme sorrow receive the stroke of untimely death, which if it come not
speedily, these hands enforced by despair, by some sinister means shall end
my misery, and with that such scalding tears distilled from her crystal
eyes, as they were sufficient witnesses of her insupportable sorrow.

Where, by the way, Gentlemen, if fond affection be not prejudicial unto your
judgment, we are by conscience constrained to condemn those unseemly Satyrs
and vain inuectiues, wherein with taunting terms and cutting quippes diverse
injurious persons most unjustly accuse Gentlewomen of inconstancy, they
themselves being such colored Camelions, as their fondness is so manifest,
that although like Aesops ass they clad themselves in a Lions skin, yet
their ears will bewray what they be: yea they accuse women of wavering when as
they themselves are such weathercocks as every wind can turn their tippets,
and every new face make them have a new fancy, dispraising others as guilty
of that crime wherewith they themselves are most infected, most unjustly
straining at a gnat, and letting pass an elephant, espying one dram of dross,
and not seeing a whole tun of ore, so injuriously descanting upon some one
dame which for her wavering mind perhaps deserves dispraise, and not
attributing due honor to so many thousand Ladies which merit to be canonized
as Saints for their incomparable constancy. But now their cauilling is so
common, and their causeless condemning come to such a custom, as Gentlewomen
think to be dispraised of a vain iangler rather brings commendation than
infers discredit, esteeming their words as wind and their talk as tales:
yea their despightfull speeches carry so little credit, as every man thinks
they rather come of course than of cause, and that their cynicall censures
proceed rather of self will than either of right or reason. Well Gentlemen, if
I might without offense infer comparison, we should plainly perceive that for
inconstancy men are far more worthy to be condemned than women to be
accused. For if we read the Roman records or Grecian histories, either fained
fables or true tales, yet we shall never find any man so faithful which has
surpassed women in constancy. Their only paragon whereof they have to boast
is poor Piramus, which killed himself for Thisbe, but to give them a sop of a
more sharper sauce, let them tell me if ever any of their brauest champio^s
offered to die for his wife as Admeta did for her husband Alcest? What man ever
swallowed burning coals as Portia did for Cato? Who so affectioned to his wife
as Cornelia was to Gracchus? Who ever so sorowed for ye misfortune of his Lady
as Iulia did for ye mishap of her best beloved Pompey? Did ever any adventure
such desperate dangers to enjoy his love as Hipsicratea did for her husband
Mithridates? What should I speak of Tercia, Aemillia, Turia, Lentula, Penelope,
or this our constant Mamillia with innumerable other, whose chastity faith and
constancy toward their lovers could not even by the dint of death be changed?
But least for saying my fancy some accuse me of flattery, again to Mamillia,
who thus plunged in perplexity, and driven into the dangerous gulf of distrust,
ouercharged afresh with the remembrance of Pharicles discurtesie, had burst
forth a new into her woonted tears, had not her father prevented her by
coming into the closet, where finding her so bedewed with tears, yea in such
distress as a woman half in despair, blamed her folly in this effect.

Daughter, quoth he, as it is a sign of a careless mind not to be moved
with mishap, so it is a token of folly to be careful without cause, and to be
grieved for that which if it were justly weied offreth at al no occasion of
sorrow: in which you commit ye fault, and deserve the blame, for your care is
too great, and the cause none at all. The sudden departure of your friend
Pharicles (as I guess) brought you into this dumpe, which in my fancy could
breed no doubt: for although sundry and uncertain rumors be spredde of his
journey, and diverse men descant diversely of his departure, as fond affection
leads them, his friends supposing the best excuse his fault, his foes
mistrusting the worst accuse him of folly, and yet they both aim at the mark
as the blind man shootes at the crow, Pharicles perhaps having so just
occasion of his journey (as his speedy and happy return shall make manifest)
that his friends by hoping well shall merit praise, and his foes by judging
ill discredit. But perhaps the late report how either he was married or
betroathed to your cousin Publia is the fretting canker which so combers your
disquiet conscience, which tale in my opinion as it was last set abroach, so it
deserves least trust, and especially on your behalf, since neither you have
heard him counted for inconstant, nor you your self have tried him wavering.
Will you then be so light as to call his credit in suspense which never gave
you occasion of suspicion, and reward him with distrust which never gave you
occasion to doubt? No Mamillia, beware of such fondness, least Pharicles
hearing of your folly perform that in deed whereof you suspect him without
desert. But suppose the worst, he has falsified his faith, has cracked his
credit, and like a troathlesse Theseus proved himself a traitor: what then?
Shall this his dissembling drive thee into despair? or his peevish
inconstancy be thy perpetual care? No, but rather Mamillia as he has stained
his faith, so strain thou thy affection, as he has fainted in performance,
so fail thou in promise, yea learn to loath him for his vice as thou louedst
him for his virtue, moderate thine affection, withdraw thy good will, and if
thou hap to find him halting, race him quite out of thy remembrance, and in so
doing it shall both please me and ease thee, in the mean time suppose the best.

Mamillia perceiving her fathers friendly affection by this his careful
counsel, and seeing his talk tended to her weal, was driven into a doubtful
dilemma what answer to frame: for if she should seem so light of love as to
have her heart at liberty both to like and loath as fickle fancy led her,
all ye world might condemn her of inconstancy: again if she did not wholly
agree to her fathers judgment, he might think she did contemn his counsel
and her own commodity: to avoid therefore the blame of disobedience and the
blemish of discurtesie, she framed him an answer on this wise.

Sir, quoth she, it is far more easy for the Physician to give counsel,
than for the patient to put it in practice, and a thing of less charge to
find a fault than to amend it: yea it were an easy matter to be pricked with
sorrow if the distressed man might as soon be cured as counseled: but to
remove care or cease from grief is lightly persuaded, but very hardly
performed, which by experience I find in my self. For I both know your
counsel to be good, and also I most heartily desire to follow it, yet the
grief of Pharicles ingratitude has taken such deep root in my hapless heart
that neither counsel nor constraint can race it out of my remembrance. And
whereas sir you persuade me to moderate mine affection, to withdraw my good will
from Pharicles, and to quench the fire of fancy with the despightfull drops
of hatred, I conjecture they be rather words of course to try my constancy,
than spoken in good earnest to exhort me to such treachery. For you know I
chose Pharicles for my mate, and you were content with the match, I fixed mine
affection not to continue with him a year in dalliance, but to remain with
him all my life in marriage, wherein no fond and uncertain liking but sincere
and perpetual love is to be required: for to marry without the force of
fancy, is to become a servile slave to sorrow. There must be a knitting of
hearts before a striking of hands, and a constraint of the mind before a
consent with the mouth, or else whatsoever the flower is, the fruit shall be
repentance. Which things considered, I am not to be blamed, though I cannot
leave to love at mine own pleasure, nor to be condemned though I am so
ouercharged with sorrow, since an other shall enjoy him upon whom my heart is
wholly fixed.

Tush Mamillia quoth Gonzaga interrupting her talk, I say as I said before,
that it is good to be careful if there were any cause, but since no occasion
of sorrow is offered, why should you be ouergrowne with grief? Pharicles has
taken a sudden and uncertain journey, what then? Will thou condemn him of
folly before thou hear the urgent cause of his speedy departure? No, but will
you say the case is too manifest, and so infer the rumor of his late supposed
marriage, which I deny as a most infamous slander raised upon so honest a
Gentleman. And for better proof thereof come with me, for I will go to my
brother Gostino, that there your cousin Publia may dissolve your doubt and
confirm my hope, and so without any delaie they hasted to hear the case
decided.

Where I cannot pass over without some speech, gentelwomen, the incomparable
constancy of Mamillia, which was so surely defenced with the rampire of
virtue, as all the fierce assaults of fortune could nowhit prevail as
prejudicial to such professed amity, no the fained treachery of so
troathlesse a traitor as Pharicles, did rather strengthen than astonish her
infallible friendship: the counsel of her father, the fear of his
displeasure, the hope of profit, or the dread of future danger, were of so
little force to diminish her affection, as it rather remained by those contrary
blastes of fortune far more inflamed than any whit extinguished.

And yet infer Mamillia and a thousand other Ladies (who for their loyalty
deserve as good report and as great renown) as perfect presidentes against
those unjust pratlers, which seek like sicophants to discredit women's
constancy, and forsooth they must stand for no payment: but alas, if they
spy one silly dame to halt or tread her shoe awrie, her fault is as much as
though all did offend, for they will exclaim against all in general, as though
none were to be found guiltless. But it is no marvel if the silly Lamb be
unjustly accused where the Woolfe comes in as plaintiff.

Well, Gonzaga being come to the house of his brother in law Gostyno, he found
the old gentleman so far spent with his long and lingering sickness, that he was
very loath with such frivolous questions to trouble his patience, yet after
salutations and many words passed between them, wherein the one deciphred his
pains, and the other lamented his case, the sick man uttering his grief with
sighs, and the other his sorrow with tears, Gonzaga like a wily Fox found
occasion to bring the matter in question so subtly, as Gostyno either not at
all, or else very hardly spied the fetch, framing his talk to this or such
like effect.

Although Plato in ye books of his common wealth does counsel the Athenians
not to visit any of their friends in time of adversity, except they could by
some means redress their misery, because that comfort (says he) is cold
and unsavory which comes not bewrapt with some kind of remedy: yet as one
condemning Platoes judgment in this case, I am come to comfort you as a
friend, but not to cure you as a Physician, lest I might be thought to hant my
friend in his health, and hate him in his sickness, which either belongs to a
fool or a flatterer. But if I were as cunning a Physician as a constant
friend, and had as great skill to cure as to counsel, yet if I take not my
marks amiss, I should more profit you with good advise than with any
potions were they never so sovereign. For your dangerous disease, which most
imports death, is age, and your sorest sickness is many years, I speak
Gostyno the more boldly, since I hear you are more willing to die than desirous
to live, and that you seek more the wealth of your soul than the health of your
body. In deed Appollonius Tianeus reports, that the Gymnosophists made a
law, that no man having passed threescore years should buy any land before he
made himself a grave, nor build any house before he had provided for himself
a Sepulcher: because in age we ought to make more readiness to die than
provisions to live, for the steel being spent, the knife cannot cut, the oil
consumed the lamp goes out, the Sun being set the day cannot tarry, the
flower being falen there is no hope of fruit, and old age being once come life
cannot be lasting. You knowing therefore that nothing is so certain in old age
as every day to look to die, having showed your self both to be wise and
wary, in that having but one only daughter, you both see her brought up in
your life, and that which is more, most worshipfully married before your death,
yea and to such a mate as she cannot but love for his person, and you like for
his parentage and patrimony, I mean our friend and neighbor Pharicles, whose
wit, wealth, and exquisite perfection both of mind and body, has made all
Padua astonished.

Stay there quoth Gostyno, and think not much though I interrupt your talk so
rashly, for as I receive both comfort and consolation by your good advise and
counsel, so your strange news has driven me into a quandary, whether I
should take your words in earnest or jest: for I am sure my daughter Publia is
as far from a husband as I am from a wife, or else I am greatly beguiled. And
with that he called Publia which stood at the window talking with her cousin
Mamillia, and began to sift her on this wise.

If the news daughter be true that your uncle Gonzaga has told me, I may
justly be accused of folly, and you be condemned of disobedience: for in that I
always left you the raines of liberty being young, to use your will as a law,
and to lead your life after your own lust, I may be counted a fool, and in
that you have abused this law of liberty, wedding your self to your own will
and despising my fatherly care and counsel as of none effect, you may be
thought a disobedient child. Why? was my nature ever so strange, or your
nourture so straight, was I so unwilling that you should match, or so wilful to
keep you from marriage, as you should choose without my advise, yea, and that
which is more, marry without my consent? Well, I know I have always had such
a care to pleasure you as a father, and you such a fear to displease me as a
daughter, that I both think the news untrue, and thee unworthy of such a
report. But if the case be so, thou art not the first, nor shall be the last
which have slipped awrie in this point: yet since thou have here such a care of
thy choice as to look before thou leap, and to love such a one as is to be
liked for his living, both for his person and virtue, thou deseruest the less
to be blamed, and I have the less cause to be offended: to put me therefore
out of doubt, and to satisfy thine uncle Gonzaga, I charge thee by the law of
duty to tell me what has passed between thee and Pharicles.

Sir quoth she, as I have always found you to have had a fatherly care to
provide for my welfare, so I have always counted it religion to requite that
fatherly affection with the duty and obedience of a child, least happily I
might seem to be more void of nature than ye brute beasts which want nurture.
The young lamb by mere instinct of Nature obeieth the bleating of the old
sheep: The sucking fawn follows the steps of the Do: The Cignets dare not
resist the call of the old Swan: the young Tigre (though never so wild) runs
at the beck of the old Tygresse: and should I then, sir, be so void of grace,
as to be more lewd than the young lamb, more void of Nature than the silly
Fawn, more senseless than the young Cignets, and more fierce than the cruel
Tygres: No no sir: But when I so far forget my self, as to pass these
unreasonable creatures in careless disobedience, then the Gods requite so
loathsome a fact with most hellish misery. Although ye voice of the common
people be a great verdit to confirm a thing in question, yet that which is
spoken of many is not always true, much less the rumor which is raised by
some one tatling person, does follow by consequence as a thing necessarily to
be believed. And therefore mine uncle Gonzaga did very ill in giving credit
to such a flying tale, and did more ouershoote himself in blowing it into your
ears, until by further trial he had searched out the truth of the matter.

In deed sir I confess, that Pharicles has showed me some courtesy, and I
have not altogether requited him with curiosity, he has made some show of
love, and I have not wholly seemed to mislike, least in loving lightly I might
seem lascivious, and in contemning churlishly I might be judged very curious:
but for to contract I never meant without your consent, nor never intended to
set on the seals before you had struck up the bargain. And for the
confirmation of these my words, and the better satisfying of mine uncle
Gonzaga, see here the letters which have passed betwixt me and Pharicles.

Gostyno perceiving by the tenure of these letters, that this tale which was
told of his daughter was wholly without troth, would very gladly have known
of Gonzaga who was the author of such a report, thinking himself ill dealt
withal to have so causeless a slander raised upon his daughter: but Gonzaga
not willing to bring the matter any surther in question, made him this answer.

Brother Gostyno quoth he, I know it is ill putting the hand between the bark
and the tree, and great folly to meddle in other men's matters, neither was it
my mind when I told you this tale, to sow any dissension between your
daughter Publia and you, but I came to warn her as a friend, and counsel her
as a kinsman, that she might take heed of the train, least she were taken in
the trap, that she might not strike at the stale least she were canuased in the
nets, that she might not venture no father into the foord than she might
easily retire without danger, I mean that she should not lay her love no
surer upon Pharicles, but that she might pluck it off at her own pleasure,
for Pharicles is betroathed, and contracted long since to my daughter Mamillia,
so that there remains nothing but that at his return home they consummate
the marriage. To cause therefore your daughter to take heed of such cogging
copesmates was the cause of my coming, least unadvisedly she might buy
repentance too dear.

Gostyno seeing the danger whereinto his daughter had fallen, if Gonzaga had
not prevented it, gave him hearty thanks for his friendly counsel, and
counted both himself and his daughter greatly bound unto him for preventing so
secret a mischief, being to exclaim against the peevish perjury and
trothlesse treachery of Pharicles, had not Gonzaga broken off the talk with
taking his leave of his brother, and Mamillia giving the A dio to her coosin
Publia, departed leaving Gostyno and his daughter wholly counseled, but not
half comforted, because they could not so suddenly digest the great abuse of
Pharacles.

But poor Mamillia who before was drowned in dread, does now swim in hope,
before (as she thought) crossed with calamity, but now crowned with
prosperity, alate drenched in the dregs of distrust, and now safely settled in
assurance, before she feared the worst, and now she hoped the best, at her
coming nothing but woe woe, at her return all was joy, her woe to weal, her
bale to bliss, her despite was turned to pleasure and delight. For now she
hoped that although Pharicles had sown wild Oats he should reap good
grain, that he had not run so far but he might easily return, that bought
wit was best, and ye being thoroughly beaten with his own rod, he would in time
learn to be wise, and that whereas before he was trothlesse now he would be
trusty, as he was false so he would be faithful: she thus persuading her
self of the best was as merry as before she was sorry. But contrariwise Publia
being before secure was now crossed with care, before in happiness now wholly
in heaviness, alate in joy, now in sorrow and annoy, so that getting her self
secretly into her chamber she fell into these pitiful plaints.

Alas quoth she, poor soul, it is too late to defend the walls when the
City is ouerrunne, to sound the retreat when the battle is fought, to apply
the salve when ye sore is incurable, and to seek to comfort where counsel
comes too late, and to reclaim affection fancy being already fixed. Thou
speak poor Publia by experience, for the counsel thine uncle Gonzaga, gave
thee was not a confect to heal thy sorrow, but a corasiue to renew thy grief.
And why? because to seek to cure an incurable disease is to double the
patients pains. Mine uncle Gonzaga did wisely warn me to beware of the
train, and alas I was before taken in the trap, he wished me to beware of
liking and I was long before in love, he had me take heed for wading too far,
and I was before over my shoes. Why but fond fool thou have not gone so far
but thou may retire, thou art not so fast in the nets but thou may
return, thy love is not so surely lodged, but thou may pull off thy liking,
thou have made no contract but thou may reclaim, nor given no consent but
thou may recall, yea, and without clog to thy conscience or crack to thy
credit. For why, he has sworn to perform that which he could not justly
promise, he has offered thee his faith, whereas before another had his
freedom, the greatest substance of his love was but a meare shadow of lust,
then Publia cast him off which so did scoff thee, and detest him which so
deeply dissembled: yea, for what fondness were it for thee to like him which
is another woman's love, to make a choice of him whom another already has
chosen, to fix thy fancy upon Pharicles since Mamillia shall enjoy him.
Alas I know all this, but what then? the person of Pharicles, his beauty,
bounty, and rare qualities are so surely shryned in my breast, as they can
never be raced out with oblivion: let Mamillia enjoy him as her husband (yea,
and I pray the Gods send them long and happy days together) yet I will both
love him and like him in a chaste mind for ever. What though he were false,
shall I be faithless? though he had no troth, shall I be treacherous? shall his
sleeting make me fickle, or his inconstancy make me without conscience? No,
no, I have once given my heart and I mean not to pull back my hand, I have
once loved him and I mean never to like any other: but here before the Gods I
vow my self a vestall virgin till death shall end my sorrow.

And indeed she promised nothing but she did perform, for not long after
Gostyno died leaving her sole heir to al his possessions. And although she
was daily sued unto by diverse brave and gallant gentlemen, yet she refused
them all, and the better to avoid the resort of suitors which daily frequented
her house, she let all her lands to lease, and entered her self into a
religious Monastery where she led her life as a chaste and famous virgin, and
at her death dying without issue (for all his treachery) she bequeathed her
possessions to her best beloved Pharicles.

Where gentlemen (think of me what you please) I am constrained by conscience
(considering the constancy of Publia) to blame those blasphemous blabs which
are never in their vain except they be breathing out some injurious speeches
against the constancy of women, not yielding any reason of their verdit or
reproach, but the reckles rancor of their own perverse will pricks the^ forward
to this despitefull folly. But I hope whatsoever the envious crew shall crow
against me for defending the loyalty of women, virtuous and well disposed
gentlemen will neither appeach me of flattery, nor condemn me of folly: But
leaving these suppositions at last to Pharicles, who after yt under the
profession of a Pilgrim he had cut the straightes with a speedy gale, and ye
mariners by compass of their course were come within ken of land, and had
descried the cliffes of Sicilia: seeing the place of this pretensed ixile to be
so near, had his heart encountered with such a diverse combat, and was so
plunged in perplexity and drenched in the dregs of doubt, as being almost
frettised for fear, the mariners by his often changing of colors thought that
either the poor pilgrim was in his Orisons, or else paying his debt by death
unto nature. But as their imagination proceeded but by conjecture of his feeble
complexion, so their aim was quite beyond the mark, for Pharicles was wishing
for rain when the shower was past, drying the malt when the kill was on fire,
sounding the retreat when the battle was fought, yea buying repentance too
late. Now he confessed the fault when judgment was past, and found himself
guilti^ when there was no hope of pardon: Now he fealt within his crazed
conscience a cruel conflict between wit and wilfulness, love and lightness,
fancy and faith: on the one side the fixed mind of Mamillia proved his fading
fancy to be founded on the tottering stage of flattery: on the other the
constancy of Publia so galded his guilty conscience, as he frankly accused
himself to be as fickle in his faith, and as light in his love, as the leaves
of the herb Baaran which continually shake without ceasing.

But the Pirate although he knows his practice to be plain theft, yet he
turns forth a new leaf, till either he be drowned in the sea, or else
tossed by some unfortunate tempest, land his ship at Tyborne: The
counterfaite Coyner although he knows his craft to be a flat trick of
treason, yet he will not take the check for his fault, until he has the
final mate for his offense. So Pharicles, although he knew himself to be a
deep dissembler, and that flattery was coosin germain to treachery, yet he
feared not to mock so long with Mamillia, and dissemble with Publia, until he
gained nothing for his reward but a ship of sorrow to digest the recklesse
root of repentance: for as he had received the stroke by fickleness, so he
meant to salve the sore by flight: as he had bred his bane by their presence,
so he would cure his disease by absence: thinking that Aristotle his sentence
in Logic was also an Axiom in love, that one contrary drives out another:
Judging as private familiarity was the father of fancy, so discontinuance
should be of sufficient force to quench out ye frying flames of love. But he
sat beside the saddle, for he spoke by guess and not by experience, by wit,
but not by wisdom. The sting of a serpent by continuance enuenometh the whole
body. He which is charmed of the Torpedo by procrastination runs mad, and
the prick of love by delay is incurable: yet Pharicles blinded with the vale
of vanity, and sowsed in the seas of selfeloue, was so wrapped in ye waves of
wilfulness, as at the first he thought his journey into Sicilia a perfect
pumicestone to race out the memory of his dainty dames in Italy. But he
skipt beyond his skill, and was very grossly blinded with folly, for he was
not only frustrate of his imagination, but did even fry amidst the floods,
that as he sailed on the seas, the beauty of his goddesses gave his conscience
such a cruel canuizado by the means of fancy, as the poor Gentleman driven
almost into the dungeon of despair, burst forth into these terms.

O unfortunate Pharicles, has the dolorous destinies decreed thy destruction,
or the perverse planets in thy nativity conspired thy bitter bane? Has froward
fortune sworn to make thee a miserable mirror of her mutabilitie? Shall thy
friends sorrow at thy hap, and thy foes rejoice at thy chance? yea all the
world wonder at thy staylesse state of life. Shall Mamillia muse at thy
madness in change, and Publia laugh at thy lightness in choice? Yea shall they
count thee more curious tha^ careful, more witty than wise, more light in thy
love than lewd in thy life, and yet so lewd as sufficient to win the best
game? Ah Pharicles, shall thy dainty dames in Italy try by experience, that
although thy person is so bravely beautified with the dowries of nature, as she
seemed to show her cunning in caruing a piece of so curious perfection, yet thy
mind to be so blotted with the blemish of inconstancy, and so foiled with the
filthy spot of fickleness, as nature may seem to make a supply in the
body, since there was such a want in the mind? Shall (I say) they compare thee
to the diamonde, who for all her glistering hue distilleth deadly poison? To
the Seastar, whose shell stayneth the Iuorie and whose meat is blacker than
Iet? Unto the trees in the Mount Vermise, whose bark burns like fire, and
whose sap is colder than Ice? Well Pharicles, cast thy cards, make thine
accountes, and thou shall find the greatest gain to be loss, and thy profit
to be such as he that makes of a mountain of gold a myerie moulhill, of an
Elephant a Gnatte, and comes from a wealthy merchant to a bare banckrout.
Consider with thy self thou have stained thy stock, and what more to be
regarded? Thou have cracked thy credit, and what of greater price? Thou have
lost thy friends, and what of more value? Thou have purchased two most trusty
lovers to be thy mortal foes, and exiled thy self as a poor pilgrim into a
strange country. Why Pharicles, can these thy dolorous discourses cure thy
care? or can unfolding of thy unfortunate life be a means to mittigate thy
misery? rub not thy galded conscience for fear of a deeper sore, but if
thou have been careless in change be now careful and constant in choice,
if thou have committed a fault seek in secret wise to make some part of
amends, if thou have offended by breaking promise make a recompense in paying
performance. Yea but the salve (be it never so pure) is not worth a rush if
unapt for the soar, the medicine being unfit for the patients disease, though
never so sovereign, brings small profit, so this thy clarkely counsel
unapt for the cause will procure thee but little ease: for thou have deceived
Mamillia, and halted with Publia, thou have made a fault to both and can make
amends but to one, thy promise is to lay thy love on two where the
performance can light but upon some particular person, so that in any wise
thou can not make a full satisfaction for thy fault, unless thou take upon
thee such a charge as thou shall never be able to rule nor they suffer. O
unhappy man art thou the only mark at which fortune means to unloose her
unfortunate quiver? And with that he cast forth such a sigh, as it was a
sufficient sign to witness a ready remorse in his troubled mind, that the
master of the ship taking compassion on this perplexed pilgrim, thought to
comfort his care with this merry motion.

Sir, quoth he, your bitter tears and deep sighs which you power forth so
plentifully, as tokens of some inward grief, has driven both the mariners
and me into a diverse dumpe, as we all stand in doubt whether those pitiful
plaints proceed from a careful conscience combred with sin, or else yt you are
of that order of pilgrims, whose pretensed pilgrimage is to seek S. James, but
their heart and devotion is vowed to an other Saint, which with a crabbed
countenance has given them such a cutting corasiue as they seek by absence
either to mittigate her mood or procure their own ease: and if you be of the
same case and in the like mind, I will think you as mad as he that counts
fasting a sovereign preservative against famine.

Pharicles hearing the Pilots parle to touch him somewhat, and perceiving his
talk to send to some end, thought as closely to stand him the ward as he had
clarkely given him the blow, and therefore trickt up his talk with this
cunning scuse.

Pilot quoth Pharicles, although they skill in navigations be great, yet if thou
had no greater cunning in stirring of the stearne, than in coniecturing the
cause of my sorrow, I would very lothly have committed my self under thy
charge to have sailed into Sicillia: for whether thou presumest upon
phisiognomie or folly, it is but a bare division to say that either love or
sin must be the cause of grief: but put case thou have hit the mark, and
that my outward sighs be signs of inward love, will not absence think thou
diminish affection?

Yes quoth the Pilote, when you find solitariness a sovereign salve against
sorrow, then will the dew of discontinuance quench out the fire of fancy: but
leaving these amorous questions, you are welcome to the coasts of Sicillia.

Pharicles seeing the cockboate ready to carry him to the shore, rewarded
both the master and the mariners very frankly, desiring the Pilot (since he
himself was a stranger) to guide him to some honest Inn, where he might make
his aboade while he stayed in the country. Who being very desirous to
gratify the Gentleman, carried Pharicles to a very friends house of his, who
for the Pilottes cause gave Pharicles such courteous entertainment, as he
thought himself to have hapt on a very good host.

Where by the way Gentlemen, we see the tickle state of such young youths whose
wits are wills, and their wills are laws, coveting so much sensual liberty, as
they bring themselves into perpetual bondage: for ye Polype has not more
colors, nor the Camelion more sundry shapes than they have change in
thoughts, now liking, now loathing: for a while professed enemies to Venus
court, and then sworn true subjects to the crown of Cupid, so variable as a
man can neither judge of their nature, nor nourture, unless by nativity they
be lunatikes, not taking this word as the English men do, for stark mad, but
as borne under the influence of Luna, and therefore as firm in their faith as
the melting wax that receives every impression, thinking as Pharicles did,
that it is a Courtiers profession to court to every dame but to be constant
to none, that it is the grace to speak finely though without faith, and to be
wedded in words to as many as the lusting eye can like: so that at length when
their talk is found tales, their love lust, and their protested promises small
performance, then their credit being cracked, they must be travelers to seek
that in a strange country which they could never find in their own: they must
into Sicillia for shifts, into Italy for pride, to France for fraud, and to
England for fashions and folly, so that they return home laden, not with
learning, but with lewdness, not with virtue but with vice, yea, their whole
fraught is a mass of mischiefs. I speak not of all travelers Gentlemen, but
of such as Pharicles, which take their journey, either that their credit at
home is crasie, or else being wedded to vanity seek to augment their folly.

But again to Pharicles, who now safely settled in Saragossa the chief city
in Sicillia, a place of no less suspicion than resort (and yet the most famous
mart in all the country) dealt so clarkely in his calling, and behaved
himself so demurely, as his pretensed kind of life gave occasion to no man to
suspect his fained profession: for his Palmers weed was worn with such a
gravity in his countenance, and such a modesty in his manners, as all men
thought the man to be half mortified. For Pharicles knew very well that he
could not live in Saragossa under the state of a gentleman, but either he must
spend with the best or sit with the woorst: yea, beside that without
companions he could not be: and he thought it very hard to choose a dram
of gold among a pound of dross, to find one Gemme amidst a whole heap of
flint, one Eele among many Scorpions, and one friend among a thousand
flatterers: it might as soon be his hap to chance on a dissembling Dauus as
on a trusty Damon, to commit his counsel to a subtle Sinon as to a faithful
Pilades, to take him for a professed friend which might be a protested foe, in
the fairest grass to find the fowlest Snake, in Oryllus box a deadly poison,
in Carolus scarph a withered root, in the shape of a friend the substance of
a foe. He thought likewise that such a City as Saragossa was often times as
well stored with Parasites as guarded with soldiers, and as full of
counterfaites as counselors, and that he might find many cousins claiming
more acquaintance to his purse than kindred to his person, more allied to his
living than to his lineage: to conclude, more to feed his fancy for gain than
either good will or friendship.

Pharicles partly feared and partly persuaded with the consideration of the
former premises, was fully resolved in his mind to abandon all company, and
to give a final farewell to his forepassed folly, to make a change of his
chaffer with better ware, of his dross with gold, and of his fleeting will
with stayed wisdom. Having thus determined to lead a Pilgrims life to punish
his body with this Palmers penance, in satisfaction of his disloyal dealings
with his trusty lovers, he had not lived in this Hermits state by the space of
a month, but he proved the Pilots talk to be no tales, nor his words to be
wind, but a settled sentence: for want of company so increased his care, and
brought such melancholic motions to his musing mind, as now he perceived
solitariness to be the nursse of sorrow, and discontinuance the father of
fancy. The modesty of Mamillia, the constancy of Publia, his credit crakt
in Italy, his youth spent in vanity, his great promises and small performance,
his fained faith and forged flattery, so battered the bulwark of his breast,
and gave such fierce assaults to his careful conscience, as he thought
himself to be in a second Hell, until he might find a means to mitigate his
misery: and therefore as solitarines was the sore, so he meant society should
be the salve, determining to drive away those dumpes by frequenting of
company, which otherwise would have bredde his utter bane: respecting neither
cost, expenses, nor hazarding of himself, so his mind might remain in quiet.

Pharicles having thus cast off his Pilgrims weed and Pilgrims profession,
gave the citizens of Saragossa in short time to understand that he was as well
a Gentleman by nature as by nurture, and as worthily brought up as worshipfully
borne. For first he made a restraint of his will by wit, then used his wit so
warily and wisely, showing such a courteous countenance and frank liberality
to al estates, as he drove them into a dout, whether the comlines of his
person, or the worthiness of his mind deserved greater commendation: In so
much as those young Gentlemen thought themselves happy which might be counted
companio^s to this new guest, and above all the rest of this courtly true which
kept him company, a young gentleman named Ferragus, only son to the governor
of Saragossa, was joined with him in most private familiarity, thinking that
day evil spent, wherein he had not visited his new friend Pharicles, and the
more to do him honor being a stranger, he oftentimes carried him to his
fathers house, where in short time Pharicles won such credit by his courtesy,
that Signor Fernese (for so was ye old gentleman called) thought his house the
more luckie he had such a guest, and his son the more happy he had chosen
such a companion: but for all this Pharicles fearing to find a pad in the straw,
and a burning spark amongst cold ashes, was a foe to none, nor a friend to
any, neither durst trust Ferragus without sufficient trial, but bare himself
so indifferent to all, yet showing himself so fit for all companies, as well
in ripeness of wit as revenues of wealth, that there was no talk for a time
but of the perfection of Pharicles.

While thus flattering fame had spread abroad his famous qualities, there was a
young gentlewoman in Saragossa called Clarynda, of more wealth than beauty, and
yet so sufficiently furnished with the perfections and dowries of nature, that
if she could have been continent and not common in her love, she might have
been for her person a fit mate for the most famous Prince in the world. But
she being both young, rich, and beautiful, having neither father nor mother
which might make a restraint of her nature by due nurture, and enjoying a
liberty without controlement which be the greatest bawdes in the world to make
a Gentlewoman slide in such slipperie paths, having neither care of her person
nor regard of her parentage, but setting both honor and honesty to sale
became a professed Curtizan.

In which staylesse state of life she waded so far, that her chiefest care was
to be careless in that which above all things she ought most to have
regarded, for whereas both her birth and beauty had been of sufficient force
to persuade her to beautify the goods of fortune and gifts of nature with a
maidenlie modesty and silent chastity, she contrariwise linking her self to
sensual liberty, and wedding her mind to vanity, sought to reap renown and
purchase fame by ye which she tried in time to breed her greatest infamy: for
why, she found both such pleasure and profit by setting her honesty to sale
in the shameless shop of voluptuous desires, that neither the shame of her
life, nor the fear of her death, the state of her birth, or the stain of her
beauty, might in any wise move her from her loathed kind of living: no her
heart was so hardened, and her ears so enchanted with the alluring charm of
Venus sophistry, yt neither the persuasions of her friends lamenting her case,
nor ye rejoicing of her foes laughing at her lewdness, could drive her to
desist from her detestable kind of dealing. Nay ye more she was counseled,
the less she was conformable; the more she was entreated, the less she was
tractable: yea, she settled her self so surely, as she thought in the seat of
selfewill and security, that she employed all her time and study to
entertain her licentious lovers, showing her self such a subtle Circes and
crafty Calipso, in giving them pestiferous potions, and drowning them in the
dregs of devilish delights, that unless it were some wary Ulysses that had
provided a preservative against her poison, they returned transformed into apes
or asses, or into worse if worse may be. And yet for all this fained affection,
her fleeting fancy was never fixed upon any, but laying the net, was free her
self, casting the bayte, avoided the hook, seeking to entrappe others, she
her self was never entangled: and as the most infectious serpent has always
the sweetest breath, so for all her vicious mind she had such a virtuous
tongue, and trickt up her talk with such painted colors, as they of Saragossa
did marvel how she could so clarkely cover ye substance of vice under the
shape of virtue: yea they learned by her lewdness to warn their children from
such state of life, they did see very well how that which was bredde by the
boane would not out of the flesh, that the young Adder would prove an old
Serpent, that the cragged twigge would prove a crooked tree, that she which
spent her youth without restraint, would lead her age without controlement,
that the maid which was vowed to vanity would wedde her self in time to
folly. But again to Clarynda, who wallowing in the waves of wantonness, and
offering her incense at the altar of Venus, heard as well as others ye rare
report of Pharicles perfections, which tickling somewhat her toyish mind, made
her desirous to try what was in the gentleman by experience, and to reap both
pleasure by his person, and profit by his purse, which was the chiefest mark
whereat she always aimed: Covering therefore the heart of a Tigre with the
fleece of a Lamb, the claws of a Grype with the pens of a Dove, the vanity
of Lais with the vale of Lucretia, the miserable conditions of a Curtizan with
the modest countenance of a matrone, decking her self with i^ns and jewels of
infinite valor, set her self in her window as an adamant object to draw the
wavering eyes of Pharicles, thinking that as none could hear the Sirens sing,
but they should be charmed with their melody, so it were as impossible to see
her and not be allured with her beauty. But as ye Lion seeking to entrap the
heart as a pray, is himself unawares taken in the toiles: so Clarinda making the
snare fell in the pit, holding the view was taken at ye gaze, seeking to catch
an other captive, was brought her self into perpetual bondage: for indeed
(according to her desire and imagination) Pharicles constrained by certain his
necessary affairs came by her house, yet armed with such a privy coat as he
warily withstood the greatest danger of her inuenomed shot: giving her to
understand that he could fly about the candle and not be singed, see the
Scorpion and not be stricken, that he could laugh and look without liking:
yea warm himself very nigh the fire and not be burned, that he could
accedere ad hunc ignem, and yet not calescere plusquam satis: For why, passing
by her window and seeing this gorgious Gorgon so shrined in the shape of a
goddess, did not only repu^e at Nature for placing so hellish a mind in so
heavenly a creature, but also smiled to see such bravery linked with so little
honesty, and such perfect beauty blemished with the want of chastity. Yet
willing to show himself a friend to all, he gave her the Salve with a cringing
courtesy, and went to his lodging without any more loss than in lending his
look to such alluring vanities. But she contrariwise being at discouert,
noting the comeliness of Pharicles countenance, and imprinting in her heart
the perfection of his person, had her fancy so fettered as well with ye report
of others as with her own judgment, that she marvelled to find such a strange
Metamorphosis in her immodest mind: for thinking to shake off ye shackles with
a bare farewell as she had done before, she felt her self so fast tied to the
stake, that it craved her greatest cunning to unloose the knot. Now she felt
the poison to work on her self that she had provided for others, and
perceived that intending to lay the snare, she her self was wholly entrapped:
yea the force of fancy gave such fierce allarmes to her new besieged mind, as
no rampire that she could make might withstand the battery. The more she
strove against the stream the less it did prevail, the closer she covered
the spark, the more it kindled: yea, in seeking to unloose the Lunes, the more
she was entangled: In fine after she had passed two or three days in kicking
against the prick, she felt such a hapless horror in her troubled mind, that
she was forced to enter into consideration with her self what conditions she
should offer to her new professed enemy, and therefore entering into her
closet uttered these speeches.

O unjust Gods quoth she, which have endued brute beasts with greater
perfection in their kind than reasonable creatures: The Garlike kills the
Serpent, and she by instinct of nature escheweth the same. The juice of
hemlocke poysoneth the bear and what more abhorred? the grease of the snayle
infecteth the ape, and what more loathed? yea every creature shunneth the
occasion of danger, man only excepted, which seeks with pursuit to obtain
that which breeds his confusion: what bruiseth the brain? what mazeth the
mind? what weakeneth the wit? what breeds fear? what brings frenzy? what
sows sorrow? what reapeth care more than love? and yet the only thing
wherein man delights. The byrd loving the woods loatheth the nets, the heart
liking the lawnes hates the snares: But man placing his felicity in freedom,
takes greatest care to cast himself into perpetual bondage.

O Clarinda, would to God thou might accuse others and be free thy self
from this folly: but alas thou do condemn others of that crime wherein
thou thy self deseruest greatest blame: Will thou now fond fool become a
professed friend to affection, which have always been a protested foe to
fancy? will thou now suffer thy mind to be nousled up in captivity, which
has always been noursed up in liberty? Thou have counseled others to
beware of the train, and will thou now thy self be taken in the trappe? thou
have boasted that thou could both like and loath at thine own pleasure, and
shall thy brags now be daunted with disgrace? will thou now prove such a
cowarde to yield to the file, to stoop at the stamp, to give over the field
before there be a stroke stricken, yea and to such a cruel tyrant as love is?
It is a saying not so common as true, that she which sows all her love in an
hour, shall not reap all her care in a year, that she which likes without
remembrance shall not live without repentance. So then Clarynda be wise, since
thou art warned, look before thou leapest: there is no better defense against
danger than to consider the end of thine enterprise. Thou art entangled with
the love of a stranger, who perhaps has his heart fixed on some other place,
thou have fondly set thine affection upon one whose wealth, wit, and
conditions, thou only know by the flattering report of fame, he is in
outward show a Saint, and perhaps in inward mind a serpent, for his person
a paragon of beauty, for his conditions since he soiourned in Saragossa most
highly to be commended: yea so perfect in substance and quality as he may in
no respect be appeached of want: why? but Clarynda fame is not always true,
and the brauest bloome has not always the best fruit: those birds which
sing sweetest, have oftentimes the sowrest flesh, the river Silia is most
pleasant to the eye and yet most hurtful to the stomach, the stone Nememphis
is not so delicate without, as deadly within, all that glisters is not gold.
Pharicles (Clarynda) for all his pompous fame of perfect conditions may be a
parasiticall flatterer of most imperfect conversation. Who was more courteous
than Conon the Athenian? and yet a very counterfeite; who more gentle than
Galba in show? yet none more treacherous in proof; Ulysses had a fair tongue
but a false heart, Metellus was modest but yet mutable: the cloth is not
known till it come to the weeting, nor a lovers quallities perceived till he
come to the wearing. Well Clarinda although it is good to doubt the worst, yet
suppose the best, he is constant, trusty, not vainglorious nor wedded unto
vanity, but a protested foe to vice and a professed friend to virtue: Alas
fond fool? if thou wey thy case in the equal balance the greater is thy care
and the more is thy misery, for by how much the more he himself is virtuous,
so much less he will esteem thee which art vicious: do thou think he
which is trusty will regard thee which art trothlesse? yt his faithful
courtesy will brook thy fained inconstancy? is thy senses so besotted with
selfeloue to suppose that a Gentleman of great wealth and no less wit, famous
both for his person and parentage, will be so witless in change or careless
in choice, so light in his love or leaude in his life, as to fix his affection
upon a professed Curtizan, whose honesty and credit is so wracked in the waves
of wantonness, and so weatherbeaten with the billows of immodestie, that it
is set to sale in the shameless shop of Venus as a thing of no value to be
cheapt of every straggling chapman. No no Clarinda, there is such a great
difference between thy hapless chance and his happy choice, between thy
careless living and his careful life, as there remains to thee not so much as
one dram of hope to cure thy intolerable malady. And why fond fool? Was
not Lamia in profession a Curtizan, in life a lascivious vassal to Venus
vanity, yea to figure her forth in plain terms a sta^esse strumpet racking
her honesty to the uttermost, thereby to raise revenues to maintain her
immodest life, and yet for all the blemish of immoderate lust wherein she was
lulled a sleep by security, she so charmed and enchanted with her Siren
subtleties the senses of king Demetrius, yt he was so blinded with the beams
of her beauty, and dimmed with the wanton vale of her alluring vanities,
forgetting that she was by calling a curtizan and by custom common to all
that could wage her honesty with the appointed price, he so entirely loved
this graceless dame, that neither the remembrance of her forepassed folly,
nor the suspicion of her present immodestie could drive that worthy king to
mislike her, until the extreme date of death parted their inseparable amity?
Were not many noble Princes allured to the love of Lais? Was not that worthy
Roman Cassius so fettered with the form of Flora the renowned curtizan of
Rome, that he offered the prime of his years at the shrine of that gorgeous
Goddess, and yet the worst of these two worthy wights far surpassing
Pharicles as well in ripeness of wit as revenues of wealth. Yea but Clarynda
infer no comparison, for these two stately dames were so decked and adorned
with the gifts of nature, and so polished with princely perfection, that they
were the most rare iems and peerless paragons of beauty that ever were
shrouded under the shape of mortality, so that if Jupiter had but once
frequented their company, no doubt Juno would have been infected with
ielowsie, whereas thy comeliness deserves no such surpassing commendation, but
that thou may yield the palm of a victory to a thousand whose beauty is
such as their greatest imperfection may daunt thee with disgrace. Why but
Clarynda, art thou so mad to lay a cutting corasiue to a green wound, to
procure heat with cold, to repress hunger with famine, to salve sorrow with
solitariness, and to mittigate thy misery with extreme despair? No no, since
thou art once lodged up in the loathsome labyrinth of love, thou must like
Theseus be haled out with the thread of hope: for better had thou met with
Minotaurus in plain combat, than be but once arrested with the miserable mase
of distrust. And therefore Clarynda cast away care, retire not before thou have
the repulse, but keep the course by thy compass: and since thou have the sore
seek the salve, apply thy wit and will, thy hand and heart to atchieue that
thing, in atteining whereof consists either thy continual calamity or
perpetual joy, and with that she stepped to her standish which stood in the
window, and wrote a letter to Pharicles in this effect.

Signora Clarynda of Saragossa, to Don Pharicles prosperity.
ALthough thou have both cause to muse and marvel (O noble Pharicles and
unacquainted gentleman) in that thou receiuest a letter from her whom neither
familiarity nor friendship can give just occasion so much as once to salute
thee with a Salve, much less to trouble thy patience with such stuff as may
breed thy misliking and my misery, if the gods be not ayding to my
enterprise, yet if thou shall vouchsafe to construe my meaning to the best, or
at the least take the pains to turn over these imperfect lines proceeding
from a perplexed person, which I hope thy noble mind and courtesy will
command thee, thou shall find it no smaller cause than the fatal fear of
death that forced me to yield to this extremity, nor the occasion less than
the dread of pinching despair which drove me to pass the golden measure of
surpassing modesty. In deed the noble and virtuous dames (Pharicles) of
famous memory, whose happy life has canonized them in Chronicles for perfect
paragons both of virtue and beauty, have with general consent auerred, that
shamefast modesty and silence be the two rarest gems and most precious jewels
wherewith a Gentlewoman may be adorned. Notwithstanding they have all been of
this mind, that where either love or necessity extend their extreme rigor to
ye uttermost, there both humane and divine laws surcease, as not of sufficient
force to abide the brunt of two such terrible and untamed tyrants. For there is
no silence such but the fyle of love will fret in sunder: nor no modesty so
shamefast but the sting of necessity will force to pass both shame and
measure. Sappho (Pharicles) was both learned, wise, and virtuous, and yet the
fire of fancy so scorched and scalded her modest mind, as she was forced to
let slip the raynes of silence to crave a salve of Phaon to cure her
intolerable malady. If Phedra (Pharicles) had not both surpassed in beauty
and modesty, poor Theseus would never have forsaken his Ariadne in the
deserts, to have linked himself with her in the inviolable league of
matrimony, yet her beauty and modesty were brought to such a low ebb by
the battery of love, that she was feign to sue for help to her unhappy
son Hipolitus. I dare not (o Pharicles) of these exemplified premises
infer either comparison or conclusion, for because to compare my self to them
were a point of arrogancy, and to derogate so much from their degree, as to
match them with my rudeness were a trick of extreme folly. Yet this I am
forced to confess, that the selfsame fire has so inflamed my fancy, and the
like battery has so beaten my breast, as silence and modesty set aside, I am
forced by love to plead for pardon at the bar of thy bounty, whose captive I
remain, till either the sentence of life or death be pronounced upon me poor
careful caytife. Love, yea, love it is, (o Pharicles) and more if more may be
that has so fettered my freedom and tied my liberty with so short a tedder,
as either thou must be the man which must unloose me from the lunes, or else I
shall remain in a loathsome Laberinth til the extreme date of death deliver me.
The Dear Pharicles, is more impatient at the first stroke, than the Hynde
which before has been galded and yet escaped, the soldier greeueth more at
the first cut, than he which has been acquainted with many wounds: so I alas
having never felt before the fire of fancy, nor tried the terrible torment of
love, think the burden more great, and the yoke more heavy, by how much the
less I have bin acquainted with such insupportable burdens. Well Pharicles, I
know thou will conclude of these my premises, that since I have been an
inhabitour so long Nell' la strada cortizana, and professed my self a friend
to Caesar, that either I have been a deep dissembler in feeding many fools
fat with flattery, or else that I never loved any but thee, is a trothlesse
tale, and a flat trick of treachery. Confess I must of force (O worthy
gentleman) that I have flattered many, but never fancied any, that I have
allured some, but loved none, that I have taken diverse in the trap, and yet
always escaped ye snare, until too long flying about the candle, I am so
scorched in the flame, and so surely fastened with the fetters of fancy by the
only sight of thy surpassing beauty, as of force I must remain thy careful
captive till either thy courtesy or cruelty cut asunder the thread of hope,
which makes me pine in misery. It is not (o Pharicles) thy pursse but thy
person which has pierced my heart, not thy coin but thy comeliness which has
made the conquest, not the help of gain, but the hope of thy good will that
has entangled my freedom, not the glitring shape of vanity but the golden
substance of virtue, not thy living, lands or parentage, but thy rare qualities
and exquisite perfections are the champions which have chayned me in the
balefull bands of lasting bondage. Lasting I may well term them, since there
is such a difference between thy state and my stay, as there remains to me no
hope of liberty. For perhaps Pharicles thou will say, that the crooked twig
will prove a crabbed tree, that the sower bud will never be sweet blossom,
how that which is bred by the bone will not easily out of ye flesh, that she
which is common in her youth will be more inconstant in her age: To conclude,
that the woman which in prime of years is lascivious, will in ripe age be most
lecherous. Yet Pharicles I answer, that the blossoms of the Mirabolanes in
Spain is most infectious, and yet the fruit very precious: that the wine may
be sower in the press, and yet by time most sweet in the Caske: that oftimes
where vice reigns in youth, there virtue remains in age. Who more perverse
being young than Paulyna, and who more perfect being old? Losyna the Queen of
the Vendales at the first a vicious maiden, but at the last a most virtuous
matrone. But to aim more near the mark, was not Rodope in the prime of her
youth counted the most famous or rather the most infamous strumpet of all
Egypt? so common a curtizan, as she was a second Messalyna for her immoderate
lust, yet in the flower of her age being married to Psammeticus the king of
Memphis, she proved so honest a wife and so chaste a Princes, as she was not
before so reproached for the small regard of her honesty, as after she was
renowned for her inviolable chastity. Phryne that graceles Gorgon of Athens,
whose monstrous life was so immodest that her careless chastity was a pray to
every straggling stranger, after she was married to Siconius, she became such
a foe to vice, and such a friend to virtue, yea, she troad her steps so
steddily in the trade of honesty, as the Metamorphosis of her life to her
perpetual fame was engraven in the brazen gates of Athens. So (Pharicles) if
the Gods shall give me such prosperous fortune as to receive some favor of
thee in liew of my most loyal love, and I shall reap some reward for my
deserts and have my fired fancy requited with fervent affection, assure thy
self I will so make a change of my chaffre for better ware, of my fleeting will
with stayed wisdom, of my inconstancy with continency, from a most vicious
liking to such a virtuous living, from a lascivious Lamia, to a most loial
Lucretia, as both thou and all the world shall have as great cause to marvel
at my modesty, as they had cause to murmr at my former dishonestie: and thus
languishing in hope I wish thee as good hap as thou can desire or imagine.

Thine though the Gods say no, Clarynda.


CLarynda having thus finished her Letter, called one of her maids which she
thought most meet for such a purpose, and willed her to carry it with as
much speed as might be to Pharicles, who having taken the charge in hand,
dealt so clarklie in the cause as she sought such fit opportunity for the
performance of her message, that she found Pharicles sitting solitary in his
chamber, to whom she offered the letter in her mistress behalf on this wise.

Sir quoth she, if my bold attempt to trouble your study may import small
manners or little modesty, the urgent cause being once known, I hope both I
shall be excused and you pacified. For so it is, that my mistress Clarynda by
the space of two or three days has been pinched with such unacquainted
pains, and griped with such unspeakable griefs, as the extremity of her
sickness is such, as we look only when the stroke of death shall free her
from this incredible calamity. Yet amidst the sorest panges of her pinching
distress, she commanded me to present this letter to your worships hands,
wherein both the cause and the sickness it self is decyphered. For she has
heard by report that you have such perfect skill in curing that kind of
malady which by fortune is inflicted upon her, that either of her death or the
restoring of her health consists in your cunning, which if it be such, as no
doubt it is, if either you have the nature of a Gentleman, or your courtesy be
such as all Saragossa speaks of, I hope her disease being once known, you
will send such a sovereign salve for her sickness, as we her poor
handmaides shall have cause to give you thanks for our mistress health, and
she her self be bound to remain a duetifull debtor of yours for ever.

Pharicles hearing the subtle song of this enchaunting Siren, doubted to touch
the scrappe for fear of the snare, and was loath to taste of any dainty
delicates, least he might unhappily be crossed with some impoysoned dish of
charming Cyrces, for Pharicles knew himself an unfit Physician for such a
paltring patient, neither could he on the sudden divine of her dangerous
disease, nor conjecture the cause of her insupportable sorrow, unless she were
fallen in love with his friend Ferragus, and thought to make him a means to
persuade his friend to the like affection. But to avoid the trappe whatsoever
the train were, he though best to look before he did leap, and to cast the
water before he gave counsel, least in kneeling to Saint Francis shrine, he
should be thought a Friar of the same fraternity: to avoid therefore such
inconvenience as might happen by replying too rashly, he gave her this
uncertain answer.

Maid quoth he, as you have for your part sufficiently satisfied me with this
excuse, not to think evil of your boldness, so you have driven me into a
doubt what I should conjecture of ye strangenes of the message, since that since
I soiourned in Saragossa, I have neither openly professed my self a Physician,
nor secretly ministered to any of my friends whereby any such supposition might
be gathered, but perhaps it pleases your Mistress to descant thus merrily with
me for my pilgrims apparel which at my first coming to Saragossa I did use to
wear, which if it be so, tell her I traueiled not as a Pilgrim that had
cunning to cure the disease of a Curtizan, because I would not buy repentance
too dear, but that my pilgrims weed did warn me to beware for cheaping such
chaffre, as was set to sale in the shameless shop of Venus: Marry if your
mistress be in earnest, and that her disease be so dangerous that all the
learned Physicians in Saragossa dare not deal withal, and yet my small skill
may cure it, I mean first to seek out the nature of the sickness, and then
the virtue of the simples to make the receipt, which being done, my Page shall
bring her an answer of her letter speedily. The maid hearing this doubtful
answer departed, but Pharicles desirous to see what clarklie conclusions he
should find in the Curtizans scrowle, could scarcely stay while the maid had
turned her back from vnripping the Seals, wherein he found Clarinda combred
with such a perilous sickness, as must of necessity breed her death if she
were not cured, or his extreme misery if she were amended, seeing himself
therefore chosen a Physician for such a passionate patient as would reward him
with large revenues and rich possessions for his pains (yea and that which
was more, yielded her person into his power in part of payment, whose comely
proportion surpassed the brauest dames in Europe, if the stayne of her honesty
had not been a blemish to her incomparable beawtie) he was with these large
offers driven into a doubtful dilemma what he should reply to Clarindas
demand, his dissembling with Mamillia, his treachery to Publia, his credit
cracked in Italy, the loss of his friends, the hate of his foes, and now
again the riches of Clarinda, her surpassing beawtie, and her promise to take
a new course of life so assaulted the fort of this perplexed Pharicles, as he
had almost yielded a listening ear to the melody of this immodest mermaide.
But as there is no herb so perilous which has not some one virtue which is
precious, nor no Serpent so infectious which is not indewed with some one
quality which is commodious: So Pharicles although he was wholly wedded unto
vanity, and had professed himself a mortal foe to virtue, being in the
state of his life such a mutable machauilian, as he neither regarded friend nor
faith, oath nor promise, if his wavering wit persuaded him to the contrary:
yet he entered into such deep considerations of the curtizans conditions and of
the care of his own credit, yea the fear of God and dread of man so daunted
his conscience, that now he so loathed this lascivious Lamia, as full of
chollar he fell into these melancholic passions.

Is it not sufficient (O fickle and unsteadfast fortune) that thou have drenched
me in the waves of distress, and tossed me with the tempest of adversity, in
loosing two such true and trusty lovers as by thy frowning frowardnes I have
lost, but now to aggrauate my grief and to repaie my care with greater
calamity, thou seek in a strange country to trappe me in the snares of
captivity, where I have neither kinsmen to comfort me, nor friends to give
me good advise to redress my misery: yea and that which is most despite, to
entangle me with such trash, the burden whereof is the greatest plague that any
mortal man can sustain? O hapless man, and unhappy fortune! Why but
Pharicles, why do thou so fondly accuse fortune of injustice? Whereas if
thou weyest all things in the equal balance, she seeks more thy preferment
than thou thy self can desire. Consider but thine own case: Mamillia has
rejected thee for a flatterer, and Publia accounts thee for a Parasite, Gonzaga
is thy foe, Gostyno thine enemy, yea thy very friends are become thine
adversaries, and all Padua despises thee as a pattern of leawdenesse: what
hope can thou have then Pharicles to recover thy credit where every man of
reputation will refuse thy company? Do thou hope to win fame where thou
art infamous, or to be counted virtuous where thou art tried to be most
lascivious? No, no, and therefore count fortune thy friend, who in a strange
country has offered thee such a match, as for her parentage and patrimony,
lands and living, birth and beauty, may deserve to be a mate for the most
famous Prince in the world. Yea but Pharicles, she is a Curtizan, common and
inconstant. What then? Has she not promised to change her vicious liking into
a most virtuous living, the state of a Curtizan into the stay a of matron, and
to make a Metamorphosis of her forepassed dishonestie into most perfect
modesty? The palm yt is most crooked being a twig is most straight being a
tree. What more hurtful to the heart than the buds of a date, and yet no
greater cordial than the fruit: nothing sauoureth worse than a Panther being
a whelp, yet no beast has so sweet a smell being old: that which often times in
prime of years is most perilous, in ripe age proves most precious. So
Pharicles although Clarinda has been a most graceless monster in her youth,
yet she may prove a most gracious matron in her age: yea and by how much the
more she has known the filthiness of vice being a maid, by so much the
more she will embrace virtue being a wife. O Pharicles are thy senses alate so
besotted, and thy wit so inueigled, art thou so blinded with the vale of vice
and dimmed with the mask of vanity, that thou art become more sottish than
the senseless stones, or more brute than unreasonable creatures. The
Crysolite being worn on the finger of an adulteress, so detesteth the crime
as it cracketh in pieces by mere instinct of nature. The Unicorn is such a
foe to adultery, and such a friend to chastity, as he always preserves the
one and kills the other. The juice of the Basco leaf so abhors unlawful
lust, as it will not by any means be digested in the stomach of a strumpet.
Will thou then Pharicles love her whom the senseless stones do loath, or deal
with that person whom very brute beasts do detest? No, no, Mamillia will
rather both forgive and forget thy flattery, and Publia pardon thy perjury,
than they would but once have thee consent to company with such a graceless
Curtizan. And with that such a sorrowful sadness oppressed his melancholic
mind, as he had fallen into forepassed passions had not his friend Ferragus
driven him out of that dumpe, who coming into the chamber and finding him as
one having his heart on his halfpeny, wakened him out of his dream with this
pleasant salutation.

I am sorry friend Pharicles to find you in this dumpe, so I am the more
grieved because I cannot conjecture the cause: and although it be the duty of
a friend to be copartner of his friends sorrow, yet I dare not wish my self a
partaker of your sadness, because I suppose you are offering incense at the
altar of such a Saint, at whose shryne you will not so much as once vouchsafe
that I should but sing placebo. If this be the care that combers your mind,
good Pharicles find some other time for your amorous passions: But if it be any
sinister mishap which has driven you into this dumpe, either want of wealth,
loss of friends or other frown of Fortune, only reveal Pharicles wherein I
may pleasure thee, and I will supply thy want with my weal, and cure thy care
with such comfortable counsel as my simple wit can afoord. The fairest sands
Pharicles are oftimes most fickle. When the leaf of the Seahuluer looks most
green, then is the root most withered, where the Sea breaks with greatest
billows, there is the water shallowest: so oftimes in the fairest speech lies
hid ye falsest heart, in flourishing words dissembling deeds, and in the
greatest show of good will the smallest effect of friendship. I can not
Pharicles paint out my affection toward thee with colored speeches, nor
decipher my amity with the pensill of flattery, but if thou will account me
for thy friend, and so use me when thou have occasion, thou shall (to be short)
find me far more prodigal in performance than prattling in promises, and so
I end.

Pharicles for all these painted speeches of his friend Ferragus, durst not
wade us far where the foord was unknown, nor reveal the cause of his care
to his companion, lest happily he might find a Pad in the straw, and try that
oftimes of the smoothest talk ensues the smallest truth: to satisfy
therefore his friend and to cloak the cause of his care, he coined this pretty
scuse.

O Ferragus quoth he, it is not as you imagine the pangs of love which have
driven me into these passions, neither the want of wealth which have thus
wrapped me in woe? for to be entangled with love I have always thought it a
madness, and to wail for wealth a point of mere folly, but it is Ferragus
such a misery, as the sturdie Stoikes themselves, which were never moved with
adversity, did only dread to be strooken with this despightfull dart of
calamity. Yet amidst this my greatest misfortune thy friendly affection is
such a comfortable collife to my crazed mind, and I find such comfort in thy
friendship, as I think my lands life nor liberty half sufficient to requite
thy courtesy, but promising unto thee the like unfeigned affection, and reposing
the stay of my life in thy trustiness, I will unfold unto thee the cause of my
distress. The smoke Ferragus of Padua is more dear unto me than the fire of
Saragossa, and the waters of Italy do far more delight my taste than the
most delicate wines in Sicilia, and rather had I live in a poor cottage in my
native soil, than be pampered up in princely palaces in a strange country:
Yea, it is Ferragus naturally given to all to choose rather to live in
adversity amongst their friends at home, than in prosperity among strangers
abroad: in so much that no greater misery can be inflicted upon any man, than
to lead an exiled life in a foreign nation. This this Ferragus is the cross
wherewith I am afflicted. For I must confess unto thee by the law of
friendship, that through the displeasure of the Emperor I am condemned to
lead my life in perpetual exile, so that neither I cannot nor may not so much
as once approach the confines of Italy, which restraint from my native country
is such a hell to my mind, and such a horror to my conscience, as death
should be thrice welcome to release me from banishment. It is not the loss of
my lands or living Ferragus which so molests my mind, but the want of my
faithful and familiar friends: for wealth may be gotten by wisdom, but a
trusty friend is hardly recovered, so that Zeno himself was of this opinion,
that the loss of friends is only to be lamented. Solon the Athenian being
demanded why he made no law for adulterers, answered, because there were none
in his common wealth. Why quoth the other, but how if there happen to be any,
shall he dye? No quoth Solon, he shall be banished, meaning that no torture,
torment nor calamity is to be compared to the misery of exile. Woe is me then
most miserable creature.

Why Pharicles quoth Ferragus, will thou salve sadness with sorrow, or cure
care with calamity? Will thou wipe away woe with wailing? or drive away these
dumps with dith despair? No no Pharicles, but to add a salve to this sore,
thus I reply to thy complaint.

The most wise and ancient Philosophers Pharicles have been of this opinion,
that the world generally is but as one City: so that wheresoever a wise man
remains, he dwells in his own home, for nature has appointed the
selfsame laws to every place, neither is she contrary to her self in the
furthest parts of ye world. There is no place where the fire is cold, and the
water hot, the air heavy, and the earth light: neither has wit or learning
less force in India than in Italy, and virtue is had in reputation as well in
the North as in the South: so that Anacharsis was wont to say, vnaquaeque
patria Sapienti patria. But perhaps Pharicles thou will object thy great
possessions which thou have lost, and how thou were of more account for thy
birth and parentage among thine own, than ever thou shall be among strangers.
But I say Pharicles, that Coriolanus was more beloved of the Volscians, among
whom he lived in exile, than of the Romans with whom he was a citizen.
Alcibiades being banished by the Athenians, became chief Captain of the army
of the Lacedaemonians. And Hanniball was better entertained by king Antiochus,
than with his own subjects in Carthage. And I dare say Pharicles, thou were
never more famous in Padua than thou art here in Saragossa: Yea, and the more
to mitigate thy misery, consider with thy self that there is no greater
comfort than to have companions in sorrow: thou art not the first, nor shall
not be the last which have been exiled into foreign countries, yea, and such
to whom thou art far inferior both in calling and countenance. Cadmus the
king of Thebes was driven out of the self same city which he had builded, and
dyed old in exile among the Illyrians. Sarcas the king of the Molossians
vanquished by Philip king of Macedonia, ended his miserable days in exile.
Dionysius the Syracusan driven out of his country was constrained to teach a
School at Corynth. Syphax the great king of Numidia seeing his city taken and
his wife Sophonisba in the arms of his mortal foe Masynissa, and that his
misery should be a trumpet to sound out Scipios triumph, ended his life both
exiled and imprisoned. Perseus the king of Macedonia, first discomfited and
then deprived of his kingdom, and lastly yielded into the hands of Paulus
Aemilius, remained long time a poore-banished prisoner. These Pharicles without
reciting any more, are sufficient, considering their crowns, kingdoms and
Majesty's, to prove that Fortune has not only offered the like mishap to
others, but also has not done so great despite unto thee as was in her power
to have done. But perhaps Pharicles thou will reply that these mighty
Monarchs are not in the same predicame^t, for they were banished their
kingdoms by open enemies, and thou thy country by supposed friends: they
were exiled by sinister enmity of foreign foes, and thou by the secret envy
of flattering companions: so that the self same citizens who were bound unto
thy father for his prudent government being their magistrate, and to thee for
thy liberality maintaining their liberties, have repayed thy courtesy with
most ungrateful cruelty. To which I answer, that Theseus whose famous acts
are so blazed abroad through all the world, was driven out of Athens by the
self same citizens which he him self had placed, and dyed an old banished
man in Tyrus. Solon who governed his citizens with most golden laws, was
notwithstanding exiled by them into Cyprus. The Lacedaemonians being bound nor
beholding to no man so much as unto Lycurgus, for all his prudent policy in
governing the city constrained him to lead his life in exile. The Romans
suffered Scipio Africanus the first which defended them from so many perils,
most miserably to die in Lyntermum. And the second Scipio for all that he
subdued Carthage and Numantia which refused to become tributaries to the
Romans, found in Rome a murderer but not a revenger. Ingratitude Pharicles,
is the most ancient mischief which reigns among the people, being so
deeply rooted that it does not as all other things wax old, but waxes
daily more fresh, so that the flower falling there follows great store of
fruit. And further Pharicles, for the loss of thy friends I confess it is
the greatest cause of care, and yet oftimes the fairest face has the fowlest
heart, and the sweetest words the sowrest deeds, thou have therefore the
means by this mishap to judge between the faithful and fained friend: for
as the touchestone tries the gold, so adversity proves friends. Had not
Orestes fallen into his extreme frenzy, he had never tried the sacred faith
of Pilades: and if the wars of the Lapythans had not lighted upon Perithous,
he might have thought himself to have had many friends, whereas he found
none but one, the famous Theseus. Eurialus had never proved the constancy of
Nysus, had he not fallen into the hands of the soldiers of Turnus. Since then
(Pharicles) fortune has but given thee occasion to try thy friends, count it
not for such a misery. For if all thy companions and kinsemen in Padua prove
but clawbackes, assure thy self thou have such a faithful friend here in
Saragossa, as counts thy mishap his misfortune, and thy care his own
calamity: yea, if either my counsel may comfort thy crazed mind, or my
wealth relieve thy want, try and then trust: and if thou find me
troathlesse, the gods reward my treachery with most vile and extreme misery.

Pharicles hearing the great protestations of his faithful friend Ferragus,
and perceiving that his friendship was constant and not counterfeite, not
only told him that this report of his exile was but a tale to try his
affection, but also revealed unto him the very troath of his departure from
Italy: what hap had passed between him and Mamillia, and also the letter of
Clarinda: which when Ferragus saw, he both gave him counsel to avoid such a
common Curtizan, and further to drive him out of those dumps, carried him to his
fathers house to pass away the time in parle.

Where, as soon as they came, they found Signor Farnesse in the garden devising
pleasantly with diverse Gentlewomen, amongst whom was Madam Gambara the
Marquess of Saldena, and the young Lady Modesta: who seeing Pharicles, were
very glad of his so happy arrival, that now they might try what was in the
Gentleman, since he was the man that bare the bell for courtly bringing up
throughout all Sicillia. But Pharicles seeing them in earnest talk, thought
they had been canuasing of some serious and secret matter, and not being very
well acquainted with the Marquess, knew it past manners to come to counsel
before he were called, began to withdraw himself out of the garden had not
Signor Farnesse recald him on this wise.

What Master Pharicles quoth he, is it the fashion in Padua to be so strange
with your friends, knowing that you are not so soon come as welcome, nor so
hastily arrived as heartily desired of all the company? I speak also for my
Lady Gambara and Madam Modesta, especially at this time, since there is such
a passing doubtful matter in question as all our cunning cannot decide. We
knowing therefore that you travelers cannot be without experience and
especially in such loving cases, will refer our whole controversy, if the
Marquess and my Lady Modesta be content, to your skillful determination, and
in my opinion we shall have hapt on a very fit judge.

Sir quoth he, I both know and find my self far more welcome to your house
than my small deserts can merit: yet not willing to strain so much upon your
courtesy, to be so bold to intrude my self into company where both my
betters are in presence and the talk utterly unknown, least they might judge
I had either small nurture or less manners. But since it has pleased my Lady
the Marquess and Madam Modesta (to whom I think my self greatly bound that
their Ladyships will vouchsafe of such a simple Gentleman) to admit me for a
hearer of such a doubtful discourse: yet Sir I accept not the conditions, for
if the case be so intricate as neither your old years nor great experience can
decide, it were far unfit for me to set down a sentence whose age and skill
is yet in the budding, and especially in such an honorable company where
either their countenance or calling may force me speak either for fear or
favor.

No Master Pharicles (quoth the Marquess) although I have such opinion both of
your wit and skill as I durst in a more weighty matter than this admit you for
a judge: yet since you are a party touched within the compass of the
commission, I will not tie my self so straightly to your verdit, as either
your yea or nay shall stand for payment unless you bring the soundest reason.

Our question is Master Pharicles whether the man or the woman be more constant
or loyal in love. The cause of our controversy arose about certain vain
verses compiled by an injurious Gentleman here in Saragossa, who with
despightfull taunts has abused the Gentlewomen of Sicillia, most peeuishlie
describing their apparel, and presumptuouslie decyphering their nature. But
leaving him to his folly, you know both the case and the cause, and therefore
let us hear your opinion.

The copy of the verses.
SInce Lady mild (too base in array) has liude as an exile,
None of account but stout: if plain? stale slut not a courtresse
Dames nowadayes? fie none: if not new guised in all points
Fancies fine, fawst with conceits, quick wits very wily.
Words of a Saint, but deeds guess how, fainde faith to deceive men.
Courtsies coy, no vale but a vaunt trickt up like a Tuscan.
Paced in print, brave lofty looks, not used with the vestals.
In hearts too glorious, not a glaunce but fit for an Empress.
As minds most valorous, so strange in array: mary stately.
Up fro the wast like a man, new guise to be casde in a dublet.
Down to the foot (perhaps like a maid) but hosde to the kneestead.
Some close breetcht to the crotch for cold, tush; peace; it is a shame Sir.
Hears by birth as black as Iet, what? art can amend them.
A perywig frounst fast to the frunt, or curld with a bodkin.
Hats from France thick pearld for pride, and plumde like a peacocke.
Ruffes of a Syse, stiff starcht to the neck, of Lawne; mary lawless.
Gowns of silk, why those be too bad? side, wide with a witness.
Small and gent In The wast, but backs as broad as a Burgess.
Needelesse noughts, as crisps, and scarphes worn Alla Morisco.
Fumde with sweetes, as sweet as chaste, no want but abundance.
Pharicles having read these verses smiling at the vain of the Gentleman,
found his mind clogged with a double care. For to praise men for their
loyalty he found his own conscience a just accuser of their inconstancy, to
condemn women for their fickleness he saw Mamillia and Publia two presidents
of perfect affection: yet for fashion sake he made this or such like answer.

If credit Madame may be given to those ancient authors, whose wit, wisdom
and learning has shrined them up in the famous temple of immortality, your
demand is answered, and the question easily decided. For Socrates, Plato, yea
and Aristotle himself, who spent all their time in searching out the secret
nature of all things, assigned this as a particular quality appertaining to
womankinde, namely, to be fickle and inconstant, alleging this Astronomicall
reason, that Luna a feminine and mutable Planet has such predominant power in
the constitution of their complexion because they be phlegmatike, that of
necessity they must be fickle, mutable and inconstant, whereas Choler,
wherewith men do abound, is contrary, and therefore by consequence stable,
firm and without change: so that by how much the more the body is
Phlegmatike, by so much the more the mind is fickle: and where the body is
most Chollerick, there the mind is most constant. To leave these rules of
Astronomy, and to come to humane reason, Pindarus, Homer, Hesiodus, Ennius,
Virgil, Martial, Propertius, and many authors more, whose pithie and golden
sentences have in all ages been holden as divine Oracles, have in all their
writings with one consent auerred, that the natural disposition of women is
framed of contraries: now liking, now loathing, delighting this, and now again
despising the same: loving and hating: yea laughing and weeping, and all with
one wind: so that it is their natural constitution in this one property to
be like the Polipe: that if it happen some one woman not to be variable, it is
not so because it is her nature, but because she has amended her fault by
nourture. For the confirmation of the former premises, Madame, it is not
necessary to infer examples, since there is none here but could report
infinite histories of such dissembling dames as have falsified their faith to
their lovers, whereas the constancy of men is such, that neither has any
authors found it faulty, neither can as I conjecture, if you speak as you
think, your conscience condemn them as guilty, so that to confirm the
loyalty of men were as much as to prove that which is not denied.

How say you to this quoth Signor Farnese, has not Pharicles answered you
fully to your question? is not now my former reasons confirmed and yours
utterly infringed?

Tush sir quoth the Marquess, one tale is always good until another is heard,
but all this wind shakes no corn, neither is the defendant overthrown at the
fist plea of the plaintiff. The more glistring the skin of the Serpent is,
the more infectious: where the billows be greatest, there the water is
shallowest: the rotten wall has the most need of painting, and the falsest
tale has need of the fairest tongue: where the greatest show of eloquence is,
there is the smallest effect of troth. But to your surmised Sophistry thus I
answer master Pharicles, that whereas you build your reasons upon the credit
of ancient authors, I will lay my foundation upon the same rock, and so
thrust you on the bosom with your own lance. For as for Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle, whom you allege as ratifiers of your former reasons, I say that
both they and others who far surpass them in the sacred skill of Astronomy,
affirm (as you say) that the natural constitution of women is Phlegm, and of
men Choler, which if you consider with indifferent judgment, proves us
trusty and you trothlesse, us constant and you variable, us loyal under Luna,
and you mutable under Mars. For the Phlegmatike complexion is cold and moist,
utterly repugnant to the flaming heat of voluptuous desires, participating of
the nature of water, which so cools and quenches the fire of fancy, as
having once fixed the mind, it resists with the cold moisture the frying
heat of fond and fickle affection, whereas the Chollerike constitution is hot
and dry, soon set on fire and soon out, easily inflamed and as easily
quenched, ready to be scorched with the least heat of beawtie, being of the
nature of fire which is the most light and moving Element of all, fiering at
the first sight, and yet so dry as it has no continuance, being very violent
and little permanent. And though Luna is predominant in our complexion, yet
Mercury is Lord of your constitution, being in his constellation fleeting,
inconstant, variable, treacherous, trothlesse, and delighting in change: so that
it is not so common as true, the nature of men is desirous of novelty. And as
touching Hesiodus, Homer, Virgil and others, I answer that evil will never
spoke well, and that Martial and the rest of his cogging companions, because
they found some one halting, they will condemn all for creeples, thinking by
discrediting others unjustly to make themselves famous, and condemning others
of that whereof they themselves are chiefly to be accused. Who fixes his
fancy, and then changes affection? who promises love and perfourmeth hate?
who now likes and within a moment lotheth? who wooeth one and sueth to
another? who loyal in his lips and a liar in his heart? but only men, and
yet they must be constant. As for the infinite examples you could infer
master Pharicles to prove the disloialtie of women, you do well to conceal
them because you cannot reveal them: for it is hard to reap corn where no
seed was sown, to gather grapes of a barraine vine, to pull hair from a balde
man's head, or to bring examples of women's disloyalty which never committed
such trothlesse treachery. But as for your changing champio^s which challenge
to defend your crazed constancy, how trusty was Theseus to poor Ariadne?
Demophoon dissembled with Phillis, and yet she died constant. Aeneas a very
stragler, yet Dido never found halting. Jason without faith, and yet Medea
never fleeting. Paris a counterfeit Camelion, and yet Oenone a trusty Turtle.
Ulysses variable, and Penelope most constant. Yea, Pharicles infinite examples
might be brought which would breed our credit and your infamy, if time as
well as matter would permit me. So that the inconstancy of such mutable
Mercurialistes, and courtly copesmates as you be, is grown to such a custom,
that flattery is no fault, and variety is rather embraced as a virtue than
rejected as a vice. In fine, the blossom of disloyalty has brought forth
such faithless fruit in your mutable minds, as he that is constant is counted
a calfe, and he that cannot dissemble cannot live.

How now Signor Farnese, quoth the lady Modesta, has not the Marquess given
Pharicles a cake of the same dow, yea, has she not better defended the Fort
than he could assault it? Now you see Pharicles counterfeit coin will go for
no payment, and his rampire too weak to withstand her force, and his reason
not so strong but they are clearly infringed.

In troth, quoth Farnese, my Lady Marquess has played the valiant champion,
and has put in so perfect a plea to defend her clients cause, that if I have
ever any case in the Court, she shall be my counselor.

Jest how you please, quoth the Marquess, I am sure mine adversary will
confess, that howsoever I faltred in my tale, I failed not in the truth.

Indeed Madame, quoth Pharicles, it is a foul byrd defiles the own neast, and
yet I will say my conscience, that for constancy men are far more to be
appeached of want than women to be condemned for defect, and therefore who
soever made the forepassed verses, was both unjust and injurious: yea, the
railing of Mantuan in his Eglogs, the exclaiming of Euripides in his Tragedies,
the tants of Martial, and privy quippes of Propertius, are more of course
than cause, and rather enforced by rage than inferred by reason.

What Pharicles quoth Signor Fernese, I see thou can hold a candle before the
devil, and that you can so cunningly run a point of Descant, that be the
plain song never so simple thou can quauer to please both parts. You were
even now a condemner of women's variety, and are you now an accuser of men's
inconstancy? If you be so variable in your verdit, we will think that either
you speak foolishlie without skill or as a flatterer to please women. But
indeed it is dangerous for him to speak ill of an Irish kearne that is
offering a Cow to Saint Patricke, and as perilous for a man to blaspheme
women that is kneeling at the shrine of Venus: since then you are in the same
case we will take your devotion for a sufficient excuse. In the mean time if
it please my Lady the Marquess we will go to dinner, and there end our
discourse more at leisure.

Content, quoth the Marquess, and with that they went to dinner, where
Pharicles behaved himself so wittily, as they stood in doubt whether his wit,
beauty, or behavior deserved greater commendations.

Well, dinner being ended, Pharicles having the spurs in his side, alleging
urgent cause of his so hastly departure took his leave of the Marquess, and
the rest of the company, and giving great thanks to Signor Fernese for his good
cheer, hyed him home in haste to his chamber. Where seeing the letter of
Clarynda, a ghastly object to his gazing eyes, willing to return an answer
that she might not accuse him of discurtesie, took Pen and Ink and wrote a
letter to this effect.

Pharicles to Clarynda, health.
IT is hard Clarynda for him which comes within the reach of a Crocodile to
escape without danger, and it is as impossible to see the Cockatrice and not
be infected. Who so touches the Torpedo must needs be charmed, and he that
handles a Scorpion cannot but be stricken: it is not possible to meddle with pitch
and have clean hands, nor to be acquainted with a strumpet and have a good
name. This considered Clarynda, I being a stranger of Italy, whose life and
living is more noted than if I were a citizen in Saragossa, counting my honest
behavior ye chiefest stay of my unknown state, feared least thy maids
arrival to my lodging should be hurtful to my countenance, or prejudicial to
my credit. If then I grieved to have my parler combred with the maid, you may
well think I were loath to have my person trobled with the Mistress. For silence
and modesty Clarynda which you say the force of my love constrained you to
pass, I am sure you shook hands with modesty, and strained courtesy with
silence long before you knew me for Pharicles, or I you for a Curtizan. Indeed
you have brought forth fit examples to confirm your consequent, and I allow
them. For silent Sapho was a riming monster of lechery, and you a rooted
Mistress in bawdrie: Modest Phedra was a most incestuous harlot, and you a
most infectious strumpet: so that your comparisons hold very well, since the
equality of your manners makes them not odious. Do thou think Clarinda that
I am so careless in choice as to choose such filthy chaffre, or so soon
allured as to be in love with such trash? No, no, I have such care to my credit
and such regard to my calling, such respect to my birth, and such fear to
defame my pare^tage, as I mean not to match with a Princess if she be not
honest, much less then link my self to a lascivious Lais whose honesty
shall be a pray to every straggling stranger. Shall I beat the bush and others
get the birds? Shall I hold the net and others catch the fish? yea, shall
every man get his fee of the Dear, and I get nothing but the horns? No I will
first fast before I taste of such a dish as will turn me to so great
displeasure. But you reply that the Mirabolanes in Spain are perilous in the
bud and precious in the fruit, that the wine is sower in the press and yet
sweet in the Caske, that she which is vicious in her youth may be virtuous in
her age: I grant indeed it may be, but it is hard to bring the posse into
esse. For the barking whelp proves always a biting dog, the young Fry will
prove old Frogs: where the blossom is venomous, there the fruit must needs
be infectious, where vice is embraced in youth, there commonly virtue is
rejected in age: yea, it is a thing most commonly seen, that a young whore
proves always an old Bawd. As for Rodhope the curtizan of Egypt, and Phyrne
the strumpet of Athens, whom you bring in as examples of this strange
Metamorphosis, I answer, that their particular conversion infers no
general conclusion. For though Rodhope of a vicious maiden became a virtuous
matron, and though Phryne of a lascivious Lamia became a loyal Lucretia, yet
it follows not that you should of a straggling harlot become a stayed huswife:
for we see it hardly comes to pass that a young devil proves an old Saint.
But put case you would perform as much as you promise, and make a change of
your chaffre with better ware, of your fleeting affection with fixed fancy,
that your forepassed dishonestie would turn to perfect constancy, that of a
careless Corynna you would become a careful Cornelia: yet I cannot recall the
stone already cast, withhold the stroke already stricken, nor reclaim
affection, fancy being already fixed. I am Clarynda, to put thee out of
doubt, betroathed to a young Gentlewoman in Padua, who in beauty, wealth and
honesty, is inferior to none in all Italy, and would thou then have me
leave the fine Partridge to pray on a carrion Kyte, to refuse the Hare and
hunt at the Hedgehog, to falsify my faith to a most honest and beautiful
dame, and plight my troth to a lascivious and dishonest strumpet? No Clarynda,
thou hear I cannot though I would, and if I could I will not, and so
farewell.

Not thine if he could, Pharicles.


Pharicles having thus finished his letter, sent it by his Page to Clarynda,
who receiving it heartily and rewarding the Page bountifully, went hastily into
her closet, where vnripping ye seals she found not a preservative, but a
poison; not news to increase her joy, but to breed her annoy; not loving lines
as from a friend, but a quipping letter as from a foe; not a comfortiue to
lengthen her life, but a corasiue to shorten her days: yea, she found the
letter so contrary to her former expectation, that now falling into a
desperate mind, she turned her fervent love into extreme hate, her deep
delight into deadly despite, as now her chiefest care and industry was to
revenge her broyling rage upon guiltless Pharicles, which she speedily
performed on this wise.

It happened that upon the same day wherein she received the Letter, Signor
Farnese and the rest of the Magistrates of Saragossa were assembled together in
the common Hall, to consult of matters as concerning the state of their City,
whither Clarynda came, and there openly accused Pharicles to be a Spy, and
that his remaining in Saragossa was to see where the City was weakest, and
that he had conferred with her how and when he might most conveniently
betraie it: and that she regarding more the commodity of her country than the
love of a stranger, thought good to reveal the matter speedily, that they
might the better prevent such a mischief.

The Magistrates giving credit to Clarynda, and knowing that Pharicles had a
pestilent wit for such a purpose, sent the officers to apprehend him, who
finding him in his lodging, made him greatly astonished when he knew the cause
of their coming, yet he made them good cheer and went the more willingly,
because he felt his conscience clear from any such crime as might be
objected against him. Pharicles being come into the common Hall, Signor Farnese
saluted him on this manner.

I see master Pharicles, quoth he, it is hard to judge the tree by the leaves, to
choose the stone by his outward hew, cloth by his color, and a man by his
fair words, for none so fair as the Panther, and yet none so ravenous, the
Peacocke has most glistering feathers and yet most ouglie feet, the barren
leaf is most delightful to be seen and most deadly to be tasted, the
Chrisolite pleases the eye and infecteth the stomach, yea, that which often
times seems most precious, proves most perilous, for treachery has a more
glozing show than troth, and flattery displaies a brauer flag than faith:
subtle Synon could tell a finer tale than simple Brennus, and deceitful
Ulysses had a fairer tongue than faithful Ajax: so Pharicles I perceive, the
more wit thou have, the more to be suspected, and thy fairest speech infers the
foulest mind, thy courtesy here in Saragossa has been but a cloak for thy
treachery. Well Pharicles, have I brought up a bird to pick out mine own
eyes? have I hatched up the egg that will prove a Cockatrice? yea, have I
cherished thee as a friend, which would murder me as a foe? have I sought
to breed thy credit and thou devised my destruction? have (I say) I sought thy
bliss and thou my bale? I thy weal and thou my woe? have our citizens here in
Saragossa honored thee as thy friends, and thou abhorred them as thine enemies?
well, the greater their love was counting thee courteous, the greater plague
will they inflict upon thee finding thee treacherous? The Troyans never showed
more favor to any than to Synon, who afterward betrayed the city. Who so
welcome into Carthage as Aeneas, and yet he repaied them with ingratitude: the
Babylonians never trusted any better than Zopyrus and he most traitorously
betrayed them to Darius: and shall not their mishaps learn us to beware? yes
Pharicles, we will prevent our danger with heaping coals upon thy head. The
cause of these my speeches I need not rehearse, because thine own conscience
condemns thee as guilty. Thou art accused here Pharicles by Clarinda to be a
spy, yea, thou have fought secretly to betray the city into the hands of the
Italians thy countrymen, and upon this she has here solemnly taken her oath.
And besides this I give thee to understand, that thou can not by the Statutes
of Saragossa plead for thy self being a stranger if thou be appeached of
treason, neither will it serve thee to have a testimonial from thy country,
since we know that the Italians are confederate to thy treachery, so that by
the law this day thou should die, since thy accuser has confirmed the
complaint with her corporal oath: yet I will stand so much thy friend as
repriue thee for forty days, to see what will fall between the cup and the
lip, and with that he sat down.

Pharicles amazed with this treacherous accusation of this graceless Curtizan,
was so drenched in distress, and sowsed in sorrow to see that he might not
acquit himself with unfolding this devised knauerie, that if very courage
had not been a conserve to comfort his care, he had there with present death
ended this dissension. But chearing himself up as well as he could, he went to
the Iailors house without uttering any one word, until there being solitary
by himself he fell into these extremities.

It is more grief (quoth he) to the silly Lamb to lie lingering in the gripe
of the Tygre, tha^ presently to be devoured, and he which is cast into the
Lions den wishes rather to be torn in pieces than to live in fear of
future torment: yea, I try by experience that to die cannot be full of care,
because death cutteth off all occasions of sorrow, but to live and yet every
day to look to die, of all woes is the most hellish misery: for the stinging
fear to die, and the greedy desire to live make such a cruel combat in the
mind of the condemned person, as no kind of torture (how ever so terrible) is
to be compared to that when as one lingereth in life without any hope at all to
live. And what then Pharicles, is there any mishap so miserable which thou
have not merited, or any death so despitefull, which thou have not deserved?
No, were thy torment thrice more terrible, it were not half sufficient to
repay thy treachery: thy dissembling with Mamillia, and thy falsehood with
Publia, unless the Gods be too unjust, cannot escape without vengeance. Why
but do the Gods fret more at my flattery than they fumed at others folly?
Aeneas dissembled with Dido, and yet was prosperous: Theseus deceived Ariadne,
and yet happy: Paris contemned Oenone, and yet the Gods favored his
enterprise in gaining Helena: Jason was unjust to Medea, and yet returned safe
to Greece. Yea, but Pharicles, they were not so wilful as thou were, to set
thy self opposite both to the Gods and Fortune, they took time while time
was, and held open the poake when the Pigge was offered. For Aeneas though he
forsook Dido, he obayed the Gods in taking Lauinia, and Theseus though he
rejected Ariadne, yet he took the dame which Fortune assigned him and that was
Phedra: But Pharicles thou have committed double offense, not only in
forsaking thy forepassed lovers, but also in rejecting her whom Fortune
proffered thee, and that was Clarinda. Oh Pharicles be content with thy state,
and let patience be the remedy to assuage this thy intolerable malady: for
better had thou far turn the stone with Sysiphus, and be torn upon the
wheel with Ixion, than be coupled with such a common Curtizan: yea, ere it be
long thou would think thy self happy to suffer ten thousand deaths to be
separated from her company: for as there is no pain to be compared to the
stinging of an Aspick, so there is no such plague as to be troubled with a
strumpet. And with that such sorrow surcharged his molested mind, as he was
not able to utter any more complaints.

While thus Pharicles lay languishing in despair, there was a Merchant of
Padua named Signor Rhamberto, who being newly arrived in Saragossa, and hearing
of the late mishap of Pharicles, durst not bewray what countreyman he was for
fear of further danger, but conveyed himself out of Sicillia with as much
speed as might be, and being come to Padua, thought good to show Signor
Gonzaga in what distress Pharicles lay in Saragossa, but being come to the
house, he found the Gentleman at the point of death, and all the Senators of
Padua lamenting the extremity of his sickness, and therefore sat down
among the rest and held his peace, when as Gonzaga scarce able to utter one
word for weakness, taking his daughter Mamillia by the hand, gave her this
fatherly advertisement.

As daughter, quoth he, the man which has the stone Agathes about him is
surely defenced against adversity, so he which is forewarned by counsel if he
be wise, is sufficiently armed against future mishap and misery. I therefore
Mamillia having such fatherly affection and care for thy future state as duty
binds me by instinct of nature, seeing I lie looking every minute when my
silly soul shall leave my careful carckasse, thought good to give thee this
fatherly farewell, as the only treasure which I charge thee by the law of
duty most carefully to keep.

Virginity Mamillia, is such a precious Jewel to a virtuous Gentlewoman, as
Euphronia being demanded of one of her suitors what dowry she had to the
advancement of her marriage, answered, such wealth as could not be valued,
for (quoth she) I am a virgin: meaning, that no wealth does so enrich a
maiden, nor no dowry, of what price so ever so adorn a Damsel, as to be
renowned for inviolable virginity. Since then Mamillia it ought to be more
dear than life, and more esteemed than wealth, as thou have been careful in
my days to keep it without spot and thereby have reaped renown, so I charge
thee after my death to be as charie of such precious chaffer, least thy
sorepassed fame turn to thy greater discredit. Yea Mamillia and when the time
comes that thou meanest to match thy self in Marriage, bestow not that
carelessly in one moment which thou have kept carefully all thy life, but look
before thou leap, try before thou trust, have makes wast, hot love soon
cold, and then too late comes repentance: contemn not the counsel of thy
friends, nor reject not the advice of thy kinsemen, prefer not thine own wit
before the wisdom of thine Ancestors, nor lean not to wilfulness least
had I wist come too late. Be not secure least want of care procure thy
calamity, nor be not too careful least pensive thought oppress thee with
misery. Build not thy love upon the outward shape of beauty, least thou try
thy foundation was laid on the fickle sands of vanity. Vow not thy self to
his wealth whom thou meanest to love, nor wed not thy self to his wit, but
let thy fancy grow so far as thou hear the report of his virtue. Choose
not by the eye Mamillia, but by the ear, and yet be not delighted with his
fair words, least if thou take pleasure in hearing the Sirens sing, thou
dash thy ship against most dangerous rocks. I need not I hope Mamillia stand
so much upon these points, for a burnt child will dread the fire, and thou
have been too sore canuased in the nets, to be allured to the scrap, thou
have been too sore sowsed in the waves to venture in an unknown foorde, and
the treachery of Pharicles is sufficient to cause thee take heed of others
flattery. Well Mamillia, after thou have chosen howsoever thy choice be, seek
to cherish thy husband with love, and obey him with reverence, be not too sad
least he think thou art sollempe, nor too light least he condemn thee of
lewdness, and above all have a regard to thy good name, and a care to the
safe keeping of thy honor. Let not too much familiarity breed any suspicion,
nor show no such countenance as may give occasion of mistrust, but so behave
thy self as thou may be a credit to thy husband, and a comfort to thy
friends. Upon these considerations Mamillia I have left thee by my last will
and testament only heir and sole executor of all my lands and moueables, yet
with this prouiso, that if thou marry with faithless Pharicles, that then
thou shall be disinherited of all my goods and lands, and that the City of
Padua shall as mine heir enter into all my possessions, and for the performance
of my will, I leave the whole Senate as superuisors. Gonzaga had scarcely
spoken these last words, but his breath was so short that he could speak no
longer, and within three hours after he departed, leaving Mamillia a
sorrowful child for the loss of so good a Father.

Well, after that Mamillia had by the space of a week worn her mourning
weed, and the daily resort of her friends had something redressed her sorrow,
Signor Rhamberto (though very loath) revealed unto her the whole estate of
Pharicles distress, how he was put in prison for a spy, and that he was
accused as one that sought to betray Saragossa where he soiourned into the
hands of the Italians, and that in liew of this his treachery he should upon
the fortith day for this so heinous a fact be executed.

Mamillia hearing into what misery Pharicles was fallen, although his unjust
dealings had deserved revenge, yet she remitted all forepassed injuries, and
began to take compassion of his mishap, yielding forth such sobbing sighs and
scalding tears, as they were witnesses of her distressed mind, and earnestly
entreating Signor Rhamberto for Pharicles credit to conceal ye matter as
secretly as might be, who having promised to keep the matter as secret as she
could request, took his leave and departed, but Mamillia seeing her self
solitary, fell into these contrary passions.

Well now I see it true by experience, that where the hedge is lowest there
every man goes over, that the weakest is thrust to the wall, and he that worst
may holds the candle: that the slendrest twig is oftimes laden with most
fruit, the smallest stalk of corn has the greatest ear, and he that has
most need of comfort is oftime most crossed with calamity. Alas injurious
fortune, is it not sufficient for thee to deprive me of my Father which was
more dear unto me than mine own life: but also to heap care upon care, and
sorrow upon sorrow, I mean to murder that man whom in all the world I
chiefly esteem! Pharicles I mean, who is the fountain of my joy, the haven
of my happiness, and the stay of all my felicity, who has won my heart by
love, and shall wear it by law. What say thou Mamillia, shall Pharicles
enjoy thee? Art thou so careless of thy fathers commandment, so soon to
forget his counsel? Shall his words be as wind, and his talk of so little
effect as thou meanest rechlesly to regard it? Wilt not thou in thy life
observe that which he enjoined thee at his death? Was not Pharicles the only
man he forbad thee to marry, and will thou choose him for thy mate? In loving
him thou do forfeit thy lands and show thy self a disobedient daughter,
in hating the man thou enioyest thy possessions, and declares thy self a
dutiful child. Tush Mamillia, is not Pharicles the man to who^ thou art
confirmed by love and contracted by law? Did not thy father consent to the
match and agree to the covenant? And shall he now upon so light an occasion
cause thee to violate thine oath, break thy promise, and turn thy love to
hate? No, I will obey my father as far as the law of Nature commands me, but
to crack my credit and clog my conscience I will not consent: neither his
fatherly counsel nor the loss of my goods and lands shall constrain me to
forsake Pharicles, no misling mists of misery, no drenching showers of
disaster fortune, nor terrible tempests of adversity shall abate my love or
wrack my fancy against the slipperie rocks of inconstancy: yea if my lands
will buy his ransom or my life purchase his freedom, he shall no longer lead
his life in calamity.

And with that she flung out of her chamber being so diligent and careful to
bring her purpose to pass, that within short space she furnished a ship
wherein in disguized apparel she sailed to Sicillia coming to Saragossa the
day before Pharicles should be executed, where she dealt so warily and wisely,
that not only she learned the cause of his imprisonment, but also got the
copy of those letters which had passed between Clarynda and Pharicles,
thinking every hour a year till the next morning.

Well the dismal day being come wherein Pharicles by the dint of death should
dispatch al his forepassed miseries, Ferragus being cladde in mourning attire
with a pensive heart and sorrowful countenance comes to accompany Pharicles
so distressed with grief and oppressed with sorrow, so blubbered with tears
and blown up with sighs, that Pharicles was feign to comfort him on this wise.

Why friend Ferragus quoth he, shall the patient appoint the salve, or the sick
man set down the medicine? Shall he that is crossed with care be a comforter,
or ye distressed man be driven to give counsel? Shall I which now on every
side am pinched with the pains of death become a Physician to cure thy
calamity? Or rather should not thou in this extremity seek to assuage my
dollor with comfortable incourageme^t? Why Ferragus am I more hardy which am at
the hazard of death, than thou which art deuoide of danger? Yea: for by how
much the more I feel my conscience guiltless of this crime, by so much the
more I feel my mind free from sorrow. Socrates would not have his friend
lament when he drunk his fatal drafte, because quoth he, causeless death
ought to be without dollour: so good Ferragus cheer thy self since thy friend
Pharicles is so far from treason to Saragossa, as thou from treachery to
Padua. Pharicles scarsly had uttered these words when the officers entreated
him to make haste, for Signior Farnese and the rest of the Magistrates had
stayed a great space for his coming at the common Hall. Pharicles knowing that
procrastination in care was but to increase sorrow, found no fish on his
fingers, nor made no delays from his death, but went with them willingly. He
being arrived there before the Magistrates, Signior Farnese standing up to
pronounce the fatal sentence, was interrupted by Mamillia, who coming in
richly attired and straungely disguised, kneeling on her knees craved leave to
speak, which being granted, she uttered these words.

You have great cause to muse and marvel) O noble and worthy Sicillians) in
that a silly virgin a stranger, yea and of the same City of Padua, which is
now so detested of the citizens of Saragossa, dare presume not fearing any
danger to present her self amidst so many enemies. But whom the devil drives
he must needs run, and where law and necessity are two spurs in the side,
there the party so perplexed neither makes delaie nor fears danger, so
that Gentlemen by how much the more my arrival is to be thought strange, by
so much the more my distressed grief is to be supposed greater. It is not the
hope of preferment which forced me to this extremity, because I am of
sufficient parentage and patrimony in mine own country, neither the desire to
see foreign fashions, because it is not fit for a virgin to be counted a
wanderer. No it is partly for thy cause Signior Farnese that I came, both to
keep thee from pronouncing unjust judgment, to discover the monstrous
treachery of a trothlesse Curtizan, and to save this guiltless Gentleman from
present danger. Who by birth is a Paduan and of noble parentage, issued from
such a stock as yet was never stained either for cowards or traitors. For his
state, he is not free but contracted unto me by consent of both our parents. As
concerning his soiourning in Saragossa, it was not to betray your city, but to
learn your fashions, not to be counted a counterfaite, but to be called
courteous? But to be brief, least my tale might seem tedious to his unjust
accusation inferred by such an injurious Curtizan, thus I answer, that if the
calling of a strumpet carried as little credit here as it does with us in
Padua, Pharicles would have been more favorably examined, and her accusation
more thoroughly canuased. It was not (O noble Farnese) that she accused
Pharicles because of his treachery, but in that he would not consent to her
vanity: not because she had such love to her native country, but in that
Pharicles would not agree to match himself with so graceless a monster: and
for the confirmation of this my allegiance, see here the Letter of Clarynda,
and the reply of Pharicles, and with that she held her peace.

Farnese and the rest of the Magistrates having read the contents of the
letters, maruelling at ye mischievous mind of so hellish a harlot, sent
speedily for Clarynda, who being come and more strictly examined, confessed the
fault, and received the punishment due for such an offense. But when the
citizens of Saragossa, and especially Ferragus, heard how Pharicles was
acquitted and the treachery discovered, they both rejoiced for his happy
delivery, and also wondered that such marvelous wit, wisdom, and
incomparable constancy could remain within the young and tender years of
Mamillia. But Pharicles seeing before his eyes the Goddess which had given him
unhoped for life, driven as it were into an ecstasy for joy, with blushing
cheeks and trembling joints as one feeling in his conscience the sting of his
former inconstancy, welcomed her on this wise.

Oh Mamillia quoth he, how welcome thou art to thy poor perplexed Pharicles
I can scarsly conceive, much less able to express, but if time and place were
convenient either to confess my fault or acknowledge my offense, thou
should perceive I did now as heartily repent as before wilfully offend. Alas
how am I bound if it were but for this one only desert to remain thy
bondslaue for ever at command, well, omitting such secrets till a more
convenient leisure, hoping thou have forgiven and forgotten al forepassed
follies, I bid thee once again most heartily welcome to Saragossa. Pharicles
quoth she, thy Mamillia takes this thy hearty welcome as a sufficient
recompense for all her trouble and travel, assuring thee she has both forgiven
and forgotten all forepassed injuries, otherwise I would never have taken such
pains to free thee from danger. Let your amorous discourses alone till an
other time quoth Farnese, for you shall with the rest of the Magistrates of
Saragossa be my guests to day at dinner. Pharicles and Mamillia thanking
Farnese for his courtesy, and accepting his gentle profer, were not only his
guests for that day, but were so sumptuously banqueted there for the space of a
week, that they easily perceived by their good cheer how welcome they were
to the Gentleman. At last taking their leave of Farnese, they returned home to
Padua, where the Senators hearing of the strange adventures which Pharicles
had passed, and perceiving the incomparable constancy of Mamillia, they were
not only content that they two should marry together, but also, contrary to
her fathers last will and testament, let her peaceably enjoy all his lands and
possessions. Marry whether Pharicles proved as inconstant a husband as a
faithless wooer, I know not: but if it be my hap to hear, look for news as
speedily as may be.

Robert Green.

In praise of the Author and his Book.
IN Britain soil there is a garden platte,
Which for the Air and Nature of the place,
Both wholesome is and bravely situate,
Where learning grows and has a noble grace.
This plat does yield unto us diverse plants,
Which spread in time this Island round about,
Though some of them good juice and moisture wants,
Yet many have both pith and force (no doubt)
Some sharp of taste, but very wholesome are,
Some not so good, yet very toothsome be,
Some toothsome are, and very good (though rare)
Which all excel each other in degree.
Not first nor next do please my fancy much,
The last are best, which pleasant profit brings,
Among whom this plant, (whose place and grace is such,)
Does yield a flower, which fair and lively springs.
Green is the plant, Mamillia the flower,
Cambridge the plat, where plant and flower groes,
London the place which brought it first in power,
The Court a seat most fit for such a rose.
And to be short (if I true prophet be)
Plat, place, and seat, this pleasant rose shall see,
If plant does please court, city, and country,
And not displease her noble Majesty.
G. B.
Nomen and ingenium cum debet inesse Poetae.
Omen ita and genium debet habere liber.
Ore placet Grenus, prodest oculisque color,
Ingenium genium, nomen and omen habet.
Vt virtutis comes inuidia, sic
Calami comes calumnia.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL and virtuous Gentlewoman Mary Rogers, wife to M. Hugh
Rogers of Euerton, increase of worship and virtue.
PRaxiteles the Painter, being demanded why in presenting a curious target to
Minerua he did most cunnigly pourtray the picture of her Priest Chrisites,
answered that Mynerua was wise, and so was Chrisites, and that being his
friend he thought this the best means to gratify him. Which saying of
Praxiteles I take as a sufficient excuse for my rashness. For if I be
demanded why in dedicating my Book to others I have inserted your worshippes
name, I answer that both your constant, virtuous and godly disposition caused
me with Praxiteles to ingraue your name in a work where Gentlewomens
constancy is so stiffly defended, knowing your rare and virtuous qualities to
be such, as your very enemies (if you have any) shall be forced maugre their
face to extol vour fame with immortal praise, and also your liberal bounty
and friendly courtesy (whereof without any desert I have tasted) drove me,
though not as I would, yet as I could, to show the dutiful affection wherewith
I am bound to be at your command for ever. While thus I wished more evidently
to show some sign of my good will, a certain letter of Mamillia to the young
Lady Modesta chanced to come unto my hands, wherein the Anatomy of Lovers
flatteries is displaied, which I humbly present unto your worshipful
patronage, desiring you to accept it, not according to the value of the gift,
but to the mind of the giver, and assuring you that none of your welwillers do
in heart wish you more prosperity, though my ability be not able in outward
show to make it manifest. Thus ceasing to trouble your worship, I commit you
to the Almighty.

Clare Hall the vij. of July. Yours at command, ROBERT GREEN.

THE ANATOMY OF LOVERS FLATTERIES.
Mamillia to the young and virtuous Virgin the Lady Modesta.
I Remember Madam that when as my grandfather Jews Go^zaga was newly created
Duke of Neuers, that diverse of his friends to show their dutiful affection,
offered him sundry rich presents most meet for so high a personage and amongst
the rest a certain Musition presented unto his hands a scrole wherein were
pricked two or three curious points of cunning descant, desiring the Duke to
accept of his simple gift, since therein was comprehended all his riches and
skill, to attain the which, he had passed diverse countries and most dangerous
perils. The Duke wisely weighing with himself, that nothing was more precious
than that which was purchased with danger, accepted the gift as a most
precious Jewel. Considering which, Madame, and finding my self so greatly
indebted to your Ladyship for the great courtesy and good entertainme^t you
showed me in Saragossa, as my insufficiency shall never be able to requite it,
I thought good least happily I might be thought ungrateful, or counted so
obliuious as to forget a good turn, in stead of precious iems and rich jewels
to present your Ladyship, with a casketful of friendly counsel, which so much
the more is to be esteemed charie chafre, by how much the more I have bought
the proof and experience of the same with pain and peril. And if Madame you
shall take it as a caveat to avoid the alluring snares of Cupids flatteries,
both I shall be glad my writing took so good effect, and you have cause
hereafter to thank me for my counsel.

That lascivious Poet Ovid, Madam Modesta, whom justly we may term the foe to
womankind, has not only prescribed in his books de art Amandi a most
monstrous Method to all men, whereby they may learn to allure simple women to
the fulfilling of their lust, and the loosing of their own honor, but also
has set down his books de remedio amoris, to restrain their affections from
placing their fancies but for a time upon any Dame, which books are so sauced
with such blasphemous descriptions of women's infirmities, as they show that
with the Satire he could out of one mouth blow both hot and cold. Yea
Iuuenall, Tibullus, Propertius, Calimachus, Phileta, Anacreon, and many other
authors have set down caueats for men, as armours of proof to defend
themselves from the alluring subtilties of women. But alas, there is none
contrariwise which has set down any prescript rules wherewith women should
guide themselves from the fained assault of men's pretended flattery, but has
left them at discouert to be maimed with the glozing gunshot of their protested
periuries, which seems repugnant to nature. For if the silly Lamb had more
need of succor than the lusty Lion, if the weak and tender vine stands in
more need of props than the strong oaks, women sure, whom they count the weak
vessels, had more need to be counseled than condemned, to be fortified than
to be feared, to be defenced tha^ both with Nature and Art to be assaulted. But
this their injurious dealing were a sufficient caveat, if women were wise, to
cause them beware of men's pretended policies, and not to be enticed to that
train whereunder they know a most perilous trap to be hidden. The beasts
will not come at the Panther for all his fair skin, because by instinct of
Nature they know he is a murderer: the fish will not come at the bait though
never so delicate, for fear of the hidden hook? neither can the glistring
feathers of the bird of Egypt cause the silly Lark to keep her company,
since she knew her for her mortal enemy. Yet we simple women too constant and
credulous, God knows to deal with such trothlesse Iasons, yield our heart
and hand, our love, life and liberties to them, whom we know cease not only
publicly to appeach us of a thousand guiltles crimes, but also secretly seek
with forged flattery to scale the Fort, and to sack both honor and honesty.
But Madam, omitting women's foolish simplicity in trusting too much men's
subtle flattery, seeing it is as well given by Nature for the woman to love
as for the man to lust, I will first define what love is, namely a desire of
beauty: and beauty according to the mind of sundry writers is of three
sorts, of the mind, of the body, and of the speech, which if they concur in
one particular person, and especially that of the mind, sufficiently furnished
with virtues and requisite quallities, such a one ought a Gentlewoman to choose:
but the chance is as hard as to find out a white Ethiopian. Since then it is so
difficult among infinite Scorpions to find out one silly Eele, amidst a whole
quarrey of flint to choose out one precious iemme, and amongst a thousand
lusting leachers one loyal lover, and so hard to descrie the true sterling
from the counterfeit coin, and the precious medicine from the perilous
confection: I will as well as I can point you out the crew of those cogging
companions, which outwardly profess themselves to be trusty lovers, and
inwardly are ravening Wolves and troathlesse leachers. There are some, Madam,
of this dissembling troup, which rightly may be termed Masquers, some
hypocrites, some Poets, some Crocodiles, some Scorpions, and the Genus to all
these forepassed Species is flatterers. The Masquers are they, Madam, which
covertly under the color of courtesy shrowde a pestilent and peevish kind of
curiosity: their countenance shall be grave though their conditions be without
grace, and when they see any Gentlewoman addicted to be courteous, honest,
wise, and virtuous, they will straight with the Polipe change themselves into
the likeness of every object, knowing that it is impossible to intise the
birds to the trap, but by a stale of the same kind. They carry in outward show
the shadow of love, but inwardly the substance of lust, they have a fine die
though a course thread, and though at the first they shrink not in the
weeting, yet that poor Gentlewoman shall have cause to curse her peniwoorth
which tries them in the wearing: she shall find them whom she though to be
Saints to be Serpents, that those who in wooing are Doves, in wedding to be
devils, that in the fairest grass lies hid the foulest Snake, in the brauest
tomb the most rotten bones, and in the fairest countenance the fowlest
conditions: those whom I term to be hypocrites, are they who pricked forward
with lust to fix their fleeting fancy upon some silly dame, whom nature
has beautified both with the shape of beauty and substance of virtue, judging
that it is naturally given to women to be desirous of praise, seek to call
them to the lure with recounting their singular quallities, and extolling their
perfections even above the skies, flourishing over their flattery with a
Rhetorical gloss of fained dissimulation, the poor maid who^ they call their
mistress, they like counterfeites cannonize for an earthly goddess, comparing
her for her beauty to Venus, for her wit to Minerua, for her chastity to
Diana, and yet this virtue the cheifest thing they seek to spoil her of: her
eyes are twinkling stars, her teeth pearls, her lips coral, her throat
Iuorie, her voice most musical harmony: yea she is so perfect in all
points, as they marvel how so heavenly a creature is shrouded under the shape
of mortality: these I say who have honey in their mouth and gall in their
heart, are such hypocritical flatterers as they seek with sugared words and
filed speech to inueigle the silly eyes of well meaning Gentlewomen, when as
inwardly they scoff at the poor maids which are so blind as not to see their
extreme folly and gross flattery. Prattling Poets I call those who having
authority with Painters to feign, lie, and dissemble, seek with Sirens songs
and enchanting charms of devilish invention, to bewitch the minds of young
and tender virgins, under the color of love to draw them to lust, painting
out in Songs and Sonets their great affection, and deciphring in fained rimes
their forged fancy: they be taken in the beams of her beauty as the Be in
the Cobweb, they are singed at the sight of her fair face, as the Fly at the
Candle, they suffer worse pains than Sisiphus, more torments than Tantalus,
more grief than Ixion: they are plunged in Plutoes pit, and so drowned in
distress, that unless the silly maid by selling her freedom, and loosing
both honor and honesty give a salve to their surmised sore, they shall end
their days in hellish misery: yea to decypher their sorrows more narrowly,
they are so ouergrowne with grief, as in all their body they have no place
whole, but their heart, nothing at quiet but their mind, nor nothing free but
their affection, they are indeed so passionate in their pen, and such
inckpot lovers, that the poor maid which by trusting too much is charmed with
their magical enchantments, shall find their firmest fancy was but forged
folly, their love was but tickling lust, and that the hotnesse in their chase
was but to make shipwreck of her chastity. The nature of the Crocodill,
Madame, is with grievous groans and trickling tears to crave help as one in
distress, but who so comes to succor him is presently devoured: so Madame,
those kind of lovers whom I term Crocodiles, are they which when neither
flattery can prevail, nor supposed courtesies is of force to scale the Fort of
their invincible honesty, then (knowing that gentlewomen are pitiful and
wholly framed of the moulde of mercy) they fall with the Crocodill to their
fained tears, seeking with dissembled sighs and sobs, with weeping and
wayling, with distressed cry, and pitiful exclamations, to move her to take
pity of their plaint, whom after with greedy gripes they bring to utter
decay and ruin. But Madame, as the juice of the herb Baaran dries faster
than it can be pressed out, and as the water of the fountain Sibia can no
faster be powered into brass but it turns into metal, so there is nothing
in the world that dries sooner than a lovers tears, nor no sickness sooner
inwardly salued than a lovers sorrow, their care may soon be cured, because it
comes not from the heart, and their mourning soon amended, since it no whit
moves the mind: yet they can so cunningly counterfeit the shadow of a
perplexed patient, and have trickling tears and far fetched sighs so at
their command, that few well meaning and pitiful maids can escape the train
of their alluring subtilties. Scorpions Madame, are they which sting with their
tail, and seek with despightfull terms to abuse the credit of Gentlewomen:
these be those kind of lovers which having neither comeliness of person nor
conditions of mind, neither wit, wisdom, beauty, or learning, nor any other
good quality to purchase them credit or win them the favor of women, but
are utterly rejected as unsavory, salting neither worth the tasting nor
eating, seek then with blasphemous reproaches and injurious railing to call the
fame of honest Gentlewomen in question, then they condemn them of
inconstancy, comparing them to Camelions, Polipes, and wethercocks, affirming
their fancies to be fleeting, their love to be light, and their choice wholly
settled in change: that they be malicious, deceitful, inchaunting Syreus,
crafty Calipsoes, as subtle as Serpents, as cruel as Tygres, and what not?
and the cause of this their unjust accusing comes not through any injury
offered them by Gentlewomen, but that they themselves are so imperfect both in
mind and body, that both by nature and art they may justly be appeached of
want. Having now Madame though not eloquently yet truly set down before your
face in plain color the Anatomy of such licentious lovers as seek with
alluring baits to entrap the minds of chaste maidens, since love is the
laberinth which leads us to be devoured of these incestuous monsters, let us
learn to fly it as warily as wise Ulysses did the Mermaides. Anacreon who
spoke by experience and writ by proof, calls love a tyrant, mischeeuous,
cruel, hardy, unkind, foul, ungracious, cursed, wicked, and the cause of
all mischief. Love of beawtie says he is the forgetting of reason, the
father of frenzy, the disturber of the mind, the enemy to health, the sincke
of sorrow, the garden of grief, and to conclude, a confused chaos of misery:
so that if it might be seen with bodily eyes, or be an object to our
exterior senses, the Basiliske is not more feared, nor the Cockatrice more
avoided than loathsome love would be eschewed and detested. What folly is it
for that woman which is free to become captive, which is at liberty to become
a perpetual slave to another man, who having the choice in her own hand to live
at her own lust, will willingly yield herself subject to be directed at
another man's pleasure? But this affection of love naturally traineth and
entrappeth young minds, and especially of women, wherefore they had need to
take the more heed least happily it steals upon them, for commonly it
comes upon such as will not seek means to prevent, but carelessly receive
it as a sweet and pleasant thing, not knowing what and how perilous a poison
lies hid under that pleasant face. Let her therefore that will avoid this
frantic and foolish affection, give no more ear unto ye alluring charms of
ye fained lover than unto the song of an enchanting sorcerer, let her consider
that as it is proper to the Camelion to change, to the Fox to be wily, to the
Lion to be hautie, and to the Hiena to be guilefull, so it is the property of
lovers to dissemble, that when he does most fry in fancy, then he does most
frize in affection, when he faineth Etna he proves Caucasus, when he
complains of care then is he most secure, when he waileth outwardly then he
laugheth inwardly, like to the stone Ceraunon, which when it burns most
fervently, being broken distilleth most cold liquor. The end also of these
lovers affection is to be considered, which is not for her virtue, wisdom, or
honesty, but either allured by her beauty which she enjoys, or her riches
that she possesses. The skin of the Ermelyn is desired and the carcass
despised, the horn of the Unicorn most preciously received and his flesh
rejected, the hoof of the Leopard is the thing that hunters seeks or else he
is contemned, so the beauty and riches of a woman is highly regarded, but her
virtue and honesty lightly esteemed, that as the taste being once glutted
thinks the sweet wine sower, or as the finest delicates to a full stomach
seems but course cates, so he that builds his love upon beauty of the
body and only regards riches when the beauty is faded, his love decreaseth
or being satiate with pleasure loatheth the plenty, or if wealth want, his
love pineth with extreme penury. But put case the mind is already caught in
the snares of Cupid, and has yielded her self as a vassal unto Venus, let us
find a remedy to draw her out of this perilous Laborinth. I remember the
saying of Dant, that love cannot roughly be thrust out but it must easily
creep, and a woman must seek by little and little to recover her former
liberty, wading in love like the Crab whose pace is always backward, calling
to her remembrance that if her lover be fair, he will be proud of his person,
if rich, his substance procures stateliness, if of noble parentage, it makes
him disdainful: that the stone Echites is most pleasant to the eye, but most
infectious to be handled, that the herb called Flos Solis is beautiful to
behold but deadly to be tasted, that the fairest face has often times the
falsest heart, and the comeliest creature most currish conditions: who more
fair than Paris, yet a trothlesse traitor to his love Oenone. Ulysses was
wise, yet wavering, Eneas a pleasant tongue, yet proved a parasiticall
flatterer, Demophoon demure and yet a dissembler, Jason promises much yet
performed little, and Theseus adds a thousand oaths to Ariadne, yet never a
one proved true. Consider the herb of India is of pleasant smell, but who so
comes to it feels present smart, the Goorde leaf profitable, the seed
poison, the rind of the tree Tillia most sweet and the fruit most bitter,
the outward show of such flattering lovers full of delight, but the inward
substance sawsed with despite. Call also to mind their often periuries, their
vain oaths, falsified promises and inconstancy, their protestations,
pilgrimages, and a thousand dissembled flatteries, and if thy lover be
infected with any particular fault, let that be the subject whereon to muse,
knowing that many vices are hidden under the colored shape of virtue, if he be
liberal think him prodigal, if eloquent a babbler, if wise inconstant, if
bold rash, if timorous a dastard, if he be well backed think it is the taylers
art and not natures workmanship, if a good waste attribute it to his coat
that is shapt with the Spanish cut, if well legd think he has a bumbast hose to
cover his deformity, yea drive all his perfections out of thy mind, and muse
upon his infirmities, so shall thou lead a quiet life in liberty and never
buy repentance too dear, and though he countes thee cruel because thou art
constant and do refuse to yield to thine own lust, think it no discredit:
for mustie caskes are fit for rotten grapes, a poisoned barrel for infectious
liquour, and cruelty is too mild a medicine for flattering lovers. Thus
Madame, you have heard my counsel which I have learned by proof and speak by
experience, which if you willingly accept, I shall think my labor well
bestowed, and if you wisely use, you shall think your time not ill spent, but
if you do neither, my well wishing is never the worse, and so fare you well.

Yours to command, Mamillia.

MODESTA TO HER Beloved Mamillia.
IT is too late, Madame Mamillia, to sound the retrait, the battle being
already fought, to dry the malt the kill being on fire, to wish for rain when
the shower is past, to apply the salve the sore being remediless, and to give
counsel the case being past cure, for before the corosiue came, the sore was
grown to a festred Fistula, and ere your comfortable confect was presented to
my hand, I was fallen into a strange Fever. Thou did Mamillia counsel me to
beware of love, and I was before in the lash. Thou did wish me to beware of
fancy, and alas I was fast fettred, I have chosen Mamillia (What do I say?)
have I chosen? yea: but so poor soul as all my friends do wish me to change,
and yet I have satisfied my self though not contented them. My friends
regarded the money and I respected the man, they wealth and I wisdom, they
lands and lordships and I beauty and good bringing up, so that either I must
choose one rich whom I did hate and so content them, or take one poor, whom I
did love and so satisfy my self. Driven Mamillia into this dilemma, I am to
ask thine advise what I should do, whether I should lead my life with
abundance of wealth in loathe, or spend my days with no riches in love. In
this if thou shall stand my friend to give me thy counsel, I will if ever I be
able requite thy courtesy. From Saragossa in haste.

Thine assuredly, doubtful Modesta.
Mamillia having received this Letter, returned her as speedily as might be an
answer to this effect.



MAMILLIA TO THE Lady Modesta.
MAdame Modesta, I have received your letters, and have viewed your doubtful
demand, whereunto thus I answer, yt to live we must follow the advice of our
friends, but to love our own fancy: for to another man's living they may give
precepts, but to fix fancy in love they can prescribe no certain
principles. Then Madame, since you have riches which may of a poor woer make a
welthy speeder, wed not for wealth, least repentance cast the accounts, nor
match not with a fool, least afterward thou repent thine own folly, but
choose one whose beauty may content thine eye, and whose virtuous wisdom may
satisfy thy mind, so shall thou have neither cause to repent, nor occasion to
mislike thy choice, and that thou may perceive my meaning more plainly, read
this following history with good aduisement.

There dwelt in Toledo a certain Castilian named Valasco by parentage a
Gentleman, by profession a Merchant, of more wealth than worship, and yet
issued of such parents as did bear both great countenance and credit in the
country. This Valasco after the decease of his father was a ward to the Duke
of Zamorra, who seeing him endued with great wealth and large possessions
having the disposition of his marriage in his hands, married him to a kinswoman
of his named Sylandra, a Gentlewoman neither indewed with wit nor adorned with
beauty: and yet not so witless but she was wilful, nor so deformed but she
was proud, insomuch as her inward vices and outward vanities, did in tract of
time so quat the queasie stomach of her husband Valasco, that although in his
childish years he did not mislike of her folly, yet in his ripe years when
reason was a rule to direct his judgment, he so detested the infirmities of
her nature and the infections of her nurture, as she was the only woman his
crasie stomach could not digest. Valasco being thus combred with such a cross,
as the burden thereof was to him more heavy than the weight of the heavens to
the shoulders of Atlas, and knowing by experience what a misery it was to
marry without love, or make his choice without skill, and how loathsome it was
to live without liking, or to be wedded to her whom neither his fancy nor
affection did desire to enjoy: having by his wife Sylandra one only daughter
named Syluia, determined with Themistocles to marry her rather to a man than
to money, and never to match her with any whom she did not both entirely love
and like. While he was in this determination Sylandra died, leaving Valasco a
diligent husband for the finishing of his wines funerals, and a careful father
for the well bringing up of his daughter Syluia, who now was about the age of
sixteen years, so beautified with the gifts of nature, and adorned with
sundry virtues and exquisite quallities, as the Citizens of Toledo were in
doubt whether her beauty or virtue deserved greater commendation. Syluia
flourishing thus in the prime of her youth and proouing daily more excellent
as well in the complexion of the body as in the perfection of her mind, grew
so renowned for her famous feature almost throughout all Europe, that as they
which came to Memphis thought they had seen nothing unless they had viewed
the Pyramides built by Rhodope, so the strangers which arrived at Toledo
thought their affairs not fully finished until they had obtained the sight of
Syluia. So that as the most charie chafre has ever most choice of chapmen, and
as the richest iem has ever most resort to view it and buy it, so by the
means of Syluia the house of Valasco was so frequented with a noble train of
worthy Suitors, as if it had been a common Burse for exchange of Merchandise.
Yet all their woing proved small speeding, since Syluia kept a loofe from
seasing on the lure. For although there were diverse of most noble parentage and
great possessions which required her in marriage, offering for her feoffment
great lands and Lordships: yet Valasco would neither condiscende without her
consent, nor constrain her to consent to his commandment. Well, Syluia thus
glorying in her freedom, and taking pleasure to trace in the large lees of
liberty, was not suffered so quietly to fortify the bulwark of her
chastity, but she had sundry assaults and daily canuizadoes to force her
yield the fort to some of her importunate suitors, amongst whom, there repaired
by meare chance at one time and in one day three Gentlemen of sundry nations
and diverse dispositions, the first an Italian called S. Gradasso, the second a
Frenchman named Monsieur de Vaste, the third, an Englishman called master
Petronius. Signor Gradasso, was very old but of great wealth, Monsieur de
Vaste of surpassing beauty, but somewhat foolish, and master Petronius of
great wit, but of very small wealth, these Gentlemen were very courteously
entertained by Signor Valasco, whom they requited with sundry salutations to
this effect. The renown sir, quoth Signor Gradasso, not only of your
daughters beauty, but also of her singular virtue is so blown abroad by fame
in every place, and in every man's ears, as there has been no talk for a
time in Italy but of the perfection of Syluia, which forced me being now old
and stricken in years, to repair hither as one desirous not only to see your
daughter, but also to take her to wife, and to endue her with such feoffements
and large possessions as she shall be satisfied and you sufficiently contented.
Gradasso having said his mind, Monsieur de Vaste not being the wisest man of
the world in telling a tale, let a man of his called Jacques be his interpreter,
faining that he was utterly ignorant in the Spanish tongue, who in his masters
behalf framed his talk to this effect. Sir, quoth he, my master being the
only son and heir to his parents, and being left the only pillar of all
his parentage, has ever since the decease of his father been very careful to
match himself with such a one in marriage as might content him for her beauty,
and be his countenance and credit for her virtue and honesty. Hearing
therefore of your daughters singular perfection as well in the one as in the
other, he was enforced by an inward affection to come as one very desirous to
match himself with so good a mate, offering all his lands in dower as a perfect
pledge of his unfeigned good will. Iacques had no sooner made an end of his
parle, but poor Petronius offered his suit very rufully. Sir quoth Petronius,
as it is a sign of folly to cheap that chaffre for the which there is far
more offered than he is able to afford: so the beauty, virtue and parentage
of your daughter Syluia, the great dowries and large feoffments offered by
sundry suitors had danted my fervent affection, since being a poor scholar by
profession, and yet a Gentleman by birth, far unfit by the means of want to be
a wooer, had I not heard that you have given the rains of liberty to your
daughter to be mistress of her own choice, neither respecting the defect of
want, nor the superfluity of wealth, so your daughter like and love the
party. Encouraged with this her free liberty in choice, I am come to offer
her neither lands nor Lordships but my silly self, ready in what I may and
she please to pleasure her.

Signor Valasco, having heard and diligently marked the effect of their talk,
smiling and maruelling at their strange adventure, that three Gentleman so
far distant in place and diverse in condition should so fitly meet at one
instant, yea and framing their suits all to one effect, returned them this
friendly and courteous answer. Gentlemen quoth he, you are not come in more
haste, than welcome with a good heart, and for my part I conceive such good
liking of you all in general, as I could be content to bestow my daughter
upon any of you in particular. For neither thy old age Signor Gradasso, nor
your want of learning, Monsieur de Vaste, nor thy lack of wealth master
Petronius, do breed in me any such misliking, but that if it please my
daughter to consent, I will willingly condescend: for in her and not in me
consists your denial. Therefore follow me and I will bring you where every
man shall prefer his suite, and have a speedy answer. And with that he
carried them to Syluias chamber, whom they found sitting solitary at her
muses. Who espying her father accompanied with these three Gentlemen
entertained every one of them so courteously with a kiss, her countenance
notwithsting importing such gravity, as they perceived she was neither
infected with curiosity, nor deuoyd of surpassing modesty: which so
astonished the passionate hearts of these three patients, that as the dear
with the sigh^ of a fair apple stands at gaze, so they were with her beauty
and virtue driven into such a maze, ye Signor Valasco was fain to break silence
in this manner. Syluia quoth he, these three gentlemen enforced by affection,
and drawn by the report of thy beauty (as they say) are come from foreign
countries to crave thee in marriage, which since it consists not in my power
to grant without thy consent, I have brought them to thy Chamber, that both
they may speak for themselves, and thou give them such an answer as fancy or
affection shall command thee. This Gentleman being old is of great riches to
maintain thy estate: the other is as thou see very fair, but not very
wise: the last is learned and wise, but not of any wealth. Now Syluia the
choice is in thine own hands, if thou love one of them I shall like him, if
thou refuse them all, I am still contented. Syluia yielding most dutiful
thanks to her father for his natural affection, returned him soberlie this
solemn answer.

Sir quoth she, I now see by experience that dreams are not always vain
illusions and fond fantasies, but that sometime they prognosticate and
foreshewe what afterward shall happen. For Julius Caesar a little before he was
Monarch of the world dreamed that he had overcome Mars in plain battle.
Penelope the night before her long looked for Ulysses came home, saw in her
sleep Cupide pricking an Olive branch at her beds head, and this night last
past I did see in a dream Venus standing in a most brave and delicate garden
wherein were but only three trees, the one a very old and withered Oak, yet
laden with Ackornes, the other a fair and beautiful Ceder tree, and yet the
root decayed and rotten, the third a green Bay tree flourishing and yielding
forth an odoriferous smell, but being barraine and without beries. And me
thought as I thus stood taking the view of the trees, Venus changed me into
a turtle Dove, and bad me build my nest in one of these trees which best
pleased my fancy. And as I was ready to yield her an answer, I sodeinlie
awooke, and Venus lost her verdit. To divine of this dream it passes my
skill, but I conjecture the three trees did represent these three Gentlemen,
and the Turtle my self: but what either Venus or the building of the neast do
signify, it passes my skill to conjecture. But omitting my dream and the
signification thereof till tract of time shall divine it, since you are
Gentlemen of sundry countries and diverse dispositions, and yet all shoot at
one mark: let me hear what every one of you can say in commendation of his
own estate, and then as Fortune shall favor you, and fancy force me, you
shall receive an answer. Syluia had no sooner ended her talk, but the
Gentleman began to divine of the dream very devoutly, descanting diversely of
the building of the neast, and applying the interpretation to their particular
preferment. The Turtle always or most commonly, quoth Gradasso, builds on
the tall and strong oak, honoring it because it is Arbor Iouis, the tree of
Jupiter, and delighting to build in it by a secret motion of nature, and
therefore I have cause if the dream prove true, to count my part the best
portion. Nay sir, quoth Iacques in his masters behalf, you have least hope
and greatest cause to doubt, for the oak was old and withered, and the turtle
naturally delights in green and flourishing trees, and especially in the
tall and beautiful Cedar, and therefore you are exempted. As for the bay tree
although it be green, yet Pliny reports it is the only tree which the
turtle Dove abhors, and therefore of these premises I infer this conclusion,
that by the divination of this dream my master shall obtain the prise at this
turnay. Well masters quoth Petronius, though you thrust me out for a wrangler,
and count me as a Cipher in Algorisme, yet I say, that neither I have occasion
to doubt nor you cause to hope. For though by the means of Venus there chanced
such a Metamorphosis, yet though her body was transformed, her heart, mind and
understanding was not changed, though she were a Turtle in show, yet she was
Syluia in sense, not having so base a mind, as either to build her neast in a
withered oak, where it were more meet for a myrie sow to feed, than so
gallant a bird to build, or on a fair Cedar, since the root was rotten and
ready to fall, but would rather make her choice of a fair and flourishing bay
tree, which may both profit her self and pleasure her senses. So that if we
have part I hope and assure my self mine to be the best. Tush Gentlemen quoth
Syluia, fish not before the net, nor make not your accountes without your
hosts, least happily your gains be small, and your shot uncertain. But if
you please to have my company, leave off all circumstances and go to the
matter. Signor Gradasso hearing Syluia to grow so short, began the assault with
this March. It is necessary says Callymachus, for him which will be a perfect
lover to have experience in his wooing and constancy in his wedding, least by
want of skill he loose his labor, and his mistress through his inconstancy
repent the bargain. For where experience wants, there commonly the choice
has an ill chance, and where constancy bears no sway, there the match is
always marred. Now these two so commendable quallities are always found in
old age, and never seen in young years. The old Bucke makes better choice of
his food than the little Fawn, the old Lion chooses always a better pray
than the young whelpe, the bird Acanthis in her age builds her neast with most
discretion, and an old man has more experience to make a perfect choice, than
a young man's skill to gain a happy chance, age directs all his doings by
wisdom, and youth doteth upon his own will, age having bought wit with
pain and peril, foreseeth dangers and escheweth the same, but youth
following wanton wit too wilfully, never preuenteth perilles while they be
past, nor dreadeth dangers while he be half drowned, yea there is such a
difference between an old man and a young stripling, between hoarie hairs
and flourishing youth, that the one is followed as a friend to others, and the
other eschewed as an enemy to himself. The Brachmans and Gymnosophistes made a
law that none under the age of forty should marry without the consent of the
Senior, least in making their choice without skill, the man in process of time
should begin to loathe, or the woman not to love. For youth fiereth his fancy
with the flame of lust, and old age fixes his affection with the heat of
love. Young years make no account but upon the glittering show of beauty,
and hoarie hairs respects only the perfect substance of virtue. Age
seeks not with subtilties to inchaunt the mind, nor with sleightes to entrap
the maid, he wears not a velvet scabbard and a rustie blade, nor a golden
Bell with a leaden clapper, he frames not his affection in the forge of
flattery, nor draws not a false color with the Pensill of dissimulation: he
does not coin his passions with a counterfeit stamp, nor feign his love with
a colored lie, he bears not honey in his mouth and gall in his heart, he
has not an Olive branch in his bosom and a sword at his back, he carries
not bread in his hand and a dagger in his sleeue, but if he fancy it is with
faith, and if he tell his tale it is tempered with truth, which shines in a
lover as a pollished iemme set in most glistring gold. So that old me^ are often
envied for their virtue, and young men pitied for their vice. The herb
Carisnum being newly sprung up has a most sour juice, but being come to his
grows a most delicate sap. The old Fur has the sweetest smell, the aged
Panther the purest breath, and the oldest man the most perfect conditions: so
that as it is natural for the Palm tree to be straight, for the Coral to be
red, for the Tygre to be fierce, for the Serpent to be subtle, and the Camel
to have a crookt back, so is it proper to old men to be endued with virtue,
and young men imbrued with vice, for horie age to be entangled with love, and
stailesse youth to be entrapped with lust, that as the brauest Sepulcher cannot
make the dead carcass to smell sweet, nor the most delicate ienimes make a
deformed face fair, so the richest attire or most costly apparel cannot make
a young mind savor of virtue. The old Pine tree is more esteemed for the
profit, than the flourishing buds of the trees in the I Will of Colchos for their
poison, the old Serpents Serapie are of greater account for their virtuous
skin, than the young and glistring Euets for their inuenomed hides. Age is
always more esteemed for his stayed mind than youth for his stailesse mood.
That flourishing and beautiful dame Rodophe which married old Sampniticus the
King of Memphis, was wont to say that she had rather be an old man's darling
than a young man's drudge, that she had rather content her self with an old man
in pleasure, than feed her fancy with a young man in penury, that she had
rather be loved of an old man ever, than liked of a young man for a while. The
mind of a young man is momentarie, his fancy fading, his affection fickle, his
love uncertain, and his liking as light as the wind, his fancy fiered with
every new face, and his mind moved with a thousand sundry motions, loathing
that which alate he did love, and liking that for which his longing mind does
lust, frying at the first, and frizing at the last, not sooner inflamed than
quickly cold, as little permanent as violent, and like the melting wax which
receives every impression, where as age is constant like to the Emeraulde,
which having received a form never takes other stamp without cracking. The
mind of an old man is not mutable, his fancy fixed, and his affection not
fleeting, he chooses not intending to change, nor changes not til death
makes the challenge. The old Oak never falls but by the carpenters axe,
nor the affection of age but by the dint of death. The old Cedar tree is less
shaken with wind than the young Bramble, and age far more stayed than youth,
yea though an old man be withered in age, yet he flourishes in affection,
though he want the beauty of body, yet he has the bounty of the mind,
though age had diminished his color, yet it has augmented his virtue, though
youth excels in strength, yet age surpasses in steadfastness, so that I
conclude by how much the more the virtues of the mind are to be preferred
before the beauty of the body, by so much the more ought an old lover to be
preferred before a young leacher. You have heard Syluia what I have said, and
you know I have spoken nothing but truth. If then it please you to think well
of my part and accept of my person, to requite my loyal love with lawful
liking, and my fixed fancy with fervent affection: assure your self you shall
have Signor Gradasso so at your command, as you in every respect can wish,
and in the pledge of this my good will I will make your feofment a thousand
Crowns of yearly revenues. Signor Gradasso had no sooner ended, but Iacques
in his masters behalf framed his talk to this effect. There is nothing quoth
he, which among mortal creatures is more detested than deformity, nor nothing
more embraced than beauty, which above all the gifts both of Nature and
Fortune does make us most resemble the gods. So that where the body is adorned
with beauty and perfection of nature, there it seems the gods show most
favor and affection, since that they took such care in caruing a piece of so
curious perfection. Insomuch that they say when the gods made beauty, they
skipt beyond their skill, in that the maker is subject to the thing made, for
what made Thetis be inconstant but beauty, what forced Venus to be in love
with Anchises but beauty? what caused Luna to like Endymion but beauty? yea,
it is said to be of so great force, that it bewitcheth the wise, and
inchaunteth them that made it. There is none so addicted to chastity whom
beauty has not changed, none so vowed to virginity whom beauty has not
charmed, none so severe whom beauty has not besotted, nor none so senseless
whom the name of beauty can not either break or bend. Love comes in at
the eye not at the ears, by seeing natures works not by hearing sugared
words, and fancy is fed by the fairness of the face not by the finenesse
of the speech. Beauty is the Siren which will draw the most adamant heart by
force, and such a charm as have constrained even the vestal virgins to forsake
their celles, yea it so inueigleth the sight and bewitcheth the senses, it so
troubles the mind and disturbeth the brain, yea it brings such extreme
delight to the heart, so that as the Viper being tied to a Beech tree, falls
into a slumber, so diverse beholding beautiful persons have stood as though
with Medusas head they had bin turned to a stone. Anacharsis being demanded
what he thought was the greatest gift that ever the Gods bestowed upon man,
answered beauty, for that it both delights the eye, contenteth the mind,
and wins good will and favor of all men. Pigmaleon for beauty loved the
Image of Iuorie, and Apelles the counterfeite which he colored with his own
skill, and the picture Ganimides greatly astonished the Ladies of Cypres. What
made Aeneas so beloved of the Carthaginians but beauty? what gained Theseus
the good will of Ariadne but beauty? what won Demophoon the love of Phillis
but beauty? and what forced the Syluein Nymph Oenone to leave the lawnes but
the incomparable beauty of Paris? The Gentlewoman which has a husband that is
endued with beauty and adorned with the gifts of Nature, shall have ever
wherewith to be satisfied, and never whereof to mislike: whereas contrary the
deformed man is such a monster in nature, and such a sorrow to a woman's
heart, as she bewailes her chance to have chosen one that every one does
loath. The foulest Serpent is ever most venomous, the tree with a withered
rind has never a sugared sap, the durty puddle has never good fish, and a
deformed body seldom a reformed mind. The wise Lapidaries say that the
precious stone with the most glistring hue has always the most secret virtue.
The pure gold is chose by the perfect color, the best fruit, by the brauest
blossoms, and the best conditions by the sweetest countenance. But perhaps
mistress Syluia you will say his fair face inflameth my fancy and his
beauty bewitched my senses, his shape in deed does persuade me to requite
his good will with mutual affection, but then his folly again quaileth my
stomach and is a cooling card to quench the fire of fancy, to which I answer
Syluia, that his folly is not so prejudicial as profitable, not so much
hurtful as commodious. Aspasia the lover of Socrates, being demanded what
thing a woman in the world chiefly desired, answered to rule, thinking that
sovereignty was the thing that women most desire, and men most fear to grant
them. If then it be a woman's wish to have her own will, and as the common
proverb says, to rule the roast after her own diet, you shall in taking my
master to your mate, have so much your hearts ease as either you can desire or
imagine. For my master will wholly be led by your line, and you shall be the
star, by whose aspect he will direct his course, your yea shall be his yea,
and your nay his denial. Thus although his folly be prejudicial in one
respect, it shall be most profitable in another, so that his incomparable beauty
shall sufficiently delight your fancy, and his folly be a means that without
restraint you may enjoy free will and liberty. Thus mistress Sylua, you have
heard what I in my masters behalf can allege. If therefore you mean to
repaie his good will with love, he promises not only to make you sole
mistress of his heart, but of all his lands and lordships. Iacques having
finished this tale, master Petronius as one betwixt fear and hope gave the
Fort the sorest assault with this Alarm. Plato the wise and grave Philosopher
was wont to say, that as man differs from brute beasts in reason, so one man
excels another by wisdom and learning: esteeming him that wanted
knowledge, science, and nourture, but the shape of a man though never so well
beautified with ye gifts of nature, supposing that although he were indewed
with the outward shadow of beauty, as justly he might compare with Paris: or
so stored with treasure and riches, as he might cast his countes with Craesus:
yet if he wanted learning to enlarge his beauty, or wisdom to direct his
wealth, he was to be counted no other but a beautiful picture burnished with
gold. He that enjoys wealth without wisdom, says Anaxagoras, possesses
care for himself, envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, a pray
for thieves, travail for his person, anguish for his spirit, a scruple for
his conscience, peril for his love, sorrow for his children, and a curse for
his heirs, because although he knows how to gather, he wants skill to
dispose. Alexander the Great made so great account of knowledge and wisdom,
that he was often wont to say, he was more bound to Aristotle for giving him
learning, than to his father Philip for his life, since the one was momentarie,
and the other never to be blotted out with oblivion. Nestor was more honored
and esteemed for his learning and wisdom at the siege of Troy, than either
Achilles for his strength, Ajax for his valor, or Agamemnon for his stout
courage. Cyrces was not enamoured with the beauty of Ulysses but entangled
with his wisdom. Aeneas when as Dido sat in Parliament, told his tale with
such wit and discretion, so seasoned with the salt of learning, and sweet sap
of science, that not only she was snared in his love, but also said, surely
thou art come of the offspring of the Gods, alluding to this saying of
Empedocles, that as we in nothing more differ from the Gods than when we are
fools, so in no thing we do come near them so much as when we are wise.
Socrates thanked the Gods only for three things, first, that they made him a
man and not a woman, that he was borne a Grecian and not a Barbarian, thirdly,
that he was a Philosopher and not unlearned, esteeming the gifts of nature and
fortune of no value unless they be beautified with the gifts of the mind. Byas
the Philosopher being reproved by a certain injurious person that he was poor
and ill-favored, answered that he was greatly deceived both in his beauty and
his riches, for quoth he, how can I be poor when I am wise, hard favored when
I am learned, thinking it the chiefest beauty to be endued with learning, and
the greatest treasure to be enriched with wisdom? The Philosopher Critolaus
being very deformed, as having a crooked back and very poor as begging with
a staff and a wallet, was notwithstanding so well beloved of a certain
Gentlewoman of great wealth and worshipful parentage, as she would willingle
have accepted him for her husband, which Critolaus perceiving, laid down his
staff and his wallet, and put off his cloak, the more to show his crookt
back, wishing her with more diligence to mark his deformed shoulders, to whom
she answered, O Critolaus, thy deformity cannot quench that which thy wisdom
and learning has set on fire. It is learning in deed which allureth when
every word shall have his weight, when nothing shall proceed but either it
shall savor of a sharp conceit or a secret conclusion. It is wisdom that
flourishes when beauty fades, that waxes young when age approaches,
resembling the sea huluer leaf, which although it be dead still continues
green. Beauty withers with age, and is impaired with sickness, be the face
never so beautiful, the least skarre or mole makes it most deformed, but
learning and knowledge by tract of time increases like to the Cygnets which
being young are very black, but in their age most perfectly white: like the
birds that build in the rocks of the Sea, whose feathers grow most glistering
in their age. As for riches it is momentarie, subject to the chance of
inconstant fortune, it may be consumed with fire, spent with folly, wasted
with riot, and stolen away by thieves: but wisdom is a treasure so certain
as no mishap can diminish, neither be impaired by any sinister frown of
fortune. Artemisia the Queen being demanded by a certain gentlewoma^, what
choice she should use in love, marry, quoth she, imitate the good Lapidaries,
who measure not the value of the stone by the outward hue, but by the secret
virtue: so choose not a husband for the shape of the body, but for the
qualities of his mind, not for his outward perfectness, but for his inward
perfection. For if thou like one that has nothing but a little beauty, thou
shall seem to be in love with the counterfeit of Ganimedes, and if thou fancy
only riches, thou choosest a wooden picture with a golden coat. Learning is
the Iemme which so decketh a man, and wisdom the Jewel which so adorneth the
mind, that she which chooses a wise man to her mate, though never so poor,
says Themistocles, makes a good match. Thus mistress Syluia you have heard
my opinion, though not so wisely as I would, yet as learnedly as I could, not
daring to be too bold, lest in wading too far in an unknown foord I sodeinly
slip over my shoes. Lands I have none, to offer you large feoffements, nor
livings to assign you a great dowry: but if it please you to accept of a
poor gentleman, I shall be bound by det and duty to be yours for ever. Syluia
having given attentive heed to these three gentlemen, as one of a very quick
wit and sharp conceit, returned them these answers. Signor Gradasso, quoth
she, it was a law among the Caspians, that he which married after he had passed
fifty years should at the common assemblies and feasts sit in the lowest and
vilest place as one that had committed a fact repugnant to the law of Nature,
calling him which was well strooken in years, and yet enamoured, that would
fry in affection when he was wholly frozen in complexion, not an old lover,
but a filthy fool, and a doting old leacher, and in my judgment they had
great reason so to term him. For old rotten strawes, are more fit for doong
than for the chamber, withered flowers to be cast away, than to be placed in a
brave nosegay, old sticks more meet for the fire than for sumptuous
building, and aged men are more fit for the grave than to spend their time in
love. Cupid, Signor Gradasso, allows none in his court but young men that can
serve, fresh and beautiful to delight, wise that can talk, secret to keep
silence, faithful to gratify, and valiant to revenge his mistress injuries.
He that is not endued and privileged with these conditions, may well love but
never be liked. How can a young woman fix her affection upon an old man, who
in ye night time in steed of talk tells the clock, cries out of the gout,
complains of the Ciatica, is combred with crampes, and troubled with the
cough, having neither health to joy himself, nor youth to enjoy her. To the
end that love be fixed sure, perpetual and true, there must be equality
between the enamoured. For if the lover be old and she be young, he
ouergrowne with age, and she in flourishing youth, assure your self that of
fained lovers they shall be ever professed and unfeigned enemies. For it is not
love but sorrow, not mirth but displeasure, not taste but torment, not delight
but despite, not joy but annoy, not recreatio^ but confusion, when in the
lover there is not both youth and liberty: yea, and the withered straw is
soon set on fire and easily quenched, the old and dry wood easily inflamed
and quickly put out, age soon doteth and soon detesteth, now swimming in love
and presently sinking in hate like to ye stone Draconites, that no sooner
comes out of the flame but it is vehemently cold. What a foolish motion, nay
what a frantike madness is it for him whom nature denies any longer to live
to entangle himself in the snares of love whose natural heat is turned to
frost, with the match of fancy to kindle a new fire when sickness sommons him
and age warnes him that death draws nigh, than to become a clyent unto Cupid,
to plead for bounty at the cruel bar of beauty, knowing that ye herb
Adiaton cannot abide to touch the withered grass, that the trees in the mount
Vernese detest to be clasped of the old Iuie, and that youth greatly abhors
to be coupled with age. Further whosoever being young, fair and beautiful,
matcheth her with a doting old lover be she as chaste as Lucretia, as trusty
as Penelope, as honest as Turia, as faithful as Artemisia, as constant as
Cornelia, yet her honor, honesty and good name shall not only be suspended
but greatly suspected: yea, in so much that the old man himself to keep his
doting wits warm, will cover his head with a ielous cap, being very credulous
to believe each flying tale, and suspicious evermore to judge the woorst. If his
young wife be merry she is immodest, if sober, sullen, and thinks of some
lover whom she likes best, if pleasant inconstant, if she laugh it is leaudly,
if she look it is lightly: yea, he casts beyond the Moon, and judges that
which neither she would nor could imagine, restraining her from all liberty
and watching as the crafty Cat over the silly Mouse, should I than Gradasso
seeing the trap follow the train, spying the hook, swallow the bait, and
seeing the mischief, run wholly into misery? No, no, I mean not to be so
foolish as the birds of Cholchos, which although they see the nets, yet
willingly strike at the stale, or like the Tortuse which desires the heat of
the Sun that notwithstanding breeds his destruction, nor so sottish as with
free consent to cross my self with perpetual calamity. Since then Signor
Gradasso I count you being so old, not a fit match for my tender youth, I pray
you at this time be content to take my nay for an answer. And as for you
Iacques which have said so well in your masters behalf, I commend you for a
faithful servant, though your reasons were to small effect. I confess
Iacques, that nothing sooner delights the eye, contenteth the sense, or
allureth the mind of a young maid than beauty: but as the stone Topason is
not more loved for the outward hue than hated for the poison which secretly is
hid within it, or as the herb Nepenthes is not more liked for the pleasant
shape, than loathed for the poisoned sap: so beauty cannot inflame the fancy
so much in a month, as ridiculous folly can quench in a moment: nay, as of
all things wit soonest sets the fancy on edge and sharpeneth affection, so
folly cools desire, and forces love in the lowdest gale to strike sail and
be quiet. What joy can that Gentlewoman have, whose husband has neither
modesty to moderate his affection, nor manner to be have himself well in
company, who can neither be constant because he is a fool, nor secret since
he is without sense, but as the Dolphin has nothing to cover his deformity
but a few glistering scales, or as the clownish Poet Cherillus had nothing to
be praised in his verses but the name of Alexander, so he has nothing to
shadow his folly but a fair face, nor nothing to be commended but a little
fading beauty. Whereas you allege that Venus was entangled with the beauty of
Anchises, and Luna with the feature of Endymion, and Dido with the brave shape
of Aeneas. I answer, that Anchises was neither a fool, Endymion a sot, nor
Aeneas witless: for if they had, they might as soon have persuaded old
Sylenus to despise the rytes of god Bacchus as have procured any of these three
to yield to their allureme^ts: since they knew that beauty in a fool is as a
ring of gold in a swines snout. We read that a Consul in Rome married a
daughter of his to a fair fool, because he was endued with great possessions,
who was not long married to his wife Iulia, for so was the Consuls daughter
called, but for want of wit and lack of wisdom, he so burned in jealousy and
surged in the seas of suspicious folly, that as the poor Gentlewoman was
stooping to pull on her shoe, he espying her fair and crystal neck, entered
into such a suspicious fury, that presently he thrust her through with his
sword, verifying the saying of Castymachus, that a fool deprived of reason is
no other but a mad man bereaved of his sense. Whereas you say that soueraintie
and rule is the chiefest thing a woman does desire, and that by marrying a
fool I shall have the ready means to attain it, put case I grant the
antecedent, yet I deny the co^sequent, for if I were as greedy to bear sway as
Semiramis that craved of her husband Nynus to rule the kingdom three days, or
as Cleopatra that coueted only to be master of Marcus Antonius, yet a fool is
so obstinate in his senseless opinion, and so perverse to be persuaded, that he
will not only deny me the superiority, but he will himself rule the roast
though it be to his utter ruin. So that Jacques I conclude that your master
being somewhat foolish, and I my self none of the wisest, it were no good
match: for two fools in one bed are too many. But now master Petronius no
longer to feed you with hope I give you this A dio, that although I confess
wisdom to be the most precious iem wherewith the mind may be adorned, and
learning one of the most famous qualities, wherefore a man may be praised, yet
if you were as wise as Solomon, as learned as Aristotle, as skillful as Plato,
as sensible as Socrates, as eloquent as Ulysses, Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere
for as, for wit does not more fry than want can frize, nor wisdom heateth not
so sore as poverty cools, and rather had I in wealth content my self with
folly, than wedding myself to a poor wise man pine in poverty. But since I
hope Petronius thou will prove like the stone Sandastra which outwardly is
rough, but inwardly full of glistring beams, and that thou will try thy self
so good a husband as thy vow, learning, and wisdom promises, I will not only
supply thy want with my wealth, and thy poverty with my plenty, but I will
repaie thy fancy with affection, and thy love with loialtie, hoping that
although my friends will count me a fool for making my choice, yet I my self
shall never have cause to repent my chance, and in pledge of this my plighted
troth, have here my heart and hand for ever at thy command. How Gradasso and
Monsieur de Vaste liked of this verdit I need not relate, nor what their
answers were I know not, and if I knew to recount them it avails not, but I
am sure Petronius thought he had made a fortunate journey. Well Signor Valasco
hearing the determination of his daughter, was as well contented with the
chance as she satisfied with the choice, and ever after made as great account
of his son in law Petronius, and liked as well of the match as though she had
married the richest Duke in Europe.

Madam Modesta, I have recounted this history that your doubtful question
might be thoroughly debated and fully decided. You see that Siluia who was
wise, fair, and virtuous, would not be allured with the golden show of riches
because she loathed the person, nor be inchaunted with the charm of beauty
since she detested his folly, but choose poor Petronius who might both comfort
and counsel her with his wisdom, and be her credit and countenance for his
learning. If then your lover be both fair and wise though without wealth, why
should you mislike your choice since you are able to apply to his sore the like
salve with Syluia, and of a poor scholar make him a wealthy Gentleman.
Choose not Modesta so that thy friends shall like the choice and thou mislike
the chance, least time and trial make thee account Rue a most bitter herb:
thus wishing thy love prosperous success howsoever the matter happen, I bid
thee heartily farewell.

Thine to her power contented Mamillia.

LONDON Printed by Th. C. for William Ponsonbie. 1593.


