A QVIP FOR AN VPstart Courtier: Or, A quaint dispute betvveen Velvet breeches
and Cloth-breeches. Wherein is plainly set down the disorders in all Estates
and Trades.



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop at Poules
chain. 1592.

To the Right Worshipful Thomas Burnabie Esquier Robert Green wishes hearts
ease, and heavens bliss.
SIr, after I had ended this Quippe for an vpstart Courtier, containing a
quaint dispute between Clothbreeches and Velvet breeches, wherein under a
dream I shadowed the abuses that Pride had bred in England, how it had
infected the Court with aspiring Envy, the City with griping covetousness,
and the country with contempt and disdain. How since men placed theit
delights in proud looks and brave atyre, Hospitality was left off,
Neighborhood was exciled, Conscience was skoft at, and charity lay frozen in
the streets: how vpstart Gentlemen for the maintenance of that their fathers
never looked after, raised rents, rackte their tenants, and imposed great
fines, I stood in a mase to whom I should dedicate my labors, knowing I
should be bitten by many, since I had touched many, and therefore need some
woorthye Patron under whose wings I might shroud my self from goodman find
fault. At last I called to mind your Worship, and thought you the fittest of al
my friends, both for the duty that I owe, and the woorshipfull qualities you
are endued withal, as also for that all Northamton^hire reports how you are a
father of the poor, a supporter of ancient Hospitality, an enemy to Pride,
and to be short, a maintayner of Cloth breeches (I mean of the old and worthy
customs of the Gentilitie and yeomanrie of England.) Induced by these reasons,
I humbly present this phamplet to your Worship, only craving you will accept it
as courtiously as I present it dutifully, and then I have the end of my desire
and foresting in hope of your favorable acceptance, I humbly take my leave.

Your duetifull adopted son, Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers health.
GEntle Gentlemen, I hope Cloth breeches shall fin^ your gentle Censors of this
homely Apo^ogie of his ancient prerogatives since though he speaks against
Velvet breeches which you were, yet he twits not the weed but the vice, not
the apparel when it is worthily worn, but the unworthy person that wears it,
who sprang of a Peasant will use any sinister means to clime to preserment,
being then so proud as the foppe forgets like the Asle that a mule was his
father. For ancient Gentility and yeomanrie, Cloth bre^ches attempteth this
quarrel, and hopes of their favor: for vpstarts he is half careless, and the
more, because he knows whatsoever some think privately, they will be no
public carpers: least by kicking where they are touched, they bewray their gald
backs to the world, and by starting up to find fault, prove themselves vpstai^s
and fools. So then poor Clothbreeches sets down his rest on the courtesy of
gentle gentlemen and bold Yeomen, that they will suffer him to take no wrong.
But suppose the worst, that he should be fround at, and that such occupations
as he has upon conscience discarded from the Jury, should commence an action
of unkind nesse against him, heel prove it not to hold plea, because all the
debate was but a dream. And so hoping all men will merrily take it, he stands
solemnly leaning on his pike staff, till he hear what you conceive of him
for being so peremptory. If well, he swears to crack his hose at the knees to
quite your courtesy. If hardly, he has vowed that whatsoever he dreams never
to blab it again, and so he wishes me humbly to bid you farewell.

A quip for an vpstart Courtier.
IT was just at that time when the Cuckoulds quir rister began to bewray April
Gentlemen, with his never changed notes, that I damped with a melan choly
humor, went into y^ fields to cheer up my wits with the fresh air: where
solitary seeking to solace my self I fell in a dream, and in that drowsy
slomber, I wandered into a vale a^ tap^stted with sweet and choice fl^wers,
there grew many simples whose virtues taught men to be (...) and to think
nature by her weeds warnd men to be wary and by their secret properties to
check wanton and sensual imperfections. Amongst the rest, there was the yellow
daffadil, a flower fit for gelous Dottrels, who through the bew^y of their
honest wives grow suspicious, and so prove themselves in the end cuckhold
Neretikes, there buded out the checket^ (Paunsie) or partly colored hearts
ea^e, an herb sildome ^eene, either of such men as are wedded to threwes or of
such women that have hasty husbands, yet there it grew, and as I stepped to gather
it, it slipped from me like Tantalus fruit that fails their master. At last,
woondring at this secret quality, I learned that none can wear it, be they
kings, but such as desire no more then they are borne to, nor have their
wishes above their fortun^s. U^pon a bank bordring by, grew women's weeds,
fenell (...) for flatterers, fit generally for that Sex, since while they are
maidens, they wish wantonly: while they are wives they will wilfully, while
they are widows, they would willingly: and yet all the^e proud desires, are
but close dissemblinges. Near adjoining sprouted out the Courtiers comfort,
Time: An herb that many stumble on and yet ouet slip, whose rank savor and
thick leaves, have this peculiar property, to make a snaile if she taste of the
sap as swift as a swallow, yet toyned with this prei^dice, that if she clime
too hastily, she falls too suddenly. Me thought I saw diverse young courtiers
tread upon it with high dis^aine, but as they past away, an Adder lurking
there bit them by the ^eeles that they wept: and then I might perceive certain
clownes in clowted shoone gather it, and ease of it with greediness: which no
sooner was sunk into their mawes, but they were metamorphose^, and loookt as
prouidly^ though pesants, as if they had been borne to be princes companions.

Amongst the rest of these changlings whom the taste of time ha^ thus altered,
there was some that lifted their heads so hie, as if they ha^ been bred to
lock n^ lower then stars, they thought Noli altum sapere was rather the saying
of a fool, then the censure of a Philosopher, and therefore stretched themselves
on their tiptoes, as if they had been a kindred to the lord Liptoft, and began
to disdain their equals, scorn their inferiors, and even their betters,
forgetting now that time had taught them to say mass, how before they had
playde the Clarks part to say Amen to the priest. Tush, then they were not so
little as Gentlemen, and their own conceit was the Herralde to blason their
descente, from an old house, whose great grandfathers would have bin glad of a
new cottage to hide their heads in. Yet as the peacocke wrapped in the pride of
his beauteous feathers is known to be but a dunghill bird by his foul feet:
so though the high looks and costly suts argue to the eyes of the world they
were Caualiers of great worship, yet the churlish illiberalitie of their
minds, bewraide their fathers were not above three pounds in the kings
books at a subsidy, but as these vpstart changelings went strouting like
philopolim^rchides the bragart in Plautus, they lookte so proudlye at the same,
that they stumbled on a bed of Rue, that grew at the bottom of the bank
where the Time was planted, which fall upon the dew of so bitter an herb,
taught them that such proud peacockes as over hastily out run their fortunes at
last to speedily, fall to repentance and yet some of them smild and said Rue
was called herb grace, which though they scorned in their youth, they might
wear in their age, and it was never too late to say Miserere. As thus I sto^d
mus^nge at this time borne broad, they vanished away like Cadmus copesmates,
that sprang by of vipers teeth, so that casting mine eye aside after them, I
saw where a crew of all estates were gathering flowers, what kind they were of
I knew not, but precious, I geste them in that they plucked them with
greediness, so that I drew toward them to be partaker of their profits,
coming nearer, I might see the weed they so wrangled for, was a little daper
flower, like a ground hunnisuckle, called thrift, praised generally of all, but
practiced for distillation but of few amongst the crew that seemed covetous of
this herb, there was a troop of old graiberds in velvet, satin, and woorsted
iackets, that stooped as nimbly to pluck it up by the roots, as if their wyats
had been supled in the oil of Misers skins, they spared no labor and pains to
get and gather, and what they got they gave to certain young boys and girls
that stood behind them, with their skirtes and laps open to receive it: among
whom some seattered it as fast as their fathers gathered it, wasting and
spoiling it at their pleasure, which their fathers got with labor.

I thought them to be some Harbalistes or some Apothecaries that had employed
such pains to extract some rare quintessence out of this flower, but one
standing by told me they were Cormorantes and vs^rers, that gathered it to fill
their ^ofers with, and whereto (quoth I) is it precious? what is the virtue of
it? mary (quoth he) to quali^ie the heat of insatiable minds that like the
serpente Dipsas never drinks enough till they are so full they burste, why
then said I the Diuel^ burst them all, and with that I fell into a great
laughter, to see certain Italianate Cantes, humorous Caualiers, youthful
Gentlemen, and Inamorati gagliardi, that scornefully plucked of it, and wore it
a while as if they were weary of it and at last le^t it as to base a flower to
put in their nosegayes. Others that seemed Homini di grand issima by their
looks and their walks gathered earn^stly and did pocket it up, as if they
meant to keep it carefully, but as they were carrieng it away, there met them a
troop of nice wantons, fair women that like to Lamiae had f^ces like Angels,
^ies like s^ars, breasts like the golden front in the Hesperides, but from the
middle downwards their shapes like serpents. These with Syrenlike alluremente
so entised these quaint squires, that they bestowed all their flowers upon
them for favors, they themselves walkinge home by beggars bushe for a
penance. Amongst this crew were Lawyers and they gathered the Devil and all,
but poor poets were thrust back and (...) not be suffered to have one
handefull to put amongst their withered garlands of baies, to make them
glorious. But Hob and John of the country they stepped in churlishly, in their
high startvps, and gathered whole sackfuls: ^somuch they wore boesoms of Thrist
in their Hat^ like for ^horses, or the lusty Gallants in a Morris dance:
seeing the crew thus to wrangle for so paltry a weed, I went alone to take one
of all the other fragrante flowers that diapred this valley, thereby I saw the
Batchelers ^uttons, whose virtue is to make wanton maidens weep when they have
worn it forty weeks under their aporne for a ^auour;

Next them grew the dessembling daisse, to warn such light of lou^ wenches not
to trust every ^aire promise that (...) amorous batchelers make them, but
sweet smells breed bitter repentance. Hard by grew the true lovers primrose,
whose kind savor wishes men to b^ faithful and women courteous. Along in a
border grew maidenhair fit for modest maidens to behold, and immedest to
blushe at, because it praises the one for their natural Tre^ses, and
condemns the other for their beas^ly and counterfeit Perriwigs, there was the
gentle gilliflowre that wives should wear if they were not too froward; and
laiall Lauender, but that was full of Cuckoe. spittes, to ^how that women's
light thoghts make their husbands heavy beads: there were sweet Lillies Gods
plenty, which showed fair (...) need not weep for wooers, and store of balm
which could cure (...) wounds, only not that wound which women receive when
they loose their maidenheads, for no herb has virtue enough to scrape out
that blot, and therefore it is the greater (...) Infinite were the flowers beside
that beautified the valley, that to know their names and opera ^ons I needed
some curious herball, but I pass them over as needelesse, since the vision of
their virtues was but a dream, and therefore I wish no man to hold any
discourse herein authentical, yet thus much I must say for a parting blow,
that at the lower end of the dale I saw a great many of women using high words
to their husbands, some striving for the bre^ches, other to have the last
(...), some sretting, they could not find a knot in a rush, others striuinge
whether it were wool or hair the Goat bare: questioning with on that I met,
why these women were so choleric, he like a (...) fellow pointed to a bush of
(...), I not willing to be satisfied by signs, asked him what he meant
thereby. Mary (quoth he) all these women that your hear brawling frowning and
scolding thus, have severally p^st on this bushe of nettles, and the virtue of
them is to force a woman that waters them to be as peevish for a whole day and
as waspish as if she had been stung in the brow with a hornet. Well, I smild at
this and left the company to seek further, when in the twincklinge of an eye I
was left alone, the valley cleared of all company, and I a distressed man,
(...) to wander out of that solitary place to seek good (...) and been
companions to pass away the day withal. As thus. I walked forward, seeking up
the hill, I was driven half into a mase with the imagination of a strange
wonder which fell out thus: Me thought I saw an (...) headless things ^ome
pacing (...) (...) the hill stepping so proudly with such a geometrical grace,
as if seem artificial bragart had resolved to measure the world with his
pares: I could not descrie it to be a man, although it had motion, for that it
wanted a body, yet seeing legs and hose, I supposed it to be some monster
nurishte up in those deserts, at last as it drew more nigh unto nigh, I might
perceive that it was a very passing costly pair of Ueluct breeches, whose
panes being made of the cheesest Neapolitane stuff, was drawn out with the
best Spanish fatine, and marvelous curiously over wipt with gold twist,
intersemed wit^ knots of pearl, the Netherstocke was of the pure^t Grauade
^ilck, no cost was spared to ^est out these costly breeches, who had girt unto
them a Kapyer and Dagger gilt, point (...), as quaintly as if some curious
Florentine bad trickte them up to square it up and down the streets before
his Mistress. As these breeches were exceeding (...) to the e^e, so were they
passing pompo^s in their ge^tures, (...) they strouted up and down the Ually
as (...) a^though they ^ad there appointed to act some desperate combat.

Blame me not if I were driven into a muse with this most monstrous sight to
see in that place such a strange headless Courtier ^ettinge up and d^wne like
the Usher of a Fence (...) about to play his Prise, when I deem never in any
age such a wonderful object fortuned unto an^ man before. Well, the greater
dumpe this Nouelty drove me into, the more desire I had to see what event
would follow: where upon looking about to se if that any more company ^ould
come, I might perceive from the top of the other hill an other pair of
Breeches more soberly marching, and with a softer pace, as if they were not too
hasty, and yet would keep promise nevertheless at the place appointed. As
soon as they were come into the vallie, I saw they were a plain pair of
Cloth breeches, without either welt or guard, straight to the thigh of white
kersie, without a slop, the netherstocke of the same, sewed too above the knee,
and only seamed with a littell country blewe, such as in Di^bus illis our
great Grandfathers more, when neighbor hood and hospitality had banished Pride
out of England. Nor were these plain breeches weaponlesse, for they had a good
sower bat with a pike in the end, able to lay on load enough, if the heart were
answerable to the weapon, and upon this staff pitched down upon the ground,
Clothbreeches stood solemnly leaning, as if they meant not to start, but to
answer to the uttermost whatsoever in that place might be objected. Looking
upon these two, I might (...) by the pride of the one, and homely resolution of
the other that this their meeting would grow to some dangerous conflict, and
therefore to prevent the fatal issue of such a pretended quarrel, I stepped
between them both, when Ueluet breeches greeted Cloth breeches with this
salutation. Proud and insolent pesant, how dare thou without leave or low
reverence press into the place whether I am come for to disport my self? Art
thou not afraid? thy high presumption should sommon me to displeasure, and so
force me draw my rapier, which is never unsheathed but it turns into the
scabberd with a triumph of mine enemies blood: bold bayard auaunt, beard me
not to my face, for this time I pardon thy folly, and grant thy legs leave to
carry away thy life. Cloth breeches nothing amassed at this brauado, bending his
staff as if he meant (if he were wronged) to bestow his benison, with a
scornful kind of smiling made this smooth reply: Mary gip goodman vpstart,
who made your father a Gentleman, soft fire makes sweet malt, the curstest Cow
has the shortest horns, and a brawling curre, of all bites the least, alas
good sir, are you so fine that no man may be your fellow, I pray you what
defference is between you and me but in the cost and the making, though you
be never so richly daubde with gould and powdered with Pearl, yet you are but
a case for the butfockes, and a cover for the basest part of a man's body no
more then I, the greatest pre-eminence is in the garnishing and thereof you are
proud, but come to the true use we were appointed to, my honor is more then
thine, for I belong to the old ancient yeomanry, yea and gentility, the
fathers, and thou to a company of proud and unmannerly vpstarts the sons. At
this, Ueluet-breeches stormd and said. Why thou beggars brat descended from the
reuersion of base pouertye, is thy insolency so great to make comparison with
me, whose difference is as great as the brightness of the sun and the
slender light of a candle: I (poor snake) am sprung from the ancient Romans,
borne in Italy the mistress of the world for chivalry, called into England from
my native home (where I was famous) to honor your country and young gentlemen
here in England with my countenance, where I am holden in high regard, that I
can press into the presence when thou poor soul shall with cap and knee beg
leave of the porter to enter, and I sit and dine with the Nobility, when thou
art feign to wait for the reuers^on of the alms basket: I am admited boldly to
tell my tale, when thou art fain to sue by means of suplication, and that and
thou to, so little regarded, that most commonly it never comes to the Princes
hand, but dies inprisoned in so^ obscure pocket: Since then there is such
defference between our estates, cease to urge my patience with thy insolent
presumption. Cloth breeches as brief as he was proud, swore by the pike of
his staff, that his choplogicke was not worth a pin, and that he would turn
his one weapon into his bosom thus, Why signor Glorioso (quoth he) though I
have not such glosing phrase to trick out my speeches withal as you, yet I
will come over your fallowes with this bad the. thoricke: I pray you Mounsier
Malapart are you therefore my superior, because you are taken up with
Gentlemen, and I with the yeomanry? Does true virtue consist in riches, or
humanity in wealth? is ancient honor tied to ontward bravery? or not rather
true Nobility, a mind excellently qualified with rare virtues? I will teach
thee a lesson worth the hearing, proud princocks, how Gentility ^rst sprung
vpe, I will not forget the old wives logic, when Adam delvd and Eve span, who
was then a Gentleman? but I tell thee after the general floode that there was
no more men upon the earth but Noe and his three sons, and that Cham had
wickedly discouere^ his fathers secrets the^ grew the division of estates thus:
The church was figured in Sem, Gentilitye in Iapheth, and labor and drudgerie
in Cham: Sem being chaste and holy, Iapheth learned and valiant, Cham churlish
and servile, yet did not the turse extend so far upon Cham, nor the blesing
upon Iapheth, but if the one altered his nature, and became either endued with
learning or valor he might be a gentleman, or if the other degenerated from
his ancient virtues, he might be heald a pesaunt, whereupon Noe inferred that
gentility grew not only by propagatio^ of nature, but by perfection of
qualities Then is your worship wide that boast of your worth for your gold and
pearl, since Cucullus non facit Monachum, nor a Ueluet ^lop make a slouen a
gentleman: And whereas thou say thou were borne in Italy, and called hither
by our courtiers, him may we curse that brought thee first into England, for
thou came not alone but acompanied with a multitude of abominable vices,
hanging to thy bumbast nothing but infectious abuses, as vainglory,
selfeloue, ^mie, and strange poisonings, wherewith thou have infected this
glorious Island, yea insolent bragart: thou have defiled thine one neast, and
fatal was the day of thy birth, for since the time of thy hatching in Italy, as
(...) famous for chinalrey and learning, the imperial state through thy pride
has decayed, and thou have like the yo^nge Pelican peckt at thy mothers breast
with thy presumption, causing them to lose that their forefathers with true
honor conquered, so have thou been the ruin of the Roman Empire, and now
fatally art thou come into England to atempte haete the like subversion.
Whereas thou do boast that I am little regarded where thou art highly
acounted of, and have sufferance to press into the presence, when I am for my
simpleness shut out of door, I grant thy all^gation in part, but not in whole,
for men of high wisdom and honor measure not men by the outward show of
bravery, but by the inward worth and honesty, and so though I am disdained of a
few over weening fools, I am valued as well as thy self with the wise. In
that thou say thou can speak when I sue by supplication, I grant it, but
the tale thou telst is to the ruin of the poor, for coming into high favor
with an im pudent face, what farm is there expired, whose lease thou doo^ not
beg? what forfeite of penal statutes? what consealed lands can ouerslip
thee? yea rather then thy bravery should fail beg powling pence for the
very smooke that comes out of poor men's chemnies, shamest thou not vplan^ish
vpstart to hear me discourse thy imperse^ions, get thoe home again into thy
own country, and let me as I was wont live famous in my native home in England
where I was borne and bred, yea and bearded Caesar thy co^ntryman til he
compast the conquest by treason. The right and title in this country base brat
(quoth velvet breeches) now authority favors me, I am admitted viceroy, and I
will make thee do me homage, and confess that thou heldst thy being and
residence in my land from the gracious savor of my sufferance, and with that
he laid hold on the hilts of his rapyer, and cloth breeches bet^ke him to his
staff, when I stepping betwixt them parted them thus. Why what mean ye, will
you decide your controversy by blows, when you may debate it by reason, this
is a land of peace, governed by true iusticiaries and honorable magistrates,
where you shall have equity without partiality, and therefore listen to me and
discuss the matter by law, your quarrel is, whether of you are most ancient
and most worthy, you sir, boast of your country and parentage, he of his natiu^
birth in England, you claim al, he would have but his own, both plead
anobsolute title of residence in this country, the^ must the course between
you be trespass or disseison of frank tenament, you Ueluet breeches in that
you claim the fir^ title you shall be plaintiff, and plead a trespass of
desseison done you by cloth breeches, so shall it be brought to a jury, and
tried by a verdict of twelve or four and twenty. Tush, tush, quoth Ueluet
breeches, I neither like to be plaintiff, nor yet allow of a jury, for they
may be partial, and so condemn me in mine ^wne action, for the country
swains cannot value of my worth nor can mine honors come within the compass
of their base wits, because I am a stranger in this land, ^ but here latly
arrived, they will hold me as an vpstart, and so lightly esteem of my
worthiness, and for my adversary is their countriman and less chargeable, he
shall have the law mitigated, if a jury of hinds or pesaunts should be
inpanelled, if ancient Gentlemen, yeomen, or plain ministers should be of the
quest I were sure to lose the day because they loath me, in that I have
persuaded so many landlordes for the maintenance of my bravery to raise their
rentes. You seek a knot in a rush (quoth. I) you need not doubt of that, for
whom you distrust and think not indifferent, him you upon a cause manifested,
challeng from your jury, If your law allow such large favor (quoth Ueluet
breeches) I am content my title be tried by a jury, and therefore let mine
adversary plead me Null tort Null disseison Cloth breeches was content with this,
and so they both agr^ I should be iud^e and iuror in this controversy,
whereupon I wish them to say for themselves what they could, that I might
discourse to the Jurie what reasons they alleged of their Tutes: then Ueluet
breeches began thus. I cannot but grieve that I should be thus outfacst with a
carters weed only fit for husbandry, seeing I am the original of al
honorable endeavors: to what end does youth bestow their wits on law,
physic, or Theology, were it not the end they aim at, is the wearing of me
and wining of preferment, Honor norisheth Art, and for the regard of dignity,
do learned men strive to exceed in their faculty. Impiger extremos currit
Mercator ad indos, Per mare, per saxa, etc. What drives the merchants to seek
forr^n martes, to venture their goods and hazard their lives? not, if still the
end of their travel were a pair of cloth breeches, no, velvet, costly atire,
curious and quaint apparel is the spur that pricks them forward to attempt
such danger. Does not the Soldiers fight to be brave, the Lawyer study to
countenance himself with cost, the artificer takes pains only for my sake
that wearing me he may brag it amongst the best, what credit carries he now
adays that goes pind up in a Cloth breech, who will keep him company that
thinks well of himself, unless he use the simple slave to make clean his
shoone, the worlds are chaungde and men are grown to more wit, and their
minds to aspire after more honorable thoughts, they were Dunces in Diebus
illis, they had not the true use of gentility, and therefore they lived meanly
and died obscurely, but now men's capacities are refined, time has set a new
edge on gentlemen's humors, and they show them as they should be, not like
glottons as their fathers did, in chines of beef and alms to the poor, but
in veluets, sattins, cloth of gold, pearl, yea pearl lace, which scarce
Caligula wore on his birth day, and to this honorable humor have I brought
these gentlemen since I came from Italy. what is the end of service to a man
but to countenance himself and credit his master with brave suites, the
scuruy tapsters and ostlers sex po puli fill pots, and rub horseheeles, to
prancke themselves with my glory, alas were it not to wear me, why would so
many apply them selves to extraordinary idleness? Beside, I make fools be
reuerenst, and thought wise amongst the common sort, I am a severe sensor to
such as offend the law, provided there be a penalty annexed that may bring in
some profit, yea by me the cheifest part of the realm is governed, and
therefore I refer my title to the verdit of any men of judgment. To this mildly
Cloth breeches answered thus.

As I have had always that honest humor in me to measure all estates by their
virtues, not by their apparel, so did I never grudge at the bravery of any
whom birth, time, place, or dignity made worthy of such costly ornaments, but
if by the favor of their Prince and their own deserts they merited them, I
held both lawful and commendable to answer their degrees in apparel,
correspondent unto their dignities, I am not so precise directly to inueigh
against the use of velvet, either in breeches or in other suits, nor will I
have men goelike John Baptist, in coats of Camels hair. Let Princes have their
Diademes, and Caesar what is due to Caesar, let Noblemen go as their birth
requires, and Gentlemen as they are borne or bear office, I speak in mine
own defense, for the ancient Gentilitye and yeomanrie of England, and inueigh
against none, but such malapart vpstart as raised up from the Plough, or
advanced for their Italian devises, or for their witless wealth, covet in
brauerye to match, nay to exceed the greatest Noblemen in this land.

But leaving this digression mounster velvet breeches, again to the
perticulars of your fond allegation. Whereas you affirm your self to be both
original and final end of learning, alas proud princox you perch a bow to hie,
did all the philosophers beat their brains, and busy their wits to wear
velvet breeches? Why both at that time thou were unknown, yea unborn, and all
excess in apparel had in high contempt, and now in these days all men of
worth, are taught by reading, that excess is a great sin: that pride is the
first step to the downfall of shame. They study with Tully, that they may
seem^ borne for their countries as well as for themselves. The Divine to
justice, the Physician to discover the secrets of Gods wonders, by working
strange cures: to be brief, the end of all being, as to know God, And not as
your worship good master velvet breeches wrest^ to creep into acquaintance.

I will not deny, but there be as fantastical fools as your self, that
perhaps are puffed up with such presuming thoughts, and ambitiously aim to trick
themselves in your worships masking suits, but while such climb for great
honors, they often fall to great shames. It may be thereupon you bring in
Honos alit Arts, but I guess your maistership never tried what true honor
meant, that trusse it vpe within the compass of a pair of veluet^ breeches,
and place it in the arrogance of the heart, no, no: say honor is idolatry, for
they make ^ooles of themselves, and idols of their carcases: but he that
valueth honor so, shall read a lecture out of Apuleius golden ass, to learn
him more wit. But now sir by your leave, a blow with your next argument which
is, that merchants hazard their goods and lives to be acquainted with your
maistership. Indeed you are awrie for wise men frequent marts for profit not
for pride, unless it be some, that by wearing of velvet breeches and apparel
too high for their calling, have proved bankeroutes in their youth, and have
been glad in their age to desire my acquaintance, and to trusse up their
tails in homespun russet: whereas thou do object the valor of hardy
soldiers to grow for the desire of brave apparel. It Is false, and I know if
any were present, they would prove upon thy bones that thou were a lier: for
their countries good, their princes service, the defense of their friends the
hope of favor is the final end of their resolutions: esteeming not only them
but the worlds glory, fickle, transitory, and inconstant. Shall I fetch from
thine own country, weapons to wound thy self withal. What say thou to
Cincinnatus, was he not caled to be Dictator from the Plough, and after many
victories, what did he iet up and down the court incosty garments and velvet
breeches? No, he despised dignity, contemned vain glory and pride, and
returned again to his quiet contented life in the country. How much did Caius
Fabritius value their Numa pompilius, Sceuola, Scipio, Epamino^das, Aristides,
they held themselves worms meat, and counted pride vanity, and yet thou art
not ashamed to say, thou art the end of soldiers worthy honor. I tell thee
saucy skipiack, it was a good and a blessed time here in England, when K.
Stephen wore a pair of cloth breeches of a Noble a pair, and thought them
passing costlye, then did he count Westminster hal to little to be his dining
chamber and his alms was not bare bones, in stead of broken meat but lusty
chiues of beef fell into the poor men's basket. Then charity flourished in the
Court, and young Courtiers str^ue to exceed one an other in virtue, not in
bravery: they rode not with fans to ward their faces from the wind, but with
Burgant to resist the stroke of a Battleaxe, they could then better exhort a
soldior to armor then court a lady with amorets, they caused the trumpette to
sound them points of war, not Poets to write them wanton Eligies of love:
they soght after honorable fame, but hunted not after fading honor: which
distinction by the way take thus. There be some that seek honor, and soome
are sought after by honor. Such vpstarts as fetch their pedigree from their
fathers ancient leather apron, and creep into the court with great humility,
ready at the first Basciare li piedi di la vostra signoria having gotten the
countenance of some Nobleman, will strait be a kindred to Cadwaller, and swear
his great grand mother was one of the Burgesses of the parliamente house, will
at last steal by degrees into some credit by their double diligence, and then
wind some woorshipfull place as far as a hungry sow can smell a sir reverence,
and then with all their friends seek day and night with coin and countenance
till they have got it. Others there be whom honor it self seeks, and such be
they whom virtue does frame fit for that purpose, that rising by high deserts,
as learning, or valor, merit more then either they look for, or their prince
has any ease conveniently to bestow on them. Such honor seeks and they with
a blushing conscience entertain him, be they never so high in favor, yet they
beg no office, as the shameless vp^art does, that has a hungry eye to spy
out, an impudent face to sue, and a flatering tongue to entreat for some void
place of worship, which little belonged to them, if the prince intended to
bestow offices for ver tue not favor, Other M. velvet breeches there be of
your crew, that pinch their bellies to polish their backs, that keep their
mawes empty, to fill their pursses that have no show of gentility but a
Ueluet slop, who by poling or selling of land that their fathers left will
be^owe all to buy an office about the court that they may be worshipful,
extorting from the poor, to raise up their money that the base deceiving
companions have laid out to have an office of some countenance and credit;
wherein they may have of me better then themselves, be tear^ed by the name of
worship. The last whom virtue pleads for, and neither silver, gold, friends,
nor favor aduanceth, be men of great worth, such as are thought of worship,
and un willingly entertain ber, rather vouchsa^ng proffered honor for their
countries cause, then for any proud opinion of hoped for preferment.

Blessed are such lan^es, whose officers are so placed, and where the Prince
promoteth not for coin nor countenance, but for his worthy deserving veitues.
But leaving this by talk, me thought I heard you say Signior Ueluet br^ches,
that you were the father of mechanical Arts, and handicraftes were found out
to fester your bravery. In faith goodman gosecape, you that are come from the
startvps, and therefore is called an vpstart, quasi start up from clowted
shoone, your lips hunge in your light, when you brought forth this Logike: for
I hope there is none so simple, but knows that handicraftes and occupations
grew for necessity, not pride: that men's inventions waxed sharp to profit
the common wealth, not to pranke up themselves in bravery, I pray you when
Tubalcane invented tempring of metals had be Ueluet breeches to wear? In
sadness, where was your woorship when his brother found out the accordes and
discordes of musiicke hiden in hell, and not yet thought on by the Devil, to
cast forth as a bait to bring many proud fools to ruin^?

Indeed I cannot deny, but your worship has brought in deceit as a journey
man into al companies, and made that a subtle craft, which while I was holden
in esteem was but a simple mystery: now every trade has his sleightes, to
slubber up his work to the eye, and to make it good to the sale, howesoeuer
it proones in the wearinge, The shoemaker cares not if his shoes hold the
bra^ing on: the tailor sowes with hot needle and burnte thread. (...) pride has
banished conscience, and Ueluet breeches honesty, and every servile drudge must
ruffle in his silks, or elie he is not suitable.

The world was not so A principio, for when velvet was worn but in kings
caps, then conscience was not a brom man in Bent streat but a Cour^ier, then
the farmer was content ^is son should hold the plough, and live as he had
done before: Beggars then feared to aspire, and the higher sorts scorned to
enu^e. Now every lowt must have his son a Courtnoll, and those dunghill
drudges wax so proud, that they will presume to wear on their feet, what kings
have worn on their heads. A clownes son must be clapped in a Ueluet
pantophle, and a velvet breech, though yt presumptious a^se be drowned in the
Mercers beoke, and make a convey of all his lands to the usurer for
commodities: yea the fop must go like a gallant for a while, although at last
in his age he^ beg. But indeed, such young youths when the broker has blessed
them with saint Needams cross, fall then to privy liftes and cosen^ages, and
when their credit is utterly cracked, they practice some bad shift, and so come
to a shameful end

Lastly, whereas thou say thou art a severe sensour to punish sins, as
austere as Cato to correct vice, of truth I hold thee so in penal statutes when
thou have begged the forfeite of the Prince: but such correction is open
extortion and oppression of the poor, nor can I compare it better M velvet
breech, then to the wolf cha^ising the lamb for disturbing their fountain,
or the Devil casting out Deuilles, through the power of Belsebab, and thus
much courteous sir I have said, to display the follies of mine adversary, and to
she we the right of mine own intrest. Why then quoth I, if you have both
said, it rests but that we had some to empanell upon a ^ury, and then no
doubt but the verdict would soon be given on one side. As thus I was talking
to them, I might see coming down the bill a brane dapper Dicke, quaintly
attired in velvet and Satin, and a cloak of cloth rash, with a cambricke
ruff as smoothly ^et, and he as ne^ly spu^ged, as if he had b^n a bridgrome,
only I gest by his pace a far off he should be a Tailor, his head was holden
up so pert, and his legs shackle hamd, as if his knees had been laced to
his thighs with points. Coming more near indeed I (...) a ^ailors m^rice
pike on his breast, a spanish needle, and then I (...) my salutations, not to
his suits but to his trade, and incountred him by a thread bare courtesy, as
if I had not known him, and asked him of what accupation he was? A Tailor,
quoth he, marry then my friend, quoth I, you are the more welcome, for beer is
a great quarrel grown betwixt velvet breeches and cloth breeches, for their
prerogative in England: the matter is grown to an issue, there must a Jury be
empannelied, and I would desire and entreat you to be one of the quest.

Not so, quoth cloth breeches I challenge him. And why quoth I? What reason
have you, does he not make them both? yes, quoth he, but his gains is not a
like: alas, by me he gets small, only he is paid for his workmanship,
unless by misfortune his shieres slipp aw^y, and then his vailes is but a
shred of homespunne cloth: where as in making of velvet breeches, where there
is required silcke lace, cloth of gold, of silver, and such costly stuff, to
welte, guard, whippstitch, edge, face, and draw out, that the vales of one
velvet breeche, is more then twenty pair of mine. I hope there is no Tailor so
precise but he can play the cook and lick his own fingers: though he look
up to Heaven, yet he can cast large shreds of such rich stuff into hell under
his shop board. Besides, he settes down like the clarke of the Check a large
bill of reckoninges, which for he keeps long in his pocket he so powders for
stinking, that the young vpstart that needs it, feels it salt in his stomach a
month after. Beside sir velvet breeches has aduan^t him: for whereas in my
time he was counted but goodman Tailor, now he is grown since velvet breeches
came in, to be called a merchant or Gentleman Merchant Tailor, geuinge arms
and the holy Lamb in his creast, where before he had no other cognizance, but
a plain spanish needle with a welsch cricket on the top: ^ith then his gain
is so great and his honor so aduaunst by velvet breeches. I will not trust
his conscience, nor shall he come upon my Jury.

Indeed you have some reason quoth I, but perhaps the Tailor does this upon
mere devotion to punish pride, and having no other authority nor mean, thinks
it best to pinche them by the purse, and make them pay well, as to ask twice
so much silk lace and other stuff as would suffice, and yet to over reach my
young ma^ster with a bill of rekoning that will make him scratche where it
itcheth not. Herein I hold the Tailor for a necessary member to teach yoonge
nouices the way to weeping cross: that when they have wasted what their (...)
left the^ by pride, they may grow sparing and humble, by inferred poverty: and
by this reason, the Tailor plays Gods part: ^e ^ralteth the poor and pulls
down the proud: For of a wealthy Esquiers son, he makes a threedbare
beggar: and of a scornful Tailor, he sets by an vpstart scaruy Gentleman. Yet
seeing you have made a reasonable challeng to him, the Tailor shall be none of
the quest.

As I bad him stand by, there was coming along the valley toward us,
square set fellow well fed and as briskly apparelled, in a black taffaty
dublet and a spruce leather ierkin, with Crystal buttons: A cloak facst
before with velvet, and a couentry cap of the ^nest wool, his face something
Ru^y blush, Cherry cheeked, like a shreed of scarlet or a little darker, like
the lees of old claret wine: a nose autem nose purpled pretiously with pearl
and stone, like a counterseit work, and between the filthy reumicast of his
bludshot ten snowt, there appeared small holes, whereat worms heads peeped as
if they meant by their appearance to preach and show the antientie and
antiquity of his house.

This fiery facst churl had upon his fingers as many goldrings, as would
furnish a gold smiths shop or beseem a pandor of long profession to wear,
wondering what companion this should be. I inquired of what occupation he was:
marry sir quoth he a Broker, why do you ask, have you any pawnes at my
house? No quoth I, nor by the help of God never will have: but the reason is to
have you upon a Jury. At this word before I could enter my discourse unto him
velvet breeches start up, and swore he should be none of the quest, he would
challeng him, and why quoth I, what know you by him? This base churl is one
of the moathes of the common wealth, he is the spoil of young Gentlemen a
blood sucker of the poor, as thirsty as a horse leach that will never leave
drinking while he burst, a knave that has intrest in the leases of forty
bawdy houses a receiver for lifts, and a dishonorable supportet of cutpurses,
to conclude, he was gotten by an Incubus a he Devil, and brought forth by an
ouerworne refuse, that had spent her youth under the ruins of Bowbies Barn.

O monstrous inuectiue, quoth I, what reason have you to be thus bitter against
him? Oh the villane, quoth he, is the Devils factor, sent from hell to torment
young Gentlemen upon earth: he has fetched me over in his time, only in pawnes,
in ten thousand pound in gold. Suppose as Gentlemen through their liberal
minds may want that I need, money: let me come to him with a pawn worth ten
pound, he still not lend upon it above three pound, and he will hane a bill of
sale and twelve pence in the pound for every month, so that it comes to
^ixteene pence, since the bill must monthly be renewed, and if you break but
your day, set down in the bill of sale, your pawn is lost, as full bought
and sold, you turned out of your goods and he an vnconscio^able gainer. Suppose
the best, you keep your day, yet paying sixtene pense a month for twenty
shillings, you pay as good for the lone as four score in the hundred, is not
this monstrous exacting upon Gentlemen. Beside the knave will be diligently
attending and waiting at dicing houses where we be at play, and there he is
ready to lend the loaser money upon rings, and chains, apparel or any other
good pawn, but the poor Gentleman paies so dear, for the lauender it is laid
up in, that if it lie long at a brokers house he seems to buy ^is apparel
twice: nay this worm eaten wretch has deeper pytfalls yet to entrap youth in,
for he being acquainted with a young Gentleman of (...) ^uing, in issue of
good parents or assured possibillity, sooths him in his monstrous expenses and
says he carries the mind of a Gentleman, promising if he want he shall not
lack for a hundred pound or two, if the Gentleman need, then has my broker an
usurer at hand as it as himself, and he brings the money, but they tie the
poor soul in such Darbies bands, what with receiving il commodities and
forfcitures upon the band, that they dub him sir John had land before they
leave him, and ^are like wolves the poor nouices wealth betwi^t them as a pray,
he is (sir) to be breefs a bowsie bawdy miser, good for none but himself and
his trugge, a carle that has a filthy carcass without a conscience, a body of
a man wherein an infernal spirit in steed of a soul does inhabit, the scum
of the seven deadly sins, an enemy to all good minds, a deuourer of young
Gentlemen, and to conclude my mortal enimis and therefore admit of my chaleng,
and let him be none of the jury. Truly (quoth. Cloth breeches) and I am willing
he should be discarded too, for were not bad brokers (I will not condemn al)
there would be less filching and fewer thieves, for they receive all is
brought them, and buy that for a Crown that is worth twenty shillings, desire
of gain blinds their conscience, and they care not how it be come by, so they
buy it cheaps. Beside they extorte upon the poor that are enforced through
extreme want to pawn their clothes and household stuffs, their pewter and
brass, and if the poor souls that labor hard ^isse but a day, the base
minded broker takes the forfeite without remorse or pity, it was not so in
Diebus illis, but thou proud vpstart Ueluetbreeches have learnd all Englishmen
their villainy, and all to mainetaine thy bravery: yea, I have known of late
when a poor woman laid a silver thimble that was sent her from her friends for
a toke^ to pawn for six pence, and the broker made her pay a halfpeny a week
for it, which comes to two shillings a year, for six pence: since then his
conscience is so bad, let him be shuffled out amongst the knaves for a
discarding card, Content quoth. I, and bad the broker stand back, when there were
even at my heels three in a cluster p^rt youths all, and neatly tired, I
questioned them what they were, and the one said he was a barber, the other a
surgion, and the third an Apoticary. How like you of these (quoth, I) shall they
be of your jury? Of the jury, quoth Cloth-breeches, never a one by my consent,
for I challenge them all: your reason quoth. I, and then you shall have my
verdict. Mary (quoth Cloth breeches) first to the barber he cannot be but a
partial man on velvet breeches side, fith he gets more by one time dressinge
of him, than by ten times dressing of me, I come plain to be polde, and to
have my beard cut, and pay him two pence, veluett breeches he sittes down in
the chair wrapped in fine clothes, as though the barber were about to make him
a footcloth for the vicar of saint fools, the^ begins he to take his sissars
in his hand and his comb, and so to snap with them as if he meant to give a
warning to all the lice in his nitt^ locks for to prepare themselves, for the
day of their d^struction was at hand, then comes he out with his fustian
elequence and making a low conge, says, Sir will you have your worcester hair cut
after the Italian manner, short and round, and then frounst with the curling
yrons, to make it look like a half moon in a mist? or like a spanyard long
at the ears, and curled like to the two ends of an old cast p^rriwig, or
will you be Frenchefied with a love lock down to your shoulders, wherein you
may wear your mistress favor? the English cut is base and gentlemen scorn
it, nouelty is daintye, speaks the word sir, my sissars are ready to execute
your worships will. His head being once dressed, which requires in combing and
rubbing some t^o hours, he comes to the basin, then being curiously washed
with no weorse then a camphire bal, he descends as low as his berd, and asks
whether he please to be shaven or no, whether he will have his peak cut short
and sharp, amiable like an inamorato or broad penda^t like a spade, to be
terrible like a warrior and a Soldado, whether he will have his crates cut low
like a Iuniperbush, or his suberches taken away with a rasor, if it be his plea
sure to have his appendices primd, or his mustachios fostered to turn about his
ears like y^ branches of a vine, or cut down to ye lip with ye Italian ^a^h,
to make him look like a half faced bauby in bras. These quaint terms Barber
you g^ee^ master velvet breeches withal, and at every word a snap with your
^ors, and a cring with your knee, whereas when you come to poor Clothbreeches
you either cut his beard at your own pleasure, or else in disdain ask him
if he will be trimd with Christ's cut, round like the half of a holland cheese,
mocking both Christ and us: for this your knauerie my will is you shall be none
of the ^urie. For you master surgion, the statutes of England exempts you from
being of any quest, and beside, alas, I seldom fall into your hands as being
quiet and making no brawls to have wounds, as swartruiting veluetbreeches
does, neither do I frequent whorehouses to catch the Marbles, and so to grow
your patient, I know you not and therefore I appeal to the statute, you shall
have nothing to do with my matter. And for you M. Apoticarie, alas, I look
not once in seven year into your shop, without it be to buy a peniworth of
wormeseed to give my child to drink, or a little triacle to drive out the
measels, or perhaps some dregs and powders to make my sick horse a drench
withal, but for my self, if I be il at cafe, I take Kitchen physic, I make
my wife my Doctor, and my garden my Apoticaries shop, whereas queasie master
velvet breeches cannot have a fart awrye, but he must have his purgations pills,
and glisters, or euacute by electuaries, he must if the lest spot of morphue
come on his face, have his oil of Tartar, his Lac virginis, his camphire
dissolved in veriuice, to make the fool as fair forsooth, as if he were to
play Maidmarian in a Maygame or Moris-daunce, tush he cannot digest his meat
without co^serues, nor end his meal without suckats, nor (shall I speak
plainly) pleas the trug his mistres without he gos to the Apothecaries, for
Eringion, Oleum formicarum alatarum and aqua mirabilis of ten pound a pint, if
mast velvet breeches with drinking these drugs hap to have a stinking breath,
then forseeth the Apoticarie must play the peri^ to make it sweet, nay what is
it about him that he blames not nature for framing, and forms it a new by
art, and in all this wh^ but mounster the Apoticarie, therefore good sir (quot
he) seeing you have taken upon you to be trior for the challenges, let those
three as partial companions be packing. Why (quoth. I) seeing you have yielded
such reason of refusal, let them stand by: presently looking about for more,
comes stalking down an aged grand sir in a black velvet coat and a black
cloth gown welted and faced, and after him as I suppose, four seruingmen,
the most il favored knaves me thought that ever I saw, one of them had on a
buffe leather ierkin all greasy before with the droppings of b^ere that fell
from hi^ beard, and by his side a skeine like a Bruers boung knife, and muffled
he was in a cloak turned over his nose, as though he had been ashamde to show
his face. The second had a belly like a buckingtub, and a threedbare black
coat vnbottond before upon the breast, whereon the map of drunkenness was
drawn, with the bawdy and bowsie excrements that dropped from his filthy leaking
mouth. The third was a long lean old slauering slangrell with a brasell staff
in the one hand, and a whipcord in the other, so pourblind that he had like to
have stumbled upon the company before he saw them: The fourth was a fat chuffe,
with a sower look, in a black cloak faced with taffata, and by his side a
great side pouch like a faulkner, for their faces all four seemed to be
brethren, they were so bumbasted with the flocks of strong beers, and lined
with the lees of old sack, that they lookte like four blown bladers painted
over with read oaker, or washed over with the suds of an old stale die. All
these, as well the master as the following mates would have past away, but
that I stepped before them and inquired first of the foremost what he was, Mary
quoth. he, a Lawier, then sir quoth. I, we have a matter in controversy that
requires counsel, and you are the more welcome. What is it quoth. he, Mary said
I, whether Clothbreeches or veluetbreeches are of more worth, and which of them
has the best title to be resident in England? At this the lawier smild, and
velvet breeches stepping forth took acquaintance of him, and commending his
honesty, said there could not be a man of better indifferency of the jury:
when cloth breeches stepping in swore he marvelled be was not as well as the
Surgion exempted by act of parliament from being of any quest, since as the
surgion was without pity, so he was without conscience, and thereupon inferd
his challenge, saying the Lawyer was never friend to clothbreeches, for when
lowliness, neighborhood, and hospitality lived in England, Westminster hall
was a dyning chamber, not a den of controversies, when the king himself was
content to keep his S. Georges day in a plain pair of kersie hose: when the
duke, earl, lord, knight, gentleman and esquire, aimed at virtue, not pride:
and wore such breeches as was spun in his house, then the lawyer was a simple
man, and in the highest degree but a bare scrinener, except Judges of the land,
which took in hand serious matters, as treasons, murders felons and such
capital offenses, but sildome was there any Pleas put in before that proud
vpstart velvet breeches, for his maintenance invented strange controversies,
and since he began to dominier in England, he has buzd such a proud, busy,
covetous and incroaching humor into every man's head that lawiers are grown to
be one of the cheese lims of the common wealth, for they do now adays de lana
caprina rixare, go to law if a hen do but scrape in his Oarchard: but
howsoever right be, might carries away the verdict: if a poor man sue a
Gentleman, why he shoots up to the sky, and the arrow falls on his own head,
howsoeur the cause go the weakest is thrust to the wall, lawiers are troubled
with the heat of the liver, which makes the palms of their hands so hot that
they cannot be cold unless they be rubd with the oil of angels, but the poor
man that gives but his bare fee, or perhaps pleads in forma pauperes, he
hunteth for hares with a taber, and gropeth in the dark to find a needle in a
botle of hay, tush these lawiers have such delatory and foren pleas, such
dormers, such quibs and quiddits, that beggering their clients they purchase to
themselves whole lordships, it booteth not men to discourse their little
conscience, and great exhortation, only suffice they be not so rich as they be
bad, and yet they be but to welthy. I inueigh not against law nor honest
lawiers, for there be some well qualified, but against extorting Ambodexters y^
wring the poor, and because I know not whether this be such a one or no, I
challenge him not to be of my Jury. Why the^, quoth I his worship may depart, and
the^ I questioned what he in the buffe ierkin was, mary quoth he, I am a
serieant, he had no sooner said so but velvet breeches leapt back, and drawing
his rapier, swore he did not only challenge him for his jury, but protested if
he stird one foot toward him, he would make him eat a piece of his po^ard,
And what is the reason quoth. I, that there is such mortal hatred betwixt you and
the serieant? Oh sir quoth. velvet breeches, search him, and I warrant you the
knave has precept upon precept to arrest me, has worn his mace smooth, with
only clapping it upon my shoulder he has had me under coram so often, oh
that reprobate is the (...), executioner to bring such Gentlemen to Limbo, as
he has overthrown with his ^ase brocage and bad commodities: and as you s^
him a fat knave with a foggie face, wherein a cup of old sack has set a seal,
to mark the bowsie drunkard to die of the dropsy, so his conscience is
consumed, and his heart ro^ of all remorse and pitye, that for money he will
betray his own father, for will a cormorant but fee him to arrest a young
Gentleman, the rakehel will be so eager to catch him, as a dog to take a bear
by the ears in Parish garden, and when he has laid hold upon him, he uses
him as courteously as a butchers c^r would do an ox cheeck, when he is
hungry, if he see the Gentleman has money in his pursse, then straight with a
cap and knee he carries him to the tavern, and bids him send for some of his
friends to bale him, but first he coue^a^ts to have some brase of angels for
his pains, and besides he calsin for wine as gree^ily, as if the knaves
mother had been brocht against a hogshead when he was begotten, but suppose
the Gentleman wants pence, he will either have a pawn or else drige him to the
counter, without respect of manhood or honesty, I should spend the wh^le day
with displaying his villainies, therefore breefly let ths suffice, he was never
made by the consent of God, but his (...) carkase was framd by the Devil, of
the rotten carian of a woolfe, and his soul of an (...) damned ghost turned out
of hell, into his body to do monstrous wickedness again upon y^ earth, so that
he shall be none of my jury, neither shall he come nearer me then the length
of my rapier will suffer ^im. In deed quoth Cloth-breeches generally serieants
be bad, but there be amongst them some honest men, that will do their duties
with lawful favor: for to say truth, if serieants were not, how should men
come by their debts (marry they are so cruel in their office, that if they
arrest a poor man, they will not suffer him (if he has no money) to stay a
quarter of an hour to talk with his creditor, although perhaps at the meeting
they might take composition, but only to the counter with him unless he will lay
his pe^vter, brass, couerlets, sherts, or such housholdstuffe, to them for
pawn of payment of some coin for their staying: therefore let him depart out
of the place, for his room is better then his company.

Well then quoth I, what say you to these three, and with that I questioned
their names, the one said he was a Sumner, the other a Jailer, and the third
an Infourmer: Jesus bless me (quoth Cloth breeches) what a Ging was here
gathered together, no doubt ^elis is broke loose, and the Devil means to keep
holiday, I make challenge against them al, as against worse men than those that
gave evidence against Christ: for the Sumner it boots me to say little more
against him, then Chaucer did in his Canturbury tales, who said he was a
knave, a briber and a bawd, but leaving that authority although it be
authentical, yet thus much I can say of my self, that these drunken drosy
sons go a tooting abroad (as they themselves term it) which is to hear if
any man has got his maid with child or plays the good fellow with his
neighbors wife, if he find a hole in any man's coat that is of wealth, then
he has his peremtory scitation ready to site him unto the Archdeacons or
officials court, there to apeere and abide the shame and penalty of the law,
the man perhaps in good credit with his neighbors, loath to bring his name in
question, greseth the sumner in the fist, and then be wipes him out of the
book, and suffer him to get twenty with child, so he keep him warm in the
hand: he has a saying to wanton wives, and they are his good dames, and as
long as they feed him with cheese, bacon, capons and such od reuersio^s, they
are honest, and be they never so bad, he swears to the official, complaints are
made upon envy, and the women of good behavior: tush what bawdry is it he will
not suffer, so he may have money and good cheer, and if he like the wench well
a snatch himself, for they know all the w^es in a country, and are as
lecherous companions as may be, to be brief, the sumner lives upon sins of
people, and out of harlatry gets he all his commodity. As for the Jailer,
although I have been little troubled in prison to have experience of his
knavery, yet I have heard the poor prisoners complain how cruel they be to
them, extorting with extraordinary fees, selling a duble curtall (as they call
it) with a duble iug of beer for 2 pence, which contains not above a pint and
a half: let a poor man be arrested into one of the counters, though he but
set his foot in the^ but half an hour, he shall be almost at an a^gels charge,
what with garnish, crossing and wiping out of the book, turning the key,
paying the chamberline, feeing for his Jury, and twenty such extortions
invented by themselves, and not allowed by any statute, God bl^s me jailer from
your henhouses, as I will ke^pe you from coming in my quest, and to you M.
Infourmer, you that look like a ci^l Citizen, or some handsome petty-fogger of
the law: although your crim^on nose ^ewraies you can sup off a cool cup of
sack without a^y thewing, yet have you as much sly knavery in your side pouch
there, as would breed the confusion of forty honest men. It may be sir you
marvel why I exclaim against the Informer since he is a most necessary member
in the commonwealth, and is highly to the Princes advantage for the benifit of
pennall statutes and other abuses, whereof he gineth special intelligence? To
wipe out this doubt, I speak not against the Office but the Officer, against
such as abuse law when they should use it, and such a one I guess this fellow
to be, by the carnation tincture of his ruby nose. Therefore let us searth his
bag, and see what trash you shall find in it: with that although the
Infourmer were very loath, yet we^ plucked eut the stuffing of his pouch, and in
it was found a hundred and od writtes: Whereat I woundred: and Clothbreeches
smiling bad me read the Labels, and the parties names, and then ^xamine the
Infourmer how many of them he knew, and wherein they had offended. I followed
his counsel, and of all he knew but three, neither could he tell what they
had done a miss^ to be arrested, and brought in question.

Clothbreeches seeing me stand in a mase, began thus to resolve me in my
doubt, perhaps, quoth he, you marvel, why the Infourmer has all these
writtes, and knows neither the parties nor can obi^t any offense to them? To
this I answer: that it being a long vacation, he learned in the roll all
those men's names, and that they were men of indifferent wealth: Now means he
to go abroad and search them out and arrest them, and though they knew not
wherein, or for what cause they should be troubled, yet rather then they will
come up to London and spend their money, they will bestow some od Angel upon
master Infourmer, and so sit at home in qu^et. But suppose some be so
stuborn^ as to stand to the trial, yet can this cunning knave declarea Tamquam
against them, so that though they be cleared, yet can they have no recompense
at all, for that he ^oth it in the courts behalf. I will not unfold his
villainies, but he is an abuser of good laws and a very knave, and so let him
be, with his fellows. I both wondered and laughed to hear Clothbreeches make
this discourse, when I saw two in y^ valley together by the ^ares, the one in
^ther, the other as black as the Devil: I stepped to them to part the (...), and
questioned what they were, and where fore they braw^ ^ Marry quoth he, that
l^kt like Lucifer, though I am black, I am not the Devil, but indeed a Colier
of Croiden, and one s^r that have sold many a man a false sack of coals, that
both wanted measure, and was half full of dust and dross. Indeed I have been
a Lieger in my time in London, and have played many mad prancks, for which
cause, you may apparently see I am made a curtall, for the Pillory (in the
sight of a great many good and sufficient witnesses) has eaten off both my
ears, and now sir this Ropemaker (...) me here with his halters, I guess him
to be come euillspirit, that in the likeness of a man, would since I have
past the Pillory, persuade me to hang my self for my old offenses, and
therefore since I cannot bless me from him in Nomine patris, I lay Spiritus
Sanctus about his shoulders with a good cra^-tree cudgel, that he may get out
of my company.

The Ropemaker replied, that honestly iourneying by the way, he acquainted
himself with the Collier, and for no other cause pretended. Honest with the
Devil, quoth the Collier, how can he (...) honest, whose mother I guess was a
witch, for I have heard them say, that witches say their prayers backward, and
so does the Ropemaker yearne his living by going backward, and the knaves
chief living is by making fatal instruments, as halters and ropes, which
diverse desperate men hang themselves with. Well quoth I, what say you to these,
shall they be on the Jury? (...) said nothing, but Clothbreeches said, in the
Ropemaker he found no great falsehood in him, therefore he was willing he
should be one, but for the Collier he thought it necessary, that as he came
so he should depart, so then I had the Ropemaker stand by till more came,
which was not long, for there came three in a cluster. As soon as they
druenie, I spied one, a fat churl with a side russet coat to his knee, and
his hands all to tanned with shifting his Ouse, yet would I not take not^re
what they were, they but questioned with them of their several occupations.
Marry quoth the first, I am a tanner, the second a shomaker, and the third a
Currier: then turning to the Plaintiff and Defendant, I asked them if they
would allow of these parties. No by my faith quoth Clothbreeches, I make
challenge to them all, and I will yield reasons of import against them: and
first to you master Tanner, are you a man worthy to be of a Jury, when your
conscience cares not to wrong the whole commonwealth, you respect not public
commodity, but private gains: not to benefit your neighbor, but for to make
the proud princo^e your son an vpstart Gentleman, and because you would
marry your Daughter, at the least to an Esquire that she may if it be
possible, be a Gentlewoman, and how comes this to pass? by your^tanne-fats for
sooth: for, whereas by the anciente laws and statutes of England, you should
let a hide lie in the Ouse at the least nine months, you can make good leather
of it before three months, you have your Dooues doong, your Marle, your Ashen
bark and a thousand things more, to bring on your Leather apace, that it is
so badly Tanned, that when it comes to the wearinge, then it (...) a way like a
piece of brown paper: and whereas your backs of all other should be the best
tanned, you bring them so full of horns to the market, that did you not grease
the sealers of Leaden Hall thoroughly in the fist, they should never be sealed,
but turned away and made ^orfiet by the statute. I cannot at large lay open
your subtle practices, to beguile the poor communalty with bad leather. But
let this suffice, you leave no villainy unsought, to bring the block head your
son to go before the Clown his father, trimly trickt up in a pair of velvet
breeches.

Now master Currier to your coosenage, you cannot be content only to burn
the leather you dress for sauit of liquor, because you would make the
shoemaker pay well and you put in little stuff: and besides, when as in backs
you should only put in Tallow hard and good, you put in soft kitchen stuff
mixed, and so to make the good and well tanned Leather by your villainy to ^leet
and wast away, but also you grow to be an extorting knave, and a forestaller
of the market, for you will buy leather, sides, backs and Calue skines, and
sell them to the poor shoomakers at an unreasonable rate, by your false
retaylinge, getting infinite goods by that excessive price: both undoing the
poor shoemaker, and causing us that we pay extremely for shoes. For if the
Currier bought not Leather by the whole of the Tanner, the shoemaker might have
it at a more reasonable price: but the shoemaker being poor, is not perhaps
able to deal with a dicker of hides nor perhaps with a couple of backs, and
the Tanner will not trust him: then the extorting and coosening Currier comes
up with this, I will lend you for a day and so pincheth him, that he is
scharce able to find his children brea^.

But well has the Prince and the honorable Lords of the privy counsel
provided by an act of Parliament, that no Currier shall buy leather either
backs or hides of the Tanner, so to bridle the extorting and forestalling
coosenage, but craftillyer and subteller has the knave Currier crosbitten the
statute, in that he deals thus with the Tanner, he makes him hold his leather
unreasonably to the shoemaker, and so when he cannot sell it, he lays it up
in the Curriers house, under a color whereas indeed he has sold it him.

Suppose this shift be spied and prevented: then compoundeth he with some
knave shoemaker, some base rakehell without a conscience, that neither
respects God, the commonwealth, nor his company, and forsooth he is half
with the Currier, who lets him have some hundred mark to lay out for
leather every month, whereas he spendes not in his shop a hundred marks
worth in a year: so the shoemaker buies it to abuse the statute for the
Currier, and the Currier by that means vndooeth the other shoomakers: thus two
crafty knaves are met and they need no broker.

Now to you gentle craft, you mass shoomakers: you can put in the inner sole,
of thin Calves skin, when as the shoo is a neates leather shoo, which you know
is clean contrary both to conscience and the statute. Beside, you will join a
neates leather vampy to a calves leather heel: is not here good stuff
master shoemaker? Well for your knavery, you shall have those cursses which
belongs unto your craft: you shall be light footed to travel far, light
witted upon every small occation to give your master the bag, you shall be
most of you unthrifts, and almost all perfect goodfellowes. Beside I remember a
merry jest how Mercury brought you to a dangerous disease, for he requested a
boon for you, which fell out to your great disadvantage, and to recreate us
here a little gentle craft, what fell to your trade by that winged God. As it
happened on a time that Jupiter and Mercury trauiling together upon earth,
Mercury was wonderfully hungry and had no money in his pursse to buy him any
food, and at last to his great comfort he spied where a company of Tailors
were at Dinner with butred pease, eating their pease with their needles points
one by one: Mercury came to them and asked them his alms, they proudly had him
sit down and do as he saw they did, and with that delivered him a needle. The
poor God being passing hungry, could not content his mawe with eating one by
one, but turned the eye of his needle and eat two or three together: which the
Tailors seeing, they start up and said: what fellow, a shoue^ and a spade, to
buttred pease, have thou no more manners, get out of ^ur company, and so they
sent him packing with many strokes.

Mercury coming back, Jupiter demanded of him what news: and he told him how
chorlishly he was used amongst the Tailors, well, wandering on further, Mercury
esp^ed where a company of sh^makers were at Dinner with powdered beef and
brewesse, going to them before ^et could ask them any alms, they said,
welcome good fellow, what is thy stomach up, will thou do as we do, and taste
of beef, Mercury thanked them and sat down and eat his belly full, and
drank well of double beer, and when he had done went hom^ to his master.

As Soon as he came Jupiter asked him what news, and he said: I have lighted
amongst a crew of shoomakers, the best fellows that ever I met withal, they
have frankely sed me without grudging, and therefore grant me a boon for
them.

Ask what thou will Mercury, quoth he, and it shall be done, why then quoth
he, grant that for this good turn they have done me, they may ever spend a
groat before they can yearne two pence. It shall be granted quoth he.

Mercury as soon as Jupiter had said the word, be bethought himself and said:
Nay but that they may yearne a groat before they spend two pence, for my tongue
slipped at the first, well, Mercury quoth he, it cannot be recald the first
wish must stand, and hereof by Mercuris boon it grew, that all of the gentle
craft are such good fellows and spendethriftes. But howsoever, none of those
three, neither Shoemaker, Lanner, nor Currier, shall be accepted to be of the
Jury.

As they went away with fleas in their ears, being thus taunted by
Clothbreeches, we might see where there came a troop of ancient Gentlemen,
with their seruingmen attending upon them. The foremost was a great old man,
with a white beard al in russet, and a fair black cloak on his back, and
attending on him he had some fine men, their cognizance as I remember was a
Peacock without a tail, the other two that accompanied him, seemed meaner then
himself. But yet Gentlemen of good worship, whereupon I went toward them and
saluted them, and was so bold as to question what they were and of their
bus^nes. The most ancientest answered he was a knight, and those two his
neighbors, the one anesquire, the other a gentleman and that they have no
urgent affaiers, but only to walk abroad to take the fresh air. Then did I
show them both Clothbreeches, and velvet breeches, and told them the
controversy, and desired their aid to be upon the Jury. They smiling answered,
they were content, and so did Cl^thbreeches seem to rejoice, that such honest
ancient English gentlemen should be triers of his title. But veluetbreeches
storming, slept in and made challenge to them al. I demanded the reason why he
should refuse Gentlemen of so good calling? And he made me this answer.

Why you may guess the inward mind by the outward apparel, and see how he is
adicted by the homely robes he is suited in. Why this knight is mortal enemy to
pride and so to me, he regards hospitality and aims at honor with releeuing
the poor, you may see although his lands and revenues be great, and he able
to maintain himself in great bravery, yet he is content with home spun cloth,
and scorneth the pride that is used now a dates amongst young vpstarts, he
holds not the worth of his Gentry to be and consi^t in veluet-breeches, but
valeweth true ^ame by the report of the common sort, who praise him for his
virtue, Justice, liberality, housekeeping and almesdeedes, Vox populi vox Dei,
his tennants and farmers would if it might be possible, make him immortal
with their prayers and praises. Be raises no rent, racketh no lands, takes no
incombs, imposes no merciless fines, enuies not an other, buyeth no house
over his neighbors head: but respects his country and the commodity thereof,
as dear as his life. He regards more to have the needy fed, to have his
board garnished with full platters, the^ to famous himself with excessine
furniture in apparel. Since then he scorneth pride, he must of force proclaim
himself mine enemy, and therefore he shall be none of my Jury, and such as
himself I guess the Squire and the Gentleman and therefore I challenge them
all three. Why quoth I, this is strange, that a man should be drawn from a
quest for his goodness. If me^ for virtue be challenged, whom shall we have
upon the Jury, your ob^ection helps not master veluetbreeches: for if he be
a man of so godly a disposition, he will neither speak for fear or favor,
he will regard neither the riches of the one, nor the plain poverty of the
other, whereupon since you have made me trier, I allow them all three to be of
the Jury, and so I requested them to sit down till our Jury was full, which they
courteously did, although veluetbreeches fround at it. When I looking for more,
saw where there came a troop of men in apparel se^ming poor honest Citizens,
in all they were eight. I demanded of them what they were, and whether they
were going. One of them that seemed the welthiest, who was in a furred Jacket
made answer, that they were al friends going to y^ burial of a neighbor of
theirs, that yester night died, and if it would do me any pleasure to hear
their names, they were not so dainty but that they would tell them, and so then
he began to tell me, that by his art he was a Skinner, the second said he
was a Joiner, the third was a Sadler, the fourth a Waterman, the fifth was a
Cutler, the sixth was a Bellows mender, the seventh a Plaisterer, and the right
a Printer. In good time quoth I, it is con^nendable when neighbors love so well
together, but if your speed be not overmuch, I must request you to be of a
Jury, so I discourst unto them the controversy between Clothbreeches and
Ueluetbreeches, and to what issue it must grow by a verdict, they seemed al
content, and I turned to the plaintiff and defendant, and asked if they would
make challenge to any of these. I scorn quoth. Ueluetbreeches, to make any great
objection against them, since they be mecannical men, and I almost hold them
indifferent, for this I know, they get as much and more by me than by him, the
Skinner I use for furs, whereas this base Cloth-breeches has scarce a gown
faced once in his life, the Sadler for costly imbroidered saddis, the ioiner
for seeling my house, the cutler for gilt rapiers, the Waterman I use
continually, ten times for his once, and so likewise the Plaisterer, for the
Bellowe^ender alas poor snake I know him not, for the Printer by our Lady I
think I am some ten pounds in his debt for books, so that for my part let
them all pass. And for me too, quoth. Clothbreeches, but yet a little to put
them in remembrance of their follies, let me have about with them all, and
first with you master Skinner, to whom I can say little but only this, that
whereas you should only put the backs of skins into facing, you taw the wombs
and so deceive the buier, besides if you have some fant aslike skin brought you
not worth two pence, with seem strange spots though it be of a libbet, you
will swear it is a most precious skin, and came from Musco or the furthest parts
of Calabria. The Sadler he stuffes his pannels with straw or hay and over
glafeth them with hair, and makes the leather of them of morts or tand sheeps
skins. The ioyner though an honest man, yet he makes his ioints weak, and
puts in sap in the morteses, which should be the heart of the tree, and all
to make his ^uffe slender. And you Cutler, you are patron of ruffions and
swashbuckiers, and will sell them a blade that may be thrust into ^ bushel. but
if a poor man come that cannot s^il of it, you sell him a sword or rapier
newauerglased, and swear the blade came either ^o^ Turkey or Toledo. Now
master waterman you will say there is no subtillty in you, for there is none so
simple but that knows your fares, and what is (...) between Green wiche and
London and how you earn^ your money painfully with the sweat of your brows, all
this is true, but let me^ whisper one thing in your ear, you will play the
goodfellowe too much if you be well greased in the fi^t, for if a young
Gentleman and a pretty wench come to you and say, waterman, my friend and I
mean to go by water and to be merry a night o^ two, I care not which way nor
whether we go, and therefore where thou think we may have best lodging
thither carry us: then off goes your cap and away they go, to brainfoordor some
other place, and then you say (...) I pray you use this Gentleman and his wife
well, they are come out of London to take the air and mean to be merry here a
night or two, and to spend their money frankly, when God wot they are neither
man nor wife, nor perhaps of any acquaintance before their match made in some
bawdy tavern, but you know no such matter, and therefore waterman I pardon
you. And for you Plaisterer and Bellowsmender I pass you over, and so do I the
Printer too, only this I must needs say to him that some of his trade will
print lewd books, and baw^y pamphlets, but Auri sacra fames quid non? and
therefore I am content they shall be al of the jury. I was glad there were so
many accepted of at once, and hoped that now quickly the jury would b^e full,
l^king about me, straight I might se one alone come running as fast as he
could. I wondered what he should be that he made such ha^re, and the skinner
told me he was an honest man, and one of their company, by his occupation
abric^laier. Oh quoth. Ueluetbreeches, a good honest simple man, he has been long
in my work, in building me a sumpteous house. But I challenge him, quoth.
Clothbreeches, for he is ai^gler, How quoth. I, can it be, see he goes very
homely in leather and has his ruler in his hand and his ^rowel at his side,
and he seems not as one that were given to such qualities, yes quoth.
clothbreeches, he has this policy, when he makes a stately place all glorious
to the cie and full of fair chambers and goodly rooms, and about the house
perhaps some three score Chimnyes, yet he can so cunningly cast by his art,
that three of the^ shall not smoke in the (...), and so spoils (...) much good
mortar and brick, Why quoth. (...) the fault is not in the workman but in the
housekeeper, for now adays men build for to please the eye, not to profit the
poor, they use no roast, but for themselves and their household, nor no fire but
alitle court chimny in their own chamber, how can the poor bricklaier then be
blamed, when the niggardnes of the lord or master is the cause no more chimnies
do smoke, for would they use ancient hospitality as there forefathers did, and
(...) as lightly of pride as their great graundfathers, then should you see
every chimny in the house smoke, and prove that the poor artificer had done
his part. Why then quoth. Clothbreeches as you please, admit him on the quest. But
what be those quoth. Clothbre^ches, that come here so soberly? I hope they be
honest men, for they lo^ke very demure, I will inquire said I, and with that
stepping to them, I demanded their names and very courteously the one said he
was a brewer, the other a butcher, the third abaker, and the sourth a vitler.
Hearing what they were, I was glad, ghessing since they were so honest
substanciall men, that they would help to make up the Jury, when
Ueluet-breeches with a grime and sower countenance gave them this challenge. I
hold it not necessary (quoth he) that these have any thing to deal in my
cause, si^h I am at ods with them al, at least in fortv pounds a piece, for
this seven years I have been indebted unto them for bread, beef, bear and
other victuales, then since they have credited me long, and I have had so little
care to pay them, I doubt now they will revenge themselves and pass against me
in the verdict. Nay (quoth I) the rather will they hold on your part, for if
they be honest wise men (as they seem to be) they will be careful of your
preferment, seeing the more hightly they are aduanst, the more like are they to
come by their own. If therefore you can object no other points of dishonesty
against them, I see no reason why they should be put by. If you do not (quoth
Clothbreeches) then hear me and I will prove them unfit to have any dealinges
here, and first for the Butcher. I pray you goodman (...), what hauock play
you with passing up of meat, and blowing with your pricker as you flea it,
have you not your artificial k^aueries to set out your meat with pricks, and
then swearche has more for mo^y the^ ever you bought, to sell a piece of an old
Cow for a chop of a young ^re, to wash your old meat that has hung weltring
in the shop with new blood, to trusse away an old eaw in stead of a young
weather, and although you know it is hurtful and forbidden by the statutes to
flea your hides, s^ines, ^acks, with cuts and slashes to the impouerishing of
the poor shoemaker when he buies it, yet I pray you how many slaughters do
you make in a poor Calves skin? Oh Butcher, a long lent be your punishment,
for you make no conscience in deceiving the poor. And you mast Brewer that
grow to be worth forty thousand pounds by your selling of sode^ water what
subtilty have you in making your bear, to spare the malt and put in the more
of the hop to make your drink (be Barley never so cheap) not a whit the
stronger, and yet never sell a whit the more measure for money, you can when you
have taken all the heart of the malt away, then clap on store of water it is
cheap enough, and mash out a tunning of smal^ bear, that it scoures a man's
mawe like rennish wine: in your conscience how many barrels draw you out of a
quarter of malt? ^e, (...) I conceal your falsehood, least I should be too
broad in setting down your faults. And for you goodman Baker, you that love to
be seen in the open market place upon the Pillory, the world cries out of your
wickedness, you crave but oue dear year to make your daughter a Gentlewoman,
you buy your corn at the best hand and yet will not be content to make your
bread weight by many ounces, you put in yeast and salt to make it heavy, and
yet all your policy cannot make it but you fine for the Pillory, the poor cry
out, the rich find fault, and the Lord Mayor and the Sherifs like honorable and
worshipful mai^strates, every day walk abroad and weigh your bread, and yet
all will not ser^ to make you honest men, but were extremity used, and the
(...) put in the highest degree in practice, you would have as few ears on
your heads as the Collier. Last to you Tom tapster, that tap your small cannes
of beer to the poor, and yet fill them half full of froth that card your h^re
(if you see your guests begin to be drunk) half small and half strong, you
cannot be content to pinch with your small pots and your (...) faggots: but
have your truggs to draw men on to villainy, and to bring customers to your
house, where you sell a joint of meat for (...). peuce that cost you scarce
si^, and if any chance to go on the skore, you skore him when he is a sleep,
and set up a groat a day more then he has, to find you drinking pots with
your companions: to be short, thou art a knave, and I like not of any of the
rest, the way lies before you, and therefore you may be gone, for you shall be
none of the quest. I (...) to s^e Clothbreeches so peremptory, when I saw five
fat fellows all in damask cotes and go^nes welted with Ueluet very brave, and
in great consultation, as if they were to determine of some weighty matter,
drawing near I saw they were welthy Citizens, so I went and reverently saluted
them, and told them how we needed their aid about the appeasing of a
controuerfie, showing them where the knight, esquire, and other stayed, tell we
might find men to fill up the Jury they were contented, but veluetbreeches
excepted against (...) (...) of them and said they were none of his friends,
that was the merchant, goldsmith, mercer, and Draper, his allegations were
these, that they were all fethered of one winge to fetch in young Gentlemen by
commodities under the color of lending of money: for the Merchant delivered the
iron, ^in, Lead, hops, Sugars, Spices, Oiles, brown paper or whatsoever else
from six mon^ths to six months, which when the poor Gentleman came to sell
again, he could not make threescore and ten in the hundred beside the usury.
The Mercer he follows the vpstart Gentleman that has no gouernemet of
himself, and he feeds his humor to go brave, he shall not want silks,
Sattins, Ueluets, to pra^ck abroad in his pomp, but with this provision, that
he must bind over his land in a statute merchant or staple, and so at last
forfeit all unto the merciless mercer, and lean himself never a foot of
ground in England, which is the reason that for a few remnaunts of veluets and
silks the Mercer (...) into whole Lordships. The Goldsmith is not behind, for
most of them deal with usury, and let young Gentlemen have commodities of
plate for ten in the hundred, but they must loose the fashion in selling it
again (which cuts them sore) beside they are most of them s^ild in alcumy, and
rantemper mettales shrewdly, with no little profit to themselves, and
disadua^tage to the buier, beside puff rings and quaint conceits which I omit.
And so for you Draper, he fetches them off for livery cloth, and cloth for six
months and si^, and yet has he more knacks in his budget, for he has so
dark a shop, that no man can well choose a piece of cloth it so shadows the dye
and the thread, a man shall be deceived in the wool and the nap, they cause the
cloth worker so to press them, beside he imposes this charge to the Cloth
worker that he draw his cloth and pull it passing hard when he sets it upon the
tenters, that he may have it full breadth and length till thread and all tear
and rent in pieces, what care they for that, have they not a drawer to serve
their turn to draw and seame by the holes so cunningly that it shall never
be espide? my self have seen in one broad cloth eighteen score holes torn
rackt and pulled by the Clothworker, only to please the Draper and deceive the
commonwealth. To be short, the Clathworker what with rowing and setting in a
fine nap, with powdering it and pressing it, with shering the wool to the
proof of the thread, deal so cunningly that they prove themselves the Drapers
minister to execute his subtilties, therefore if he chance to come let him be
remembered. Now sir for the Uintner, he is an honest substantial man a friend to
all goodfellows, and truly my friend for my money, and worthy to be of the
jury. Why, no quoth. Clothbreeches I am of another mind, for I hold him as
dece^tfull as any of the rest, what the vintner, why, he is a kind of
Negromancer, for at midnight when all men are in bed, then he for sooth falls to
his charms and spells, so that he tumbles one hog shead into another, and can
make a cup of claret that has lost his color look high with a dash of red
wine at his pleasure, if he has a strong gascoigne wine, for fear it should
make his guests to soon drunk, he can allay it with a small Rochel wine: he
can cherish up white wine with sack, and perhaps if you bid him wash the pot
clean when he goes to draw you a quart of wine, he will leave a little water
in the bottom, and then draw it full of wine and what and if he do? it is no
harm, wine and water is good against the heat of the liver. It were infinite to
rehearse the iugling of Uintuers, the disorder of their houses, especially of
the persons that frequent them, and therefore since Ueluetbreeches has put by
the Merchant, goldsmith mercer, and draper, the vintner shall go with them for
company. As these were going away in a snuf, for being thus plainly tau^ted,
we might se a mad merry crew come leaping over the field as frolickly as if
they ought not all the world two pence, and drawing nearer we might perceive
that either bottle-ale or beer bad made a fraie with them, for the lifting of
their feet showed the lightness of their heads, the foremost was plain
country sir John, or vicar that proclaimed by y^ r^dnesse of his nose he did go
oftener into the alehouse than the Pulpit, and him I asked what they were and
whether they were going: what are you quoth. the prist, that stands by the high
way to examine me and my friends heeres none in my company but are able to
answer for themselves, I seeing they were all set on a merry pin, sold the
cause, and how the controversy grew betwixt Clothbreeches and Ueluet-breeches
and that we needed them to be ^f the quest. Marry (quoth Sir John) a good
motion, know these all are my pars^ioners, and we have been drinking with a
poor man, and spending our money with him, a neighbor of ours that has lost a
cow, now for our names and our trades, this is a smith, the second a weauer,
the third a nuller, the fourth a cook the fifth a carpenter, the sixth a glouer,
ye seventh a peddler, ye eight a tinker, the ninth a waterberer, the tenth a
husbandman, the eleventh a diar, and the twelfth a sa^lor, (...) I their
Uicker: how could you sir have a fitter Jury than me and my parishioners? you
are a little to brief, quoth, Cloth-breeches, are you not some puritan M. parson,
or some fellow that raises up new scisme^s and herisies amongst your people? A
plague on them al quoth I sir, for the world was never in quiet devotion,
neighborhood nor hospitality never flourished in this land, since such up
start boys and shittle witted fools became of the ministry, I cannot tell,
they preach faith, faith, and say that doing of alms is papistry, but they
have taught so long Fides solemn iustificat, that they have preached good works
quite out of our Parish, a poor man shall as soon break his neck as his fast
at a rich man's door: for my friend, I am indeed none of the best scholars,
yet I can read an Homely every Sunday and holyday, and heepe company with my
neighbors, and go to the alehouse with them, and if they be fallen out, spend
my money to make them friends, and on the Sundaies sometime if goofellowship call
me away, I say both morning and evening prayer at once, and so let them have a
whole afternoon to play in. This is my life, I spend my living with my
parishioners, I seek to do al good, and I offer no man harm.

Well (quoth Cloth breeches) I warrant thou art an honest Uicar, and therefore
stand by thou shall be one of the quest, and for you Smith, I see no great
fault in you, you yerne your living with the sweat of your brows, and there
can be no great knavery in you only I would have you to mend your life for
drinking, since you are never at quiet unless the pot be still at your nose. But
you weauer, the Proverb puts you down for a crafty knave, you can, filtch and
steal almost as ill as the Tailor, your woofe and warpe is so cunningly drawn
out that you plague the poor country Huswiues for their yarne, and dawbed on
so much dregs that you make it seem both well wrought and to bear weight, when
it is slenderly wouen, and you have stolen a quarter of it from the poor wife.
Away, be packing, for you shall be cashierd. What Miller, shake hands with
your brother the Weauer for knavery: You can take toll twice, and have false
hoppers to convey away the poor man's meal. Be gone I love not your dusty
looks, and for company goodman Cook go you with them, for you cosen the
poor men and country Tearmers with your filthy meat: you will buy of the
worst and cheapest, when it is bad enough for dogs, and yet so powder it and
parboile it, that you will sell it to some honest poor men, an^ that
unreasonably to: If you leave any meat over night, you make a shift to heat it
again the next day: Nay, if on the thursday at night there be any left, you
make pies of it on sunday mornings, and almost with your slouenly knavery
poison the poor people. To be short, I brook you not, and therefore be
walking. For the Carpenter, Glouer, and Waterbearer, the Husbandmen, Dier, and
Sailor, since your trades have but petty slights, stand you with Master Uicar,
you are like to help to give in the verdict: but for the peddler and the
Tinker, they are two notable knaves, both of an hair, (...) both cosen
Germans to yt Devil. For the tinker, why he is a drowsy, bawdy, drunken
companion, that walks up and down with a trug after him, and in stopping (...)
makes three: and if in convenient place he meets with one alone perhaps ^ifle
him or her of all that ever they have. A base knave without fear of God or
love to any one, but to his whore and himself. The Peddler as bad or rather
worse, walks the country with his docksey at the least, if he have not two
his mortes dels, and Autem mortis, he passes commonly through every pair of
stocks, either for his drunkenness or his lechery. And beside it is reported
you can lift or nip a bounge like a gu^re Coue, if you want pence, and that you
carry your pack but for a color to shadow your other villainies, well
howsoever, you are both knaves and ^o belogging. Well quoth I, suppose the jury be
almost full. I believe we want not above three or four persons: look you where
they come to make up the number, and they should be men of good disposition,
for they seem to be all of the country. As Soon as they came to us I met them,
and told them the matter, and they were content.

The one said he was a Grasier, the other a Farmer, the other a shephard to
them both. What think you of these three quoth. I? marry says Ueluetbreeches,
two of them are honest men, but the other is a base knave: but (...) no matter,
shuffle him in amongst the rest. Nay by your lean quoth Cloth-breeches, I will
shuffle out these two for they are very Cormorants of the Country, and devour
the poor people with their monsterous exaction. And first I allege against
the ^rasier that he (...) (...) (...) and meadow grounds, for the faeding of his
cattle, and wringeth leases of them out of poor men's hands; and in his (...)
of cattle he commits great (...), for if it prove a wet year, then he
makes hauock and sells dear: if it be a (...) year, then he (...) cheap,
and yet having pasture keeps them till he may come to his own prise: he
knows as well as the (...) by the seed of a Bullock how much Tallow he will
yield, what his quarters will amount unto: what the Tanner will give for the
Hide: nay, what the sowse wives are able to make of the inwards: so that (...)
(...) it so dear to the Butcher, that he can scarce live of it, and therefore
what subtilty the Butcher uses comes from the Grasier, so that I exempt him
from the quest as a bad member, and an ill friend to Clothbreeches. And for you
mass Farmer, you know how through you covetous Landlords raise their rents,
for if a poor man have but a plough land, if you see his pastures bear good
grass, and his earable (...) (...) corn, and that he prospers and goes
forward (...) it and (...); (...) and maintains his wife and servants
honestly, then Inuidusaltenus rebus marcessit opinis, viciounique pecus
grandins vber habet.

Then straight (...) pricks the Farmer forward and he bids the Landlord far
more then the poor man (...) yearly for it: so that if he be a Tenant at
will, he puts him out to beg in the streat: or when his lease comes out be
over loades him in the fine, and thus blood sucketh he the poor for his own
private profit. Besides the base ch^e if he sees a forward year and that
corn is like to be plenty, then he murmereth against God, and swereth and
protests he shall be undone: respe^ing more the filling of his own coffers
by a dearth, then the profit of his country by a general plenty. Beside sir
may it please you, whennew corn co^es into the market, who brings it in to
relieve the state? Not your mastership, but the poor husbandman, that wants
pence. For you keep it till the back end of the year nay you have your
Garners which have corn of two or three years old, upon hope still of a dear
year, rather letting the weasels eat it, the^ the poor should have it at any
reasonable price. So that I conclude, you are a Cormorant of the common wealth,
and a wretch that lives of the spoil of the (...), and so I leave you to (...)
with the GrasierMarry for the Sepsheard, unless it be that he kills a Lamb
now and the^, and says the fox stole him, I know little craft in his budget,
therefore let him be amongst the honest men of the Jury.

Well Clothbreeches quoth. I, you are very peremptory in your challenges, what say
you here comes three or four Citizens, will any of these serve turn, I cannot
tell quoth. he till I know their names and conditions, with that I slept before
the company, and inquired what they were, the eldest of the^ being a grave
Citizen, said he was a Grocer, the rest his good and honest neighbors, a
Chandler, a Haberdasher, a Clothworker, and two strangers, one a Wallon, the
other a Duchman. How like you of these quoth. I to veluetbreeches, well enough
quoth he, for I am a little acquainted with them, yet I know they favor me,
because I have on a sunday seen them all in there silks. I marry, quoth
Clothbreeches, but they never get that bravery with honesty, for the
Clothworker his saults were laid open, before when we had the Draper in
question: and therefore let him be packing. For you chandler, I like not of
your tricks, you are to co^uersant with the kitchenstuff wives you after your
week or snaffe is stiffened, you dip it (...) dros, and after give him a coat
of good tallowe, which makes the Candles drop and wast away, to the great
hinderance of the poor workmen that watches in the night. Beside you pinch
in your waights and have false measures, and many other knaueries that I omit,
but this be sure you shall not meddle in my matter: neither the Haberdasher, for
he trimes up old felts and makes them very fair to the (...), and faceth and
edgeth them neatly, and then he turns them away to such a simple man as I am:
and so abuses us with his coosenage. Beside you buy gumd Tafata, where with
you line Hats that will straight assunder as soon as it comes to the heat of a
man's head. To be brief, I am not well skild in your knaueries, But indeed you
are to subtle for poor Clothbreeches, and therefore you shall be none of the
Jury. Marry the Grocer seems an honest man, and I am content to admit of him,
only take this as a caveat by the way, that you buy of the Garbellers of
spices, the refuse that they sl^t from the merchant, and that you mix again
and sell it to your customers. Besides in your beaten spices, as inpeper you
put in bay berries, and such dross, and so wring the poor, but these are
slight causes and so I ouerpasse them, and vouchsafe you to be of the quest.
But I pray you what be those two honest men? quoth the Grocer, the one a
Dutchman and a Shoemaker, the other a Frenchman and (...) Millainer in Sant
Martins, and sels Shirts, Bands, Bracelets, Jewels, and such pretty toies for
Gentle women: oh they be of Ueluet^reeches acquaintance, vpstaris as well as
he, that have brought with them pride and abuses into England, and first to
the Millainer. What toies deuiseth he to feed the humor of the vpstart
Gentleman withal, and of fond Gentlewomen, such fans, such ouches, such
brooches, such bracelets, such grau^dcies, such periwigs, such paintings, such
ruffes, and cuffs, as has almost made England as full of proud foppries as
Tire and Sydon were. There is no Seamster can make a band or a shirt so well as
his wife: and why forsooth? because the filthy queen wears a craunce, and is
a French woman forsooth. Where as our English women of the Erchange, are both
better workwomen, and will afford a better peniworth. And so for the drunken
Dutchman. this shoemaker, he and such as he is, abuses the common wealth, and
the poor mechanical men and handicrafts men of London, for our new vpstart
fools of (...) fraternity, likes nothing but that the outlandish Ass makes.
They like no shoo so well as the Dutchman makes, when our English men pass
them far, and so for chandlers, and all other occupatious, they are wronged by
the Dutch and French And therefore since the Commons hates them they cannot be
my friends, and therefore let them be launching to Flushing, for they shall be
no triers of my controversy. Well quoth I now I suppose the Jury is full, and
we see no more coming, let us call them and see how many we have. So they
appeared to there names, as follows.

The Names of the Jury to be empanelled.
1 Knight. 2 Esquire. 3 Gentleman. 4 Priest. 5 Printer. 6 Grocer. 7 Skinner. 8
Dier. 9 Pewterer. 10 Sadler. 11 Ioyner. 12 Bricklaier. 13 Cutler. 14
Plaisterer. 15 Saylor. 16 Ropemaker. 17 Smith. 18 Glouer. 19 Husbandman. 20
Shepherd. 21 Waterman. 22 Waterbearer. 23 Bellowsmender.
What is it not possible quoth I, to have one more to make up the four and
twenty? as I was thus speaking, I espied (...) oss, a certain kind of an
ouerworne Gentleman at^red in Ueluet and Satin but it was some what dropped
and greasse, and boots on his legs, whose soles wered thin and seemed to
complain of their Mai^er which treading thrift under his feet, had brought
them unto that consumption, be walked not as other men in the common beaten
way, but came compassing Circum circa, as if we had been Devils, and he
would draw a Circle about us, and at every third s^p he looked back, as if he
were afraid of a Baily or Serieant.

After him followed two pert Applesquires, the one had a Murrty cloth gown on,
faced down before with gray Conny, and laid thick on the sleeves with lace,
which he quaintly bare up, to show his white Laffata hose and black silk
stockings, a huge ruf about his neck wrapped in his great head like a wicker
Cage, a little Hat with (...) like the wings of a doublet, wherein he wore a
Jewel of Glass, as broad as a chancery seal: after him followed two boys in
cloa^es like butter flies, carrying one of them his cutting sword of choler,
the other his daunsing papier of delight. His Comerade that bare hun company
was a jolly light timberd Jack a Napes, in a suit of Watchet Laffata cut to the
skin, with a cloak all to be dawbed with colored lace: both he and my gowned
brother seemed by their pase as if they had some suits to Mounsieur Boots. At
length coming near, I might deserne the first to be a Poet, the second a
Piaier, the third a Musition, alias the Usher of a daunsing School. Well met
Mais^er Poet quoth I, and welcome you friends also, though not so perticularly
known. So it is, though none of you three be common wealthsmen yet upon
vrge^t necessity we must be forced to employ you. We have a Jury to be
empanelled immediately, which one of you three must belp to make up, even he
which approues himself the honest est man. They are all honest men and
goodfellowes quoth (...)ches, therefore it is no great matter whether of them
we choose.

The Doctors doubt of that quoth Cloth-breeches, for I am of a different
opinion. The first whom by his careless slouenly gate at first sight I
immagined to be a Poet, is a wast good and an unthrift, that he is borne to
make the Lauernes rich and himself a beggar, if he have forty pounds in his
purse together, he puts it not to usury, neither buies land nor Merchandise
with it, but a months commodity of wenches and (...). Ten pound a supper, why
(...) nothing, If his plough ^oes and (...) (...) be clear: Take one of them
worth twenty thousand (...) and hang him. He is a king of his pleasure and
(...) all other (...) and Pesants, that though they have money at command (...)
know not like him how to Domineere with it to any purpose as they should. But
to speak plainly, I think him an honest (...) (...) would but (...) within
his compass, and generally no man's (...) but his own. Therefore I hold him a
man fit to (...) of my Jury. Nay quoth (...), I have more mind to these two,
for this Peet is a proud fellow, that because he has a little wit in his
budget (...) contemn and (...) us that are the common sort of G^tlemen, and
think we are beholding to him if he do but (...) (...) (...) lookevpon us.
The Plaier and the usher of the dancing (...) are (...), honest, humble men,
that for a penny or an old cast suit of apparel. Indeed quoth (...) you say
troth, they are but to humble, for they be so lowly, that they be base minded,
I mean not in their (...) (...) (...), (...) so they be Peacocks and painted
asses, but in their corse of life, for they care not how they get crowns, I
m^ane how basely so they have them, and yet of the two I hold the plaier to be
the better Chri^tian, although in his own imagination, too (...) of (...) and
selfelone, and is unfit to be of the Jury though I hide and conceal his faults
and fopperies, in that I have b^ne merry. at his (...), only this I must say,
that such a plain country fellow as my self, they bring in as clownes and
fools to laugh at in their play, whereas they get by us, and of our alms the
proudest of them all does live. Well to be brief, let him trot to the stage,
for he shall be none of the Jury. And for you master (...) of the (...)
school, you are a leader into all misrule, you instruct Gentlemen to order
their feet, when you drive the^ to misorder their manners, you are a bad
fellow that stand upon your tricks and capers, till you make young Gentlemen
caper without their lands, why (...) to be (...) withyou, you live by your
legs, as a iugler by his (...), you are given over to the pumps and vanities
of the world, and to be short you (...) a keeper of misrule and a lewd fellow,
and you s^all be none of the quest. why then quoth I, you are both agreed that
the (...) (...) that most make up the xxiiii. They answered both he, and none
but he. Then I calling them all together, bad them lay their hands on the
book, and first I called the Knight, and after the rest as they followed in
order, then I gave them their charge thus.

Worshipful Sir with the rest of the Jury, whom we have sol^ited of choice
honest men, whose consciences will deal uprightly in this controu^rsie, you
and the rest of your company are here upon your oath and oaths to inquire
whether Cloth^reeches have done desseison unto Ueluet^reeches yea or no in or
about London, in putting him out of frank tenement wronging him of his right
and Imballishing his credit, if you find that clothbreeches has don
velu^reeches wrong then let him be set in his former estate and allow him
reasonable damages. Upon this they laid their hands on the book and were
sworn and departed to scrutine of the matter by inquiry amongst themselves,
not stirring out of our sight nor staying long but straight returned, and the
Knight for them all as the foremost, said thus. So it is, that we have with
equity and conscience considered of this controversy between Ueluet-breeches
and Cloth-breeches, as touching the prerogative of them both, which are most
worthy to be rightly resident, and have seison in Frank tenement here in
England. and we d^ find that Clothbreeches is by many hundred years more
ancient, ever since Brute an inhabitant in this Ialnd, one that has been in
Diebus illis a companion to kings, an equal with the nobility a friend to
Gentlemen and yeomen, and patron of the poor, a true subject, a good
housekeeper, and general as honest as he is ancient, Whereas Ueluet^reeches
is an vpstart come out of Italy, begot of Pride, nursed vpby self love, and
brought into this country by his companion Nufanglenesse, that he is but of
late time a raiser of rents, and an enemy to the commonwealth, and one that is
not any way to be preferred in equity before Clothbreeches to have don him no
wrong, but that he has lawfully claimed his title of Frank tenement, and in
that w^e appoint him for ever t^ be resident. At this verdict pronounst by the
Knight, all the standers by clapped their hands, and gave a mighty shout, where
at I started and awaked, for I was in a dream and in my bed, and so rose up,
and writ in a merry vain what you have heard.

FINIS.

