THE PRISONERS PRAYERS. OR, An Heavenly help to DEVOTION.

Composed by H. Greenwood, Preacher of the Word of God.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5.17. Pray continually.

LONDON Printed by I. H. for Henry Bell. 1628.

To the most Illustrious and right Virtuous Princess, the Lady KATHERINE,
Duchess of Buckingham her grace, all honor and grace in this life, and
eternal glory in the life to come.
RIght Gracious Lady, the counsel of the holy Apostle is, Iam. 5.13.
That if any be afflicted let him pray: I have not only in my long and great
afflictions in some measure herein delightfully obeyed, but also composed some
few yet comfortable prayers for the benefit of the Church of God.

Now considering with my self to whom I should commend the same, I thought
upon your Grace, as most worthy of the Dedication, both in regard of your late
and happy call from darkness to light, as also for your constant and
conscionable maintenance of holy and wholesome prayers in your family, to the
glory of the Almighty, and the daily supporting and refreshing of your own
soul.

Now that your Grace may grow and go on in grace, and in the saving knowledge
of the Lord Jesus, let me entreat you at your best leisure, to peruse this
poor yet profitable present: the Lord give you grace to stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ Jesus made you free; Gal. 5.1.
and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

And as your Grace (by Gods especial mercy) has tasted of the true and
heavenly refreshing, the Lord make you an happy and heavenly Instrument of the
conversion of many great Ones among us, so shall you shine as a star in the
firmament of salvation: Thus Andrew drew on Peter, and Philip Nathaniel: thus
doing, greater shall your reward be in heaven.

And because every thing is sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5.
the Lord give you grace to reverence the one, and highly respect the other,
that your soul may be preserved alive in the righteousness of Christ Jesus,
to life and glory everlasting: Psalm. 45.10.
If you thus forget your fathers house, then shall the heavenly King, and
earthly too, take pleasure in your beauty.

The Psalmist setting forth the glory of that famous Jerusalem, speaks thus,
Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God: so (without flattery I
auerre it) good things are spoken of thee, O thou hopeful and happy Daughter
of God.

Great is the outward glory cast upon your Grace, I pray God with all my heart,
that the commendation of the Kings daughter may be yours, That you may be
found also all glorious within. Psalm. 45.13.


Now the Lords best blessings evermore attend you, and the Lord prosper the
person of your dearest friend, the most Noble and Illustrious DVKE, with grace
and honor, and all his lawful attempts with good success and victory, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Your Graces most humbly obseruant in the Lord Jesus, H. Greenewood.
From his Majesty's Prison of the Fleet, this 13 of Nouemb. 1627.
A Catalogue of the Prayers contained in this Book, with a note of the Pages
where they may be found.
A Prayer against sin and Satan in general. Page 1 A prayer against the
worlds illusions. Page 5 A Prayer against Pride. Page 7 A Prayer against Envy
Page 9 A Prayer against Adultery. Page 12 A Prayer against Covetousness. Page
15 A Prayer against hardness of heart. Page 18 A Prayer against Drunkenness.
Page 21 A prayer against Murder. Page 25 A Prayer against Hypocrisy. Page 27
A Prayer against Revenge. Page 31 A Prayer against Theft. Page 35 A Prayer
against Swearing. Page 38 A Prayer against Perjury. Page 41 A Prayer against
Security. Page 43 A Prayer against Desperation. Page 46 A Prayer against
Heresy. Page 50 A Prayer against Lying. Page 54 A Prayer against Sabbath
breaking. Page 56 A Prayer against idle words. Page 60 A Prayer against evil
thoughts. Page 63 A Prayer against disobedience to Parents. Page 67 A Prayer
against blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Page 69 A Prayer against Presumption.
Page 73 A Prayer against the Plague. Page 77 A Prayer against the Sword. Page
80 A Prayer against Famine. Page 83 A Prayer for grace in general. Page 87 A
Prayer for knowledge. Page 92 A Prayer for Humiliation. Page 96 A Prayer for
Faith. Page 99 A Prayer for obedience. Page 105 A Prayer for Zeal. Page 109 A
Prayer for brotherly love. Page 112 A Prayer for Humility. Page 116 A Prayer
for Patience. Page 120 A Prayer for Innocence. Page 124 A Prayer for mercy and
compassion. Page 126 A Prayer for peace of Conscience. Page 130 A Prayer for
joy in the Holy Ghost. Page 134 A Prayer for increase of Grace. Page 138 A
Prayer for perseverance in Grace. Page 143 A Prayer for preparation to the
Sacrament. Page 147 A Prayer for the Gospels continuance. Page 153 A Prayer for
preparation to Death. Page 156 A Prayer for a woman in Childbirth. Page 160 A
Prayer after Childbirth. Page 164 A Prayer for the Traveler by land. Page 167
A Prayer for the Traveler by sea. Page 170 A Prayer for the Church. Page 174 A
Prayer for the conversion of the Jew. Page 179 A Morning Prayer for a family.
Page 183 An Evening Prayer for a Family. Page 188
The Prisoners Prayers.
A Prayer against sin and Satan in general.
MOST blessed and glorious LORD GOD, I beseech thee of thine infinite mercies,
be pitifully merciful unto me, poor, miserable and most corrupted sinner: O
Lord, cast out sin and Satan, let a greater than Satan enter (even thine
holy and good Spirit) and bind that enemy of thy glory, my salvation, that he
may prevail no longer against me.

Thus thou did deal (O my gracious God) most mercifully with Mary Magdalene,
^uk. 8.2.
casting seven Devils out of her: Good Father, I confess that seventy times
seven do grieve my poor and pensive soul, for so many foul lusts, so many
unclean Devils: Lord, in thy might and mercy, give me to prevail against
them. What will sin afford me, but shame in this world, and confusion in the
world to come?

Lord therefore strengthen me against these corruptions and chiefest enemies of
my soul: let me be as willing evermore to put a Toad into my mouth, as to
suffer a sin to rest and reign in my soul. O that my ways were made so
direct, that I might never sin more. Lord hear my mournful prayers, and let
these my cries come up unto thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, thy Son, my Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer against the worlds illusions.
MOst gracious and blessed heavenly Father, forasmuch as thou have taught me,
that I must use the world as not abusing it; and seeing also I find my self
by nature too too prone and ready to set my delight on things below, and to
give more affection to things seen, than things unseen: O Lord (who art the
only sanctifier of thine elect) save me from immoderate love, and excessive
delight of the same: grant that no worldly honor, pleasure, profit, may
deceive me, but I beseech thee that thy lower blessings may be received of me
with a lower love, and thine heavenly graces, thine eternal glories, with the
greatest glory, and chiefest delight of my soul. Lord for thy Christ's sake
hear me herein. Amen,

Amen.
A Prayer against Pride.
MOst dear and gracious God, I most humbly entreat thee so to assist me with
thy grace, that I may evermore take heed of that first and worst sin, the
sin of the Devil, namely pride: O Lord grant I may never be puffed up in
mind, nor have a scornful eye; for pride will have a fearful fall, and
high-mindednesse always goes before destruction.

Dan. 4.27, 28.
Nabuchadnezzar paid dearly for his vain and foolish vaunting: and that proud
and boasting Pharisee went home condemned for his sin: Luke 18.14.
O Lord, then give me power and strength against this wicked lust, this base
and senseless sin: Let not (O God of all goodness) this evil appear in
me, by mine apparel, speech, look, gate, or any other unseemly behavior:
for thou (O God) resistest the proud, and give thy grace only to the humble:
Humble me then (I pray thee) that I may in due time be everlastingly exalted
of thee in the Lord JESUS.

Amen.
A Prayer against Envy.
O LORD GOD, whereas thou have taught me by thy blessed Apostle, Romans 12.15.
to rejoice with them that rejoice; I beseech thee save and defend me from
that fearful sin of Envy, the sin of Satan, for he envied the standing
power of Adam: the sin of Cain, Genesis 4.5.
who vexed his soul at thy graces apparent in Abel: O God, of thy goodness,
save me from this sin and wickedness.

Grant (most holy and heavenly Father) that I may abound in love toward my
brethren, and bless thee as heartily for any mercy or blessing conferred upon
others, as upon mine own soul: As one member rejoices in the glory and
welfare of another, so grant that I may prove my self a true member of Christ
Jesus, in delighting in the prosperity of thy Saints and servants.

Lord keep me from an hateful soul, and fulfill mine heart with love, to the
glory of thy great name, and everlasting salvation of my poor soul, in the
merits of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer against Adultery.
MOst mighty* and most merciful Father, for as much as thou have shown unto
me from thy holy and heavenly word, that no unclean thing shall enter into thy
Kingdom, and no adulterer shall inherit heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9.
such shall only enter into thy glory as have not defiled themselves with
women, as Saint John declares in his Revelations: Good Father (I pray thee)
purge my soul from all foul and fleshly lusts: my body is the Temple of thy
holy Spirit, Lord let me never defile it: grant (Lord) that I may preserve and
present it spotless to the coming of the Lord Jesus: turn away mine eyes
that I behold not vanity: Matthew. 5.20.
If mine eye offend me, Lord grant that I may pull it out: better for me to go
into that life with one eye, than to go with two eyes into the darkness and
damnation of hell.

Give me (O Lord) the help of thy grace, that I may conquer all beastly
lusts, all unclean desires, al polluted and polluting actions, and be freed
from them, for the honor of thy name, in the worthiness of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer against Covetousness.
O Eternal and everliving Lord God, thou have revealed unto me from thy blessed
word, Psalm. 10.3.
that thou abhorrest the covetous, and covetousness is so foul an evil, as it
is called, Spiritual Idolatry: O LORD of thy mercy save my soul from this vile
and earthly sin, give me to take heed and beware of Covetousness, for a
man's life stands not in his wealth and abundance: that man in the Gospel was
rightly termed a fool for resting on his goods, Luke 12.20.
and making them his God: O Lord, what greater folly can there be, than to
leave thee the fountain of living waters, and to trust in vain and uncertain
riches: for as the Psalmist tells me, Psalm 49.7.
A man by his wealth cannot redeem his brother, so precious is the redemption
of souls, and their continuance for ever.

Therefore let my conversation (O Lord) be without covetousness, for thou have
promised, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5.
Lord raise mine heart from earthly mindedness, and let my chief delight be
on heaven and heavenly things; give me this covetousness, namely to covet
after spiritual things, and let all my delight be in thy statutes: that my
life being holy and conversation heavenly, I may in the end obtain the
kingdom of heaven, and life everlasting, through Jesus Christ mine only Lord
and Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer against hardness of heart.
O Lord my God, I most humbly beseech thee, in the Lord Jesus, to frame my soul
according to thy will, to bring mine heart to the obedience of thy holy and
heavenly law in all things: mollify my stiff and stubborn heart, give me a
teachable and tractable spirit, that I may evermore be guided by the motions of
thy holy Spirit, and counsel of thy heavenly word into all goodness. Take
away (good Father) the stoninesse of my heart (for I feel much hardness in
it) and give me an heart of flesh: Ezekiel. 36.26.
give me the spirit of good King JOSIAH, 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
whose heart melted within him at the reading of thy Law: give me (O Lord) to
tremble at my sins, to mourn at thy judgments, to be comforted by thy
mercies in the merits of the LORD JESUS. Create in me (O Lord) a new heart,
Psalm. 51.10.
and renew a right spirit within me: turn me, and I shall be turned; convert
me, and then shall my soul be converted unto thee.

Thy mercies now I ask, Lord grant that I may have: thy sweet graces now I
seek, grant (Lord) that I may find: at thy heavenly gates I knock, Lord open
unto me the door of salvation, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer against Drunkenness.
MOst dear and gracious God, I thine unworthy servant, am bold upon the
multitude of thy mercies to present my self before thee, earnestly craving
pardon for my sins, and thy power and presence of grace, for the prevention
of them in time to come.

In particular (O Lord) I beseech thee, that I may be preserved from that
swinish sin of drunkenness: fearful are thy woes denounced against the
same; many other most damnable transgressions always wait upon the same; yea,
a legion of devils attends the same, as swearing, adultery, quarrelling, and
the like: Lord for thy mercies sake, save me from excess: whether I eat or
drink, or whatsoever I do else, let me do all to the glory of thy blessed
name.

And (good Father) give me to shun all occasions of this sin; especially, I
pray thee, to preserve me from vain and ungodly society, and let me frequent
evermore the company of thy saints: temper mine affections, moderate mine
unruly lust: give me always to consider, that no drunkard shall inherit the
kingdom of heaven: Also that vnsober persons are unable to resist the devil,
but he works his will and pleasure upon them: preserve me then (my God) from
this common, capital, national evil: Lord give me a wise and moderate use
of thy creatures: let them not be snares unto me, but refreshers of me; not
destroyers, but supporters of me, to thy glory, and the eternal salvation of
my poor soul in the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer against murder.
Almighty and most merciful heavenly Father, I thy poor servant beg from
thy throne of grace, grace and strength against all sins and transgressions
whatsoever; especially, against those crying sins spoken of in thy word, such
as will never leave roaring in thine ears, till thy judgments be ^hundred
against the committers of them, one whereof is murder: a fearful and
diabolical sin, for the devil was a murderer from the beginning: Lord save
me from taking away the name or life of any man; grant I may not harbor malice
in mine heart, 1 John 3.15.
for he that hates his brother in his heart, is a manslayer: give me to look
upon thy judgments executed upon such malefactors as Cain, Ahab, others, that I
may never offend in the same: Lord give me love, patience, meekness, that I
may in the moderation of my passions and affections, preserve my soul from
this griesly evil, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer against Hypocrisy.
O Most gracious and merciful God, thy holy word has revealed unto me thy
heavy vengeance against such as are dissemblers with thee, that deep is their
portion in hell, therefore is it said, Give him his portion with hypocrites: O
my God, I crave hereupon thy merciful assistance, that I may take heed of
hypocrisy, that I may walk in uprightness with thee, that I may with
Nathaniel, John 1.47.
be found a true Israelite, in whom is no guile: Lord grant in all good duties,
I may seek thy glory, and pleasure of thy will, not mine own ends, or glory of
mine own name.

O Lord save me from pride, one maine cause of this foul and foolish sin,
and give me sincerity, for that man shall be advanced to thy holy hill, that
speaks the truth (without hypocrisy) and professes it from the heart.

Lord let not the marks of this Pharisaical evil be found in me, as pride,
malicious censuring, and the like: O Lord, though my graces be small, yet let
them be true, and then the gates of hell shall not prevail against me: to this
end, I beseech thee, vouchsafe me a large and plentiful measure of humility,
that so I may in uprightness serve thee in this life, and hereby be sealed up
to thy glory everlasting in that blessed life to come, for Jesus Christ his
sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
A Prayer against Revenge.
MOst loving and gracious GOD, thy holy word has taught me, Romans 12.19.
that vengeance is thine, thou will repay all offered wrongs whatsoever:
whereupon I beseech thee, O Lord, in all abuses and oppressions, give me
patience and meekness of spirit, Romans 12.17.
that I may not render evil for evil, that I may not seek maliciously to
revenge those that have done wrong and injury unto me: to do good for good,
Publicanes can do the same: to do evil for evil, that is an act of flesh and
blood: to do evil for good, is egregious ungodliness: but to do good against
evil, this is only proper to the righteous: when others curse, let me
bless; let me pray when others persecute, as the first Martyr in the Gospel
prayed for them that stoned him, A^^^ ^.6^.
and my blessed Savior for those that mocked and killed him.

It is not possible but offenses will come, man is so vicious, so malicious;
How often shall I then forgive? seven times? No Lord, more than so, seventy
times seven: Matthew. 18.34
he that would not forgive his brother the pence, his pounds, yea, talents
were exacted from him to the uttermost farthing in prison: If I cannot heartily
forgive my brother, how shall I look for forgiveness of sins at thy hands?

Therefore (dear God) grant me thy grace to conquer malicious and reuengefull
thoughts, and possess me with the spirit of meeknes and love, to my present
peace, to mine everlasting salvation, in and through my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
A Prayer against Theft.
O LORD and heavenly Father, whereas thine express commandment is, Exodus 20.15.
that I shall not steal, O Lord give me thy fear, that I may take heed that I
oppress not my brother, by unjust and deceitful dealing, nor take away by
violence that which is his, but as I would be done unto, so let me evermore do,
for this is the Law and the Prophets: Matthew. 7.12.
As I desire heartily thy grace to walk before thee in holiness, so also I
beseech thee, give me in all things to carry my self to my neighbor in
righteousness: without shall be dogs, murderers, thieves, these wretched
persons shall for evermore be expelled and excluded thy kingdom of glory: and
who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? Psalm. 15.3.
even he that has not done evil to his neighbor, as in body and name, so in
goods and estate.

A little that the righteous has, being well got, is better than great riches
of the ungodly, gotten by fraud, violence, wrong: Give me to know that I must
one day give an account of my stewardship, Luke 16.2.
how I have gotten my goods, as well as how I have spent them.

Therefore I beseech thee give me thy fear and grace, to preserve my soul
from these worldly and wicked errors here, and give me everlasting salvation
when I die, in the Lord Jesus that freely died for me.

Amen.
A Prayer against Swearing.
MOST Mighty, most glorious, and most merciful Lord God, great thou art in thy
majesty, wondrous in thy power, who is able to resist thy wrath? O Lord
evermore defend me from taking thy great and mighty name in vain, Exodus 20.7.
for thou will not hold him guiltless that takes thy Name in vain: Heavy are
thy judgments denounced against this sin: thy curse shall not depart from
the house of the swearer: Therefore my good God, grant I may never be found
culpable of this sin, but give me thy grace that I may serve thee in fear,
and rejoice before thee in reverence all the days of my life: Lord let me
never think or speak of thy great and holy Name, but with all fear, respect,
reverence, trembling.

Give me also thy fear and grace, that I may not endure thy Name to be
dishonored of others, but let it be a Simeons Sword to pierce my soul, Luke
2.35.
and give me evermore to reprove and condemn it.

Lord hear, help, and have mercy upon thy poor servant, here and in heaven.

Amen.
A Prayer against Perjury.
O Lord God, to who^ vengeance belongs, thou great Judge of heaven and earth,
to whom all secrets are known; I most humbly pray thee that thy fear and
grace may so assist me, that I may never swerue from the truth of thy Law: thou
have charged me not to bear false witness against my neighbor, Exodus 20.16.
but to speak the truth impartially when I am thereunto called, for Lord thou
know all secrets, though man cannot detect them: therefore keep me from
false swearing, for as it is great wrong in judgment, so is it odious and
abominable before thee, for thine infinite wisdom is dishonored; and he that
dishonors thee in this desperate, impudent, and damnable manner, thou will
dishonor and condemn him for ever.

Lord give me an honest heart and faithful soul, that in all things I may
carry my self upright, as in thy great and mighty presence, now and for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against Security.
BLessed and euer-glorious LORD GOD, I pray thee most humbly and earnestly in
Christ Jesus, to keep me from that dangerous evil of security: many are the
enemies of my soul, the devil goes up and down, seeking whom he may
devour: the world by his allurements seeks to ouerturne my soul: carnal
concupiscence, and inbred corruption takes all advantages to betray and
overthrow me: I beseech thy Majesty (seeing my poor soul is thus dangerously
assaulted) give me all diligence and care to keep my soul from sinning
against thee: O give me the watch of thy Spirit of grace, to prevent these
woeful enemies of my soul: Matthew. 26.41.
let me ever watch and pray, and stand upon my guard, lest I fall into
temptation: let me be less careful for the things of this life, and more
careful for thy glory, and the eternal salvation of my soul: that I
glorifying thy great Name constantly in this life, may in JESUS CHRIST be
everlastingly glorified of thee in the life to come.

Amen.
A Prayer against Desperation.
O Lord my God most mighty and glorious, I most humbly entreat thee to assist
me in all assaults of Satan: this enemy is strong, I poor sinner weak, I pray
thee then help me against all his most desperate and dismal temptations: I
confess my sins most odious, most damnable, yet upon my true humiliation, I am
bold to rest upon thy renowned mercies for forgiveness of them; To whom will thou look (O blessed Lord God) but to him that is of a contrite heart, Esa.
66.2.
and trembles at thy words: therefore in the confidence of this thy promise and
mercy, give me resolution against all fears, and desperate harms of my
soul: not to believe thy promise, who art truth it self, not to hope in thy
performance, who art most faithful and just, it were to deny thy glorious
Name, it were heavy and fearful sinning against thee: I have sinned (Lord
thou know) too too much already, shall I now by despair add sin to
sin? O Lord God forbid it: though my sins be many, yet thy mercies are
more; though they be as red as crimson, yet in the crimson Blood of Christ thy
Son, Esa. 1.18.
thou can make them all as white as snow or wool. O Lord my God, who art so
full of mercy, as thou delightest not in the death of the greatest sinner,
Ezekiel. 18.32.
but rather that he may convert and live, give me to break mine heart for
sin, but not to despair of thy mercies for the forgiveness of my sins,
for thou give grace and salvation to the humble, and the Lord Jesus came to
call none but bleeding sinners to repentance: In hope of which thy truth and
mercy, I make bold to rest upon thee (O Lord my God and Savior) for present
peace, for everlasting salvation. Amen.

Amen.
A Prayer against Heresy.
O LORD and heavenly Father, seeing there is but one truth, one faith, one way
laid out for life, which is the Lord Jesus, John 14.6.
for he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: save me (O Lord) from all bypath
and errors, all false ways, Psalm.
grant (with David thy servant) I may utterly abhor: especially I beseech
thee, keep me that I drink not of the cup of fornication, which the Whore
of Babylon holds in her hand, wherewith the greatest part of the world is
deceived, poisoned, drunk: a cup pleasing to flesh and blood, Revel. 17.4.
and therefore called, A golden Cup, yet within it is full of deadly poison and
abomination.

Lord grant I may not be misled in judgment, nor obstinate in defending
errors against thy truth, but give me an humble heart, 1 Cor. 14.32.
and let my spirit be evermore subject to the judgment of thy zealous Prophets:
O Lord, give me to this end (with the Boroans) to examine all things, Acts.
and to confer Scripture with Scripture, that so I may never swerue from thy
most pure, holy, and sacred Truth.

And give me (my good Father) courage and magnanimity to defend and uphold thy
glorious Gospel, against barking Papists, and cauilling Atheists, and all
malicious opposers of the same, to the loss and laying down of my de^rest
life and blood.

Thus grant me (gracious God) to stand for thy truth against al defacers of the
same, to my lives end.

Amen.
A Prayer against Lying.
MOST dear and gracious heavenly father, who art truth it self, in whom no
error nor falcity can abide or dwell, grant me (of thy goodness) that I may
abhor that vain and vile evil of lying, let me evermore speak the truth with
fear and care in a good conscience.

The jesting lie is mere vanity; the officious lie, or lie for profit or
advantage, is gross iniquity: the malicious lie, or lie to do hurt, is most
pernicious and damnable impiety: Good Lord keep me from all these abominations,
and give me to know, that thine infinite wisdom, and all-seeing knowledge is
most grievously dishonored herein: for (Lord) thou know all secrets,
nothing hidden from thine all-seeing eye; though man may be deceived, yet thy
Majesty can never be deceived: A lie then is most foolish, most odious; Lord
keep me from this vanity, now and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against Sabbath-breaking.
O Eternal GOD, Creator and governor of all things, seeing thou have put a
principal charge upon thy fourth commandment, Exodus 20.8.
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day: O my God, grant me thy fear, thy
grace, that that thy day may never be neglected of me: Lord grant I may spend
it in prayer public, private, in hearing and reading of thy holy word, in
instructing my family: Lord vouchsafe me so great a care, so heavenly a desire,
as I may not therein speak mine own words, Esaias 58.13.
nor think mine own thoughts, and that I may make the exercise of that day my
joy, my souls delight: No one shall enter thy Sabbath and rest of glory, but
he that has been strictly careful to keep thy Sabbath on earth: Grant I may
deal with no worldly thing on this thy day, that I may go to thy Temple, and
return to mine house, and make no other walk on this thy day, that I may not
do or look upon any vain pastimes on this thy day.

And (good Lord) stir up mine heart to bless thy Name, for so blessed and
happy a day, wherein thine heavenly instructions are imparted to my soul: Did
not this day shine in thine ordinance most graciously upon me, all the days of
the week, yea all the days of my life would be dismal unto me: Lord
continue this thine holy day to the coming of the Lord Jesus in the clouds to
judgment, for thy mercies sake sweet LORD.

Amen.
A Prayer against Idle words.
MOst glorious and blessed heavenly Father, whereas thou have shown unto me
from thy heavenly Word, Matthew. 12.36.
That of every idle word that men shall speak, account shall be given at the
day of judgment: O GOD of thy great goodness and mercy, so possess me with
thy power of grace, that I may always say with thy good and godly servant
David, Psalm. 39.1.
I will take heed unto my ways that I offend not in my tongue.

Lord, if I speak, 1 Pet. 4.11.
give me that I may speak, as thy holy word prescribes me, holily,
profitably, to the glorification of thy great Name, the edification of the
hearers, and consolation of mine own soul.

Moderate (I beseech thee) the rudeness and rashness of my tongue; it is but a
little member, James 3.5, 8.
but (Lord) I confess, a very hard thing for me to rule and tame: grant
therefore I may set a watch ouermore before the door of my lips, Psalm. 41.3.
that no vanity may be uttered: the tongue (in the original) signifies
glory; Lord grant that I thereby may glorify thy great and godly name.

O Lord, give me never to speak but holily, modestly, heavenly, that I may in
the end for ever in heaven with the same my tongue sing a most joyful and
glorious Halleluiah to thee (O blessed Lord God) and to the Lamb, the Lord
Jesus, for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against evil Thoughts.
MY most holy and heavenly LORD GOD, I pray thee in and for the Lord Jesus, to
reform mine erroneous nature, and sanctify my most sinful and polluted soul:
Lord cleanse my heart within, and then the outside shall be clean also: It is
not (O Lord) that which goes into man that defiles a man, Matthew. 15.19.
but that which comes out of man that defiles him; for out of the heart
comes murder, adultery, and other unclean evils: O my dear and blessed
heavenly Father, purge the fountain, and the river shall be clean: purge mine
heart from vain and evil thoughts and lusts, then shall my mouth praise thee,
and mine actions be in some measure suitable to thy holy will: O Lord, P^ou.
4.23.
give me to keep mine heart with all diligence, for therout comes life: if I
keep it not with all diligence, thereout will come death, that is, sin, whose
wages is death. Give me (my blessed Savior) to keep a narrow watch over my
thoughts, that no wicked thought, profane lust, or ungodly desire may nestle in
my soul, Wisd. 1.9.
for inquisition shall be made for the very thoughts of the ungodly: Lord grant
then that the thoughts of my heart may be always holy and heavenly, that so
my soul being taken up with holy meditations, and heavenly contemplations
here, I may be admitted to that most excellent glory of heaven, purchased in
the blood of the LORD JESUS: to whom with thee and thine holy Spirit, my soul
in her best thoughts desire to render all glory in all reverence now and for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against disobedience to Parents.
O Almighty God, as thou have promised long and happy life to those that honor
their Father and Mother, Exodus 20.12.
so is it most certain, that disobedient children shall not escape thy
fearful vindicts and judgments: for he that disobeyeth his father or mother,
the Ravens of the valleys shall pick out his eyes, and devoured shall he be of
the young Eagles. Prou. 30.17.


O Lord, give me to consider, that I received from my Parents my being, my
maintenance, mine education; how then shall I sufficiently express my duty
unto them? better never been borne, than to contemn or neglect them by whom I
had my being: O good God bless my parents, sanctify them, give them thy
mercies in this life, thy salvation in the next, and me thy grace to do unto
them all honor and help, while I live. Amen.

A Prayer against blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.
O Blessed and gracious God, thy mercy is to be mightily magnified, and
everlastingly extolled, for thy compassion to humbled and penitent sinners, for
there is mercy and salvation with thee that thou may be feared, Psalm.
130.4.
and trusted to for life: yet notwithstanding, thou have revealed thine
irreuocable Sentence against one sin, and but one, that he that commits
it, shall never be pardoned, neither here nor at the day of judgment, Matthew.
12.32.
and that is, blasphemy against the HOLY GHOST, a sin unto death, unto
damnation, not to be pardoned, not to be prayed for: Lord give me thy grace,
that I may carefully seek to know it, and more carefully seek to avoid it:
when a man is enlightened to know thy truth, to profess thy truth, to give good
allowance of it, to reverence and honor it, and then by the devils strong
temptations to fall off from the same, maliciously to oppose and persecute the
same, and the professors of the same, to rail upon it, and disgracefully
blaspheme it, the conscience notwithstanding all this while conuincing him,
this is that unpardonable sin, and it is impossible for this man to repent
and be saved: Good Lord grant that I may never be thus overcome by Satan,
grant (sweet Jesus) I may take heed of the way of this fearful offense and
sin: Lord give me grace that I may not be vnreuerent to thy Word, that I
may not mock, but make much of sincere professors of the same, that evermore I
may have a trembling respect to thy Majesty and ordinance, that so I may be
graciously preserved from this fearful sin here, and the damnation of it
hereafter in hell for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer against Presumption.
O MOST blessed Lord God, I cannot while I live in this body of sin, be freed
from sin and corruption, this world will afford me no perfection: therefore
(good Father) seeing I cannot but sin, grant me this favor and compassion,
that the sins which I daily do offend in, may be of infirmity, not of
wilfulness, nor of maliciousnes, nor against the light of conscience;
especially (with thy servant David) I pray thee keep me from presumptuous
sins, Psalm. 19.13.
that they may not prevail over me.

Gracious heavenly Father, let not me boldly offend thee, upon hope of mercy
from thee, nor presume to sin upon expectation of thy pardon: what greater
abuse of thy mercy than this can there be? Romans 2.4.
thy mercy should lead me from my sins, unto repentance, not from repentance
unto sin.

Lord, with grief of heart I do mournfully confess before thee, that I have
too too much presumed in bold and wilful sinning against thee, upon hope of
pardon from thee: Lord humble me more and more for this my most dangerous sin
and offense, and let it not be me, but sin in me, whenever I sin against
thee.

LORD, above all things save me from an impudent and shameless soul, save me
from sinning against thee with so high an hand, in so great a measure: that my
chiefest care being to master sin in this life, it may be thy good will and
pleasure to free me from damnation in the world to come, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

A Prayer against the Plague.
O Lord my God, most mighty and glorious, whereas thy gracious promise is,
Psalm. 91.4.7.
to save me from plague and pestilence, to hide me under thy wings, and to
keep me safe under thy feathers, thousands shall fall on my right hand, and ten
thousand on my left, and no plague shall come near my dwelling: Lord for thy
mercies sake save me from this wrath of thine, and evermore defend me.

And (heavenly Father) I pray thee to this end purge my soul from the leprosy
of sin, the cause of all thy judgments present and to come; this fearful
affliction never comes, but always some or other sin procuring it: four
great and grievous plagues thou sentest against the house of Israel, four
lamentable sins procuring the same, as bellicheare, Number. 11. Number. 16. Number.
25. 2 Samuel 24.
contempt of thy Ministers, fornicating, and putting confidence in the arm of
flesh for victory: O Lord preserve me and this whole nation from these and al
other transgressions, that so iniquity may never be our destruction.

Thus (I most humbly beseech thee) save me from sins and judgments in this life
and from everlasting damnation in the world to come, for Jesus sake.

Amen.
A Prayer against the Sword.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, great are thy judgments, and fearful thy
punishments appointed for sinners, yea, for thine own people, if they sin
against thee: though thou will in the Lord JESUS, spare them in thine
everlasting love, from an everlasting damnation, yet if they be bold to sin,
thou will lash them with a temporary correction: as thou did threaten thine
own people Israel, Ezekiel. 21.4.
that thou would draw thy Sword, and cut off the righteous with the wicked:
O Lord I beseech thee, save me from this fearful misery, let the sword of thy
law pierce and humble me, that the sword of thy judgments may never overtake
me.

I bless thee (O Lord God) for peace in our borders, we have no howling in
our gates, no complaining in our streets, Psalm. 144.14.
no leading into captivity, no defiling of Temple and City, blessed are the
people that are so, happy are they that have thee (O Lord) for their God.

O Lord God, give me and the whole nation grace to repent with Nineve of all
our sins, I^^. 3.10.
that so we may never be devoured by the sword, but in peace (if it be meet
for thy glory, and the good of thy church) we may pass to peace and glory
everlasting.

Amen.
A Prayer against Famine.
O Most mighty and most glorious Lord God, I beseech thee save me from misery
and destruction, which justly for my sins might come upon me: O Lord in
particular, I pray thee for thy mercies sake, preserve me from famine, and
perishing by hunger, that ruefull judgment, and of all deaths the most
miserable under the Sun, for none like staruing to death: Lord grant I may
daily dye unto my sins, that for them I may never in this terrible judgment
die: how heavy is it to my soul the remembrance of that distressed woman, 2
Kings 6.28.
who in that famine of Samaria, complained to her King, That her neighbor
shared with her in the eating of her child, but she could not again have part
with her neighbor: a lamentable complaint, a distress most miserable; O Lord
of thy goodness save me and this nation from the same.

And as we would be spared from these thy dismal judgments, so (Lord) grant
we may labor to be freed from our wicked and abominable transgressions: we
have abused thy creatures unto vanity, and thy comfortable mercies unto riot
and excess: it were just with thee to fulfill that heavy sentence upon us, He
that has not, it shall be taken away that which he has; he that has not to
a good and holy use, it shall be taken away that which he has.

O Lord have mercy upon me, and deliver me from famine in this life, and
destruction in the next to come, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for grace in general.
O Eternal GOD, and my most merciful heavenly Father, who art Author and
finisher of my faith, from whom every good and perfect gift descends, I most
humbly entreat thee to sanctify my soul with thy holy and heavenly grace,
especially with those excellent gifts of thy holy Spirit, spoken of by thine
holy Apostle Peter, proper only to thine elect and chosen: as faith, virtue,
knowledge, patience, temperance, godliness, brotherly kindness, love: for if
these things be in me, and abound, I shall never fall into the ditch of hell.

Lord, let me not do mine own will, but give me always to be guided by the
motions of thine holy Spirit into all truth: let it be my meat and drink, the
obedience of thy word: grant I may find out that old and good way, Ier. 6.16.
the way of thy fear and grace, that walking in it constantly and
conscionably, I may find everlasting peace and rest to my soul: O Lord give
me to loath sin, as the greatest enemy of my soul, for the wages of sin is
death, but the gift of thee (O my God) is eternal life, Romans 6.23.
through my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

If I be not borne twice, better it had been for me never to have been
borne: except I repent, I perish: Luke 13.3.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy Tabernacle? even he that leads an
incorrupt life, for no unclean thing shall enter into thy kingdom,
unsanctified, vnsaued: and without holiness I can never see thee, O God:
therefore I beseech thine holy and heavenly majesty, to mortify sin in mine
earthly members, and to renew me in soul and body: give me (O my God) a new
mind, new will, new affections, new thoughts, new words, new ways, all new,
for he that is a member of the Lord Jesus, is thus become a new creature.

O Lord, evermore delight my soul with holiness, and let thy fear preserve
me always from evil: thus give me (I pray thee) to live purely in some good
measure in this life, that I may have the surer hope of happiness in heaven, for
blessed are the pure in heart, they shall see thee O God.

Bless me then (good Father) with the blessing of sanctity in this life, and
of everlasting felicity in the life to come, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Knowledge.
MOst blessed and heavenly Father, I confess by nature I am a creature most
miserable, so blinded and darkened by sin, as I know not what may make for
thy glory, or the comfortable salvation of my poor soul: the darkness of
Egypt was not so black, so palpable as the blindness and darkness of my
soul: O Lord my God, my suit unto thee is with blind Bartimeus that I may
receive my sight, Mark 10.51.
send me (Lord) some or other good Ananias to vnscale mine eyes that I may
judge and see the wonders of thy Law.

Acquaint me (good Father) by thy Law, with my woeful sins, thy fearful
curses due unto me for the same, that so I may be broken hearted for them,
and made capable of remission and salvation: acquaint me also with thy promise
made unto the humbled in Jesus Christ for forgiveness, for thou give grace
to the humble: acquaint me also with the way of the regenerate, and affect my
soul with holiness, that so I may come to salvation in the end: this is life
eternal to know thee thus, and him whom thou have sent even Jesus Christ. John


Make good unto me that thy gracious promise, Psalm. 25.
thou will impart thy secrets to them that fear thee: Lord discover thy glory
unto me, that I may answerably fear thy Name: reveal thy will (O Lord) most
plentifully unto me, that I may strictly serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life, for Jesus sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Humiliation.
MOst mighty and most glorious Lord God, seeing that thine holy Word has
taught me, that the Lord Jesus came to save none but sinners, grieved sinners,
wounded sinners, such sinners as would never sin more: and moreover thou will
look to none but to such as are of a contrite spirit, Esaias 66.2.
and tremble at thy words: O Lord, Esaias 66.2.
break mine heart for breaking thy commandments, and smite my soul for
sinning against thee: grant I may be ashamed of the filthiness of my sins,
grieve for offending so loving a God by them, and quake and tremble, lest thou
should condemn me in thy strict justice for them for evermore: if my sinful
soul be not thus rent, thus tormented for my wicked sins in this life, I
cannot escape at the day of judgment the damnation of hell: better ten
thousand times to have my hell here, than hereafter: Lord therefore bruise my
soul for all my vile transgressions, and fearful abominations.

And leave me not (good Lord) I pray thee, in these my soul afflictions and
affrightments, but when thou have sufficiently corrected me, then (Lord) turn
again and revive me, Psalm.
say unto my soul thou art, thou will be my salvation: for thou have made
this gracious promise, that the laden shall be eased, and the wearied shall
be refreshed: Lord hear then these my mournful prayers, and let these my
groaning cries come up unto thee, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Faith.
MOST dear and gracious God, I humbly beseech thee to cut me off from the
stock of corruption and sin, and that by sound humbling, and to plant me
(who art that heavenly husbandman) by the power of thy blessed Spirit, into
that holy stock the Lord Jesus, and that by effectual believing: Lord give
me to live by faith, and not by flesh; by grace, and not by sin, for they
that are in Christ Jesus walk not after the flesh, Romans 8.1.
but after the Spirit.

Grant (gracious God) I may rest upon thee in thy Son Christ, for forgiveness
of sin, and for life everlasting: grant upon this my deliverance I may live to
the praise of thee my blessed Redeemer, in holiness and righteousness all the
days of my life: grant (holy Father) I may not only by faith depend upon all
thy promises for this life, and for heaven, but likewise by the same faith
labor to walk in the obedience of all thy commandments.

O Lord increase my faith, for my heart is full of doubting, thou (O Lord) art
faithful and true, yea, truth it self, why should I then waver? My soul is
weak through my remaining corruptions in obeying thy holy Word, Lord
strengthen me: my heart is faint, and ready to sink under the least trial and
affliction, Lord for thy mercies support and comfort me.

Give me (my dear God) to believe beyond belief, when I feel not, to rest
upon thee for comfort, as thy servant Job Job.
resolved, Lord if thou killest me yet will I put my trust in thee: Lord give
me by faith, clearly to see my sins pardoned, my life reformed, my soul
reconciled with thee, and my name written in the book of heaven.

Most loving Father, I pray thee grant me thy grace, that I may deny my self,
that I may wholly rest upon Christ Jesus, and follow his heavenly commandments
for life: grant that my faith Iam. 2.26.
may not be a dead faith, but a lively, walking, working faith: that is a dead
and vain faith that moves not in the obedience of thy most holy
commandments: thus (I pray thee) guide me by thy good Spirit into all truth,
that thy power of grace possessing me in this life, I may have the better hope
of eternal salvation in the life to come, and that for the merits of the Lord
Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for Obedience.
O Lord God most mighty, most glorious, I most humbly crave thy gracious and
loving favor, that I may be enabled by strength and power received from thee,
to walk in absolute obedience before thee: Lord let me not do my will, but
thy will in all things: Luke 7.8.
as the Centurion said of his servants, He said to one, go, and he goes; to
another, come, and he comes; to another, do this, and he does it: Lord
grant me the like obedience and tractability to thy will in all things.

1 Samuel 15.22.
Lord give me to understand that obedience is better than sacrifice, yea, to
obey is the best of all sacrifices: let me then obey thee in all thy
commandments, and submit unto thee in all thy corrections: not my will, but
thy will most willingly be yielded unto in all things, my Lord, my God.

O Lord vouchsafe me sincerity in this my most bounden duty and service, that I
may obey thee in one commandment as well as in another; let me with thy godly
servant David, Psalm. 119.
evermore have respect unto all thy commandments: O then that my ways were
made so direct, that I may never sin more, but in all things do thy righteous
judgments: O let it be my meat and drink, the obedience of thy will: O that I
could find out the old way, which is the good way, that walking constantly,
and conscionably in the same, I may find everlasting rest and peace to my
poor soul: Lord, thus sanctify me in this life with thy holy fear, that I
may not fail of salvation in the world to come, for thy love in the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for Zeal.
MOst blessed and glorious heavenly Father, my heart is grieved and much
perplexed within me, because I find my soul so dead, so cold in all good
duties which thou have appointed me to walk in. O Lord quicke^ me, and make me
more zealous, more fervent for the praise and glory of thy great and heavenly
Name: let (I pray thee) thy good pleasure be my chiefest glory, and the
constant service of thee, the greatest delight of my soul.

O Lord my God, grant I may never endure thy Name to be dishonored, nor thy
holy Law disgraced by my self or others, but so affect my soul with thy
fear, care, love, that I may, evermore defend thee, and support the glory of
thy Name: give me to bleed in heart, and melt in soul at the great and
grievous evils of the time, let mine eyes gush out into rivers of water,
because men keep not thy Law: Psalm. 119.
let every evil beholden of me, be as a goad in my side, and as a thorn in
mine eye: grant (good God) I may most strictly walk before thee, and so burn
in zeal of thy law and glory, that thy service, and the obedience of thy will,
may be more precious, more delightful unto me than the eternal salvation of
my soul: Thus (Lord) inflame my soul with thy love, fear, grace, that so my
part and portion may be with thy Saints and Angels in joy and glory
everlasting, in and through my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A Prayer for brotherly love.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, for as much as thou have shown unto me,
1 Ioh. 4.16.
that he that dwells in love, dwells in thee, for thou art love, and by
this shall all men know, that we are thy disciples, if we love one another; and
again, If I cannot love him whom I see daily, how shall I persuade my self I
love thee, 1 Ioh. 4.20.
who^ I never saw? good Lord I beseech thee then to fill my soul with love,
and to abound me with charity and goodness toward my brethren: as the members
of the body carry themselves one to another, so (I pray thee) give me grace to
behave my self to my brethren, and fellow members of the Lord Jesus: one
member despises not another, grant then I may not be puffed up: one member
enuieth not another, grant I may not grudge at the prosperity of my brethren:
one member is helpefull to another, grant (Lord) that I may do all the good I
can unto others while I live: one member suffers with another, grant that I
may weep with them that weep: one member reuengeth not another, Lord grant
that I may bear offered wrongs and injuries, and never seek revenge.

Thus (I beseech thee) possess me with thy Spirit of love, for it is the
ground and mother of all goodness, yea, the fulfilling of thy whole Law, and
without love I am as sounding brass, and as a tinkling Cymball, I am nothing:
1 Cor. 13.1.
Thus give me to resemble thy Majesty in love and kindness in this life, that
I may be admitted to that place of happiness, where love shall never vanish
away, and that for thy love in the Lord Jesus, my most loving Savior and
Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for humility.
MOst holy and heavenly Lord God, for as much as thou have revealed unto me
from thy holy Word, That thou resistest the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5.
and give grace to the humble, and none but the humble shall be exalted: O
Lord my God, endue me with the spirit of humility, grant I may be far from vain
thoughts and proud looks, give me to learn of my blessed Savior Jesus
Christ to be humble and meek, so shall I find rest to my soul: the humbled
Publicane went home exalted, but the proud Pharisee condemned.

O Lord my God, I cannot but confess, that I have deserved shame and confusion
for my sins done against thee, yea, the best of mine actions are so
corrupted, as I deserve no less than damnation for them, yea, when I have done
all that I can I am an unprofitable servant: what cause (holy Father) then have
I to boast my self before thee? If any good I do, it is not I, but thy Spirit
in me, for what have I that I have not received? Give me then to be glad of
thy gifts of grace, but not proud: Act. 12.23.
Not unto me (O Lord) not unto me, but unto thy Name, grant I may evermore
give the praise, lest for mine arrogance I be smitten as was Herod, and the
worms, and thy wrath consume me.

Lord possess me with meekness and lowlines here, that my portion may be with
thy Saints in glory everlasting hereafter, for thy Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Patience.
MOST loving and gracious GOD, seeing I am compassed about with so many
miseries, some from thy Majesty as corrections, some from Satan as
temptations, some from wicked men as persecutions, and some from concupiscence
as treacherous seductions: I beseech thee therefore give me patience in this
sinful and sorrowful world, let me possess my soul with patience, Heb. 12.1.
and run the race that is set before me with comfort and patience. Thus the
Lord Jesus possessed himself in patience, who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, but prayed for his persecutors, and in his dying afflictions opened not
his mouth: thus thy servants went quietly and gently through their sharp
afflictions, as Job, Steven, Act. 7.60.
and others: Lord grant I may gently and meekly go through whatsoever
tribulation for the kingdom of heaven sake.

Grant I may not repine or murmr under the cross, whether it be want, or
imprisonment, or sickness, or banishment, or death of friends, or any other
affliction: Heb. 12.6.
for whom thou love, thou will chasten, and it is good for me to be in
trouble, for thereby I learn better to keep thy Law: and as grace is the way
of life, so is cross the companion of this way, all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution: I must be contented to suffer with
Christ, and for Christ on earth, if ever I would reign with Christ in heaven.

Thus submitting my soul to thy will and pleasure in this life, I shall have
the surer hope of admssion to life and salvation when I dye, in the merits of
the Lord Jesus, thy Son my Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for Innocence.
O Eternal and everliving LORD GOD, seeing I must one day rise to give an
account for all things done in my body, I most humbly beseech thee therefore,
to give me grace to endeavor with thine holy Apostle Paul, always to keep a
clear conscience, both toward thee and man: Lord give me to be innocent from
all manner of offense, innocent to thee, innocent to man: Psalm. 37.38.
O that I could keep innocence, and do the thing that is right, this would
bring me peace at the last.

Lord grant I may wrong no man, neither in body, goods, nor name: grant I may
say with Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3.
whose Ox have I bribed? whose Ass have I taken? whom have I done wrong to?
give me to do good to all, hurt to none: give me to be wise as the Serpent,
but innocent as the Dove: that living harmlesly in this world, I may live
happily in the next, for the merits sake of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for mercy and compassion.
O Lord my GOD most mighty and glorious, seeing thou have commanded me to
weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15.
and being also the godly practice of my Savior, for he wept over Jerusalem,
and lamented their destruction: grant (good Lord) I may compassionate the
present miseries of thy Church abroad, that my heart may melt within me to see
thy vine thus stroyed, and thy Church thus trodden down by the enemies of thy
truth: O Lord, Psalm. 80.14.
betimes look down from heaven and visit this vine, though thou suffer it
to be pruned, Lord let it never be extinguished.

I further entreat thee (O my God) that I may not only mourn over the
afflictions of my brethren, but likewise be pricked in heart at the falls and
sins of thy people: and let not this my pity be in word and show alone, but
in deed and in truth, to pull them out of their impiety, and succor them in
their adversity, to cover the naked, to feed the hungry, to visit the sick
and imprisoned, Matthew. 25.
to comfort and relieve them: if this pity dwells not in me, no piety can
possess me: Lord grant I may be thus merciful as thou (my heavenly Father)
art merciful: give me with thy holy Apostle to cry out, Who is afflicted, and
I mourn not? Keep me from mercilesnesse, O Lord of thy goodness, for
judgment shall be ministered without mercy, Iam. 2.13.
to him that has showed no mercy: Thus I pray thee vouchsafe me a tender
heart for thy glory, the good of the afflicted, and the eternal salvation of
my poor soul, in the merits of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for peace of Conscience.
O Almighty and most merciful God, I beseech thee to remove from my soul all
desperate fears, all vile corruptions, and give me that great and heavenly
blessing, namely, Prou.
The peace of Conscience which passes all understanding, which is a most
comfortable and continual feast.

And seeing this peace of conscience arises from thy reconcilement, remission
of sins, and assurance of life everlasting: good Lord, I pray thee, be at peace
with me through the Lord Jesus, let all my sins in the bloody passions of thy
Son be discharged, and let my name be found written in the Book of life.

And give me further (I beseech thee good Father) to preserve this peace of
conscience, and that by avoiding all, but especially known sins, by doing
every duty uprightly, though not perfectly, and by renewing my humiliation and
repentance more thoroughly: Lord grant I may not sin against the light of
conscience, that I may never defile and wound my conscience by wilful
offending, that faith and holiness may dwell therein, O help me (good Lord)
Act. 4.16.
thus to keep a clear conscience both toward thee and man: Save me (my God)
from a benumbed conscience, a desperate conscience, an erroneous conscience, a
polluted conscience, and give me a pure conscience, a peaceable conscience, a
good conscience, that this may minister comfort unto me in the greatest
afflictions, strongest temptations, at the hour of death, at the day of
judgment, and be a sure seal to my soul of life and salvation everlasting,
in the merits of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for joy in the holy Ghost.
MOST dear and gracious GOD, for as much as thy divine consolation is a sure
mark and evidence of thy love for life, for thy blessed Apostle affirms,
Romans 14.17.
that thy kingdom stands in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost:
Lord of thy goodness, fill mine heart with this thy heavenly joy, let it not
be hidden unto me as it is unto those that are lost, but (I pray thee) shed
abroad this thy love in mine heart: this sweet and heavenly joy is thine own
wine, laid up in thine own seller, for thine own spouse, the wicked of the
world shall never taste thereof.

This joy the wise men found when they found the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 2.10.
for they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy: This joy was in the blessed
Virgin, Luke 1.47.
for her spirit rejoiced in Christ her Savior: So (good Lord) distill some
saving drops of this water of life into my thirsting soul: Lord show me this
thy glory: Psalm. 4 6.
some crave worldly goods, and riches do embrace, but Lord grant me thy
countenance, thy favor and thy grace; for thou thereby shall make my heart
more joyful and more glad, than they that of their corn and wine full great
increase have had.

O Lord, to this end, increase my faith, inflame my zeal, better my obedience,
mortify my corruptions, sanctify my affections, that so I may evermore
rejoice under the hope of salvation, in the LORD JESUS, yea, here and in heaven
for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for increase of Grace.
MOst blessed and heavenly Father, I read in thy holy word That thy Kingdom is
like a grain of Mustard seed, Luke 13.19.
a little seed, yet in time it sends forth a mighty stalk, that the birds
of the air may nestle therein, thy Majesty intimating thereby the smalnesse of
Grace at the first, and the great increase by degrees in the hearts of thy
children at last: now (good Father) I pray thee, increase thy graces in me;
for I may say with that poor believer in the Gospel, Lord I believe, but help
mine unbelief: Lord give me to increase in faith, in knowledge, in obedience,
in all goodness, that so I going on from strength to strength, may in the end
enjoy thy face in Sion.

That tree that grows not, is dead; if I grow not better and better, and
bring not forth more fruit in mine old age, I cannot prove my self an impe of
the Lord Jesus.

And as it fares with the natural birth, so does it also with the spiritual,
a child new born is weak and small, yet in time it grows to be a tall and
strong man; so the soul at first is weak and feeble in grace, as smoke to
fire, as a bruised reed to a sturdie oak of Lebanon, but in time the convert
grows to be a perfect man in the Lord Jesus: therefore my gracious GOD, grant
I may (as a newborn babe) 1 Pet. 2.2.
desire the sincere milk of the word, that I may grow thereby: I confess with
a heavy heart (O Lord) that I grow but poorly in the power and might of grace,
Lord quicken me, Lord abound thy graces in me: Ioh. 6.12.
thou that made bread grow, double thy graces in me: as that oil increased,
2 King. 4.6.
Lord increase the oil of thy graces within me: Ioh. 2.7.
as those water pots were filled, so fill my soul with thy goodness, even up
to the brim, and let my cup run over with thine euer-flowing mercies, that
hereby I may be made more able to serve thee in holiness, and also more
assured of everlasting happiness in Christ Jesus, to whom thou gave the
Spirit without measure, to whom with thee and thy holy Spirit be all glory
returned, now and for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for perseverance in Grace.
MY most dear and gracious GOD, many are the troubles of the righteous; and
those that truly profess thy fear and Name, have man and devil against them,
for Cain will hate Abel for good, and Ismael mock Isaac for God; thus they
persecuted the Lord Jesus, and the Prophets: O Lord, hereupon I pray thee give
me magnanimity and courage, that nothing may draw me from thy law, thy love,
thy fear: grant I may hold the faith to the death, Revel. 2.10.
that so I may have a crown of life, for he that endures to the end, Matthew.
10.22.
the same shall be saved; but reuolters, and back-sliders shall go under the
earth, and great shall be their torment in hell.

Give me to look upon the constancy and courage of thy holy Martyrs, who went
as cheerfully to the flame, as to a delicate feast: my blessed Savior
suffered ten thousand times more for me than I can do for him, therefore
grant that I may lose my life, rather than thy love, for he that will save his
life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for thy Names sake, shall
everlastingly save it: Come then torment, come torture, come what will come,
come and welcome, nothing shall separate me from my Lord Jesus.

O Lord, give me to this end to be sincere in thy service, to be increased in
thy graces, to be inflamed with the love of thy Law, and zeal of thy glory, to
consider the disgrace that is done to thy truth by reuolting, and the danger of
backsliding, and the incomparable glory laid up in heaven for those that
defend thy faith with their dearest blood, that so I may never be daunted at
whatsoever torment, but pass courageously and cheerfully through the same to
life and glory everlasting in the might and merit of the Lord Jesus, thy Son
my Savior.

Amen.
A Prayer for preparation to the Sacrament.
O Almighty and most gracious Lord God, great is thy mercy and rare is thy love
to mortal and miserable man, in that thou have not only given him thy Word to
beget faith, but also the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus, to
seal him to life and salvation: good Lord I pray thee so address my soul, and
prepare my heart, that I may receive the same thy holy and heavenly ordinance
to my comfort, not condemnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
for whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
condemnation: therefore (holy Father) grant I may never come to this thy holy
table without the wedding garment, without holy and due preparation: prepare
then (dear God) my heart hereunto, especially in these six and several Graces;

First, I beseech thee grant that I may come with knowledge; knowledge of my
self, knowledge of my blessed Savior Jesus, knowledge of this most reverend
ordinance, and of the holy use of the same, that I may graciously and wisely
distinguish that bread Sacramental, from bread at home, it prefiguring the
Lord Jesus, that Bread of my soul that came from heaven.

Secondly, grant I may come with humiliation of soul, for the Lords breakings
heal none but the broken heart, and contrite soul: If I cannot roar for my
sins that killed the Lord Jesus, the roarings of the Lord Jesus cannot ease
me.

Again, prepare me by faith to rest upon thy Son for mercy and forgiveness:
If my heart be thus humbled for sin, what shall hinder me to believe? for thy
grace in Christ Jesus is given only to the humble; therefore grant as my mouth
eats the bread, my soul by faith answerably may be comforted by the merits
of Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, I beseech thee to give me sound repentance, to die to sin, to live
to my blessed Redeemer, in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

Fifthly, give me a thankful heart to thy sweet Majesty for the redemption of
my poor soul, in the merits of thy Son.

Lastly, give me love to my brethren, as thou have pardoned my sins, so give
me thy grace, that I may freely and heartily pardon those that have offended
me, and wish the holy Sacrament as effectual unto them as mine own soul:
Lord grant unto me all these my requests for the honor of thy great name in the
worthy merits of the Lord Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for the Gospels continuance.
MOst holy and heavenly Lord God, of all thy mercies vouchsafed to thy Church
on earth, none like that of thy word, therefore it is said by thine Apostle,
showing the prerogative of the Jew above the Gentile, that to them were
committed the oracles Romans 3.2.
of God, as though thy Law was the principal of thy blessings, their
preferments: I pray thee then (good Father) continue thy Word and Sacraments
unto us of this nation, and our posterities after us, till Jesus come in the
clouds to judgment.

To this end Lord give us that we may walk in the light, while the light thus
clearly shines unto us, Revel. 2.5.
lest for our contempt and profaneness thy candlestick be removed from us:
whatsoever judgment thou will please to afflict thy Church withal, Lord save
us from the famine of thy Word: the famine of bread brings but a bodily death,
but that of thy Word brings perpetual destruction to body and soul.

O Lord also continue good and faithful Pastors and Teachers of thy Flock:
grant a bright shining Lamp to every candlestick, and an able instructor to
every Congregation, that many hereby may be drawn from darkness to light, from
the power of sin and Satan, to the knowledge and salvation of thee, O God,
for thy mercies sake in the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for preparation to Death.
O Lord God most mighty and glorious, seeing I am of a mortal condition, and
the time of my death uncertain, and as I am found in death, so shall I be in
judgment, if in sin impenitent, condemned then for ever; if vigilant in
godliness, then embraced to heavenly salvation: Good Lord grant I may prepare
for this day, and so live here, as I may live with thee in heaven for ever: 1
Cor. 15.56.
Death is a Scorpion, and the sting of this Scorpion is sin: now if the sting
of a scorpion be pulled out, it can do no harm, therefore give me the wisdom
of thy Spirit, that I may pull out the sting of death, which is sin, then death
shall not affright me: for as death to the wicked is dismal, and packeth to
hell, so to the godly it is amiable, and passes their souls to heaven: grant
then (dear God) that death may be to me as to all thy Saints and servants,
the gate to life, the end of sinning and sorrowing, and the passage of my poor
soul to life and glory everlasting.

O Lord grant I may ever have death in mine eye, that I may evermore desire it,
abhor it never: that I may never do any one act but that I durst do if I were
now dying, and called to thy strict tribunal to give an account for it in my
person: thus grant me grace to live in thy fear, and dye in thy favor, and
obtain that blessedness spoken of in the Revelations, Revel. 14.13.
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord: thus prepare me for the first death,
and save me from the second, in the merits of the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
A Prayer for a woman in Childbirth.
MY most loving and gracious God, thy power is mighty, and thy goodness
answerable, to them that fear thee: thou art so potent as thou can do more
than ever thou will do, from fear and danger thou can and wilt deliver all
those that put their trust in thy mercy: thus thou sauedst Sydrach from the
fire, Dan. 3.27.
and did divide the Sea to save the house of Jacob from the host of Pharaoh:
Exodus 14.28.
Lord I beseech thee, save me from my present danger of Childbearing, and
bring me safely through my present straight and misery: thou (O Lord) that
can make hard things easy, show now thy might and mercy upon me: Matthew.
19.26.
that which is impossible with man, is easy with thee to be accomplished.

I confess (O my God) that the woman was first in the transgression, and
therefore this was her judgment, that in sorrow should she bring forth, yet
notwithstanding even through childbearing she (being truly humbled for her
sin) shall be saved, 1 Timothy 2.15.
if she continue in faith with holiness.

Give me (O Lord) to rest comfortably upon thee for deliverance: Lord grant I
may cleave unto thee in the extreamitie of my pains: If I perish, Lord, I will
perish in thy bosom: Lord, moderate my torments, remember Lord I am but dust,
unable to bear thy heavy displeasure for my sin: lay no more upon me than
thou will enable me comfortably to bear: thus (good Lord) bless me in my
soul, in my body, in the fruit of my womb, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer after Childbirth.
MY most dear and gracious God, whereas thou have commanded me to call upon
thee in the day of trouble, and upon deliverance to glorify thy Name: O Lord,
according to my bounden duty, from the bottom of my heart, I desire to
magnify thy Name, for that thou have thus graciously preserved me from pain
and peril of Childbirth: let me never (O Lord) forget this thine unspeakable
goodness and mercy, but let it lead me into all obedience: as I live yet by
thee, give me grace to live unto thee, and the praise of thy great Name.

I thank thee also (gracious God) for that thou have made me a joyful mother
of children: good Lord grant I may labor to bring them up in thy holy fear,
that as I am an instrument of their generation, which is sinful and damnable,
so make me an happy instrument of their regeneration, without which neither I
nor they can ever see thy Kingdom, O God.

And good Lord, I pray thee, grant that I may also submit unto my husband in
all due obedience, according to thy will: that I may be a comfort unto him,
living faithfully, lovingly, chastely, and godlily with him, till death us
depart, that so thy blessing may be upon him, my self, my children, and
family, from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Traveler by land.
ALmighty GOD, by whose providence all things are directed, supported and
preserved, I pray thee bless me in mine outgoings, and incommings, make (I
pray thee) this my journey prosperous unto me, keep me from sinning and bad
society, and that by the watch of grace, keep me also from all outward
perils, from peril of thieves, peril by beasts, peril by lightning, Psalm.
91.12.
and from dashing my foot at any time against a stone, and that by the watch of
thy holy and heavenly Angels.

And (good Father) as thou did go with Jacob, and defend him in his long and
perilous voyage to Laban, Cen. 35.3.
and did bring him safely back again: so I pray thee preserve me in this
my journey from all dangers bodily and ghostly, and bring me safe home again
to my friends and family, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for the traveler by Sea.
O Most merciful and gracious heavenly Father, I beseech thee in this my
dangerous voyage by Sea, to prosper and defend me: Lord make it profitable and
aduantageable unto me: to this end I pray thee, direct my course with safety,
and give me favorable and convenient winds: defend me from raging tempests,
that they may not ouerturne me: save me from all dangerous rocks and sands,
that they may not despoile me: keep me safe also from piraticall and
tyrannous enemies, that they may never prevail against me.

To this end Lord give me and my whole company, to be constant and instant in
prayer with thee, to spend our hours in hearing and reading thy holy and
heavenly Word, to fly and shun all evil: and when I come to the haven where I
would be, Lord give me to praise thee for my safe arrival: and save me from
the sins of the place and people whither I go: and let me not be corrupted or
perverted by them, but grant by my good counsel and holy conversation, I may
labor the conversion of them: which mercy if thy Majesty shall vouchsafe to
grant, I shall more rejoice in heart than if I had won the whole world.

And good Lord, I pray thee, give me a safe and timely return with credit,
profit, comfort, that so I tasting of thy mercies in this life, I may not fail
of salvation when I die, and that for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Church.
O Most glorious and merciful Lord God, I pray thee for thy mercies sake
behold from heaven thy Church and people: honor them Lord that honor thee, and
confound them that rise up against thee: great is our present misery, the earth
and world throughout, good Lord save thy servants from the hands of all their
enemies: thy Church is every where despised and despighted, and trodden under
foot of the wicked of the world, O Lord, sleep not, but arise in thy power,
and let all thine and our soes be scattered.

Give (O Lord) thy Gospel a free passage, for the enlargement of thy kingdom,
all the world through, in despite of Turk and Pope, and all malignant enemies
of the same: continue it where it is; where it is not, Lord (of thy goodness)
plant thy heavenly power: though we have failed and grievously offended, yet
correct us thou in thy mercy, and give us not over a prey unto their teeth,
whose tender mercies are cruel: down with Dagon, and set up the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus among the sons of men.

Now (O Lord) thy Church is heavily assaulted, I beseech thee fight out al our
battles, and evermore defend us: let them not say, There, there, so would we
have it; neither let them say, We have devoured them: let them not mock and
vaunt, Where is now their God? they cry maliciously, Down with them, Psalm.
137.7.
down with them even to the ground; but Lord, better than thy Church should be
extinguished, the whole army of Satan to be confounded: If it may be, Lord
convert the enemies of thy Church; if that cannot be, Lord confound them. Thus
(Lord) I pray thee powerfully protect, and graciously direct thy Church on
earth, and make it one day triumphant in heaven, for Jesus sake alone, in whom
thou art well pleased.

Amen.
A Prayer for the conversion of the Jew.
MOst gracious and blessed heavenly Father, there was a time wherein thou in
thy mercy did vouchsafe thy Law to Israel, all other nations of the world
deprived of the same: and now is the time wherein they for their contempt of
thy Son Jesus Christ are deprived of thy Gospel, and the Gentiles of the
world enlightened with the same: and there will come a time wherein Jew and
Gentile shall be of one fold and faith, and that is, when the time of the
Gentiles be fulfilled.

O Lord, pity the fall of thy first chosen, and let not thine anger be ever
against them: turn again (O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) and visit them
with thy salvation, that are now scattered, and a despised people over the face
of the whole earth: O Lord convert them, and bring them to the faith of the
Lord Jesus: dispell the mist of ignorance from their eyes, and let not such
multitudes go to perdition: for Abraham thy servants sake, look upon the
desolate progeny.

And seeing contempt and unbelief cast them off, Romans 11.2.
Lord give us to believe and obey thy truth, left we also be cast out and
expelled: if thou sparedst not the natural Olive, how will thou spare the
wild branch?

Lord grant that Jew and Gentile may all the world through oyne in one faith and
truth to thy glory and the salvation of innumerable souls in the LORD JESUS.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer for a family.
O Lord our GOD most mighty, glorious, and in mercy abundantly gracious, we
thy servants desire this morning and evermore to bless thy holy and heavenly
Name, for all thy blessed mercies first and last afforded us in the Lord Jesus:
In particular, we bless thee for thy safe protection and providence over us
this last night past, in keeping us alive of thy goodness and mercy to this
hour, and day: O Lord, as we live by thee, give us all thy grace to live unto
thee, and to the praise of thy blessed Name.

And we entreat thy Majesty to bless us this day, and evermore to come: Lord
save us from bodily perils, and that by the watch of thy good Angels: save us
especially (O Lord) from sinning against thee, and that by the Power and
residence of grace in our souls: thus bless us in body and soul in this
life, that so we may have the surer hope of everlasting salvation in the life
to come.

And (good Father) grant that we may labor and strive against all corruption
and sin, but most especially against those evils that have most defiled our
souls, let us fly all occasions of them, and use all holy helps against them,
and in the might and strength of thine all -- sufficient grace, vouchsafe us
daily victory over them: O that we could say with thy feruant Paul, I thank
my God, 1 Cor. 15.
concerning sin I die daily.

And (good Lord) so bless us with thy grace, that we may cheerfully and
constantly go on in the performance of all such duties as thou have appointed
for us to walk in: grant that the concupiscence of the eye, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
the concupiscence of the flesh, the pride of life may never corrupt and defile
us, but let evermore our conuersations be holy and heavenly: keep us also from
idleness, grant we may be always sound exercised in the duties of our
calling, either general or particular: that when our Lord and Master comes
(being found thus vigilant) we may enter with him into the joy of the Lord.

Thus (gracious God) give us to walk in holiness and vprightnes before thee,
that so we may both save our own souls, and those that are about us, for
Jesus Christ his sake, thy Son our Savior.

Amen.
An Evening Prayer for a Family.
MOST dear and gracious Lord God, we thy humble servants most earnestly
desire thy mercy and compassion upon us, in pardoning all our sins, original,
actual, and in giving us grace for the prevention of them in time to come: and
so sanctify every of us, that all our ends may be peace.

O Lord, to this end give us (we pray thee) to be broken in heart for breaking
thy commandments, and smite our sinful souls for offending thee, that so we
may come within compass of healing and refreshing: for none but the laden can
be eased, and the wearied only shall be refreshed.

And (good Father) seeing thou have promised salvation to the humble, grant
that by faith we may comfortably rest upon thy promise for mercy and
forgiveness, and also by power of the same faith, live unto the praise of thee
(our Redeemer) for evermore.

Vouchsafe (O Lord) unto us all those blessed graces of thy blessed Spirit,
only proper to thine elect and chosen, as knowledge, virtue, faith, patience,
temperance, godliness, brotherly kindness, love: if these things be in us and
abound, we shall never fall into the ditch of hell.

Lord turn out sin and Satan, for we confess that we are out of measure
sinful: sinful by thought, sinful by word, sinful by work, Lord be
merciful unto us thus miserable sinners: and (good Lord) let thine holy Spirit
make his residence in us, that in this new righteousness we shall labor and
learn to do, in that we may save all our poor souls everlastingly alive.

O Lord, bless with us thy Church universal, Lord save it from overthrow, and
deliver it from the present calamity: more especially we beseech thy mercies
upon this nation whereof we are members: this sinful nation laden with
transgression, iniquity, sin; Lord heal the sores of it, pardon the sins
of it, give it the repentance of Nineue, from the Kings person, to the beggar
amongst us, that so thy judgments may be diuerted from us.

Lord herein (we pray thee) bless the principal Member over us, CHARLES by
thy good providence, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, give him a
long and lasting life on earth, and an everlasting in heaven: bless our most
noble and gracious Queen: the Prince and Princess Palatine, and their
Princely Issue: bless all the true hearted Nobility, all the reverend Clergy,
the civil Magistracy, Gentry, Commonalty, all Schools of learning, the two
Universities, all afflicted persons, bodily or soulely tormented: O Lord,
deliver Israel from all their sins and sorrows.

And good LORD, bless all that are dear and near in nature unto us, as
father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, child; LORD give us all thy
grace in this life, thy salvation for ever in heaven.

And for our selves again, we beseech thee this night to bless us, in body,
in soul; in basket and store, within doors, without: Lord save us from
thieves, from winds, from fire, from all dangers, and give us a sweet rest and
comfortable sleep: and for our souls, save them (good Lord) from sinful
lusts and Satan's assaults: that so we being preserved from sin and danger in
this life, we may not fail of thy merciful salvation in the end, and that for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
FINIS.

