GREENES Never too late. Or, A Powder of Experience: Sent to all youthful
Gentlemen; to root out the infectious follies, that ouer-reaching conceits
foster in the spring time of their youth. Decyphering in a true English
history, those particular vanities, that with their frostie vapors nip the
blossoms of every ripe brain, from atteining to his intended perfection. As
pleasant, as profitable, being a right pumice stone, apt to race out idleness
with delight, and folly with admonition.

Rob. Green in artibus Magister.

Omne tulit punctum.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin for N.L. and John Busbie. 1590.

To the right Worshipful, Thomas Burnaby Esquire, Robert Green wishes
increase of al honorable virtues.
SVch (right Worshipful) as coueted to deck the Temple of Delphos, adorned
the shrine either with green bays, or curious instruments, because Apollo did
as well patronize Music as Poetry. When the Troyans sought to pacify the
wrath of Pallas: the peoples presents were books and lances, to signify her
deity, as well defended by letters as arms. And they which desired to be in
the favor of Alexander, brought him either wise Philosophers or hardy
Soldiers; for he sought counselors like Aristotle, and captains like
Perdycas. Seeing then how gifts are the more gratefully accepted, by how much
the more they fit the hum^r of the party to whom they are presented: desirous
a long time to gratifi^ your Worship with something that might signify, how in all bounden duty. I have for sundry favors bin affected to your Worship, and
finding my ability to be unfit to present you with any thing of worth; at last
I resolved so far to presume as to trouble your Worship with the patronage of
this Pamph^^t, knowing you are such a Maecenas of learning that you will as
soon vouch with Augustus a f^w verses, given by a poor Greek as of the
Arabian Courser, presented by Tytinius. The Book is little, yet drawn from a
large principle, Nunquam (...) est ad bonos mores via: wherein I have discouer^^
so artificially the fraudulent effects of Venus trumperies, and so plainly as
in a platform, laid open the prejudicial pleasures of love, that Gentlemen
may see, that as the Diamond is beauteous to the sight, and yet deadly poison
to the stomach, that as the Ba^an leaf contains both the Antidote, and the
Aconiton, so love (unless only grounded upon virtue) breeds more
disparagement to the credit than content to the fancy. If then (right
Worshipful) out of this confused Chaos Gentlemen shall gather any principles,
whereby to direct their actions, and that from rash and resolute mainteners of
Venus heresies they become reformed champions to defend Vestaes philosophies.
Then all the profit and pleasure that shall redound to them by this Pamphlet
shall be attribu^ed to your Worship, as to the man, by whose means th^s
Nunquam sera came to light. Hoping therefore your Worship will with a favorable
insight enter more into the mind of the giver than the worth of the gift, I
commit your Worship unto the Almighty.

Your Worships humbly to command, Rob. Green.

To the Gentlem^^ Readers.
SVch Gentlemen as had their ^ares filld with the harmony of Orpheus harp,
could not abide the arsh music of Hiparchions pipe; yet the Thessalians would
allow the poor fiddler license to frolic it among shepherds. Though no
pictures could go for current with Alexander, b^t such as past through Apelles
pensill, yet poor men had their houses shadowed with Phidias course colors.
Ennius was called a Poet as well as Virgil, and Vulcan with his po^t foot
friskt with Venus as well as Mars. Gentlemen, if I presume to present you as
hethertoo I have done with frivolous toys; yet for that I stretch my strings
as hie as I can; if you praise me not with Orpheus, hiss me not out with
Hiparchion: if I I paint not with Apelles, yet scrape not out my shadows with
disgrace; if I stir my stumpes with Vulcan, though it be lamely done, yet
think it is a dance: so if my Nunquam sera est please not; yet I pray you
pass it over with patience, and say it is a book. So hoping I shall find you
as ever I have done, I end.

Robert Green.

A Madrigale to wanton Lovers.
YOu that by Alcidalions silver brooks
Sit and sigh out the passions of your loves,
That on your Goddess beauties feed your looks,
And pamper up sweet Venus wanton Doves,
That seek to sit by Cupids scorching fire,
And dally in the fountains of desire.
You that account no heaven like Venus sphere,
That think each dimple in your Mistress chin
Earths paradise, that deem her golden hair
Tresses of bliss wherein to wander in:
That sigh and court suppliant all to prove,
Cupid is God, and there is no heaven but Love.
Come see the work that Green has s^ilie wrought,
Take but his Nunquam sera in your view,
As in a myrrour there is deeply taught
The wanton vices of proud fancies crew,
There is depainted by most curious art,
How love and folly iumpe in every part.
There may you see repentance all in black,
Scourging the forward passions of fond youth,
How fad^ng pleasures end in dismal wrack,
How lovers joys are tempred all with ruth,
Since then his Nunquam sera yeeldes such gains,
Read it, and thank the Author for his pains.
Ralph Sidley.
(...).
IF Horace satyrs merit mickle praise,
For taunting such as lived in Paphos I Will,
If wise Propertius was in elder days
Laureat for figuring out fond Venus wile:
If Rome applauded Ouids pleasing verse,
That did the salues that medcine love rehearse.
Then English Gentles stoop and gather bays,
Make coronets of Floraes proudest flowers,
As gifts for Green for he must have the praise,
And taste the deawes that high Parna^sus showers,
As having leapt beyond old Horace strain,
In taunting lovers for their fruitless pain.
His Nunquam sera more conceits combines,
Than wanton Ovid in his art did paint,
And sharper satyrs are within his lines,
Than Martial s^ong proud Venus to attaint,
Read then his art, and all his actions prove,
There is no folly like to foolish love.
Richard Hake, Gent.
GREENES Nunquam sera est.
BEing resident in Bergamo, not far distant from Venice, sitting under a
cool shade that the^ shrouded me from the extreme violence of the meridionall
heat, having never a book in my hand to beguyle time, nor no patheticall
impression in my head to procure any secret meditation, I had flat fallen into
a slumber, if I had not espied a traveler weary and desolate, to have bended
his steps toward me. Desirous to shake off drowsinesse with some company I
attended his arrival; but as he drew ne^re, he s^emed so quaint in his
attire, and so conceited in his countenance, as I deemed the man either some
penitent pilgrim that was very religious, or some despayring lover that had
bin too too affectionate: For thus take his description.

An Ode.
Down the valley began he tracke,
Bag and bottle at his back,
In a surcoate all of gray,
Such wear Palmers on the way,
When with scrip and staff they see
Jesus grave on Caluarie,
A hat of straw like a swain
Shealter for the son and rain,
With a scollop shell before:
Sandalls on his feet he wore,
Legs were bare, arms vnclad,
Such attire this Palmer had.
His face fair like Titans shine^
Gray and b^^some were his eyne,
Whereout dropped pearls of sorrow:
Such sweet tears Love does borrow,
When in outward d^awes she plains
Hearts distress that Lovers paines^
Rubie lips, cherrie cheeks,
Such rare mixture Venus seeks,
When to keep her damsels quiet
Beauty sets them down their diet:
Adon' was not thought more ^aire.
Curled locks of amber hair:
Locks where Love did sit and twine
Nets to snare the gazers eyne:
Such a Palmer nere was seen,
Less love himsel^e had Palmer been.
Yet for all he was so quaint
Sorrow did his visage taint.
Midst the riches of his face,
Grief decyphred hi^ disgrace:
Every step stra^^d a ^eare,
Sudden sighs showed his fear:
And yet his fear by his sight,
Ended in a str^nge delight.
That his passions did approve,
We^des and sorrow were for love.
Thus attired in his traveling roabes and leueld out in the lineaments of his
Phis^^mie, not seeing me that lay close in the thicketh h^^ ^ate him down
under a Beech tree, where after he had taken up his seat with a sigh he began
thus to point out his passions.

Unfortunate Palmer, whose weeds discouers thy woes, whose looks thy
sorrows, whose sighs thy repentance: tho^ wandrest to beway^e thy sin, that
hereto^ fore have not wondered at the greatness of sin; and seek now by
the sight of a strange Land, to satisfy those sol^^es committed in thy Native
home. Why, is there more grace in the East than in the West^^ is God more
gracious in ^ewrie, than merciful in England? more favorable to Palmers for
their travel, than pi^ifull to sinner^ for their penance? No, be not so
superstitious, least thou measuring his favor by circumstaunce, he punish thy
faults in severity. Ah, but the deepest ulcers have the sharpest corasiues,
some sores can not be cured but by Subl^matum, and some offenses as they
begin in content so they end in sack^loth: I wear not this Palmers gray to
challenge grace, nor seek the holy Land to counteruaile the Law, nor am a
Pilgrim to acquittance sin with penance: but I content me in this habit
to show the meeknes of my heart, and travel through many countries to make
other men lear^e to beware by my harms: for if I come amongst youth, I will
show them that the finest buds are soonest ^^p^ with frosts, the sweetest
flowers sores^ eaten with canckars, and the ripest and yong^st ^its soonest
ouergrowen with follies: if I chance among Courtiers, I will tell the^, that as
the star Artophilex is brightest, yet sets soonest; so their glo^^es b^ing
most gorgeous, are dash^ with sodainest overthrows: if among schol^ers, I will
prove that their Philosophical axioms, their quiddities of Logic, their
aphorisms of art, are dissolved with this definit peri^d Omma sub sole vanitas^
If amongst Lovers, and with this the tears fell from his eyes, and the sighs
flew from his heart, as if all should split again: If quoth he, (and he doubled
his words with an Emphasis) I fall amongst Lovers, I will de^ypher to them that
their God is a boy, as fond as he is blind; their Goddess a woman,
inconstant^ false, flattring, like the winds that rise in the shoares of
Lepanthus, which in the morning send forth gusts from the North, and in the
Evening calmes from the West^ that their fancies are like April showers, begun
with a Sun shine, and ended in a storm; their passions deep hels, their
pleasures Chimeraes portraitures, sudden joys that appearing like Juno, are
nothing when Ixion touches them but duskie and fading clouds. Here he
stopped, and took his scrip from his back, and his bottle from his side, and
with such cates as he had, as limons, apricocks and olives, he began a palmers
banquet, which digesting with a cup of wine well te^pred with water, after
every draught he sighed out this Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via. When he
had taken his repast, casting up his eyes to heaven, as being thankful for
his benefits and sorrowful for his sins, falling into a deep meditation,
after he had a while lien as a man in a Trance, he started up suddenly, and
with a half cheered countenance song out this Ode.

The Palmers Ode.
Old Menalcas on a day,
As in field this shepherd lay^
Tuning of his o^en pipe,
Which he hit with many a stripe;
Said to Coridon that he
Once was young and full of glee,
Blithe and wanton was I then:
Such desires follow men.
As I lay and kept my sheep,
Came the God that hates sleep,
Clad in armor all of fire,
Hand in hand with Queen Desire:
And with a dart that wounded nie,
Pearst my heart as I did lie:
That when I wooke I began swear,
Phillis beauty palm did bear.
Up I start, forth went I,
With her face to feed mine eye:
There I saw Desire sit,
That my heart with Love had hit,
Laying forth bright Beauties hooks
To entrap my gazing looks.
Love I did and began ^o woe,
Pray and sigh, all would not do:
Women when they take the toy
Covet to be counted coy.
Coy she was, and I began court,
She thought Love was but a sport.
Profound Hell was in my thought,
Such a pain Desire had wrought,
That I sued with sighs and tears,
Still ingrate she stopped her ears,
Till my youth I had spent.
Last a passion of Repent,
Told me flat that Desire,
Was a br^nd of Loves fire,
Which consumes men in thrall,
Virtue, youth, wit, and all.
At this saw back I start,
Bet Desire from my heart,
Shook of Love and made an ^th,
To be enemy to both.
Old I was when thus I fled,
Such fond ^oyes as cloyde my hea^.
But this I learnd at Virtues ga^e,
The way to good is never late.
Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via.
As soon as he had ended his Ode, he fell to his old principle Nunquam sera
est: and confirming it with a sigh, he rose up, and was ready to depart toward
Bergamo to take up his lodging, for the s^nne was declining toward the West.

But I desirous to search further into this passionate Palmer, crossed him the
way with this salutation: Palm^r (for so thy appar^ll discouers) and penitent,
if thy inward heart agree with thy outward passions; if my ques^ions may not
aggrauate thy grief, nor my demand be tedious to thy travels, let me crave of
courtesy whither thou do bend the end of thy pilgrimage, that if thou be
stepped awry, I may dir^ct thee, or if thou know the country, I may wish
boon fortune to thy iou^ney; for I have all my life time coueted to be
faithful to my friends and courteous to strangers. The Palmer amazed at my
sudden salutation stepped back and be^^ his bro^es, as if he feared some
prejudice, or were offended at my presence; but when h^e saw me weaponlesse,
and without company, and yet so affable in words and debonaire in exterior
curtesi^s as might importe a Gentleman, he devoutly moved his bonnet of gray,
and m^de this reply.

Gentleman (for no less you seem) if the flower may be known by smell, or the
man by his words. I am a Palmer, discovered by my gray, and a penitent, if you
note my grief, which sorrow is as effectual as my attire is little
counterfeite, the direction of my journey is not to Jerusalem: for my faith
tells me, Christ can d^aw as great favor down in England as in Jericho: and
prayers are not heard for the place, but in the b^h^lfe of the person heartily
repentant. My native home is England, the end of my journey is Venice, where I
mean to visit an old f^iend of mine, an Eng^ishman, to whom I have been
long time indebted, and now mean partly to repay with such store as I have
bought with hard expe^ience. This night I will r^st in the next vill^ge, and
thus I hope sir you rest sa^^sfied.

This auswere of the Palmer made me the more desirous to enquire into his
state, that I intreted him I might be host to such a guest: and seeing I was
resident in Bergamo, where that night he mean^ to harbor, such lodging as a
country Gentleman could afford, and such che^re as such a village might on the
sudden yield, should be at his command.

Well could this Palmer skill of courtesy, and returning me many thanks,
voucht of my proffer, and was willing to take my house for his Inn. As we
past on the way, we chanced to fall into prattle thus. Sir (quoth I) if I
might wi^h many questions not be offensive, I would feign be inquisitiue to
know, as you have passed along France, Germany, the Rine, and part of Italy,
what you have noted worthy of memory. Moving his cappe as a man that was
passing courteous, he answered thus: I tell you sir (quo^h he) as a foolish
ques^ion merits silence, so a familiar demand craves a friendly reply of
duty, although Zeno the philosopher counted it more honor to be a silent
naturall^st, than an eloquent Orator. But as I am not a Gymnosophist to iangle
at every Sophistical Objection, so I am not a severe Stoicke to answer but by
Syllables, and therefore thus to your question.

After I had cut from Dover to Calice, I rem^mbred what old Homer writ of
Ulysses, that he coueted, not only to see strange Countries, but with a deep
insight to have a view into the manners of men: so I thought as I passed
thorough Paris, not only to please mine eye, which the curious Architecture
of the building, but wi^h the diverse disposition of the inhabita^tes. I f^unde
therefore the Court (for I aim first at the fairest) to have a King fit for so
royal a Regiment, if he had ^eene as perfect in true Religion, as pollitique
in Martial Discipline, the Cour^^ers, they as Aris^ippus faw^de upon
Dyonisius, turning like to the Cameleon into the likeness of every Object
that the King proff^red to their humorous conceits, for if the king smiled
every one in the Court was in his iollitie, if he frownd, their plumes fell
like the peacocks feathers, so that their outward presence depend^d on his
inward passions. Generally so, but particularly thus; the French Gentlemen are
amorous, as soon persuaded by the beauty of their mistress, to make a braule,
as for the maintenance of religion, to enter ^rmes; their eyes are like
Salamander stones, that fire at the sight of every flame; their hearts as
queasie as the mineralls of Aetna that burn at the heat of the sun, and are
quenched with the puff of every wind. They count it Courtlike to spend their
youth in courting of Ladies, and their age in repen^ing of sins, yet more
forward in the one, than devout in the other. They bandy glaunces upon every
face, and as though they would approve every passion for a principle, they set
down the p^riod with a deep sigh: yet, as the breath of a man upon st^^le no
sooner lights on but it leapeth off, is the beginning and ending of their
loves. Thus much for th^i^ amour^. Now for their a^ms, they be hardy soldiers
and r^s^l^^e. For their faith, friendship, religion, or other par^icular
qualities, for there is a league betwixt us and them: I will spare to speak,
least in b^ing Satyricall, I should plod too far with Diogenes, or in
flattering their faults or their follies, I should claw a fools shoulder with
Dauus in Terence, skipping therefore from them to the Germans. Nay stay sir
(quoth I) before you pass the Alps, give me leave to hold you an hour still
in Lions: for though you be a Palmer and religious, yet I hope such deep
devotion rested not in you, but an ounce of Venus favors hung in your eyes,
and when you had sp^nt the morning in orisons, you could in the afternoon lend
a glaunce to a fair Lady. The egle soars not so hie in the air, but ^e can
spy a little fish in the sea, the sun in Cancer goes retrograde, the coldest
clime has his summer, and Apollo was neu^r so stoicall, but sem^l in anno he
could let fall a smile; and the most severe p^lgrime or palmer has an eye well
(...) a heart, and a look to lend to beauty as a thought to bend to Theology.
Therefore I pray you what think you of the French women: at this question
although his gravity was great, yet with a pleasant countenance he made this
reply: although fire is hot as well in the coldest region of the North, as in
the furthest Southern parallel, the grass of the same color in Egypt as it
is in Iewry, and women wheresoever they be br^d be mala necessaria, yet though
their general essence be all one as coming from Eua, and therefore froward,
inconstant, light, amorous, d^c^itfull^ and quid non, better desciphered by
Mantuan than I can make description of: yet as the Diamonds in India be more
hard than the Cornish s^on^s in England, as the margarites of the west are
more orient than the pearls of the Sou^h, so women's affections are ^ffected
after the disposition of the clime wh^rein they are borne although Auycen in
his Aphorisms settes down this conclusion, that thorns no where grow
without pricks, nor nettles without stings; but leaving off these preambles,
thus to your qu^stion. The women in France generally as concerning the
exterior ^iniam^nts of their outward perfection, are beautiful, as being
westernly seated near great Britain where nature si^s and hatcheth beauteous
paramours: yet although nature naturans has showed her cunning in their
purtraiturs, as women that think nothing perfect that Art has not pollished,
they have drugges of Alexandria, mineralls of Egypt, waters from Tharsu^,
paintings from Spain: and what to do forsooth? To make them more beautiful
than v^rtuous, and more pleasing in the eyes of men than delitefull in the
sight of God, this is but their ext^rior vanity that blemisheth their inward
virtues, if they have any, but more to their interior inclination. Some, as if
they were votaries unto Venus, and at their natiuities had no other influence,
take no pleasure but in amorous passions no delight but in madrigales of love,
wetting Cupids winge^ with rosewater, and tricking up his quiver with sweet
perfumes, they set out their faces as Foulers do their daring glasses, that
the Larks that soar highest may stoop soonest, and as soon as the poor
loving fo^les are wrapped within their nets, then they sue with sighs, and
plead with Sonnets, feign tears, and paint out passions to win her, that
seeming to be coy, comes at the first lure: for when they see young nouices
intrapt, then the French dames are like to the people Hyperborei that spurning
liquorice with their feet, secretly slake their hunger with the juice thereof;
so they outwardly seming to contemn their suitors motions, stand in deadly
fear, least they should leave off their amorous passions: so that they have
love in their eie-lids, so sle^derly tacked on by fancy, as it drops off with
every dream, and is shakte off with every vain slumber. Some of the^ are as
Sapho was, subtle to allure, and slippery to deceive, having their hearts made
of wax ready to receive every impression, not content till they have as many
lovers as their hearts have entrance for love, and those are like to pumice
stones that are light and full of holes. Some are as inconstant as Cressyda,
that be Troilus never so true, yet, out of sight out of mind: and as soon as
Diomede begins to court, she like Venetian traffic is for his penny, current
a currendo, sterling coin passable from man to man in way of exchange. Others
are as Lidia, cruel, whose hearts are hammered in the forge of pride, thinking
themselves too good for all, and none worthy of them, and yet often times
nestling all day in the sun with the beetle, are at night contented with a
cowsherd for shelter. These have eyes of Basiliskes, that are prejudicial to
every object, and hearts of Adamant not any way to be pierced: and yet I
think, not dying maids, nor leading Apes in hell: for Vestaes sacrifice ceased
long since in Rome, and Uirgins are as rare as black swannes, opportunity is
^ sore plea in Venus Court, able, I tell you, to overthrow the coyest she that
is: I could infer more particular instances, and distinguish more at large of
the French Gentlewomen: but let me leave them to their humorous vanities, and
resolve ^ur selves, that Ireland does not only bring forth wolves, nor Egypt
Crocodiles, nor Barbaris Leopards, nor France such qualified women, but as the
earth yeeldes weeds as well in the lowest valleys, as in the highest mountains,
so women are universally mala necessaria, wheresoever they be ^yther bred or
brought up. With this conclusiue period he breathed him: and I could not but
smile to see the palmer shake his head at the fondness of women, as a man that
had bin galled with their ingratitude. Well, after he had pawsed a little, he
left France, and began to talk of Germany, and that was thus: After I had left
Lions, I passed up the Alp^^, and coasted into Germany, where, as I found the
Country seated under a cold clime, so I perceived the people high-minded and
fuller of words than of courtesy, given more to drink than to devotion: and
yet sundry places stuffed with schisms and heresies, as people that delight to
be factious: there might you see their interior vanities more than their
outward apparel did importe, and often times their vaunts more than their
manhood: for love, as I saw Venus of no great account, yet she had there a
temple, and though they did not beautify it with jewels, they plainly powered
forth such Orizons as did bewray, though they could not court it as the French
did with art, yet their Just was no less, nor their lives more honest. Because
the people were little affable, I grew not so far inquisitiue into their
manners and customs, but sicco pede past them over, so that I traveled up as
far as Vienna, where I saw a thing worthy of memory. In a Ualley between
two high mountains topt with trees of marvelous verdure, whereby ran a
fountain pleasant as well for the murmr of the streams, as for the
sweetness of waters, there was situated a little lodge artificialy built, and
at the door, a man of v^rie great gravity and no less age, sa^e leaning upon
his staff, so to take the benefit of the air and the sun, his hairs were
as white as the threeds of silk in Arabia, or as the Palm trees on the mount
Libanus; many years had made fur^ows in his face, where experience sace and
seemed to tell forth oracles: devotion apeared in his habit, and his outward
cloth discovered his inward heart, that the old Hermit seemed in the world a
resolute despiser of the world: standing a while and wondering at this old man,
at last al reverence done that his years did require, or my youth was bound
unto, after salutatio^s I questioned him of the order of his life, who answered
me with such courtesy and humility as I perceived in his words the perfect Idea
of a mortified man: after sundry questions broken with pro and contra, at last
he took me by the hand and carried me into his cell, where I found not those
Vtensilia which Tully says are necessary to be in every cottage, but I found
books and that of Theology, a drinking cup, and that was full of water: a d^ad
man's scul, an hour glass, and a Bible, thus only was his house garnished.
After he had sat down a little, he looked me very earne^^ly in the face, as a
man that had some skill in phis^ognomy, to censure of the inward qualities by
the outward appeara^ce, at last in ^ough hie Dutch verses he thus breached out
his opinion, which I drew thus into blancke verse.

The Hermites first exordium.
Here look my son for no vainegloriou^ shows
Of royal apparition for the eye,
Humble and m^eke befitteth men of years,
Behold my cell built in a silent shade,
Holding content for poverty and peace,
And in my lodge is fealty and faith,
Labor and love united in one league.
I want not, for my mind affords wealth^
I know not envy, for I climb not hie:
Thus do I live, and thus I mean to die.
Then he stepped to his shelfe, and takes down a deaths head, whereon looking
as a man that meditated upon some deep matter, he shook his head, and the
tears standing in his ^yes, he prosecuted his matter thus.

If that the world presents illusions,
Or Satan seeks to puff me up with pomp,
As man is frail and apt to follow pride:
Then see my son where I have in my cell,
A dead man's scull which calls this straight to mind
That as this is, so must my ending be.
When then I see that earth to earth must pass,
I sigh, and say, all flesh is like to grass.
After he had thus explained the reason why he kept the dead man's scull in his
Cell, he reached to his hour glass, and upon that he began thus to descant.

If care to live, or sweet delight in life,
As man desires to see out many days,
Draws me to listen to the flattering world:
Then see my glass which swiftly out does run,
Comparde to man, who dies ere he begins.
This tells me, time slackes not his poasting course,
But as the glass runs out with every hour,
Some in their youth, some in their weakest age,
All sure to die, but no man knows his time.
By this I think, how vain a thing is man,
Whose longest life is likened to a spar.
Lastly, he took his Bible in his hand, whereupon leaving his arm he
amplified thus.

When Sat^an seeks to si^t me with his wiles,
Or proudly dares to give a fierce assault,
To make a shipwreck of my faith with fears:
Then armde at all points to withstand the foe
With holy armor: here is the martial sword:
This book, this bible, this two edged blade,
Whose sweet content pierces the gates of hell:
Decyphring laws and discipline of war,
To overthrow the strength of Satan's iarr^.
Thus the Hermit discovered to me the secrets of his Cell: and after, that I
should be privy to all his Patheticall conceits, he brought forth a few
roots, and such s^mple diet as he had, to confirm that he tied Nature every
way within hit limits: wondering at the method he used in his Cell, after I
had taken my repast with him, as we met courteously, we parted friendly; he
with exhortations to beware of youths follies; I with thanks and reverence to
his age^ years, for his grave and fatherly persuasion: so I went from his Cell
to Vienna, and from thence coasted up into the borders of Italy.

The Palmer had scarce named Italy, but we were come to my house, where I gave
him such intertainment, as either the ability of my substance, the plenty of
the Country, or the shortness of the time could afford: and because I would
every wa^ grace him, I brought down my wife to give him a royal welcome; a
favor seldom showed in Italy: yet because he was a Palmer and his profession
valued beauty at a light price, I did him that grace. To be short, at last we
sat down to supper, and there past the time with such pleasing chatt, as the
pleasant Palmer p^eased to confer upon. Supper done, I des^red the Palmer to
discourse (if it were not offensive) what reason moved him to direct his
Pilgrimage only to Venice? Raising himself up with a smiling countenance he
made this reply.

Courteous Gentleman, for so much your affable and liberal disposition does
a^prooue. Jupiter when he was interteined by poor Baucis, accounted
ingratitude so heinous, as he turnde their cottage to a Temple, and made them
Sacrificers at his Altars: Hospitality is so precious, as no price may value.
Then, if I should not grant any lawful demand, I might seem as little
pliant to humanity, as you liable to courtesy: and therefore if the
Ge^tlewoman your wife and you will sit up to hear the discourses of a
traveler, I will first rehearse you an English History acted and euented in
my Country of England: but for that the Gentleman is yet living I will shadow
his name, although I manifest his follies; and when I have made relation I will
show why I directed the course of my Pilgrimage only to Venice. My Wife by his
countenance seemed to be merueilous content, and my self kept silence:
Whereupon the Palmer began as follows.

The Palmers Tale.
IN those days when Palmer^^ reigned King of great Britain, famoused for his
deeds of Chivalry, there dwelled in the City of Caerbranck; a Gentleman of
an ancient house, called Francesco a man whose parentage though it were
worshipful, yet it was not endued with much wealth: in so much that his
learning was better than his revenues, and his wit more beneficial than his
substance. This Signor Francesco desirous to bend the course of his compass to
some peaceable Port, spread no more cloth in the wind than might make easy
sail, least hoys^ing up too hastily above the maine yeard, some sodain^ gust
might make him founder in the deep. Though he were young yet he was not rash
with Icarus to soar into the sky, but to cry out with old Dedalus, Medium
tenere tutissimum: treading his shoe without any slip. He was so generally
loved of the Citizens, that the richest Merchant or grauest Burghmaster would
not refuse to grant him his daughter in marriage, hoping more of his ensuing
fortunes, than of his present substance. At last, casting his eye on a
Gentleman's daughter that dwelt not far from Caerbranck, he fell in love, and
prosecuted his suit with such affable courtesy, as the maid considering the
virtue and wit of the man, was content to set up her rest with him, so that her
fathers consent might be at the knitting up of the match. Francesco thinking
himself co^ksure, as a man that hoped his credit in the City might carry
away more than a country Gentleman's daughter, finding her father on a day at
fit opportuni^ie, he made the motion about the grant of his daughters marriage.
The old churl that listened with both ears to such a question, did not in
this in vtramuis aurem dormire: but leaning on his elbow, made present
answer, that her dowry required a greater feoffinent than his lands were
able to afford. And upon that, without farther debating of the matter, he rose
up, and hied him home, whether as soon as he came, he called his daughter
before him, whose name was Isabel, to whom he uttered these words; Why Huswife
quoth he, are you so idle tasked, that you stand upon thorns while you have a
husband? are you no sooner hatched with the Lapwing, but you will run away
with the shell on your head? Soon pricks the tree that will prove a thorn,
and a Girl that loves too soon, will repent too late. What a husband? Why the
Maids in Rome durst not look at Venus temple till they were thirty, nor went
they unmasked till they were married; that neither their beauties might allure
other, nor they glaunce their eyes on every wanton. I tell thee fond Girl,
when Nilus ouerfloweth before his time, Aegipt is plagued with a dearth: the
trees that blossom in February, are nipped with the frosts in May; untimely
fruits had never good fortune, and young Gentlewomen that are wooed and won ere
they be wise, sorrow and repent before they be old. What see thou in
Francesco, that thine eye must choose, and thy heart must fancy? Is he
beautiful? Why fond Girl, what the eye likes at morn, it hates at night:
Love is like a hauyn, but a blaze; and Beauty, why how can I better compare it
than to the gorgeous Cedar, that is only for show and nothing for profit; to
the apples of Tantalus, that are precious in the eye, and dust in the hand; to
the star Artophilex, that is most bright, but fitteth not for any compass;
so young men that stand upon their outward portraiture. I tell thee they are
prejudicial: Demophon was fair, but how dealt he with Phillis? Aeneas was a
brave man but a dissembler: fond girl, all are but little worth, if they be
not welthie. And I pray thee, what substance has Fra^cesco to endue thee with?
Have thou not heard, that want breaks amity, that love begins in gold and
ends in beggerie; that such as marie but to a fair face, tie themselves often
to a foul bargain? And what will thou do with a husband that is not able to
maintain thee? buy forsooth a dram of pleasure with a pound of sorrow, and a
pint of content with a whole tun of prejudicial displeasures? But why do I
cast stones into the air, or breath my words into the wind; when to persuade
a woman from her will is to roll Sisiphus stone; or to hale a headstrong Girl
from love, is to tie the Furies again in fetters. Therefore huswife, to
prevent all misfortunes, I will be your Iay^er. And with that, he carried her
in and shut her up in his own chamber, not giving her leave to depart but when
his key gave her license: yet at last she so cunningly dissembled, that she gat
thus far liberty, not to be close prisoner, but to walk about the house;
yet every night he shut up her clothes, that no nightly fear of her escape
might hinder his broken slumbers.

Where leaving her, let ^s return to Francesco; who to his sorrow heard of
all these hard fortunes: and being pensive was full of many passions, but
almost in despayr^; as a man that durst not come nigh her Fathers door, nor
send any letters whereby to comfort his Mistress, or to lay any plot of her
liberty: for no sooner any stranger came thither, but he suspitio^s they
came from Francesco, first sent up his Daughter into her chamber; then as
watchful as Argus with all his eyes, he pried into every particular gesture
and behauiou^ of the party: and if any ielous humor took him in the head,
he would not only be very inquisitiue with cutting questions, but would
strain courtesies and search them very narrowly, whether they had ^^ie letters
or no to his Daughter Isabel.

This narrow inquisitio^ made the poor Gentleman almost frantic, that he
turned over Anacreon, Ovid de Ar^^ amend^, and all books that might teach him
any sleights of love: but for all their principles, his own wit served him for
the best shift, and that was happily begun and fortunately ended thus; It
chanced that as he walked thus in his muses, fetching the compass of his
conceit beyond the Moon, he met with a poor woman that from door to door
sought her living by charity. The woman as her custom^ was, began her exordium
with I pray good Master, and so forth, hoping to find the Gentleman as
liberal, as he was full of gracious favors: neither did she miss of her
imag^nation; for he that thought her like^y to be drawn on to the executing of
his purpose, conceipted this, that gold was as good as glue to knit her to
any practice whatsoever, and therefore out with his purse, and clapped her in the
hand with a French crown. This unaccustomed reward made made her more frank of
her cur^sies, that every rag reached the Gentleman a reverence with promise of
many prayers for his health. He that harped on another string took the woman
by the hand, and sitting down upon the green grass, discourst unto her from
point to point the beginning and sequel of his loves, and how by no means
(except by her) he could convey any letter. The beggar desirous to do the
Gentleman any pleasure, said she was ready to take any pains that might
redound to his content. Whereupon he replied thus; Then mother, thou shall go
to yonder Abbey which is her fathers house, and when thou come thither use
thy wonted eloquence to entreat for thine alms: if the master of the house be
present, show thy pasport, and seem very passionate: but if he be absent or
out of ye way, then, oh then mother, look about if thou see Diana masking in
the shape of a Uirgin, if thou spi^st Venus, nay one more beautiful than loves
goddess, and I tell thee she is my love fair Isabel, whom thou shall discern
from her other sister, thus: her visage is fair, containing as great
resemblance of virtue as liniaments of beauty, and yet I tell thee she is full
of favor, whether thou respects the outward portraiture or inward perfection:
her eye like the diamond, and so pointed that it pearceth to the quick, yet so
chaste in the motion as therein is seen as in a myrrour courtesy tempred with
a virtuous disdain: her countenance is the very map of modesty, and to give
thee a more near mark, if thou find her in the way, thou shall see her
more liberal to bestow, than thou pitiful to demand, her name is Isabell: to
her from me shall thou carry a letter, foulded up every way like thy pasport,
with a greasy backside, and a great seal. If cunningly and closely thou can
thus convey unto her the tenure of my mind, when thou bring me an answer,
I will give thee a brace of Angels. The poor woman was glad of this proffer,
and thereuppon promised to venture a joint, but she would further him in his
loves: whereupon she followed him to his chamber, and the whiles he writ a
letter to this effect.

Signor Francesco to fair Isabel.
WHen I note fair Isabel the extremity of thy fortunes and measure the
passions of my Love, I find that Venus has made thee constant to requit my
miseries; and that where the greatest onset is given by fortune, there is
strongest defense made by affection: for I heard that thy father suspicious, or
rather ielous of our late united simpathie, does watch like Argos over Io, not
suffering thee to pass beyond the reach of his eye, unless (as he thinks) thou
should ouerreach thy self. His mind is like the Tapers in Ianus Temple,
that set once on fire burn till they consume themselves; his thoghts like
the Sun beams, that search every secret. Thus watching thee he ouerwaketh
himself; and yet I hope profits as little as they which gaze on the flames
of Actna, which vanish out of their sight in smoke.

I have heard them say (fair Isabell) that as the Diamondes are tried by
cutting of Glass, the Topace by byding the force of the Andu^ile, the Sethin
Wood by the hardness, so women's excellence is discovered in their constancy.
Then if the periode of all their v^rtues consist in this, that they take in
love by months, and let it slip by minutes, that as the Tortois^ they creep
pedetentim, and when they come to their rest, will hardly be removed. I hope
thou will confirm in thy loves the very pattern of femenine loyalty, having
no motion in thy thoughts, but fancy, and no affection, but to thy Francisco.
In that I am stopped from thy sight, I am deprived of the chiefest Organ of my
life^ having no sense in my self, perfect, in that I want the view of thy
perfection, ready with sorrow to perish in despair, if resolved of thy
constancy, I did not triumph in hope. Therefore now restes it in thee to
salve all these sores and provide medicines for these dangerous maladies, that
our passions appeased, we may end ou^ harmony in the faithful union of two
hearts. Thou see love has his shifts, and Venus q^iddities are most subtle
sophistry, that he which is touched with beauty, is ever in league with
opportunity: these principles are proved by the messenger, whose state
discouers my restless thoughts, impatient of any longer repulse. I have
therefore sought to ouermatch thy father in policy, ^s he over strains us in
jealousy, and seeing he seeks it, to let him find a knot in a rush; as
therefore I have sent thee the sum of my passions in the form of a pasport,
so return me a reply wrapped in the same paper^ that as we are forced to cover
our deceits in one shift, so here after we may unite our loves in one
Simpathie: Appoint what I shall do to compass a private conference^ Think I
will account of the seas as Leander, of the wars as Troylus, of all dangers as
a man resolved to attempt any peril, or break any prejudice for thy sake.
Say, when, and where I shall meet thee, and so as I be^gunne passionately, I
break off abruptly. Farewell.

Thine in fatal resolution, Seigneur Francisco.


AFter he had written the letter, and dispatched the messenger her mind was so
fixed on the brace of Angels, that she stirred her old stumpes til she came to
the house of Seigneur Fregoso, who at that instant was walked abroad to take
view of his pastures. She no sooner began her method of begging with a
solemn prayer, and a pater noster. But Isabell, whose devotion was ever bent
to pity the poor, came to the door, to see the necessity of the party, who
began to salute her thus. Fair Mistress, whose virtues exceed your
be^^ties, and yet I doubt not but you deem your perfection equiuolent with the
rarest paragons in Britain, as your eye receives the object of my misery, so
let your heart have an insight into my extremities, who once was young^ and
then favored by fortunes, now old and crossed by the destinies, driven when I
am weakest to the wall, and when I am worst forced to hel^e the candle. Seeing
then the faults of my youth has forced the fall of mine age, and I am driven
in the winter of min^ years to abide the brunt of al storms, let the plenty
of your youth p^ty the want of my dec^epite state; and the rather, because my
fortune was once as hie as my fall is now low: for proof, sweet Mistress,
see my pasporte, wherein you shall find many passions and much patience: at
which period, making a cour^esie, her very r^gges seemed to give Isabell
reverence. She hearing the beggar insinuate with such a sensible preamble,
thought the woman had had some good parts in her, and therefore took her
certificate, which as soon as she had opened, and that she perceived it was
Franciscoes hand, she smiled, and yet bewrayed a passion with a blush. So that
stepping from the woman, she went into her ^hamber, where she read it over
with such patheticall impressions as every motion was entangled with a dilemma:
for on the one side, the love of Francisco grounded more on his interior
virtues, than his exterior beauties, gave such fierce assaults to the bulwa^ke
of her affection, as the Fort was ready to be yielded up, but that the fear
of her fathers displeasure armed with the instigations of nature drove her to
meditate thus with her self.

Now Isabell, Love and Fortune has brought thee into a Labyrinth, thy thoughts
are like to Ianus pictures, that present both peace and war, and thy mind
like Venus Anuile, whereon is hammered both Fear and Hope. Since then the
chance lies in thine own choice, do not with Medea see and allow of the best,
and then follow the worst: but of two extremes, if they be Immediata, choose
that may have least prejudice and most profi^e. Thy father is aged, and wise,
and many years has taught him much experience. The old Fox is more subtle
than the young Cub, the bucke more skillful to choose (...) than the young
sawnes. Men of age fear and for^see that which youth leapeth at with
repentance. If then his grave wisdom exceedes thy green wit, and his ripened
fruits ^hy sprowting blossoms, think if he speak for thy avail, as his
principles are perfect, so they are grounded on Love and Nature. It is a near
collo^, says he, is cut out of the own flesh, and the ^^ay of thy fortunes,
is the staff of his life^ no dou^t he sees with a more p^etting judgment into
the life of Francesco: for thou overcome with fancy, censurest of all his
actions with partiality. Francesco, though he be young and beautiful, yet
his revenues are not answerable to his favors: the Cedar is fair, but
unfruitful, the Volgo a bright stream, but without fish: men covet rather to
plant the Olive for profit, than the Alder for beauty, and young Gentlewomen
should rather fancy to live, than affect to lust: for love without Lands, is
like to a fire without fuel, that for a while shows a bright blaze, and in
a m^ment dies in his own cinders. Do ^hou think this Isabell, that thine
eye may not surfeit so with beauty, that the mind shall vomit up
repentance: yes, ^or the fairest R^ses have pricks, the purest Lawnes their
moles, the brightest Diamonds their crackes, and the most beautiful men of the
most imperfec^ conditions, for nature having care to pollish the body so fair,
ouerweenes herself in her excellency, that she leaves their minds
imperfect. Whither now Isabell, into absurd Aphorisms? what can thy father
persuade thee to this, that the most glorious shelles have not the most orient
mar^arites, that the purest flowers have not the most perfect savors, that
men, as they excel in proportion of body, so the^ exceed in perfection of
mind? Is not nature both curious and absolute, hiding the most virtuous minds
in the most beautiful couertures. Why what of this fond girl? suppose these
premises be granted, yet they infer no conclusion: for, suppose he be
beautiful and virtuous, and his wit is equal with his parentage, yet he
wantes wealth to maintain love, and therefore says old Fregose not worthy of
Isabels love. Shall I the^ tie my affection to his lands or to his liniame^ts?
to his riches or his qualities? are Venus altars to be filled with gold or
loialty of hearts? Is the Simpathie of Cupids consistory united in the
abundance of coin? Or the absolute perfection of constancy? Ah Isabell,
think this, that love brooketh no exception of want, that where fancy
displayes her colors there always either Plenty keeps her Court, or else
Patience so tempers every extreme, that all defectes are supplied with
content. Upon this, as having a farther reach, and a deeper insight, she stepped
hastily to her standish, and writ him this answer.

Isabell to Francisco, health.
ALthough the nature of a father, and the duty of a child might move me
resolutely to r^iect thy letters, yet I received them, for that thou art
Francisco and I Isabell, who were once private in affection, as now we are
distant in places. But know, my father, whose command to me is a law of
constraint, settes down this censure, that love wit^out wealth is like to a
Cedar tree without fruit, or to corn sown in the sands that withers for
want of moisture: and I have reason Francesco to deem of snow by the
whiteness, and of tr^^s by the blossoms. The old man whose words are Oracles
tells me that love that enters in a moment, flies out in a minute, that men's
affections is like the deawe upon a crystal, which no sooner lights on, but
it leapeth off: their eyes with every glaunce make a new choice, and every
look can command a sigh, having their hearts like Saltpet^r, that fiereth
at the first, and yet proves but a flash, their thoughts r^aching as high as
C^dars, but as brittle as rods that break with every blast: had Car^hage b^ene
bere^t of so famous a Virago: if the beaut^ous Trojan had b^ene as constant as
he was comely? Had the Qu^ene of Poetry been pinched with so many passions, if
the wanton Ferriman had been as faithful as he was fair. No Francesco, and
therefor seeing the brightest blossoms are pes^red with most caterpillars, the
sweet^st Roses with the sharp^st pricks, the fairest Cambrickes with the
fowlest stains, and men wi^h the best proportion, have commonly least
perf^ction. I ^ay fear to swallowe the ^ooke, l^ast I find more ba^e i^ the
confection, than pleasure in the bait. But here let m^ breath, and with sighs
foresee mine own folly. Women, poor souls, are l^ke to the Hearts in
Calabria, that knowing Dictannum to be deadly, yet bruise on it with
greediness, res^mbling the ^ish Mugra, that seeing the hook bare, yet
swallow^s it with d^light, so women for^see, yet do not preu^nt, knowing what
is profitable^ yet not esc^ewing the prejudice: so Francesco I see thy
beauties, I know^ thy want, and I fear thy vanities, yet can I not but allow
of all, were they the woorst of all, because I find in my mind this
principle; in Love is no lack. What should I ^rancesco covet to dally with ^he
Mouse when the Cat stands by, or fill my letter full of needless ambages when
my father like Argos sets a hundred eyes to ouerpry my actions, while I am
writing thy messenger stands at the door praying. Therefore least I should
hold her too long in her orisons, or keep the poor man too long in suspense;
thus briefly, Be upon Thursday next at night hard by the Orchard under the
greatest Oak, where expect my coming, and provide for our safe passage: for
stood all the world on the one side, and thou on the other, Francesco should
be my guide to direct me whither he pleased. Fail not then, unless thou be
false to her that would have life fail, ere she falsify faith to thee.

Not her own, because thine, Isabell.


AS soon as she had dispatched her letter she came down, and delivered the
letter folded in form of a pasport to the messenger, giving her after her
accustomed manner an alms, and closely clapped her in the fist with a brace of
Angels, the woman thanking her good Master, and her good mistress, giving
the house her benison, hied her back again^ to Francesco, who^ she found
sitting sollitary in his chamber: no sooner did he spy her, but flinging out
of his chair, he changed color as a man in a doubtful ecstasy what should
b^tide: yet conceyuing good hope by her count^naunce, who smiled more at the
remembrance of her reward ^han at any other conce^t, he took the letter and
read it, wherein he found his humor so fitted, that he not only thanked the
messenger, but gave her all the money in his purse, so that she returned so
highly gratified, as never aft^r she was found to exercise her old occupation.
But leaving her to the hope of her hus^^f^i^ again to Francesco, who seeing
the constant affection of his mistress, that neither the sower looks of her
father, nor his hard threats could afright her, to make change of her fancy,
that no disaster fortune could drive her to make shipwreck of her fixed
affec^ion, that the blustering storms of adversity might assault, but not
sack the for^e of her constant resoltuion, he fell into this pleasing
passion: Women (quoth he) whi^ as they are heavens weal^h, so they are earthes
miracles, ^ramed by nature to despite beauty, adorned with the singularity of
proportion, to shrowde the excellence of all perfection, as far exceeding men
in virtues as they excel them in beauties, resembling Angels in qualities, as
they are, like to gods in perfectness, being purer in mind than in mould, and
yet made of the purity of man: just they are, as giving love her due;
constant, as holding Loy^ltie more precious than life; as hardly to be drawn
from united affection, as the Salamanders fro the cauerns of Aetna. Tush quoth
Francesco, what should I say they be women? and therefore the continents of all
excellence. In this pleasant humor he passed away the time, not slacking his
business for provision against thursday at night; to the care of which
affairs let us leave him and return to Isabell, who after she had sent her
letter fell into a great dumpe, entering into the consid^ration of men's
inconstancy, and of the fickleness of their fancies, but all these
meditations did sort to no ^ffect; whereupon sitting down, she took her Lute
in her hand, and sung this Ode.

Isabells Ode.
Sitting by a river side,
Where a silent stream did glide,
Banckt about with choice flowers,
Such as spring from April showers,
When fair Iris smiling sheaws
All her riches in her dewes,
Thick leaued trees so were planted,
As nor art nor nature wanted,
Bo^dring all the broke with shade,
As if Venus there had made
By Floraes wile a curious bower
To dally with her paramours.
At this current as I gazde,
Eyes intrapt, mind amazde,
I might see in my ken,
Such a flame as fireth men,
Such a fire as does fry,
With one blaze both heart and ^ie,
Such a heat as d^oth prove
No heat like to heat of love.
Bright she was, for it was a she
That tracde her steps toward me:
On her head she ware a bay,
To fence Phoebus light away:
In her face one might descrie
The curious beauty of the sky,
Her eyes carried darts of fire,
Feathred all with swift desire,
Yet forth these fiery darts did pass
Pearled tears as bright as glass,
That wonder it was in her eine
Fire and water should combine:
If ^h'old saw did not borrow,
Fire is love, and water sorrow,
Down she sat pale and sad,
No mirth in her looks she had,
Face and eyes showed distress,
Inward sighs discourst no less:
Head on hand might I see
Elbow leaned on her knee,
Last she breathed out this saw,
Oh that love has no law;
Love inforceth with constraint,
Love delights in complaint.
Who so loves hates his life:
For loves pe^ce is minds strife.
Love does frede on beauties fare,
Every dish saw^t with care:
C^iefly women, reason why,
Love is hatched in their eye:
Thence it steppeth to the heart,
There it poysonet^ every part:
Mind and heart, eye and thought,
Till sweet love their woe^ has wrought.
Then repentant they began cry,
Oh my heart that trowed mine eye.
Thus she said and then she rose,
Face and mind both full of woes:
Flinging thence with this saw,
Fie on love that has no law.
Having finished her Do, she heard that her father was come in; and therefore
leaving her an ^^ous i^strumen^s, she fell to her labor, to confirm the old
proue^be in her fathers i^lous head, Otia si ^ollas, periere Cupidinis arcu^:
but as warye as she was, yet the old goose could spi^ the gosling wink, and
would not up any means trust her, but used his accustomed manner of
restraint: yet, as it is impossible for the smoke to be concealed, or fire to
be suppressed; so Fregoso could by no subtle driftes so war^ly watch his
^ra^s^ormed Io, but she found a M^rcurie to release her. For upon the thurs^ay
lying in her bed with little intent to sleep, she offered many sighs to
Venus that she would be ^^atresse to Morpheus that some dead slumber might
possess all the house; which fell out accordin^ly, so that at midnight she rose
up and finding her apparel shut up, she was feign to go without hose, only
in her ^mocke and her peticoate with her fathers hat and an old cloak. Thus
attired like Diana in her night geete, she marches down softly, where she
found Francesco ready with a private and familiar friend of his to watch her
coming forth, who casting his eye aside, and seeing one in a hat and a cloak,
suspecting some treachery drew his sword, at which Isabel smiling she
incountred him thus.

Gentle sir, if you be as valiant as you seem cholaricke, or as martial as
you would be thought hardy; set not upon a weaponlesse woman, least in
thinking to triumph in so mean a conquest, you be preiudicte with the taint of
cowardice. It Was never yet read, that warlicke Mars drew his fawchion against
lovely Venus^ were her offense never great, or his choler never so much.
Therefore Gentleman if you be the man I take you, Isabels Francesco, leave off
your arms and fall to amors, and let your parlee in them be as short, as the
night is silent, and the time dangerous. Francesco seeing it was the Paramour
of his affections, let fall his sword, and caught her in his arms, ready to
fall in a swound by a sudden ecstasy of joy: at last recovering his senses, he
encountered her thus.

Fair Isabel, Natures ouermatch in beauty, as you are Dianas superior in
virtue: at the sight of this atti^e, I dre^ my sword, as fearing some privy
foe; but as soon as the view of your perfection glaunced as an object to mine
eye, I let fall mine arms, trembling as Acteon did, that he had dared too far
in gazing against so gorgeous a Goddess: yet ready in the defense of your
sweet self, and rather than I would loose so rich a prize, not only to take
up my weapons, but to incou^ter hand to hand with the stoutest champion in the
world. Sir (quoth she) these protestations are now bootlesse: and therefore to
be brief, thus (and with that the tears trickled down the vermilion of her
cheeks, and she blubbred out this passion) O Francesco, thou may see by my
attire the depth of my fancy, and in these homely roabes may thou noate the
rechlesnesse of my fortunes, that for thy love have straind a note too high in
love. I offend nature as repugnant to my father, whose displeasure I have
purchased to please thee; I have given a final farewell to my friends, to be
thy familiar; I have lost all hope of preferment, to confirm the simpathie of
both our desires: Ah Francesco, see I come thus poor in apparel, to make th^e
rich in content. Now if hereafter (oh let me sigh at that, least I be forced to
repent too late) when thy eye is glutted with my beauty, and thy hot love
proved soon told, thou beginst to hate her that thus loves thee, and p^oue
as Demophon did to Phillis, or as Aeneas did to Dido: what then may I do
rejected, but accurse mi^e ^wne folly, that has brought me to such hard
fortunes. Give me leave Francesco, to fear what may fall: for men are as
inconstant in performance, as cunning in practices. She could not fully
discourse what she was ^bo^t to utter; but he broke off with this protestation.
Ah Isabel, although the winds of Lepanthos are ever inconstant, the Chris^^oll
ever brittle, the Polype ever changeable; yet measure not my mind by others
motions, nor the depth of my affection by the fleeting of others fancies: for
as there is a Topace that will yield to every stamp, so there is an Emerald
that will yield to no impression. The self same Troy, as it had an Aeneas that
was fickle, so it had a Troylus that was constant. Greece had a Piramus, as it
had a Demophon; and though some have been ungrateful, yet accuse not al to be
unthankful: for when Francesco shall let his eye slip from thy beauty, or his
thoughts from thy qualities, or his heart from thy virtues, or his whole self
from ever honoring thee: then shall heaven cease to have stars, the earth
trees, the world Clements, and every thing reuersed shall fall to their former
Chaos.

Why then (quoth Isabel) to hors^backe, for fear the faith of two such Lovers
be impeached by my fathers wakefull iealouzie. And with that (poor woman)
half naked as she was, she mounted, and as fast as horse would pace away they
post toward a town in the said Country of Britain called Dunecastrum. Where
let us leave them in their false gallop, and return to old Fregoso, who rising
early in the morning, and missing his Daughter, asked for her through the whole
house, but seeing none could discover where she was, as a^sured of her escape,
he cried out as a man half Lunaticke, that he was by Francesco robde of his
only jewel. Whereupon in a despayring fury he caused all his men and his
tenaunts to mount them, and to disperse themselves every one with hue and cry
for the recovery of his daughter, he himself being horst, and riding the
ready way to Dunecastrum. Where he no sooner came, but fortune meaning to
dally with the old doteard, and to present him a boane to gnaw on, brought it
so to pass that as he came riding down the town, he met Francesco and his
daughter coming from the Church, which although it piercte him to the quick,
and strainde every s^ring of his heart to the highest noate of sorrow, yet he
concealed it till he took his Inn; and then stumbling as fast as he could to
the Mayors houle of the town, he revealed unto him the whole cause of his
distress, requiring his favor for the clapping up of this unruly Gentleman,
and to make the matter the more hamous, he accused him of felony, that he had
not only contrary to the custom bereft him of his daughter against his will,
but with his daughter had taken away certain pla^e. This evidence caused the
Mayor straight guarded with his Officers to march down with Fregoso to the
place where Isabel and her Francesco were at breakfast, little thinking poor
souls such a sharp storm should follow so quiet a calm: but fortune would
have it so. And therefore as they were carrowsing each to other in a sweet
frolic of hoped for content, the Mayor rusht in, and apprehended him of
felony; which drove the poor perplexed lovers into such a dumpe, that they
s^ood as the pictures that Perseus with his shield turnde into stones.
Francesco presently with a sharp insight entered into the cause, and perceived
it was the drift of the old fox his father in law: wherefore he took it
with the more patience. But Isabel seeing her new husband so handled, fell in a
swownd for sorrow, which could not prevail with the Serieants, but they
conveyed him to prison, and her to the Mayors house. As soon as this was done,
Fregoso as a man careless what should become of them in a strange Country,
took horse and rode home, he past melancholy, and these remained sorrowful,
especially Isabel: who after she had almost blubbred out her eyes for grief,
fell at length into this passion.

Unfortunate Isabel, and therefore unfortunate because thy sorrows are more
than thy years, and thy distress too heavy for the prime of thy youth. Are
the heavens so unjust, the stars so dismal, the planets so injurious, that
they have more contrary oppositions than favorable aspects? that their
influence does infuse more prejudice than they ca^ infer profit? Then no
doubt if their motions be so malign, Saturn conspiring with all his balefull
signs, calculated the hour of thy birth full of disaster accidents. Ah
Isabel, thou may see the birds that are hatched in Winter, are nipt with
every storm; such as fly against the Sun are either scorched or blinded;
and those that repugne again nature, are ever crossed by fortune. Thy father
foresaw these evils, and warned thee by experience; thou reiectedst his
counsel, and therefore art bitten with repentance: such as look not before
they leap, often fall into the ditch; and they that scorn their parents,
cannot avoid punishment. The young Tigers follow the braying of their old
sire, the tender Fawnes choose their food by the old Bucke: These brute
beasts and without reason stray not from the limits of nature; thou a woman and
endued with reason, art therefore thus sorrowful, because thou have been
unnatural.

Whether now Isabel? What, like the shrubbes of India parched with every
storm? Will thou resemble the brooks of Caruia, that dry up with every
Sunshine? Shall one blast of Fortune blemish all thy affection? one frown of
thy father infringe thy love toward thy husband? Will thou be so inconstant at
the first, that have promised to be loyal ever? If thou be daunted on thy
marriage day, thou will be fleeting hereafter. Did thou not choose him for
his virtues, and now will thou refuse him for hi^ hard fortunes? Is he not thy
husband? yes: and therefore more dear to thee than is thy Father. I Isabel,
and upon that resolve, least having so faithful a Troilus, thou prove as
hateful a Cressyda: sorrow Isabel, but not that thou have followed Francesco:
but that Francesco by thee is fallen into such misfortunes: seek to mitigate
his maladies by thy patience, not to incense his grief with thy passions:
courage is known in extremities, womanhood i^ distress: and as the Chrisolite
is proved in the fire, the diamond by the anuill; so love is tried, not by the
favor of Fortune, but by the adversity of Time. Therefore Isabel, Feras, non
culpes, quod vitari non po^es, and with Tully resolve thus: Puto rerum
humanarum nihil esse firmum: Ita nee in prosperis la^itia gost^s, nec in
aduersis dolor concides. With this she held he^ peace and rested, silent, so
behauing her self in the Mayors house with such modesty and patience, that as
they held her for a paragon of beauty, so they counted he^ for a spectacle of
virtue: thinking her outward proportion was far inferior to her inward
perfection: so that generally she wan the hearts of the whole house, in that
they pitied her case, and wished her liberty. Insomuch that Francesco was the
better used for her sake: who being imprisoned, grieved not at his own
sinister mishap, but sorowed for the fortune of Isabel, passing both day and
night with many extreme passions, to think on the distress of his beloved
paramour. Fortune who had wrought this tragedy, intending to show that her
frunt is as full of favors as of frown^s; and that she holds a dimple in her
cheek, as she has a (...) in her brow, began thus in a Comicall vain to be
pleasant. After many days were passed, and that the Mayor had e^^red into the
good demenor o^ them b^th, noting that it proceeded rather of ^he ^ispleasure
of her father, than for any special ^^sart of felony, seeing youth would have
his swinge, and that as the mineralls of Aetna stooue fire, as the leaves in
Parthia burn with the Sun; so young years are incident to the heat of love,
and affection will burst into such amorous parties. He, not as Chremes in
Ter^nce, measuring the flames of youth by his dead cinders, but thinking of
their present fortunes by the follies of his former age, called a Conuenticle
of his Brethren, and seeing there was none to give any further evidence, thought
to let Francesco lose. Having their fr^e consent, the next day, (...) Isabel
with him, he went to the Iayle, where they heard such rare (...) of the
behavior of Francesco, that they sorrowed not so much at his fortunes, as ^hey
wondered at his ^ertues: for the Iayler discourst unto them, how as he was
greatly passionate, so he used great patience, having this v^^s often in his
mouth Fortiter ille f^cit, ^q^i miser esse po^est.
That he was affable and courteous, winning al, and offending none, that all
his house as they greeu^d at his imprisonment, would be sor^ie at his
enlargement; not for envy of his person, but for sorrow of his absence. The
Iaylour thus commending the Gentleman, conducted them to the chamberdoore where
Francesco lay, whom they found in secret meditation with himself: therefore
they stayed, and were silent auditors to his passions. The first word they
heard him breath out with a sigh was this, Soasrir me plaist, cur l'espoir me
conforte.


And with that taking a Citterne in his hand, saying this note Pour paruenir
l'endure.
He warbled out this Ode.

Francescos Ode.
When I look about the place
Where sorrow nurseth up disgrac^,
Wrap^ within a fold of cares,
Whose distress no heart spares:
Eyes might look, but see no light,
Heart might think but on despite,
Son did shine, but not on me:
Sorrow said it may not be,
That heart or eye should once possess
Any salve to cure distress:
For men in prison must suppose
Their couches are the beds of woes.
Seeing this I sighed then,
For^une thus should pu^ish men.
But when I calde to ^^nd^ her face
For whose love I brook this place,
St^rrie eyes whereat my sigh^,
Did eclipse with much delight,
Eyes that lighten and do shine,
Bea^es of love that are divine,
Lilly cheeks whereon beside
Buds of roses show their pride,
Cherrie lips which did speak
Words that made all hearts to break^;
Words most sweet, for breath was sweet,
Such perfume for love is meet.
Precious words, as hard to tell
Which more pleased wit or smell.
When I saw my greatest pains
Grow for her that beauty stains.
Fortune thus I did reprove,
Nothing grieuefull grows from love.
Having thus chanted over his Ode, he heard the chamber door open; whereupon
he grew melanchol^e, but when he saw the goddess of his affection, on whose
constant loyalty depended, the essence of his happiness, he started up as when
loue-sicke Mars saw Venus entering his pauilion in triumph, entertaining them
all generally with such aff^bilitie, and her particularly with such courtesy,
that he showed himself as full of nurture as of nature. Interchange of
intertainment thus past between these two lovers, as well with emphasis of
words as ecstasy of minds, concluding with streams of patheticall tears. The
Mayor at la^^ entered parlee, and told Francesco, though his father in law had
alleged felony against him, yet because he perceived that it rather proceeded
of some secret revenge, than any manifest truth, and that no further evidence
came to censure the allegation, he was content to set him at liberty,
conditionally, Francesco should give his hand to be answerable to what
hereafter in that behalf might be objected against him. These conditions
accepted, Francesco was set ^t liberty, and he and Isabell, jointly together
taking ^hemselues to a little cottage, began to be as Cy^eronicall as they were
amorous; with their hands thrift coveting to satisf^e their hearts thirst, and
to be as diligent in labors, as they were affectionate in loves: so that the
parish wherein they lived, so affected them for the course of their life, that
they were counted the very myrrours of a D^mocraticall method: for he being a
Scholar, and ^urst up in the Uniuersities, resolved rather to ^iue by his wit,
than any way to be pinched with want, thinking this old sentence to be true,
that wishers and woulders were never good householders, therefore he applied
himself to teaching of a School, where, by his i^dustry he had, not on^lie
great favor, but got wealth to withstand fortune. Isabel, that she might
seem no le^se profitable than her husband careful, fell to her needle, and wi^h
her work ^ought to prevent the iniu^ie of necessity. Thus they labored to
mainetaine their loves, being as busy as b^es, and as true as Turtles, as
desirous to satisfy the world with their desert, as to feed the humors of
their own desires. Living thus in a league of united ver^ues, out of this
mutual concord of confirmed perfection, they had a son answerable to their
o^^e proportion, which did increase their amity, so as the ^ight of their
young infant was a double ratifying of their affection. Fortune and Love thus
joining in league to make these parties to forget the storms that had nipped
the blossoms of their former years, addicted to the content of their loves
this conclusion of bliss. After the term of five years Seigneur Fregoso
hearing by sundry reports the fame of their forwardness, how Francesco
co^^ted to be most loving to his daughter, and she most dutiful to him, and
both strive to exceed one an other in loyalty, glad at this mutual agreement
he fell from the fury of his former melancholy passions, and satisfied him
self with a contented patience, that at l^st he directed letters to his son
in law, that he should make repair to his house with his daughter. Which
news was no s^^ner come to the ears of this married couple; but providing for
all things necessary for the furniture of their voyage they pos^ed as fast as
they could toward Caerbrancke, where speedily arriving at their fathers
house they found such friendly intertainement at the old man's hand, that they
counted this smile of Fortune able to counteruaile all the contrary storms,
that the adverse planets had inflicted upon them. Seated thus, as they thought,
so surely, as no sinister chance, or dismal influence might remove. She that
is constant in nothing but inconstancy, began in fair sky to produce a
tempest thus.

It so chanced that Francesco had necessary business to dispatch certain his
urgent affairs at the chief city of that Island called Troyno^ant; thither
wi^h l^aue of his father, and farewell to his wife, the departed after they
were married seven years: where after he was arrived, knowing that he should
make hi^ abode there, for the space of some nine weeks he sold his horse and
hired him a chamber, earnestly endeavoring to make speedy dispatch of his
affairs, that he might the sooner enjoy the sight of his desired Isabel: for
did he see any woman beautiful, he viewed her with a sigh, thinking how far
his wife did surpass her in excellence: were the modesty of any woman well
noted by her qualities it grieved him, he was not at home with his Isabel, who
did excel them all in virtues.

Thus he construed all to her perfection, having no vacant time, neither day
nor night ^herein he did not ruminate on the perfection of his Isabell. As thus
his thoughts were divided on his business, and on his wife, looking one day
out at his Chamber window he espied a young Gentlewoman which looked out at a
casement right opposite against his prospect, who fixed her eyes upon him with
such cunning and artificial gla^^ces, as she showed in them a chaste disdain,
(...) yet a ^odest desire. Where (by the way Gentlemen) let me say this much,
that our curtiza^s of Troyn^^^n^ are far ^uperiour in artificial allurement to
them of all the worl^, for al^hough they have not the painting of It^lie, nor
the charms of France, nor the iewelles of Spain, yet they have in their eyes
adamants that will draw youth (...) the I^t the s^ra^e, or the sight of the
Panther the (...) looks are like lu^es that will reclaim, and like Cy^^es
apparition^, that can represent in them all motions: they contain modesty,
mirth, chastity, wantonness, and what not, and she that holds in her eye most
ciuility, has often in her heart most dishonestie, bring like the pyrie stone,
that is, fire wit^out and frost within. Such a one was this merry minion, whose
hon^stie was as choice as Venus chastity, being as fair as Helena and as
faithless, as well featured as Cressida and as crafty; having an eye for ^uery
passenger, a sigh for every lover, a smile for every one that vailde his
bonnet: and because she loved the game well, a quiver for every woodmans
arrowe. This courtisan seeing this countr^y Francesco was no other but a mere
nouice, and that so newly, that to use the old proverb, he had scarce seent the
lions. She thought to entrap him and so arrest him with her amorous glances
that she would wring him by the pursse: whereupon every day she would out at
her casement stand, and there discover her beauties. Francesco, who was like
the Fly that delighted in the flame, and coueted to feed his eye on this
b^auteous Courtisan tilted at her with interchange of glaunces, and on a day to
try the finesse of his wit, with a poetical fury, began thus to make a
Canzone.

Canzone.
As then the Sun sat lordly in his pride,
Not shadowed with the vale of any cloud:
The Welkin had no rack that seemd to glide,
No duski^ vapor did bright Phoebus shroude:
No blemish did eclipse the beau^eou^ sky
From setting forth heavens secret searching eye.
No blustering wind did shake the shadie trees,
Each leaf lay still and silent in the wood,
The birds were musical, the laboring Bees
That in the summer heap^^ their winters good,
Plied to their hiues sweet honey from those flowers,
Whereout the serpent strengthens all his powers.
The lion laid and stretched him in the lawnes,
No storm did hold the Leopard fro his pray,
The fallow fields were full of wanton fawnes,
The plough-swaines never saw a fairer day,
For every beast and bird did take delight
To see the quiet heavens to shine so bright.
When thus the winds lay sleeping in the caue^,
The air was silent in her concaue sphere,
And Neptune with a calm did please his slaves,
Ready to wash the never d^enched Bear:
Then did the change of my affects begin,
And wanton love assaid to snare me in,
Leaning my back against a lof^ie pine,
Whose top did check the pride of all the air,
Fixing my thoughts, and with my thoughts mine eine
Upon the sun, the fairest of all fair:
What thing made God so fair as this, quoth I?
And thus I musde until I darkt mine eye.
Finding the sun too glorious for my sight,
I glaunst my look to shun so bright a lamp^,
With that appear an object twice as bright,
So gorgeous as my senses all were damp^.
In Ida richer beauty did not win
When lovely Venus showed her silver skin.
Her pace was like to Iunoes pompous strains,
When as she sweeps through heuens brass paued way,
Her front was powdered through with azurde veins,
That twixt sweet Roses and fair lillies lay,
Reflecting such a mixture from her face,
As tainted Venus beauty with disgrace.
Artophilex the brightest of the stars
Was not so orient as her crystal eyes,
Wherein triumphant sat both peace and wars,
From out whose arches such sweet favors flies,
As might reclai^^ Mars in his highest rage,
At beauties charge his fury to assuage.
The diamond gleames not more reflecting lights
Painted with fiery pyramides to shine,
Than are those flames that burn^sh in our sights,
Darting fire out the crystal of her eine,
Able to set Narcissus thoughts on fire
Although he sw^re him foe to swe^te desi^r.
Gasing upon this lemman with mine eye,
I felt my sight vail^ bonnet to her looks,
So deep a passion to my heart did fly,
As I was trap^ within her luring looks,
F^rst to confess before that I had done,
Her beauty far more brighter than the Sun.
Francesco having thus in a poetical humor pleased his fancy, when his
leisure served him would to make proof of his constancy interchange amorous
gl^unces with this fair curtisan, whose name was Infida, thinking his inward
affections were so surely grounded on the virtues of his Isabel, that no
exterior proportion could effect any passion to the contrary: but at last he
found by experience, that the fairest blossoms, are soonest nipt with frost,
the best fruit s^onest touched with Caterpillars, and the ripest wits most
apt to be overthrown by love. Infida taught him with her looks to learn
this, that the ^ie of the Basiliske pierces with prejudice; that the (...) of
Celidonie is sweet, but it fretteth deadly; that Cyrces cups were too strong
for all antidotes, and women's flatteries too forceable to resist at voluntary:
for she so snared him in the favors of her face, that his eye began to
censure partially of her perfection, insomuch, that he thought her second to
Isabel, if not superior. Dallying thus with beauty as the fly in the flame:
Venus willing to show how forceable her influence was, so tempred with
opportunity, that as Francesco walked abroad to take the air, he met with
Infida gadding abroad with certain her companions, who like blazing stars
showed the ma^kes of inconstant minions; for she no sooner drew near
Francesco, but dying her face with a Uermillion blush, and in a wanton ^ie
hiding afained modesty, she saluted him with a low courtesy. Seigneur
Francesco that could well skill to court all kind of degrees, least he might
then be thought to have little manners, returned, not only her courtesies with
his bonnet, but taking Infida by the hand began thus. Fair mistress, and if
mine eye be not deceived in so bright an object, mine overthwart neighbor:
having often seen with delight, and coueted with desire to be acquainted with
your sweet self; I can not now but gratulate fortune with many thanks that
has offered such fit opportunity to bring me to your presence, hoping I shall
find you so friendly, as to crave that we may be more familiar. She that
knew how to entertain such a young nouice made him this cunning reply.
Indeed sir, neighborhoode crau^s charity, and such affable Gentlemen as your
self deserves rather to be entertained with courtesi^ than rejected with
disdain. Therefore sir, what private friendship mine honor or honesty may
afford you above all (that hitherto I have known) shall command. Then
Mist^rs (quoth he) for that every man counts it credit to have a pa^ronesse
of his fortun^s, and I am a mere stranger in this City: let me find such
favor, that all my actions may be shrouded under your excellence, and carry
the name of your servant, ready for requital of such gr^^ious countenance to
vnsheath my sword in the ^efence of my patroness for ever. She that had her
humor ^itted with this motion, answered thus, with a l^^ke that had been able
to have forced Troylus to have been tr^thlesse to his Cressida: How kindly I
take it Seigneur Francesco, for so I understand your name, that you pr^^fer
your service to so mean a Mistress, the effectual fa^^urs that shall to my
poor ability gratify your courtesy, shall manifest how I account of such a
friend. Therefore from henceforth Infida intertai^s Francesco for her servant:
and I (quoth he) accept of the beauteous Infida as my Mistress. Upon this they
fell into other amorous pr^ttle which I lean off, and walked abroad while it
was dinner time. Fra^cesco still having his eye upon his new mistress, whose
bea^ties he thought, if they were equally tempered with virtues, to exce^de all
that yet his eye had made survey of. Doting thus on this new face with a new
fancy, he often wroong her by the hand, and brake o^f his sentences, with
such deep sighs, that she perceived by the Weather-cocke where the wind
blewe: returning such amorous passions, as she seemed as much entangled, as he
was enamoured. Well, thinking now that she had bayted her hook, she would
not cease while she had fully caught the fish, she began thus to lay the
train. When they were come near to the City gates, she stayed on a sudden,
and strayning him hard by the hand, and glauncing a look from her eyes, as if
she would both show favor, and crave affection, she began thus smilinglie to
assault him.

Servant, the Lawyers say the assumpsit is never good, where the party gives
not somewhat in consideration; that service is void, where it is not made fast
by some fee. Least therefore your eye should make your mind uariable as men's
thoughts follow their sights, and their looks waver at the excellence of new
obi^c^s, and so I loose such a servant: to tie you to yt stak^ with an earnest,
you shall this day be my guest at dinner. Then if hereafter you forget your
mistress, I shall appeal at the bar of Loyalty, and so condemn you of
lightness. Francesco that was tied by the ei^s, and had his har^ on his
halfpeny, could not deny her^ but with many thanks accepted of her motion, so
that agreed they went all to Infidaes house to dinner; where they had such
cheer as could upon the sudden be provided. Infida giving him such friendly
and familiar intertainement at his repast, as well with sweet prattle, as with
amorous glances, that he rested captive within the laborinth of her flatteries.
After dinner was done, that she might tie him from starting, she thought to set
all her wits upon Ela. Therefore she took a Lute in her hand, and in an
angelical harmony warbled out this conceited dittie.

Infidas song.
SWeet Adon' dare not glaunce thine eye
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Upon thy Venus that must die,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy.
See how sad thy Venu^ lies,
N'oseres vous, mon bell ^^y,
Love in heart and tears in eyes,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vou^, mon bell amy.
Thy face as fair as Paphos brooks,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Wherein fancy baits her hooks,
Ie vous ^n pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy^
Thy cheeks like cherries that do grow
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Amongst the Western mounts of snow,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous mon bell amy.
Thy lips vermilion, full of love,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Thy neck as silver, white as dove,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy.
Thine eyes like flames of holy fires,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Burns all my thoughts with sweet desires,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy.
All thy beauties sting my heart,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
I must die through Cupids dart,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous mon bell amy.
Will thou let thy Venus die,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
Adon were unkind say I,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N^oseres vous, mon bell amy.
To let fair Venus die for woe,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy,
That does love sweet Adon so,
Ie vous en pry, pity me:
N'oseres vous, mon bell, mon bell,
N'oseres vous, mon bell amy.
While thus Infida sung her song, Francesco sat, as if with Orpheus melody he
had been inchaunted, having his eyes fixed on her face, and his ears attendant
on her Music, so that he yielded to that Siren which after forced him to a
fatal shipwreck: Infida laying away her lute after fell to other prattle. But
because it grew late in the afternoon, Francesco that was called away by his
urgent affairs, t^^ke his leave: whereat Infida seemed very melancholy, which
made our young scholar half mad yet with a solemp^e conge departing he went
about his business: whereas our cunning Curtizan, seeing her nouice gone, began
to smile, and said to her companions, that she had made a good market that had
caught such ^ tame fool. Alas poor young Gentleman (quoth she) he is like to
the leaves in Aegipt, that as they spring without rain, so they burn at the
sight of the fire: or to the swallows, that think every Sun shine a
Summers day. He was never long wayter in Venus Court, that counts every
smile a favor, and every laugh to be true love: but it is no matter, he has
store of pence, and I will sell him many passions, until I leave him as
empty of coin, as my self is void of fancy. And thus leaving her i^^^ing at
her new entertained servant, again to Francesco, who after he had made
dispatch of his business, got him home to his lodging: where sitting solitary
in his chamber, he began to call to remembrance the perfections of his new
Mistress, the excellent proportion of her Phisnomie, her stature, voice,
gesture, virtues (as he thought) ruminating upon every part with a plaudite.
At last, as he was in this pleasing suppose, he remembered his sweet Isabel,
whose beauty and virtue was once so precious, that between his old love, and
his new fancy, he fell into these passions. Ah Francesco, whether art thou
carried with new conceits? shall thy fruits be more subjects to the Northern
blasts, than thy blossoms? shall thy middle age be more full of folly, than thy
tender years? will thou love in thy youth, and lust when thy days are half
spent? Men say, that the Cedar, the elder it is, the straighter it grows; that
Narcissus flowers the higher they spring, the more glorious is their hiew: and
so should Gentlemen as they exceed in years excel in virtues: but thou
Francesco are like to the Halciones, which being hatched white as milk, grow to
be as black as Ieat?; the young storkes have a musical voice, ^ut the old a
fearful sound. When thou were of small age men honored thee for thy qualities,
and now in years, shall they hate thee for thy vices. But to what end tendes
this large preamble to check thy fondness, that must leave to love, and
learn to lust? What leave to love Isabel, whose beauty is divine, whose
virtues rare, whose chastity loyal, whose constancy untainted? And for whom?
for the love of some unknown Curtizan. Consider this Francesco, Isabel for thy
sake has left her parents, forsaken her friends, rejected the world, and was
content rather to brook poverty with thee, than possess wealth with her
father. Is she not fair to content thine eye, virtuous to allure thy mind?
nay, is she not thy wife, to whom thou art bound by law, love, and conscience:
and yet will thou start from her? what from Isabel? Did thou not vow that
the heavens should be without lamps, the earth without ^eas^s, the world
without Elements, before Isabel should be forsaken of her Francesco? And will thou prove as f^lse as she is faithful? Shall she like Dido cry out against
Aeneas? like Phillis against Demophon? like Ariadne against Theseus? and thou
be canonized in the Chronicles, for a man full of perjury. Oh consider
Francesco whom thou shall lose if thou losest Isabel, and what thou shall
gain, if thou winnest Infida: the one being a loving wife, the other a
flattring Courtisan. Have thou read Aristotle, and find thou not in his
Philosophy, this sentence set down. Omne animal irrationale ad sui similem
diligendum natura dirigitur. And will thou that art a creature endued with
reason as thou art, excelling them in wisdom, exceed them in vanities? Have
thou turned over the liberal sciences as a scholar, and amongst them all have
not found this general principle, that unity is the essence of amity, and yet
will thou make a division in the greatest simpathie of all loves. Nay
Francesco, art thou a Christian, and have tasted of the swe^t fruits of
Theology, and have not read this in holy writ^, pend down by that miracle of
wisdom Solomon, th^^ he which is wise should reject the strange woman, and
not regard not the sw^etnesse of her fl^ttrie: Desire not the beauty of a
strange woman in thy heart, nor be not intrapped in her eye liddes:

For through a whorish woman, a m^n is brought to a morsel of bread, and a
woman will hunt for the precious life of a man.

Can a man take fire in his bosom, and not be burnt? Or can a man tread upon
coals, and not be scorched?

So he that goes to his neighbors wife, shall not be innocent whosoever
touches her.

Men do not despise a thief when he steals to satisfy his soul: but if he
be found he shall restore seven fold or give all the substance of his house.

But he that commits adultrie with a woman, he is destitute of
understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul.

He shall find a wound and dishooour, and his reproach shall never be put away.



If then Francesco, Theology tells thee such axioms, will thou strive against
the stream? and with the dear feed against the wind? Will thou swallow up
sin with greedines, that thou may be punished without repentance? No
Francesco, home to the wife of thy youth, and drink the pleasant waters of
thine own well. And what of all these frivolous circumstances? Will thou
measure every action with philosophy, or every thought with Divinity? Then
shall thou live in the world, as a man hated in the world. What Francesco, he
that is afraid of every bush, shall never prove good huntsman, and he that at
every gu^t puts to the Lee shall never be good Nauigator. Thou art now
Francesco to be a Lover, not a Divine; to measure thy affections by Ouids
principles, not by rules of Theology: and time present wills thee to love
Infida, when thou can not look on Isabel, distance of place is a discharge
of d^^i^, and men have their falts, as they are full of fancies. What the blind
^ates many a fly, and much water runs by the mill that the Miller never
knows of; the evil that the eye s^es not the heart rues not, Cast si non
caute: Tush Francesco, Isabel has not Lynceus eyes, to see so far. Therefore
while thou art resident in London, enjoy the beauty of Infida, and when thou
art at home only content thee with Isabel: so with a small fault shall thou
fully satisfy thine own affection. Thus Francesco soothed himself, and did In
vtram^is aurem dormire, caring little for his good, as long as he might please
his new Goddess; and making no exception of a wife, so he might be accepted
of his paramour. To effect therefore the desired end of his affects, he made
himself as neat and quaint as might be, and hied him to his new Mistress
house, to put in practice that which himself had purposed; whether in the
afternoon ariuing, he understood by her chamber maid that she was at home and
solitary: by her therefore he was conducted to Infidas closet, where he found
her seeming melancholy, and thus awaked her from her dumpes.

Fair Mistres, hail to your person, quiet to your thoghts and content to your
desires. At my first coming into your chamber, seeing you sit so melancholy, I
thought either Diana sat musing on the principles of her modesty, or Venus
malecontent dumping on her amors; for the show of your virtues represents the
one, and the excellence of your beauties discouers the other: but at last when
the glister of your beauty surpassing the^ both, reflected like the pride of
Phoebus on my face, I perceived it was my good Mistres, that discontented sat
in her dumpes: wherefore as your bounden servant, if either my word or sword
may free you from these passions, I am here ready in all actions howsoever
prejudicial, to show the effect of my affection. Infida glad to see her Lover
in this Laborinth; wherein to bind him sure, she taking him by the hand, made
this wily answer.

Sweet servant, how discontent soever I seem, dismay not you; for your
welcome is such as you can wish, or the sincerity of my heart afford: w^mens
dumps grow not ever of a prejudicial mishap, but oftimes of some superficial
melancholy, enforced with a frown, and shaken off with a smile; having sorrow
in their faces, and pleasure in their heart; resembling the leaves of the
liquorice, that when they are most full of d^aw without, are then most dry
within. I tell you servant, women are wily cattle, and therefore have I chosen
so g^^d a heardsman as your self, that what our wantonness offends, your
wisdom may amend. But trust me Francesco, were I wronged by Fortune, or
injured by ^nie foe, the promise of such a Champion were sufficient to arm me
with disdain agai^^^ both: but rest satis^^ed, your presence has banished all
passi^^s: and therefore you may see servant, you are the Loadstone, by whose
virtue my thoughts take all their direction. Being thus pleasant, she sat
Francesco down by her, and hand in hand interchanged amorous glaunces. But he
that was abasht to discover his mind, in that some sparks of honesty still
remained in his heart, sat tormented with love and fear, pricked forward by
the one to discourse his desires, kept back by the other from vttring his
affections. Thus in a quandarie, he sat like one of Medusaes cha^glings, til
Infida seeing him in this sudden amaze, began thus to shake him out of his
passions.

Now Signor Francesco, I s^e the old adage is not always true, Consulenti
nunqu^^ caput doluit: for you that erst alleged persuasions of mirth, are now
ouergrowen with melancholy. When a extreme Storm follows a pleasant calm,
then the effects are Metaphusicall, and where such a violent dumpe of cares is
sequence to such an ecstasy of joys, either I must attribute it to some
apoplexy of senses, or some strange alteration of passions. Francesco the oven
dampt up has the greatest heat, fire suppressed is most forceable, the streams
stopped, either break through or ouerflow; and sorrows concealed as they are
most passionate, so they are most peremptory.

What Francesco? spit on thy hand, and lay hold on thy heart, o^e pound of cate
pays not an ounce of debt, a friend to reveal is a medcine to relieve,
discover thy grief, and if I be not able to redress with wealth, although
what I have, is at thy command, yet I will attempt with counsel, either to
persuade thee from p^ssi^^s, or entreat thee to patience: say Francesco, and
fear not, for as I will be a friendly counselor, so I will be a faithful
co^cealer. Our young Gentleman hearing Infida apply such le^atiue plasters to
his cutting corasiues, thought the patient had great hope when the physician
was so friendly, he therefore with a demure countenance beginning lover like
his preamble with a deep sigh courted her thus.

Fair Mistress (quoth he) if I fail in my speeches; think it is, because I
faint in my passions, being as timorous t^ offend as I am amorous to attempt,
when the object is offered to the sense, the sight i^ hindered, Sensibil^ sensui
opposi^um, nulla fit sensatio: Mars could never play the Orator when he wr^^ng
Venus by the hands: nor Tulli^ tell his tale when his thoughts were in
Terentiaes eyes: Lovers are like to the ^eba^ blossoms that open with the
deawe, and sh^t with the sun, so they in presence of their Mistress have
their tongues tied, and their eyes open, pleading with the one, and being
silent in the other, which one describes thus.

Alter in alterius iactantes ^^mina vultus,
Quarebant taciti noster vbi esset amor.
Therefore, sweet Infida, what my tongue vtters not, think conceited in my
heart, and then thus: since first my good fortune, if thou fa^o^rest me, or my
adverse destinies, if I find the contrary, brought me to Troyno^ant, and that
these ouerdaring eyes were entertained into those gorg^ous objects, know that
Cupid lying at advantage so snared me in thy perfections, that ever s^^ce
every sense has rested imperfect. For when I marked thy face, more beaut^ous
than Venus, I (...) it with a sigh, and mi^^ eye p^rtrayed it with a passion,
when I noted thy virtues, the^ my mind rested capti^e, when I heard thy wit, I
did not only wonder, but I was so wr^pt in the laborinth of thine excelle^ce,
that no ^tarre but I^fida could be the guide whereby to (...) my course. (...)
Mistress, you, and ^^ne but you, (...) of my a^^ertions, h^^bo^r (...) in such
a sweet body a (...), but do (...) justice, let me have love for (...), least
I complain^ my (...) ^ot to be equivalent to my (...), and think my fortunes
to be sharper thus my (...). Thin^e Infida (...) in affections, are but slight
follies; Venus has shri^es to shadow her tr^^ants, and Cupids wings are
shelters for such as ^^^ter far to content their thoughts. (...) unseen, are
^^lfe pardoned; and Law requires not chastity, but that her souldi^ur^ (...).
Then think ((...) Infida) if thou gr^unt my desire, how careful I will be of
thy honor, rather ready to abide the prejudice of life, than to br^^ke the
disparagement of thy fame: In lieu therefore of my loyal service, gra^^t me
that sweet gift, which as it begins in amity, can no way take (...) but in
death: otherwise I shall be forced to accurse my fortunes, accuse thy
frowardnes^e, and expect no other (...), but a life full of miseries, or a
death full of martyrdom. With this passion ending his plea, he dissolved into
such ^^ghes, that it disco^ered his inward affection ^o^ to be less th^^ his
outward protestation. Infida noting the perplexity of her Lover, conceited his
grief with great joy: yet that she might not be thought t^o forward, she
seemed thus froward; and although her thoughts were more than his desires, and
that her mind was no less than his motion, yet pulling her hand from his, she
made this frow^ing reply.

What Francesco, when the Tygre hunteth for his pray, does he then hide his
claws? Is the pyrit sto^e the^ most hot, when it looks most cold? Are men
so subtle, that when they seem most holy, they are farthest from god, can they
under the shadow of virtue cover ^he substance of vanity, and like Ianus be
double faced, to present both faith and flattery. I had thought (servant) when
I entertained thee for thy courtesy: I should not have had occasion to shake
thee off for thy boldness: nor ^^en I lik^e thee for thy affable s^mplicity I
should have ^^sliked thee for thy secret subtilty: What Francesco, to de^^re
such a grant as may, i^ thou were wise, neither stand with thy honesty to
inte^d, nor with my honor to effect. Tell me Francesco, has either my
countenance bin so ouerc^^teous, that it mig^^ promise such small curiosity,
or my looks so lascivious that thou might hope to find me sol^^ish, or my
actions so wavering, or my disposition so full of vanity that my honor might
seem soon to be assaulted, and soon sacked. If I have ( Francesco) bin faulty
in these follies, then will I seek to amend wherein thou say I have made
offense; if not, but that thou think, for that I am a woman, I am eas^e to
be won, with promises of love and protestations of loyalty, thou art (sweet
servant) in a wrong box, and sit far beside the c^shion; for I pass of my
honor more than life, and covet rather to have the title of honesty, than the
dignity of a diademe^ cease then, unless thou will surcease to have my favor,
and content^ thee with this^ that Infida allows of thee for love, not for
lust: and yet if she should tread her shoo awrie, would rather yield the
spoil of her honor to her servant, than to the greatest prince of the world.
Francesco, though he was a nouice in these affairs, and was nipped on the head
with this sharp repulse, yet he was not so to take the shower for the first
storm, nor so ill a woodman to g^ue over the chase at y^ first default, but
that he prosecuted his purpose thus. I am sorry (fair goddess of my devotion)
if my presumption has given any offense to my sweet mistress, for rather than
I should but procure a frown in her forhead: I would have a de^p wound in my
own heart, coveting rather to suppres my passions with death, than to disparage
my credit with so g^^d a patroness. Therefore although my destinies be
extreme, my affection great, and my loves such as can take no end, but in your
favors, yet I rest upon this, Infida has commanded me to cease, and I will
not dare so much as to prosecute my suit, although every passion should be a
purgatory, and every days de^i^ll a months punishment in hell: with that he
set down his period with such a sigh, that as the Mariners say, a man would
have thought all would have split again. This cunning Curtizan being afraid,
with this check to have quatted the qu^^zie stomach of her lover, de^irous to
draw to her that with both hands, which she had thrust away with her little
finger, began to be pleasant with Francisco, thus.

What seru^nt, are you such a fresh water soldier, that you faint at the first
skirmish? fear not man, you have not to deal with Mars, but with Venus^ and
her darts of denial as they prick sharp, so they pierce little^ and her
thu^derbolts do afright, not prejudice. Fear not man, a woman's heart and her
tongue are not relatiues; it is not ever true, that what the heart thinks the
tongue clacketh. Venus storms are tempred with Rose water, and when she has
the greatest wrinkle in her ^rowe, then she has the sweetest dimple in her
chin: be blithe man, a faint heart never wonn^ fair Lady. Francesco hearing
hi^ Mistress thus pleasant, took oppor^^nitie by the forhead, and dea^t so
with his Infida, that before he went all was well, she blushed not, nor he^
basht, but both made up their market with a fair of ki^ses: which simpathie of
affections, bred the poor Gentleman's overthrow; for he was so snared in the
wily tramels of her alluring flattery, that neither the remembrance of his
Isabel, the care of his child, the favor of his friends, or the fear of his
discredit, could in any wise hale him from that hell, whereinto through his
own folly, he was fallen.

Where, by the way (Gentlemen) let us note the subtlety of these Sirens, that
with their false harmony persuade, and then prejudice; who bewitch like
Calipso,^ and inchaunt like Circes, carrying a show as if they were Uestalls,
and could with Amulia carry water in a sieve, when they are flat Curtizans, as
far from honesty, as they are from devotion. At the first, they carry a
fair show, resembling Calisto, who hid her vanities with Dianas vail, having in
their looks a coy disdain, but in their hearts a boat desire, denying with
the tongue, and enticing with their looks, rejecting in words, and alluring
in gestures, and such a one (gentlemen) was Infida, who so plied Francesco with
her flattering fawnes, that as the iron follows the adamant, the straw the Iet,
and the Helitropion the beams of the sun, so his actions were directed after
her eye, and what she said stood for a principle, insomuch, that he was not
only ready in all submisse humors to please her fancies, but willing for the
least word of offense, to draw his weapon against the stoutest champion in all
Troynouant. Thus seated in her beauty he lived a long while, forgetting his
return to Ca^rbrancke, till on a day sitting musing with himself, he fell
into a deep consideration of his former fortunes and present follies;
whereupon taking his Lute in his hand he so^ng this Roundley.

Francescoes Roundeley.
Sitting and sighing in my secret muse.
As once Apollo did surprisde with love,
Noting the slippery ways young years do use
What fond affects the prime of youth does move,
With bitter tears despairing I do cry,
W^ worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
When wanton age the blossoms of my time
Drew me to gaze upon the gorgeous sight
That beauty pompous in her highest prime,
Presents to tangle men with sweet delight,
Then with despairing tear^s ^y thoughts do cri^,
W^ worth the faults and folli^s of (...) ^i^.
When I s^r^eid the riches of her looks,
Whereout flew fl^^es of never quenched desire,
Wherein lay baits, that Venus snares with ^ookes.
Oh where proud Cupid s^te all armde with fire:
Then touched with love my inw^rd soul^ did cri^,
W^ worth the f^ultes and follies of mi^^ ^i^.
The milke-white Galaxia of her (...),
Where love does dance la voltas of his ski^^,
Like to the Temple where true lovers vow
To follow what shall please their Mistress wi^^,
Noting her i^orie front, (...) do I cry,
W^ worth the faul^s and follies of mi^e ^i^.
Her face like silver Luna in her shin^,
All tainted through with bright Vermilli^^ str^i^es,
Like lillies dipped in Bacchus choicest wine,
Powdered and inters^^^d with az^rde de v^ines,
Delighting in their pride now may I cri^^
W^ worth the faults and folli^s of mi^e ^i^.
The golden wyers that checkers in the d^y,
Inf^^^our to the ^resses of her (...),
Her amber tra^ells did my heart dis^^y,
That when I look^e I durst not over d^^^:
Proud of her pride now am I f^rst to cri^.
W^ worth the faults and follies of mi^e ^i^.
These fading beauties drew me ^n to sin
Natures great riches fra^de my bitter ruth,
These were the trappes that love did snare me in,
Oh, these, and none but these have wrackt my youth,
Misled by them I may dispairing cry.
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
By these I slipped from virtues holy tracke,
That leads unto the highest crystal sphere,
By these I fell to vanity and wrack,
And as a man forlorn with sin and fear,
Despair and sorrow does constrain me cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
Although this sonnet was of his ready invention, and that he uttered it in
bitterness of mind, yet after he had past over his melancholy, and from his
solitary was fallen into company, he forgate this patheticall impression of
virtue, and like the dog did redire ad vomitum, and fell to his own vomit,
resembling those Gretians, that with Ulysses drinking of Cyrces drugges, lost
both form and memory: Well his affairs were done, his horse sold, and no
other business now rested to hinder him from hying home, but his Mistress
which was such a violent deteyner of his person, and thoughts, that there is no
heaven but Infidaes house, where although he pleasantly entered in with
delight, yet cowardly he slipped away with repentance. Well, leaving him to his
new loves, at last to Isabell, who daily expected the coming home of ^er best
beloved Francesco, thinking every hour a year, till she might see him, in
whom rested all her coutent. But when (poor soul) she could neither ^eede
her sight with his presence, nor her ears with his letters, she b^ganne to
lower and grew so discontent, that she fell into a fever. Fortune that meant
to ^rie her patience thought to pro^u^ her with these tragical news: It was
told her by certain Gentlemen her friends, who were her husbands private
familiars, that he meant to soiorne most part of the year in Troynouant: one
blunt fellow amongst the rest that was plain and without falsh^^de, told
her the whole cause of his residence, how ^ee was in love with a m^st
beautiful Gentlewoman called Infida, and that so deeply, that no persuasion
might revoke him from that alluring curtizan. At this Isabell made no account,
but took it as a frivolous tale, and thought the worse of such as buzzed such
fantastical follies into her ears, but when the general report of his
mis^emeanours were bruted abroad throughout all Caerbrancke, then with blushing
cheeks, she hid her head, and gre^uing at his follies, and her own fortunes,
smothered the flames of her sorrows with inward conceit, but outwardly
withs^^^d such in satyricall terms as did inueigh against the hone^^ie of
Francesco, so that she won great commendations of all for her loyalty and
constancy, yet when she was gotten secret by her self, her heart full of
sorrowful passions, and her eyes full of tears, she began to meditate with
her self of the prime of her youth vowed to Francesco, how she fors^^ke
father, fri^ndes and Country to be paramour unto her hearts paragon. The
vows he made, when he carried her away in the night, the solemn promises
and protestations that were uttered. When she had pondred all these things,
then she called to mind Aeneas, Demophon and Theseus, and matched them with
Dido, Phillis and Ariadne, and at last sighed thus: And shall it be so between
Isabel and Francesco? No, think not so (fond woman) let not jealousy blind
thee, whom love has indne^ with such a pi^rcing insight: for as there is no
content to the sweetness of love, so there is no despair to the prejudice of
Jealousy: whereupon to shake off all fancies, she ^ooke her Citter^ in her
hand, and soong this verse out of Ariosto.

Che piu felice e pui i^condo stato,
Che viuer pui dolce e pui beato
Sarui di seruire vno amoroso cuore,
Che d'esser in seruitu d'amore,
Se non fusse huomo sempr^ stimulato,
Da quella rio timore, da quella frenezia,
Da quella rabbia, della i^lozia.
Yet as women are constant, so they are easy to believe, especially truth,
and so it fell out with Isabell, for she (poor soul) could take no rest, so
was her hand troubled with these ^^wes, hammering a thousand humors in her
brain how she might know the certainty of his follies, and how she might
reclaim him for his new entertained affection. She considered with herself,
that men allure Doves by the beauty of the house, and reclaim hawks by the
fairness of the lure, and that love joined with virtue, were able to recall
the most straggling A^neas to make sails again to Carthage. Tush quoth she to
her self, suppose he be fallen in Love with a curtizan, and that beauty has
given him the brave: what shall I utterly condemn him? No, as he was not the
first, so he shall not be the last: what youth will have his swindge, the briar
will be full of prickles, the nettle will have his sting, and youth his
amors: men must love and will love, though it be both against l^w and reason;
a crooked sien will prove a straight tr^e, the Juniper is sower when it is a
twigge, and sweet when it is a tree; time changes manners, and Francesco when
he enters into the conditions of a ^^attring Curtizan, will forsake her, and
return penitent and more loving to his Isabel. Thus like a good wife she
const^^^^ all to the best, yet she though^ to put him in mind of his return,
and therefore she writ him a letter to this effect.

Isabel to Francesco health.
IF Penelope long^^ for her Ulysses, think Isabel ^^sheth for her Francesco,
as loyal to thee as she was constant to the wily Greek, and no less desirous
to s^^ thee in Caerbranck, than she to enjoy his presence in I^^^ca, watering
my cheeckes with as many tears, as she her face with plaints, yet my
Francesco, hoping I have no such cause (...) she to increase her cares: for I
have such resolution in thy constancy, that no Circes with all her
enchantments, no Calipso with all her sorceries, no Siren with all their
melodies could pervert thee from thinking on thine Isabel, I know Francesco so
deeply has the faithful promise and loyal vows made and interchanged between
us taken place in thy thoughts, that no time how long soever, no di^^ance of
place howsoever different, may alter that impression. But why (...) I infer
this needless insinuation to him, that no vanity can alienate from virtue:
let me Francesco persw^de th^^ with other circumstances. First my (...), think
how thine Isabel lies alone, measuring the time with sighs, and thine absence
with passions; counting the day ^ismall, and the night full of sorrows; being
every way discontent, because she is not content with her Francesco. The
only comfort that I have in thine absence is thy child, who lies on his
mothers knee, and smiles as wanto^ly as his father when he was a wooer. But
when the boy says: Mam, where is my dad, when will he come home? Then the
calm of my content turns to a present storm of piercing sorrow, that I am
forced sometime to say: Unkind Francesco, that forgets his Isabell. I hope
Francesco, it is thine affairs, not my faults that procures this long delay.
For if I knew my follies did any way offend thee, to rest thus long absent, I
would punish my self both with outward and inward penance. But howsoever, I
pray for thy health, and thy speedy return, and so Francesco farewell.

Thine more than her own Isabell.


SHe having thus finished her letters con^cied them speedily to Troynouant,
where they were delivered to Francesco, who receiving them with a blush, went
into his study, and there v^ript the seals with a sigh, perceiving by the
contents that Isabell had an inckling of his unkind loves, which drive him
into a great quandarie, that deeply entering into the insight of his lascivious
life, he began to feel a remorce in his conscience, how grievously he
has offended her, that had so faithfully loved him. Oh, quoth he, shall I be
so ingrate as to quittance affection with fraud? So unkind as to weigh down
love with discourtesie, to give her a weed that presents me a flower, and to
beat her with nettles that perfumes me with roses, consider with thy self
Francesco, how deeply thou do sin: First, thou offendest thy God in
choosing so wanton a goddess; then, thou do wrong thy wife, in preferring
an inco^stant curtizan before so faithful a paramour: yet Francesco, thy
harvest is in the grass, thou may stop at the brimme, because thou have
never touched the bottom. What? men may fall, but to wallowe in wickedness is
a double fault. Therefore recall thy self, reclayme thy affections: Is not
thine Isabell as fair? Oh, if she be not, yet she is more virtuous. Is not
Isabell so witty as Infida? Oh but she is more constant, and then art thou so
mad, to prefer dross before Gold, a common Flint before a choice Diam^^d,
vice before virtue, fading beauty before the excellence of inward qualilties:
No, shake off these follies, and say, both in mouth and in heart; None like
Isabell; This he s^ide by himself, but when he went forth of his Chamber, and
spied but his Mistress looking out of her window all this gear chaungde, and
the case was altered: she calde, and in he must, and there in a jest scofft
at his Wives Letters, taking his Infida in his arms, and saying, I will not
leave this Troy for the chastest Penelope in the world.

Thus he soothed himself in the sweetness of his sin, resembling the
Leopardes that feed on Marioran while they die, or the People Hyperborei, that
sit so long and gaze against the Sun till they become blind; so he doated
on the perfection of Infida, till it gr^we to his utter prejudice: for no
reason could divert him from his damned intent, so had he drowned himself in
the dregs of lust: insomuch that he conuted it no sin to ^ffend with so
^aire a Saint: alluding to the saying of the holy Father.

Consuetudo peccandi, tollit sensum peccati.
Thus did these two con^inue in the Sympathy of their sins, while p^^re
Isabel rested her at home content in this, that at last he would be reclaimed,
and till then she would use patience, seei^g Nunquam sera est ad bonos mor^^
via. Wallowing thus in the foldes of their own follies, Fortune that meant to
experience the force of Love, dealt thus conceiptedly; After these two Lovers
had by the space of three years securely slumbred in the sweetness of their
pleasures, and drunk with the surfeit of Content, thought no other heaven, but
their own suppos^d happiness; as every storm has his calm, and the
greatest Springtide the deadest ebb, so fared it with Francesco: for so long
w^nt the pot to the water, that at last it came broken home; and so long put he
his hand into his pursse, that at last the empty bottom returned him a Writ
of Non est inuentus; for well might the Devil da^ce there, for ever a cross
to keep him back.

Well, this Lover fuller of passions than of pence, began (when he entered into
the consideration of his own estate) to mourn of the chyne, and to hang the
lip as one that for want of sounding had stroke himself upon the Sands; yet
he covered his inward sorrow with outward smiles, and like Ianus present^d his
Mistress with a merry look, when the other side of his visage was full of
sorrows. But she that was as good as a touchstone to try mettalls, could
straight spy by the last where the shoe wringde him: and seeing her
Francesco was almost foundred, thought to see if a skillful Farrier might mend
him; if not, like an unthankful Hackney-man she meant to turn him into the
bare leas, and set him as a tyrde jade to pick a sallet.

Upon which determin^tion, that she might do nothing rashly, she made
inquiry (...) his estate, what Livings he had, what Lands to sell, how they
were either tied by Statute, or I^tail^e? At last, thorough her secret and
subtle inquisition, she found that all his corn was on the floore^ that his
she^pe were clipped, and the W^^ll fold; to be short, that what he had by his
Wife could neither be sold nor morgaged, and what he had of his ^wne was
spent upon her, that nothing was left for him to live upon but his wits.
This news was such a cooling Card to this Curtizan, that the extreme heat of
her love was already grown to be luke warm: which Francesco might easily
perceive; for at his arrival, his welcome was more strange, her looks more
coy, his fare more slender, her glaunces less amorous: and she seemed to be
Infida in proportion, but not in wonted passions.

This uncouth disdain made Francesco marvel, who yet had not entered into her
deceiptes, nor (being ^^mple of himself) had ever yet experienst a strumpets
subtlety; he imputed therefore his Mistresses coyness to the distemperature
of her body, and thought that being not well, it was no wonder though she
gave him the less welcome.

Thus poor Nouice did he conster every thing to the best, until Time
presented him with the truth of the worst: for in short time, his hostess
calde for money, his creditors threatened him with an arrest, his clothes waxt
thread bare, and there was no more coin in the Mynte to amend them. Whereupon
on a day, sitting in a great dumpe by his Infida, who was as solemn as he was
sorrowful, he burst forth into these speeches.

I have read sweet Love in the Aphorisms of Philosophers, that heat
suppressed is more violent, the stream stopped makes the greater Deluge, and
passi^ns concealed, procure the deeper sorrows. Then if Contrariorum Contraria
est r^^io, there is nothing better than a bosom friend with whom to confer
upon the injury of fortune. Finding my self (my Infida) full of Pathemas as
sting to the quick, inuenymed with the Tarantula of heart sick torments, I
think no medicine fitter for my malady, than to be cu^ed by the musical
harmony of thy friendly counsai^e. Know then Infida that Troynouant is a
place of great expense, like the Serpent Hidaspis, that the more it suckes, the
more it is a thirst, eating men alive as the Crocodile, and being a place of as
dangerous allurement, as the seat where the Sirens sit and chaunt their
prejudicial melody. It is to young Gentlemen, like the Laborynth, whereout
Theseus could not get without a thread, but here be such monstrous Minotaures
as first devour the thread, and then the person. The Innes are like hotehouses,
which by little and little sweat a man into a consumption; the host he
carries a pint of wine in the one hand to welcome, but a poniard in the other
to stab; and the hostess she has smiles in her forhead, and prouides good
meat for her guests, but the sauce is costly, for it far exceeds the cates. If
coin want, then either to Limbo, or else clap up a commodity (if so much
credit be left) where he shall find such knots, as he will never be able
without his utter prejudice to untie. Brokers, I leave them of, as too course
ware to be mouthde wit^ an honest man's tongue. These Mi^otaures fair Infida,
have so eaten me up in this Laborinth, as to be p^aine with thee that art my
second self, I want, and am so far indebted to the Mercer and mine Hostess,
as either thou must stand my friend to disburse so much money for me, or else I
must depart from Troyno^ant, and so from thy sight, which how precious it is to
me, I refer to thine own conscience; or for an Vltimum vale take up my
lodging in the counter, which I know, as it would be uncouth to me, so it would
be greeuefull to thee; and therefore now hangs my welfare in thy will. How loath
I was to utter unto thee my want and sorrow, measure by my love; who wish
rather death than thy discontent.

Infida could scarce suffer him in so long a Periode, and therefore with her
forehead full of furrows, she made him this answer. And would you have me
(sir) buy an ounce of pleasure with a cunne of mishappes, or reach after
repentance with so hie a rate: have I lent thee the blossoms of my youth, and
delighted thee with the prime of my years? have thou had the spoil of my
virginity. and now would thou have the sack of my substance? when thou
have withered my person, aymest thou at my wealth? No sir, no; know, that for
the love of thee, I have cracked my credit, that never before was slained. I
cannot look abroad without a blush, nor go with my neighbors without a frump,
thou, and thy name is ever cast in my dish, my foes laugh, and my f^^ends
sorrow to see my follies: wherefore seeing thou beginnest to pick a quarrel,
and hereafter, when thine own base fortunes have brought thee to beggarie ^ilt
say, that Infida cost thee ^o many Crowns, and was thine overthrow: auaunt
nouice, home to thine own wife, who (poor Gentlewoman) sits and wants what
thou consumest at Tauerns. Thou have had my despoyle, and I fear I beat in my
belly the token of too much love I ought thee. Yet content with this
discredit, rather than to run into further extremity: get thee out of my
d^^res, for from henceforth thou shall never be welcome to Infida. And with
that she ^^ung up, and went into her Chamber: Francesco would have made a
reply, but she would not hear him, nor hold him any more that: Wherev^on
with a st^ain his ear, he went to his lodging. There ruminating on the number
of his follies, and the hardness of his fortunes, seeing his skore great^ his
coin little, his credit less: weighing how hardly he had used his Isabell:
at last leaning his head on his hand, with tears in his eyes, he began to be
thus extremely passionate. Now Francesco piscator ictus sapit, experience is a
true mistress, but she makes her Scholars tread upon Thorns, have thou
not leaped into the ditch, which thou have long foreseen, and bought that with
repentance which thou have so greedily desired to reap. Oh now thou see the
difference between love and lust: the one full of contented pleasure, the other
of pleasing miseries: thy thoughts were feathered with fancy, and whether did
they fly so far that they freeed themselves, and thou rests consume^. Oh
Francesco, what are women? If they be honest Saints, the purity of nature,
the excellence of virtue, the perfection of earthly content. But if they be
curtisans and strumpe^s. Oh let me breath before I can utter the depth of such
a monstrous description. They be in shape Angels, but in quallities Deuilles,
painted Sepulchers with rotten bones, their foreheads are Kalenders of
misfortunes, their eyes like comets, that when they sparkle foretell some
fatal disparagement, they allure with amorous glaunces of lust, and kill with
bitter looks of hate, they have dimples in their cheeks to deceive, and
wrinckles in their browe^ to betray, their lips are like honey combs, but
who tastes the drops is impoisoned; they are as cle^re as Crystal, but
bruise them, and they are as infectio^s as the Diamond, their tears are like
the Aconiton, that the Hidra wept; they present as Deiani^a shirts for
presents, but who so puts them on, consumes like Hercules, they lay out the
foldes of their hair, and i^tangle men in their tresses, playing the
horse-leach, that sucketh while they burst; between their breasts i^ the vale
of destruction, and in their beds o^ there is sorrow, repentance, hell and
despair. They consume man alive, and aim at his substance not his perfection;
like eagles, that only fly thither, where the carrion is, they lead men to
hell, and leave him at the gates. To ^e brief, they are ungrateful, peri^red,
untrue, inconstant, ^^e^ting, full of fraud, deceitful, and to conclude in one
word, they be the very refuse of natures extrements. Oh Francesco, what a
Satyricall inuectiue have thou uttered? I may best, quoth he, for I have
bought every principle with a pound: What now rests for thee poor unfortunate
man? Thou have yet left a means to end all these miseries, and that is this
Draw thy rapi^r and so die, that with a manly resolution thou may prevent
thy further misfortunes. Oh although thou have ^inned, yet despair^ not, though
thou art^ ^nathema, yet prove not an Atheist, the mercy of God is above all
his works, (...) balm. Home to thy wife, to the wife of thy youth Francesco,
to Isabell, who with her patience will cover all thy follies: remember th^s
man, Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via.

Thus he ended, and with very grief fell in a slumber. At this the Palmer
breathed, and made a stop and a long periode. His host desirous to hear out
the end of Francescoes fortunes, wished him to go forward in his discourse.
Pardon me Sir, quoth the Palmer, the night is late, and I have traveled all
the day; my belly is full, and my bones would be at rest. Therefore for this
time, let thus much suffice, and to morrow at our vprising, which shall be
with the Sun. I will not only discourse unto you the end of Francescoes
amors, of his return home to his wife, and his repentance, but manifest unto
you the reason why I aimed my pilgrimage to Venice.

The Gentleman and his Wife very loath to be tedious to the good Palmer, were
content with his promise; and so taking up the candle lighted him to bedde^
where we leave him. And therefore as soon as may be Gentlemen, look for
Francescoes further fortunes, and after that my Farewell to follies, and then
adieu to all amorous Pamphlets.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for N. L. and John Busbie, and are to be
sold at the West end of Paul's Church. 1590.

^ra^ce^cos Fortunes: Or The second part of Greenes Never too late.

Wherein is discoursed the fall of Love, the bitter fruits of Follies
pleasure, and the repentant sorrows of a reformed man.

Sero, sed serio.

Robertus Green in Artibus Magister.

Imprinted at London for N.L. and John Busbie. 1590.

To the right Worshipful Thomas Burnaby Esquier, Robert Green wishes
increase of all honorable virtues.
THe Athenians counted such men unworthy their Common wealth as were
ingratfull: and Plato seeing an unthankful man prosper, said, see men of
Greece the Gods are proved unjust; for they have laden a thistle with fruit.
When (right Worshipful) these reasons entered into my reach, and that I saw
how odious in elder time ungrateful men were to all estates and degrees; least
I might be stained with such a hateful blemish, having received many friendly,
nay fatherly favors at your ^ands, I resolved to endeavor how I might show
the depth of my affection toward your Worship, I found my ability was not
^^swerable to my desires to proportionate equal requital to your deserts, so
that I only thought to make thanks my pay mistress, and so pass over your
good turn with the old proverb, God and Saint Francis thank you. Yet when I
perceived great men had taken little gifts, I took heart at grass, and
imboldened my self to present you with a Pamphlet of my penning, called my
Nunquam sera est: which your Worship so gratefully accepted, measuring my will
more than the worth; that having made my second part, wherein is discoursed the
sequel of Francescoes further fortunes, I thought to shrowde it under your
patronage: I have discovered herein the other follies of his youth, and how at
last, repentance stroke in him such a remorse, that his sorrow for his sins
were more than the pleasures conceipted in his vanities. I have from the love
of a lascivious Curtizan, brought him to the Wife of his youth: the story
necessary for young Gentlemen, and not offensive unto grave ears: for the most
severe Stoic of all that seeks a knot in a rush, may herein find some
sentence worth the marking. And though you as Virgill hold Ennius, yet you may
out of his dross gather some gold. They which think there is no God to their
Goddess, may here find that wanton loves are the ready paths to prejudice,
and that effeminate follies are the efficient causes of dyre disparagement, and
that there is no Jewel like the gift of an honest wife. But whatsoever it is,
all is shrouded under your favor: which hoping you will as gratefully
patronage as the former, I wish your Worship as many good fortunes as your
self can desire, or I imagine.

Your Worships adopted son in all humble duty to command. Robert Green.

^o the Gentlemen Readers health.
IF (Gentlemen) I had not promised the further discourse of Francescos
fortunes, this Pamphlet had not come to the press: but seeing promise was
debt, and sundry made challenge at the Stationers shop, that I should be a
man of my word. To satisfy therefore al my well wishers, I have written what
befell Francesco after he had forsaken his Infida, no great adventures, but you
may see plotted down many passions full of repentant sorrows, and read many
of his Sonnets that he made in remorse of mind; such as they be they are
yours, or what my pen can do, but look for it in more deeper matters.

Yours, Robert Green.

In laudem Authoris.
THough wanton Horace writ of Loves delight,
And blythlie chaunted of his less,
Bonny and bright as any glass:
Yet did the Poet Odes and Satyrs write,
Wherein he taught fond youth
That folly hatchethruth,
And with his toys
Mixed virtues joys:
So by his works he reapt immortal praise.
Let him that writes the fall of Lovers fits,
Of beauty and her scortching fires,
And fancy and her fond desires:
If unto virtues l^re he wrest his wits,
And pen down follies fall,
Whereto young youth is thrall,
Have honor then
To grace his pen:
But envy lives too much in these our days.
Richard Hake.

Virtutis comes inuidia.
R. S.
THe Be is praisde for labor, not for ease,
The more she works the richer is her hiue:
The little Ant that teaches man to thrive,
Is famed for that her labors never cease.
The more the fruit, more precious is the tree;
The more the fish, more valued is the stream;
The sweetest night when many stars do gleame^
The better ground that brings most grain we se^.
The more it works, the quicker is the wit^
The more it writes, the better to be steemed:
By labor ought men's wills and wits b^ deemed,
Though dreaming dunces do inueigh against it.
But write thou on, though Momus sit and frown,
A Cart^rs Iigge is fittest for a Clown.
Bonum quo communius, eo melius.
Greenes Never too late.
Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via.

NO sooner did Phoebus burnish the heaven with his brightness, and decked in a
glorious diadem of chrisolites, had mounted him on his Coach to lighten the
Lamp that makes Flora beauteous, but the Palmer was up and at his Orysons,
being as devout in his thoughts, as he was mindful of his travels: walking
in the garden all alone, and seeing the Sun new peeping out of the East, he
began to meditate with himself of the state of man, comparing his life to the
length of a spanne, or the compass of the Sun, who rising bright and orient,
continues but his appointed course, and that ofttimes shadowed with so many
Clouds, and strainde with a sable vale of such thick fogges, that he is more
darkened with s^ormes than beautified with light: and if it fortune his shine
is without blemish, yet he sets and that more often in a fold of Clouds,
than in a clear Sky: so man bor^^ ^n the pride of beauty or pomp of wealth,
be his honors equal with his fortunes, and he as happy as Augustus; yet his
life has but his limittes, and that clogged with so many cares and crosses,
that his days are more full of miseries than of pleasures, and his disas^er
mishaps are more than his prosperous fortunes: but if the stars grace him
with all favorable aspects, and that he live full of content in many honors
and much wealth, yet his prime has his Autum, his fair blossoms turns to
tawnie leaves, age will shake him by the shoulder, and nature will have his
due, that at last he must set with the Sun, and perhaps in such a cloud of
sin, as his rising may be in a storm of sorrows. Thus did the Palmer
meditate with himself, ^eeing penitent for the follies of his youth, that at
last thinking to be as musical to himself, as the birds were melodious, he
chanced out this O^e.

The penitent Palmers Ode.
Whilome in the winters rage
A Palmer old and full of age,
Sat and thought upon his youth,
With eyes, tears, and hearts ruth,
Being all with cares yblent,
When he thought on years misspent.
When his follies came to mind,
How fond love had made him blind,
And wrapped him in a ^ield of wo^s,
Shadowed with pleasures shoes,
Then he sighed and said alas,
Man is sin and flesh is grass,
I thought my mistress hairs were gold^
And in their locks my heart I fold:
Her amber tresses were the sight
That wrapped me in vain delight:
Her Iuorie front, her preti^ chin,
Were stales that drew me on to sin:
Her starrie looks, her Crystal eyes,
Brighter than the Suns arise:
Sparkling pleasing flames on fire,
Yoakt my thoughts and my desire,
That I began cry ere I blin,
Oh her eyes are paths to sin.
Her face was fair, her breath was sweet,
All her looks for love was meet:
But love is folly this I kn^we.
And beauty fades like to snowe^
Oh why should man delight in pride,
Whose blossom like a deaw does glide:
When these supposes touched my thought,
That world was vain and beauty naught,
I began sigh and say alas,
Man is sin and flesh is grass.
The Palmer having ended this Ode, sat in a great dump in the garden, when his
Host accompanied with his wife, desirous to hear out Francescos fortune, were
come into the place and gave him the bon iorno thus. Courteous Palmer, a kind
salute to waken you from your mornings meditation, I see you keep the proverb
for a principle, to bed with the Be and up with the Lark: no sooner the Sun
in the Sky but you are at your Orysons, either ruminating passions or penance,
either some old remembrance or some new reuerse. Howsoever (gentle Palmer) it is
no manners to enter to^ far into your thoughts, and therefore leaving your
secrets to your self, Com^ stat^ la vos^ra signoria quest a matina. The Palmer
that had learned a little broken Italian, seeing his honest host in such a
merry mood, made this answer. Io sto bensignior di^ merce, ringratiando^i
sonnamenti di vostra grande cor^esia, holding it fi^ for my fortunes to have
many cares and little s^eepe, that my penance may be great since my sins are
many: long slumbers are for idle persons, not for penitent Palmers; and sweet
dreams are no instances of hearty devotion; therefore do I watch with the
mouse to argue my self miserable, and enjoin my self to much pains, because
I am combred wi^h many passions. This morning entering into this garden^ I saw
by the works of nature the course of the world: for when I saw Floras glory
shut up in the soldes of I^is frowns, I began to consider that the pride of
man was like the pomp of a flower, that to day glories in the field and to
morrow is in the furnace; that we be like the flies Hemerae, that take life
with the Sun and dye with the deaw; that our honors are compared to the
blossoms of a Cedar, which vanish ere they begin to burnish, and al our
triumphs like caracters written in snow, that printed in a vapor, at the
least Sun shine discover our vanity, for they are as soon melted as our
pleasures are momentarie. Tied by Fates to this ti^kle state, we have nothing
more certain than to dye, nor nothing more uncertain than the hour of death:
and therefore when I call to mind the follies of my youth, how they have been
tickled with vice, I eouet in the flower of mine years to repent and amend:
for Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via.


You do well sir (quoth the Gentleman) in all your actions to consider the end;
for he that forerepents, foresees many perrills^ Had I wist is a great fault,
and after wits are bitten with many sorrows: therefore such as grieve at their
follies, and covet to prevent dangerous fortunes, they which take an antidote
of grace against the deadly aconiton of sin, and with present remorse prevent
ensuing vanities: such indeed, as they live well, shall dye blessed. But
leaving this humor till another time, you may see by our early rising how my
wife and I were delighted with your euenings par^ie: for trust me sir, desire
of Francescos further fortunes made us thus watchful, and therefore seeing the
morning is gray and our longing great, and yet a good while to breakefast, if
your leisure may afford so much, I pray you sit down and tell us what was the
end of his loves, and the effects of his repentance. The Palmer very willing
to pleasure his courteous host, sat him down in an Arbor and began thus.

The Palmers tale of Francesco.
AS soon as Francesco awak^ from his slumber, and began to enter further into
the consideration of Infidas cousenage, his heart throbd at his follies, and a
present passion of his great misfortunes so payned him, that all perplexed he
began again to sing his former song, and to say that women's thoughts were like
to the leaves of a Da^e tree that change colors with the wind^, in a moment
figuring out sorrow with tears, and in that instant deciphering pleasure with
smiles: neither too resolute with the Stoickes to yield to no passions, nor too
absolute with the Esseni to surfeit with over much chastity: their desires
(quoth he) resemble Aeolus forhead, that next every storm contains a calm:
their deeds are like Almanacks that decipher nothing but uncertainty; either
too scrupulous with Daphne to contemn all, or too voluptuous with Venus to
desire all; and straight neither flesh nor fish as the Porpus, but time
pleasers, to content themselves with variety of fancies. In this humorous
melancholy he arose up and raunged about the City, despayring of his estate
as a man pennylesse, and therefore impatient because he knew not how to
redress his miseries: to rely upon the help of a Curtizan, he saw by
experience was to hang hope in the air: to stand upon the favor of friends,
that was bootelesse; for he had few in the City, as being but a stranger
there, and such as he had were won with an Apple, trencher friends, and
therefore to be left with the puff of the least blast of adversities. To go
home to his wife to fair Isabel, that was as hard a censure as the sentence of
death, for shame of his follies made him ashamed to show his face to a woman
of so high deserts. In this perplexity he passed over three or four days
till his purse was clean empty, his score great, and his hostess would trust
him for no more money, but ^hreatned him, if present payment were not made, to
lay him in prison. This news was hard to Francesco, that knew not how to
avoid the prejudice, only his refuge was to prevent such a misfortune to carry
his apparel to the Brokers, and with great loss to make money to pay for his
diet: which once discharged, he walk^ up and down as a man forlorn, having
neither coin nor credit. Necessity yt stingeth unto the quick, made him set
his wits on the tenter, and to stretch his brains as high as Ela, to see how
he could recover pence to defray his charges by any sinister means to salve
his sorrows: the care of his parents and of his own honor persuaded him from
making gain by labor: he had never been brought up to any mechanical course
of life. Thus every way destitute of means to live, he sight out this old
said saw, Miserrimum est fuisse beatum: yet at last, as extremities search
very far, he calde to mind that he was a scholar, and that although in
these days Art wanted honor, and learning lackt his due, yet good letters
were not brought to so low an ebb, but that there might some profit arise by
them to procure his maintenance. In this humor he fell in amongst a company
of Players, who persuaded him to try his wit in writing of Comedies,
Tragedies, or Pastorals, and if he could perform any thing worth the stage,
then they would largely reward him for his pains. Francesco glad of this
motion, seeing a means to mitigate ye extremity of his wa^^, thought it no
dishonor to make gain of his wit, or to get profit by his pen^ and therefore
getting him home to his chamber writ a Comedy, which so generally pleased all
the audience, that happy were those Actors in short time that could get any of
his works, he grew so exquisite in that faculty. By this means his want was
relieved, his credit in his hosts house, recovered his apparel in greater
bravery then it was, and his purse well lined with Crowns.

At this discourse of Francesco, the Gentleman took his guest by the hand and
broke off his tale thus. Now gentle Palmer, seeing we are fallen by course of
prattle to parlie of Plays, if without offense do me that favor to show me
your judgment of Plays, Playmakers and Players. Although (quoth the Palmer)
that some for being too lavish against that faculty, have for their satiricall
inuectiues been well canuased, yet seeing here is none but our selves, and that
I hope what you hear shall be ^roden under foot, I will flatly say what I
can both even by reading and experience. The invention of Comedies were first
found amongst the Greeks, and practiced at Athens: some think by Menander
whom Terence so highly commends in his Heautontimorumenon. The reason was,
that under the ^ouert of such pleasant and Comicall events, they aym^d at the
overthrow of many vanities that then reigned in the City: for therein they
painted out in the persons the course of the world, how either it was graced
with honor, or discredited with vices: There might you see leueld out the vain
life that boasting Thrases use, smoothed up with the self conceit of their
own excellence; the miserable estate of covetous parents, that rather let
their sons ^ast of any misfortunes, than to relieve them with the
superfluity of their wealth: the pourtraiture of parasiticall friends and
flattering Gnatos, that only are time pleasers and trencher friends, which
sooth young Gentlemen subtellie in their follies, as long as they may: Ex eorum
sullo viuere was set out in lively colors. In those Comedies the abuse of
Bawdes that made sa^e of honest virgins, and lived by the spoil of women's
honors, was deeply discovered. To be short, Lechery, Covetousness, Pride,
self-love, disobedience of parents, and such vices predominant both in age and
youth were shot at, not only with examples and instances to feed the eye, but
with golden sentences of moral works to please the ear^. Thus did Menander win
honor in Greece with his works, and reclaim both old and young for their
vanit^es by ye pleasant effects of his Comedies. After him this faculty grew
to be famous in Rome, practiced by Plautus, Terence, and other that excelled in
this quality, all aiming as Menander did in all their worke^ to suppress vice
and advance virtue. Now, so highly were Comedies esteemed in those days, that
men of great honor and grave account were the Actors, the Senate and the
Consuls continually present, as auditors at all such sports, rewarding the
Author with rich rewards, according to the excellency of the Comedy. Thus
continued this faculty famous, till covetousness crept into the quality, and
that mean men greedy of gains did fall to practice the acting of such
Plays, and in the Theater presented their Comedies but to such only, as
rewarded them well for their pains: when thus Comedians grew to be
mercinaries, then men of account left to practice such pastimes, and dis^ained
to have their honors blemished with the stain of such base and vile gaines^ in
so much that both Comedies and Tragedies grew to less account in Rome, in that
the free sight of such sports was taken away by covetous desires: yet the
people (who are delighted with such novelties and pastimes) made great resort,
paid largely, and highly applauded their doings, in so much that the Actors by
continual use grew not only excellent, but rich and insolent. Amongst whom
in the days of Tully one Roscius grew to be of such exquisit perfection in
his faculty, that he offered to contend with the Orators of that time in
gesture, as they did in eloquence; boasting that he could express a passion in
as many sundry actions, as Tully could discourse it in variety of phrases:
yea so proud he grew by the daily applause of people, that he looked for
hon^ur and reverence to be done him in the streeres: which self conceit when
Tully entered into with a pearcing insight, he quipt at in this manner.

It chanced that Roscius and he met at a dinner, both guests unto Archias the
Poet, where the proud Comedian dared to make comparison with Tully: which
insolency made the learned Orator to grow into these terms; why Roscius, art
thou proud with Esops Crow being (...) w^^h ^he glory of others feathers^ of
thy self thou can say nothing^ and if the Cobbler has taught thee to say^
Aue Caesar, ^isdain not thy tutor, because thou pratest in a Kings chamber:
what sentence thou vtterest on the stage, flows from the censure of our
wits; and what sentence or conceipte of the invention the people applaud for
excellent, that comes from the secrets of our knowledge. I g^a^nt your action,
though it be a kind of mechanical labor; yet well done t^s worthy of praise:
but you worthless, if for so small a ^oy you wa^e proud. At this Roscius waxt
red, and bewraied his imperfec^ion with silence: but this check of Tully could
not keep others from the blemish of that fault, for it grew to a general vice
amongst the Actors, to excel in ^^de as they did exceed in excellence, and to
brave it in the streets, as they brag it on the stage^ so that they reueld it
in Rome in such costly roabes, that they seemed rather men of great patrimony,
than such as li^ed by the favor of the people. Which Publius Seruilius very
well noted; for he being the son of a Senator, and a man very valiant, met
on a day with a player in the streets richly apparrelled^ who so ^arre forgot
himself, that he took the wall of the young noble man^ which Seruilius taking
in dis^aine, counterchecke with ^his f^ump: My friend (quoth he) be not so
brag of thy silken roabes, for I saw them but yesterday make a gre^^ show in
a broakers shop. At this the one was ashamed, and the other smilde^ and they
which ^ea^d the ^uip^ ^augh^ at the folly of the one and the wit of the other.
Thus sir ^aue you heard my opinion briefly of plays, that Menander deuise^
th^^ for the s^ppressing of vanities, necessary in a common we^^^^, as long as
they are uses in their right kind; the play makers worthy of honor for their
Art: and pla^er^^ men deserving both pray^e and profit, as long as they wa^
^^^ther covetous nor insolent. I have caused you (...) (^uoth y^ gentleman) to
make ^ large digressio^^ but y^u have resolved me in a matter that I long
doubted of: and therefore I may (...) again to Francesco. Why then thus quoth
the Palmer^ After he grew excellent for making of Comedies, he want not only
brave, but full of Crowns: which Infida hearing of, and having intelligence
what course of life he did taken thought to cast forth her lure to r^claime
him, though by her unkindness he was proved haggard; for she thought that
Francesco was such a ^ame fool that he would he brought to strike at any
stale, ^ecking her self therefore as gorgiously as she could, painting her
face with the choice of all her drugges, she walk^ abroad where she thought
Francesco used to take the air; Love and Fortune joining in league so favored
her, that according to her desire she met him. At which encounter I guess, more
for shame than love she blasht; and filled her countenance with such repentant
remorse (yet having her looks full o^ amorous glaunces) that she seemed like
Venus, reconciling her self so froward Mars. The sight of Infida was pleasing
in the eyes of Francesco, and almost as deadly as the basilisk: that had he
not had about him Moly as Ulysses, he had been inchaunted by the charms of
that wily Circes; but the abuse so s^ucke in his stomach that she had proffered
him in his extremity, that he returned all her glaunces with a frown, and so
parted. Infida was not ama^ed with his angry mood, as one that thought loves
furnace of force to heat^ the coldest Amatist, and the swe^te words of a woman
as able to dr^w on desire, as the Sirens melody the passengers. What quoth
she, though for a while he be choleric, Beauty is able to quench the ^^ame,
as it sets hearts on fire; as Helens faults angered Paris, so her favors
pleased Paris: though she were false to Menelaus, ye^ her fair made him brook
her follie^: Women are priuiledgd t^ have their words and their will, and whom
they kill with a ^rowne they can revive with ^ smile. Tush, Francesco is not so
froward, but he may he won, he is n^ Saturnist to bear anger long, he is
soon hot and soon cold, choleric and kind hearted; who though (...) be
sco^ded away with bitter words (...) will be reclaimed again with sweet
kisses^ a woman's tears are Adam^nt, and men are no harder than Iron^ and
therefore may ^ee drawn to pity their passions. I will feign, fla^ter, and
what not, to get again my Francesco; for his purse is full, and my coffers wax
empty. In this humor taking pen and paper, she wrote a letter to him to this
effect.

Infida to Francesco wishes what he wants in health or wealth.
IF my outward penance ( Francesco) could discover my inward passions, my
sighe^ bewray my sorrows, or my countenance my miseries, then should I look
the most desolate of all, as I am the most distressed of all; and the furrows in
my face ^ee numberless, as the griefs of my heart are matchles: But as the
feathers of y^ Halciones glister most against the ^orest storm, and Nylus is
most calm against a deluge^ so the sorrows of my mind are so great that they
smother inwardly, though they mak^ no out^^rd appearance of mishap. All these
miseries Francesco grow from the consideration of mine own disc^^^esies: for
when I think of thy constancy, thy faith, thy ^^^ture, and thy beauty, and
weigh with my self how all these v^wed unto Infida, they were lost by the
disloyalty of Infida: I ca^^ i^ in question, whether I had better despair and
die, or in ^ope of thy favor linger o^^ my life. Penance of freewill merits
pardons of course, and griefs that grow from rem^rse, deserve to ^ee salued
with ru^h. I confess Francesco that I wronged the^, and therefore I am wroong
at y^ hear^: but so does the (...) of thy perfection, and the excellence of thy
^^^tues (...) in my heart (...) although th^^ should vow t^ lo^th me. I
(...) ceas^ to ^oue thee. O^ consider, (...) have their f^ults (...) their
fo^l^e^, and act y^ in an hour which they rep^t a^ their life alter. Though
Mars and Ven^^ (...), they were friends after (...) for (...) and forget
Francesco then hartelie, that I repent so deeply: grace thy Infida again with
one smile, ease her impatient passions with thy sweet presence; and assure thy
self she will satisfy with love, what she has offended with folly. Bones
that are broken and after set again, are the more stronger: where the Beech
Tree is ^ut, there it grows most hard: reconciled friendship is the sweetest
amity. Then be friends with thy Infida: look on her, and but visit her: and
if she win not thy love with her words, and show her self so penitent
that thou shall pardon: then let her perish in her own misfortunes, and die
for the want of thy favor. Farewell.

Thine ever, dispay^ing Infida.


THis letter she sealed up and sent it by a secret friend to Francesco: who at
the first, knowing from whence it came, would scarcely receive it; yet at last
willing to hear what humor had made the Curtizan write unto him; he ^roke ^pe
the seals and read the former contents: which when he had thoroughly perused^
he found himself perplexed: for the cunning of her flattery made y^ poor
man passionate. In so much that sitting down with the letter in his hand; he
began thus to meditate with himself.

Why do thou vouchsafe Francesco to look on her letters that is so lewd, to
view her lines that are powdered with flattery, to hear her charms that
seeks thy prejudice, to liste^ to such a Calipso that alms only at thy
substance, not at thy person? Whilt thou were poor her forhead was full of
frowns, and in her loo^^ sat the storms of disdain: but when the sees thou
^ast fethered thy ^est, and have crowns in thy purse, she would play the
hors-le^ch to ^uck away thy wealth: and n^w would she be (...) hearts gold,
while she ^est thee not one dra^ of go^^e. Oh Francesco she ^ides her ^lawes,
(...) loo^^s ^or her pray with the ^y^er, she weeps with the Crocodile, and
smiles with the Hi^na, and ^^^tters with the Panther, and under the couer^ of a
(...), shrowdes the intent of thy ^a^e. Know thou not that a^ the Marble
dr^p^s against rain, (...) their tears fo^^poynt mischief, that the savors
of a Curtizan are like the song^ of the Grashoper, that ever fortel some fatal
disparagement, Beware then Francesco (Pisca^^^ actu^ s^pl^) she has once
burnt thee, fear fire with the Chil^^ she has crossed thee with disdain,
covet not her with desi^^^ h^^e h^^, ^or in loathing such a one thou love thy
GOD. Return not with the dog to the vomit, wallow not with ^wine in the mire,
foresee not the best and follow the worst. And (...) Francesco trust me she is
fair, bea^tifull and wise: I but with that a Curtizan^ perhaps she will now
love thee faithfully^ if she do, fond man, is not her hearty liking, hateful
lu^t^ dangero^s to thy body, and damnation to thy Soul. It Is a saying not so
common as true, that he which looks continually against the Sun shall at
la^^ be blind^^ that who so handles pitch must needs be de^iled, the tree
(...) abides many blasts, at last falls by the Carpenter (...), the bird y^
strikes at every stale cannot long escape the (...), ^o long goes the pitcher
to the brooke^ that at last it ^omes broken home, and he that securely
swimmeth in (...) shall surely be drowned in iniquity, who so ^indeth sins
together shall never be never be vnreue^g^d in the one, and he that delights
to offend in youth, shall no doubt fe^le the punishment. Quod defir^ur n^n
^nfertur. Though GOD for a time suffer a man to wallow in his own wick^^nesse,
and to say unto his soul, Tush the Lord regards not the way of sin (...)
seem the more, and thy sin the greater. He that has the dropsy, drinks
while he bursteth and yet not (...); the Horseleach has two daughters that
never try ^^^ugh who so is slung with the Serpent Dipsas, burns, ^ut can
never be c^^led: and who so is inflamed with sin, thirsts continually
after wickednes^ until he has s^ppe^ the dregs of Gods displeasure, to his
own destruction. Beware by this, fall not into the trap, when thou fee^^ the
train: for knowing the sin, if thou offendest against thine own conscience;
the Lord will send upon thee cursing, trouble, and shame in all that thou
set thy hand unto, and will not cease to revenge until thou perish from
off the face of the earth. Oh have thou not at home an Isabel that is the wife
of thy youth and the only friend of thy bosom, endued with such exquisit^
beauty and exce^ding virtue, that it is hard to judge whether the pure
complexion of her body, or the perfect consti^ution of her mind, holds the
supremacy. And is not a peaceable woman and of a good heart, the gi^t of the
Lord? There is nothing so much worth as a woman well instructed^ a shame fast
and faithful woman is a double grace, and there is no treasure to be compared
to her continent mind: but as the glistering beams of y^ sun when it arises,
decketh the heaven: so the beauty of a good wife adorneth the house: and as
golden pillars ^^e shine upon the sockets of silver, so does a fair face in a
virtuous mind. Shall the fear of God then Francesco be so far from thine
eyes as to leave thine own wife and embrace a Curtizan, to leave the law of
God, and suffer thy heart to be subverted by ^u^t. The Lion so abhors this
crime, as he kills the Lioness, for commit^ing this fac^. The Storke never
m^dlet^ (...) with ^is (...). The Iaci^th (...) w^^ not be wor^e on the (...)
of (...), nor the Olive grow, if pl^^ed (...) one tha^ lends his life in
unlawful lusts: and will thou (...) thy self more ^a^^les in this crime than
(...), more ^^ckles th^^ unreasonable creatures, more (...) than (...)^ y^a far
less in virtue than a man, and far (...) vice tha^ a beast. The^ (...) the
Lord l^ok down from heaven, and plague thee with a heavy (...). At this ^^^use
standing a great while in a maze, at last he stepe to h^s (...) and wrote this
answer.

Francesco wishes to Infida remorse of conscience, and regard of honesty.
I Have read thy letters Infida wherein I hoped to have (...) more honesty and
l^sse vani^y; a sign of better though^^^ and lines of more remorse; else had I
lef^ them sealed, as I c^uet to leave thee unseen. But I percei^e as no time
will alter the Panther from his spots, the Mouse from her fear, nor the Tiger
from his fearcenes; so neith^r date nor reason will change the conditions of a
Curtizan: Thou writest thou are pe^i^^^^, so I think, but it is no^ for thy
sins; but that thou have not liberty enough to ^in, enioynd by some
overthwart neighbor to be more honest than thou wo^l^^t be, which is ^s great
a penance to one of thy trade, as along pilgrimage to a s^^rowful Palme^. A
^eare in a (...) like heat ^^ops in a bright (...) the Crocodile when she
weep^, a Cur^e^^^s laughter is like to lightning, y^ beawtifies the ^eau^^ for
a bl^ze but fore^^^ storms and thunder. Art tho^ in love with Francesco,
^^^rie gippe Giglet, thy love sits on thy ^onges (...), ready to leap off
as soon as thy mouth ope^s^ and thine hones^ie hangs at thine ^ye^ which fall^
away with every (...) art (...) with my be aw^^, that is because thou hear^^t
I have a rich p^rse, not afaire face^ for thou va^e west as much of beauty
without pence, as a horse of a foyre ^tabl^ without prene^der. Thou art en^ised
by my virtues, I wonder how that word virtue comes in thy mouth, when it is so
far from thy heart^ and pe^^^o^r^^^^e, for the most infectious Serpents have
sweet^t breathes: and the commone^t Curtezans, the most courteous speeches.

Thou wo^ldest have me grace thee with my prese^^^^ and (...) our old^
friendship: so I will, when ^ mean to give my body to y^ Surgeon, and my
Soul to the Devil: for in loving thee, I must needs grant this Legacy. Thy
reason is, that bones once broken, united again, are the strongest. I would
thy neck might make the experience, and then I would trust the instance. But
why pe^ter I so much paper to so lew^ a person? as I found thee at the first, I
leave thee at the last, even empty gordgde to bai^e at a full purse,
incon^inient, false, perjured; as far from God as thou art friend to the
Devil: and so adieu.

Franc^sco penitent, and therefore a persecuter of curtizans.


AFter he had written this letter he sent it to Infida, ^horeading it, and
seeing she could get^e no (...) at the hands of Francesco; that wrought she
never so subtillie, yet her trains were discovered, that her painted luers
could no^ make him stoop, so had ^e with reason re^elled his former folly:
when she perceived (I say) that all her (...) potions were found to ^e^
poyso^s, though she covered them never so clarkly^ she ^el not in despair
with overmuch love, but swore in her self to intend him some sec^e^e
^^eiudice, if ever it lay in her by any means to procure i^: but leaving her
to the Justice of him that poyseth the deeds of such impenitent persons in his
balance, and committing Francesco to the making of some strange comedie^ I
will show you how Fortune made an assault to the unfeigned affection of fair
Isabel.

The discourse of Isabels Fortune^.
ISabel living thus pensive in that she wanted ^^e presence of her Francesco,
yet for her patience and virtue grew so famous, that all Caerbranck talked of
her pe^fections: her beauty was admired of every eye, be ^^^lities applauded
in every man's ear, that she was esteemed for a pattern of virtuous
excellence throughout the whole City. Amongst the rest that censured of her
curious favors, there was one Signor Bernardo ^ Bourgomaster of the City, who
chauncing on a time to pass by the ^^^re where Isabel so iourned; seeing so
sweet a Saint, began to fa^l enamoured of so fair an object: and although he
was old, yet the fire of lust crept into his eyes and so inflamed his heart,
that with a disordinate desire he began to affect her: but the renown of her
chastity was such, that it almost quatted those sparks that heated him on to
such lawless affection. But yet when he calde to mind that want was a great
stumbling block, and saw the necessity that Isabel was in by the absence of
Francesco, he thought gold would be a ready means to gain a woman's good
will^ and therefore dispayred not of obtaining his purpose. After that this
Signor Bernardo had well noted the exquisite perfection of her body, and how
she was adorned with most special gifts of nature, he was so snared with the
^etters of lascivious Concupiscence, as reason could not redress what lust had
ingrafted; his aged years yielded unto danitie, so that he turned away his
mind from God, and durst not lift up his eyes unto heaven, least it should be
a witness of his wickedness, or a corasiue to his guilty conscience: for the
remembrance of God is a terror to the unrighteous, and the sight of his
creatures is a sting to the mind of the ^^probate. He therefore feeling his
devilish heart to b^e ^^rplexed with such hellish passions, carele^^^^ cast
off the (...) of God from before his eyes, neither remembr^^^ (...) was an
Elder to give good counsel, ^or a Judge in the ^^tie to minister right: his
hoarie hairs could not have him from sin, nor his calling convert him from
filthiness, but he greedily drunk up the dregs (...) carefully ^us^ed his
brains to oppress (...) obtain his purpose (...) his (...) thus. Being (...)
Bourgomaster in all the city, he determined to make a privy search for some
suspected person; and being master of the watch himself, to go up into her
chamber, and there to discover the depth of his desire, so he thought to join
love and opportunity in one union, and with his office and his age to wipe out
all suspicion. Age is a crown of glory when it is adorned with
righteousness, but the dregs of dishonor when it is mingled with mischief:
for honorable age consists not in the term of years, nor is not measured
by the date of a man's days, but godly wisdom is the gray hair, and an
vndef^led life is ^lde age. The Herb grace the older it is, the ranker smell
it has: the Sea star is most black being old: the Eagle the more years,
the more crooked is her bill; and the greater age in wicked men, the more
unrighteousness: which this Signor Bernardo tried true; for desire made him
hate delap, and therefore within two or three nights, picking out a watch
answerable to his wish, he himself (as if it had been some matter of great
import) went abroad, and to color his folly with the better shadow, he
searched diverse houses, and at last came to the place where Isabel lay,
charging the host to rise and to show him her chamber; for (quoth he) I must
confer with her of most secret affairs. The good man of the house obeyed
willingly, as one that held Bernardo in great reverence, and brought him and
the match to the chamber door. Bernardo taking a ^andle in his hand, ^ad them
all depart till he had ^alked with the Gentlewoman, which they did, and he
entering in shutting the door, found her fast on sleep; which fight ^raue the
old Lecher into a (...) for there seein^ nature in her pride, lust (...) him
y^ more, that he sat on ^he bed side a great while viewing of her beauty: at
last starting up, he awak^ her out of a sw^ete ^^umbe^^ Isabel looking up, and
seeing one of the Bourgomasters in the chamber, (for Bernardo was known for
his grauit^^ and wealth of every one in the City) she was amazed^ yet
gathering her wits together, raising herself up on her pillowe, (...) although
he knew she (...) rightly refell hi^ folly, and ^a^^ly perceived her
c^^^s^ile cooled the extreme of his desires, yet the fear of God was so far
from him, that he prosecuted his intent thus.

Signor Bernardos answer to Isabels reply.
WHy Isabel (quoth he) think thou thy painted sp^^^ches, or thy hard
d^nialls shall preu^il^ against (...) pretended purpose? No, he is a coward
that y^eldeth at the first shot, and h^ no^ w^^thie to wear the bud of beauty
that is daunted with the (...) repulse. I have the tr^e in my hand and mean to
enjoy the fruit: I have he^ten the bush and now will not let the birds ^^ie^
and seei^g (...) here alone, your (...) shall stand for no sterlin^ that if you
consent, be (...) of a most trust^e fr^^nd^ if not, hope for no other hap b^^
open infamy. For ^^ou know ( Isabel) that a woman's chiefest treasure is her
good (...), and that she which has (...) her ^redite is h^lfe hanged, for
death cu^s off all miseries, but (...) is y^ beginning of all sorrows. Since
then infamy i^ worse than loss of life, assure thy self I will (...) thee to
the quick, for I will presently send thee to prison, and cause some R^ffi^n
in the city to swear that stars y^ absence of thy (...) Franc^s^^^ he has
(...) so shall (...) punishm^nt, and make (...) laughing stock to the world,
odious to thy friends, and to live hated of thy husband: mine (...) and
au^hor^tie, my ag^ and (...) my pr^ten^e (...) th^n (^ai^e Is^bel) (...) of thy
(...) thy self a wi^e woman, (...) ^^^^bel hearing the mis^hieuous (...)
Le^h^r and se^ing he had (...) she could not avoid (...) of the body or the
destruction of the soul, was so driven into such a passionate dilemma, that
she burst forth into tears, sighs and plaints, which she blubbred forth on
this wise.

Alas (quoth she) most vile and unjust wretch, is the fear of God so far
from thy mind, that thou seek not only to sack mine honor, but to suck
my blood? Is it not injury enough that thou seek to spoil mine honesty,
but that you long to spill my life? Has thy sweet love pretended such bitter
taste? Is this the fruit of your fained fancy? No doubt the cause must be
pernicious when the effect is so pestilent. Flatter not yourselfe in this thy
folly, nor sooth not thy thoughts in thy sins; for there is a God that sees
and will revenge, and has promised that who binds two (...) together shall
not be unpunished in the one. But what avails it to talk of wisdom to a
fool, or of the wrath of God to a wilful reprobate. The Charmer charm he
never so wisely, charms in vain if the Adder be deaffe; and he casts stones
against the wind that seeks to draw the wicked from his folly: let me
therefore (poor soul) more narrowly consider mine own case, I am perplexed
with diverse doubtful passions, and grievous troubles assaileth me on every
side: if I commit this crime though never so secretly, yet the Lord is (...),
and pearceth into the very thoughts, and mine own conscience will be a
continual witness against me of this wickedness: Stopendium peccatimors,
then what other hap can I hope for but perpetual damnation, since the Lord
himself has promised to be a swi^^ witness against all wilful adulterers:
And if I consent not unto this unrighteous wretch, I am like to be unjustly
accused of the like crime, and so shall I being guiltless, have mine honor
ever blemishe with infamy. By this means what a discredit shall I bring to
my parents, to my husband and my children: the hoarie hai^es of my father shall
be brought with sorrow unto the grave, Francesco shall be ashamed to show his
face in the streates of the City, and my (...) seed of an harlot^ and (...)
alas I m^ self (...) ^acklesse. Why my secret offense shall (...) all this open
shame; The Lord is slow to wr^th, (...) his mercy exceeds al his works: he
wishes not the death (...) and (...) repentance pacifi^th his displeasure. But
oh vile wretch that I am, why do I blaspheme (...) the L^^ and his Law? why
do A (...) C^n I say I will rep^^^ at my (...) or shall I (...) sin in hope
because the Lord is merci^^ll? (...), it i^ better for me to fall into thy
hands (...) commit the (...) than to sin in the sight of the Lor^^ shall I
not rather fear God than man; and dread him more that kills both soul and
body, than him that h^th power (...) to kill the body only? Yet his fear
shall be my def^^ce. (...) with (...) she raised her self up, spitted in his
face, and wished him to do his worst: whereupon ^e calle^ up the w^tch, and
commanded her to make he ready, for sh^^ should to prison. Her Host wondering
what the cause should (...) to her ^ctions and the ^ertue of he^ life; (...)
his word for he^, that she should the ^ext day (...) whatsoever should be
objected against her^ but hi^ wo^de would not be taken; for Bernardo (...)
^ull of ^urie, and carried her away to prison; where d^epel^ grie^^d, and yet
smothering her sorrow wi^h patience, (...) next morrow as soon as day brake,
she called for pen and inck and wrote this mournful (...).

Isabels Sonnet that she made in prison.
^
No (...)
For (...)
The (...)
The (...)
Report that sild to honor is a friend,
May many li^s against true meaning mynt:
But yet at last,
Against slanders blast,
Truth does the silly sackles soul defend.
Though false reproach seeks honor to distaine,
And envy bites the bud though nere so pure,
Though lust does seek to blemish ^hast desire:
Yet truth tha^ b^o^kes not falsehoods flaunderous stain,
Nor can the spite of en^ies wrath endure:
Will try tru^ love from lust in I^stice fire:
And mau^ge^ all
Well free from thr^^^
The guiltles soul that keeps his footing sure.
Where innocence triumphs in her prime,
And guilt cannot approach the honest mind;
Where chaste intent is free from any miss,
Though (...) strive, yet searching time
With piercing insight will the truth out find,
And make discovery who the guilty is^
For time still tries
The truth from lies:
And God makes open what the world does blinds.
Veritas Temp^ris filia.
ISabel wetting her sonnet with ^eares, and pronouncing every line with a sigh,
sat in a dump. Whilst the fame of this fact was spread abroad throughou^ al
Caerbra^ck, every man began sundry conjectures as affection led them: her
friends sorrowing suspected the cankred mind of the Burgomaster; yet for his
calling durst not discover their suspicion: her foes laughing said, that
dissembled holiness was a double sin, and that the holi^st cou^^enaunce has
(...) mischiefs, I thought it my duty to bring her into open infamy that she
may be punished for her fault, known for a h^rlot, and from henceforth live
despised and hated of all For proof that she has lived long in this leawd
kind of life, this young man shall here before you all make present
deposition; and with that he reached him ^ bible: whereo^ he swore that he had
long time conuerst dishonestly with Isabel, ever since the departure of her
husband. At which oath the people that were Jurors in the cause, believing the
protestation of Bernardo, and the deposition of the youth, presently found her
guilty: and then Bernardo and the rest of the B^rgomasters gave judgment,
that she should presently have some open and seue^^ punishment, and after ^t
banished ^ut of the town. As Soon as Isabel heard the censure, she appeald for
no mercy, nor bashed any whit, as one desirous of favor; but lifting up her
eyes to heaven, only said thus. O God which see the secrets of all hearts,
and know all things before they come to pass, which des^er^est the very
inward thoughts, and ^riest the heart and the reins: Thou knowe^t that because
I would not consent unto the filthy Just of this ^oting lecher; nor agree by
defiling my husbands bed to fulfill his fleshly desires, that he has slandred
me with that crime whereof I was never guilty, that he has produced this young
man by sinister subornation to periure himself in a fault whereas not so much as
in thought I committed such a fact; he has to satisfy his malicious mind
without cause devised this false crime. I confess O Lordis be a most grievous
offend^r, and to deserve far greater punishment, but not for this d^^^e.
Hear then O Lord my pr^yer, and let the innocence of my case plead before thy
divine maies^y: if it be thy will pre^^^^ his (...), confound his counsels and
let him which has dug the pit for others, fall into the snare himself.
Thou have never as yet O Lord lets the su^c^^rles without helpe^ but have
delivered them which fear thee from al aduersiti^: thou did^se set free Joseph
from the hands of his brethren which sought to spill his blood, and did
prevent the practices of S^^l, inte^^ed against thy servant Dauid^ Elize^^
(...) Dotham was not only freed from his (...) but also guarded about with a
troop of holy Angels: Elias was ^reserued from the cruel^ie of Iesabel, and
(...) with Ravens. But chiefly in my case; how mightily ^i^st thou (...)
Susanna from the ^reacherie of the two Elders in raising up young Daniel to
maintain her right^ Nay (...) has trusted in thy mercy, which has come to
mish^ppe^ or who has put his hope in thee and has suffered harm. So O Lord,
if it be thy will thou can disciose the devise of this Signor Bernardo, and
unfold the follyes of this false wit^esse: help then O LORD, for in thee is
my trust.

The people hearing the solemn protestation of sorrowful Isabel, though^ she
had spoken these words to excuse her fault, but not that she was guiltles of
the fact; giving more credit to the reverend age of Bernardo, and the ^ath of
the young man countena^^tou^ by the B^rgomaster; th^n to the young yea^es of a
simple woman, supposing her speeches were more of custom^ to cloak her
follies, than of conscience to clear her of that crime; and therefore they
would have returned her back again unto prison, till the day assigned for her
punishment. As sh^e was ready to be carried away, he which had accused I^abel
^^are up as a man lu^^ticke, and cried out unto the peopl^^ Thus I have ^ame^
men of Caerbranck, I have sinned^ the thought of my ^^esent perjury is a hell
to my (...); for I hau^ (...) fal^ly against the innocent and have consented to
condemn Isabel without cause: an^ wi^h that he (...) at the ba^re how Signor
Bernardo had (...) him against the Gentlewoman, and how in all hi^ life before
he never wa^ in her comp^^^e. (...) which confession of the young man, the
Burg^m^st^^s examined the matter more effec^^ally, and found tha^ ^sabel was
clear, tha^^, honest and virtuous, and Bernardo was a doting lecher: where^p^^
they not only amersed him in a great fine, to be paid to Isabel, but put him
for ever after from ^earing any office in the City.

Thus was Isabel delivered from her enemies, and reckoned more famous for her
chastity through al Caerbranck. This strange event spread abroad through all
the countrey^ and as fame ^lies swift and far, so at last i^ came to the ears
of Francesco: for he sitting in Tr^ynouant at an ordinary amongst other
Gentleman, heard this fortune of Isabel reported at the table for strange
news, by a Gentleman of Caerbranck, who brought in Isabel for a myrrour of
chastity, and added this more, that she was married to a Gentleman of a ripe
wit, good parentage, and well skild in the liberal Sciences, but (quoth he)
an vnthrist; and one that has not been with his wife this six years. At
this all the table condemned him as passing unkind, that could wrong so
virtuous i^ wife with absence: He was silent and blushed, feeling the worm of
his conscience to wring him; and that with inch a sharp sting, that as soon as
he got into his chamber, he fell to meditate with himself of the great abuses
he offered his wife, the excellence of her exterior perfection, her beauty,
virtue, and other rare ornaments of nature presented themselves into his
thoughts, that he began not only to be passing passionate; but deeply
penitent, sorrowing as much at his former follies, as his hope was to joy in
his ensuing goood fortunes: Now he saw that Omnia sub sole vanitas: that
beauty without virtue was like to a glorious flower without any operation,
which the Apothecaries set in their shoppes for to be seen, but as soon as it
withers, they cast it into the furnace as an unprofitable weed: that the
imbracings of a Curtizan seem they never so sweet, yet they were the paths to
destruction; that their looks were stales unto death, and the foldes of their
hands are fetters to snare men in sin. Now he saw that pride was extreme
folly, for such as look^ most high against the Sun grew soonest blind: that
Icarus caught his fall, by soring high^ that ^ime (...) spent in^^^itie, in
ryotous company, amongst a ^rew of careless Caualier^, that would boast it in
the town, not brave in the field wa^ neither to be recalled nor recompen^^.
Oh Francesco (quoth he) how (...) thou been lead away with every loo^e, fed
upon with Trencher flie^, eaten alive ^ith fla^te^^rs, given to look at a
^^oddesse more than thy God, more ready to a Bowl th^n thy Boo^e, squaring in
the streets when thou shoul^^st be meditating in thy chamber. If thou know
these to be extreme parts o^ folly, repent and amend: The Dear knowing
Tam^risk is deadly to his nature, scorns to come near the tree. The Unicorne
will not brook to re^t under a Cytron t^ee, for that he holds it mortal:
The Eleph^n^ will fly out of the comp^nie of a murderer. These brute beasts
avoid what nature tells them is perilous: thou huntest after those harms with
greediness, that thou know are prejudicial.

Well Francesco, then now or else n^uer they with such follies; step at the
bottom, and then it is S^ro, (...) let it be Seri^^ home to thy wife of shy
youth, recon^ile thy self to her, she will forgive and forget thy former
fondness, and entertain her penitent pa^^m^^r, with as great kind^esse^ as he
comes home with penau^^e: What man, Nu^qu^^ sera ^st ad bonos mores via. With
that Francesco took ^en^ and paper, and wrote this (...).

Francescoes Sonnet, made in the prim^ of his penance.
With sweating brows I long have plowde the sand^^
My seeds was youth, my cr^ppe was endl^sse care:
Repent has sent me home with empty hands
At last, to tell how rife our follies are:
And time has left experience to approue^
The gain is grief to those that traffic love.
The sil^nt thought of my repentant ye^res
That fill my head, have called m^ home at last:
Now love unmasked a wanton wretch apeares;
Begot by guilefull thought with over have.
In prime of youth a rose, in age a we^de,
That for a minutes i^ye pays endless need.
Dead to delights, a foe to fond conceit,
Allied to wit by want, and sorrow bought:
Farewell fond youth, long fostred in deceit:
Forgive me Time disguis^ in idle thought.
And Love adieu, lo hasting to mine end;
I find no time too late for to amend.
Having framed this sonet, he gave the copy to some of his friends^ making
ma^ifest to them his resolution to leave Troynouant, and to go home, and by
their help, who furnished him with such necessaries ^s he did want, he in short
time took his iour^ey. The day of his departure was joyful to all his
friends, in so much that as many as knew of his Iurney, gathered themselves
together, and made him a banquet; where (very merry and pleasant) they
karoust to the health of his Isabel: One amongst the rest who loved Francesco
so tenderly, took a cup of wine in his hand, and with tears in his eyes,
said thus: Francesco, I have nothing to give thee, being my self pinched with
want: but some precepte^ of wit that I have bought with much experience,
those shall thou have at my hands. which if thou put in practice, think I have
given much tre^sure.

The farewell of a friend.
1 Let gods worship be thy mornings work, and his wisdom the direction of thy
days labor. 2 Rise not without thanks, not sleep not without repentance. 3
Choose but a few friends and try those; for the fla^terer speaks fairest. 4
If thy wife be wise make her thy Secretary, else lock thy thoughts in thy
heart, for women are sildome silent. 5 If she be fair, be not jealous; for
suspicion cures not women's follies. 6 If she be wise, wrong her not: for if
thou love others she will loath thee. 7 Let thy childrens nou^^ure be their
richest portion: for wisdom is more precious than wealth. 8 Be not proud
amongst thy poor neighbors: for a poor man's hate is perilous. 9 Nor too
familiar with great men: for presumption wins disdain. 10 Neither be too
prodigal in thy fare, nor die not indebted to thy belly, but enough is a
feast. 11 Be no^ envious, least thou fall in thine own thoughes. 12 Use
patience, mirth, and quiet: for care is enemy to health.
And Francesco (quoth his friend) that thou may remember my precepts I
drink to thee. Upon this he pl^^ged him, and so in pleasant that they past
away the time till breakfast was done, and then he ga^ him to horse, and then
brought him a mile out of the Cit^e. At last, alt^ough they played loath to
depart, yet Francesco must away, but before he departe^, when they were ready
to shake hands, (...) out of his sleeue a Sonnet that he had made and gave them
it. The effec^s were these.

Francescos Sonnet called his parting blow.
Reason that long in prison of my will
Have wept thy mistress wants and loss of time:
Thy wonted siege of honor safely clime,
To thee I yield as guilty of mine ill.
Lo (fettered in their tears) mine eyes are pressed
To pay due homage to their nati^e guide,
My wretched heart wounded with bad betide,
To crave his peace f^^m reason, is addressed.
My thoughts ashamd since by themselves consumd,
Have done their duty to rep^ntant wit:
Ashamde of all sweet guide I sorry sit,
To see in youth how I too far presumde.
Thus he whom love and error did betray,
Subscribes to thee, and takes the better way.
Sero sed serio.
As Soon as he had delivered them the Sonnet, shaking hands, he put spurs to
his horse and road onward on his iourney^ within five vaies he arrived at
Caerbrancke, where as soon as he was lighte^ he went to the house where his
wife soiourned, and one of the maids espying Francesco, yet knew him for all
his long absence, and ^anne in and told it to Isabel that her husband was at
the d^ore: she being at work in he^ chamber, sat at this news a^ one in an
ecstasy, until Francesco came up, who (...) ^he (...) sighe of his wife,
considering the excellency of her beauty, her virtues, chastity, and other
perfections, and measuring he^ constancy with his disloyalty, stood as a man
metamorph^sed: at last he began thus.

Ah Isabel, what shall I say to thy fortunes or my (...)? what exordium shall I
^se to show my penance, or disco^e^ my sorrows, or express my present joys
and For I ^ell th^e I conceive as great pleasure to s^^ th^^ well, as grief in
that I have wronged thee with my absence. Might sighs, ( Isabel) tears,
plaints, or any such exterior p^ssions pourtray out my inward repentance, I
would show thee the Anatomy of a most distressed man: but amongst many
sorrowing thoughts there is such a confusion, that superflu^^^^ ^f griefs
stops the source of my discontent. To figure out my follies or the extremity
of my fancie^, were but to m^nifest the bad course of my life^ and ^o ra^ the
fearre by ^^^ting out mine own scathe^ a^^ theref^re (...) it suffice, I
r^pent heartelie, I sorrow ^eeplie, and mean to amend and continue in the
same constan^ite. A^ th^^ Francesco st^^de and w^p^, which Isabel seeing,
contained by ^is outward griefs his secret passions, and therefore taking him
about the neck, wetting his cheeks with the tears that fell from her eyes,
she made him this womanly, and wise answer.

What Francesco, come thou home full of woes, or s^ekest thou at thy return
to make me weep? Have thou be^^ long absent, and now bring thou me a
treatise of discon^ent? I see thou are penitent, and therefore I like not to
hear wh^t follie^ are past. It (...) for Isabel that he^cefoor^h thou will
love I^^bel. and upon that condition without any more words welcome to Isabel.
With that she smiled and wept, and in doing both together sealed up all her
contrary passions in a kiss. Many lo^kes p^st between them, many odd (...)
and many fauours^ but what they did, or how they agreed in secret that I (...)
forth they come great (...) out of the chamber, where Francesco was welcomed
home of his wifes ^ost with great cheate^ who to show his kindness the more,
^ad provided ^ ^^lemne ^an^^e^, having hidden many of hi^ neighbors to supper,
that they might accompany F^^^^esco.

Well, supper being done and they sitting by the fire, the host seeing them all
in a dumpe, said, that to drive them out of their melancholy he would tell
them a tale, which they al desirous of, sat silent, and he began thus.

The Hosts tale.
IN Thessalie, where Nature has made the soil proud with the beauty of
Shepherds, there dwelled a swayne called Selador; ancient, as having age
seated in his hairs; and wealthy, as infeoffed with great possessions; and
honest, as being endued with many virtuous qualities. This Selador had to joy
him in his age a daughter of great beauty, so exquisite in her exterior
feature, as no blemish might eclipse the glory that Nature b^stowed in her
liniaments. As thus she was fair, so was she wise, and with her wit joined
virtue, that to behold, she was Helena; to hear, Pallas; and to court, a
Daphne. This Damsel whose name was Mirimida, kept her fathers sheep, and in
a scarlet peticoate, with a chaplet of flowers on her head, went every day to
the ^^^lds, where she plide the care of her fathers foldes with such diligence,
that she seemed with Labor to enter arms against Love, and with her hands
thrift to prevent her hear^s grief. Using thus daily the playnes of
Thessalie, the Shepherds delighted at the gaze of so excellent an object, and
held their eyes fortunate when they might behold her feature, esteeming him
happy that could lay his flocks nearest to her foldes. Amongst the rest of
all the swaynes that fed their thoughts (...) he favors, there was one called
Eurymachus, a young youth that had the pride of his years triumphing in his
countenance, witty and full of pleasant conceits, and that Fortune might
iumpe with love, and make him gracious in women's eyes he was wealthy; for gold
is the Chrisocoll of love. This Eurymachus always so plotten the course of his
sheep walk, that he was next neighbor to Mirimida, in so much that to
discover his fancy he did her often favors; for when any of her Lambs went
^^tray, or any thing grew amiss, then Eurymachus was the swayne that
endeavored by his labor to redress every loss. By this means he waxed
private and familiar with Mirimida, which was the means that wrought him into
a prejudicial l^borinth; for he did so near acced^r^ ad ig^em, that he did
calescere plu^ quam saetis: for as none comes near the fume of the Misselden
but he waxes blind, nor any touch the Salamander but he is troubled with the
palsy; so none could gaze on the face of Mirimida (...) they went away
l^nguishing. This did poor E^rymachus experience: for although he knew Loves
fires were fatal, and did not warm but scortch; yet he loved with the bird ^o
fly to the ^lame though he burn his wings and fell in the ^ush; he would not
with Ulysses stop his ears, but sit and sing with the Syreus; he feared no
enchantment, but caroust with Circes, till his ouerdaring drew him into a
passionate danger, and so long sucked in the beauty of Mirimida with his ever
thirsty eyes, till his heart was fuller of passions, than his eyes of
affections: yet discover his thoughts he durst not, but smoothered up his
inward pains with outward silence; having the Oven the hatter within for that
it was dam^ up, and his gre^fes the deeper for that they were concealed. To
ma^ifest his malady to her he durst no^, he thought himself too homely a
patient for such a Physician: to utter his loue^ to another and make any his
Secretary but himself, he supposed was to draw in a rival to his loves.
Thus was Eurymachus perplexed, till at last to give a little ^ent to the flame,
sitting on a day on a hill, he pulled forth pen and incke, and wrote this
fancy.

Eurymachus fancy in the prime of his affection.
When lordly Saturn in a sable roabe
Sat full of frowns and mourning in the West,
The evening star scarce p^^pt from out her lodge,
And Phoebus nowly gallopt to his rest:
Even th^n
Did I
Within my boat sit in the silent streams,
All void of cares as he that lies and dr^am^s.
As Phao so a Ferriman I was,
The country lasses said I was too fair,
With easy toil I labourd at mine ^are,
To pass from side to side who did repair:
And then
Did I
For pain^s take pence, and Charon like transport
As Soon the swayne as men of high import.
When want of work did give me l^aue to rest,
My sport was catching of the wanton fish:
So did I wear the tedious time away,
And with my labor mended often my dish^
For why
I thought
That idle hours were Calenders of ruth^
And time ill spent was prejudice to youth.
I scornd to love, for were the Nymph as fa^re
As she that loved the beauteous Latmian swayne,
Her face, her eyes, her tresses, nor her brows
Like Iuorie could my affection gain:
For^ by
I said
With high disdain, Love is a base desire,
And Cupids flames, why the are but ^atrie fire.
As thus I sat disdayning of proud love,
Have ever F^rri^^^ there cried a boy,
And with him was a paragon, for bu^
A lovely (...) beauteous and coy,
And ^^ere
With her.
A maiden, covered with a t^^nie val^,
Her face unseen far breeding lovers bal^.
I stird my boat, and when I came to shore
The boy was wingd, me thought it was a wonder:
The dame had eyes like lightning or the flash
That runs before ^he (...) report of thunder;
Her smiles.
Were sweet^,
Lovely her face: was near so fair a creature,
For earthly cark^sse had a heavenly feature.
My friend (quoth she) (...) behold,
We three must pass, but not af^r thing fare,
But I will give (for (...) Queen of l^ue)
The brightest less thou like unto thy share,
Choose where
Thou ^^est,
Be she as fair as Loves sweet Ladi^ is,
She shall (...) if (...) will be thy bliss.
With that she smiled with such a pleasing face,
As might have made the marble rock relent:
But that I triumph^ in disdain of love,
Bad (...) on him (...) ^o fond love was bent,
And then
Said thus,
So light the Ferriman for love does care,
As Venus pass not, if she pay no f^r^.
At thi^^^ a frown ^at on her angry brow,
She winkes upon her wanton son hard by:
He from his quiver drow a bolt of fire,
And aymd so right as that he pearst mine eye:
And then
Did she
Draw down the v^le that hid the virgins face,
Whose heavenly beauti^ lightened all the place.
Straight then I leande mine arm upon mine ear,
And ^ookt upon the Nymph (if so) was fair:
Her eyes were stars, and like Apollos lo^ks
Me thought appeard the tramels of her hair.
Thus did
I ga^e
And sucked in beauty till that sweet desire
Cast fue^^ on and set my thought on fire.
When I was lodgd within the net of love,
And that they saw my heart was all on flame,
The Nymph away, and with her trips along
The winged boy, and with her goes his dame.
Oh then
I cried
Stay Ladies stay and take not any care^
You all shall pass and pay no penny fare^
Away they fling, and looking coylie back
They laugh at me: oh with a loud disdain.
I send out sighs to overtake the Nimphs,
And t^^res a^ lures to call them back again:
But ^^ey
Fly ^hence,
But I sit in my boat^, with (...)
And feel a pain^, (...) know not what (...) sore.
At last I feel it is the flame of love,
I strive but bootlesse to express the pain,
It cooles, it fires, i^ hopes, i^ feare^, i^ fr^ts,
And s^irreth passions thr^^ghout every (...)
That (...)
I sat^
And sighing did fair^ Venus laws appr^^^,
And swore n^ thing so ^weete and sour as love,
^r^ ^lorida pungu^^.
Having made this Canzon he put it in his bosom, and often when he was by
himself would read it, easing his passion with viewing the conceip^s of his
own fancy: on a day having brought down his s^eep^ he espies Mirimida, and
to her he goes, and after his wonted salut^ sat down by her, and fell to such
that (...), int^rmedling his passion with so (...) sighs, (...) his eye so
effectually upon her face without (...), that she perceived the Shepherd had
(...), and that there was none but she that b^re the Antidote. As thus she
noated his passions, she espied a (...) of paper sticking out of his bosom,
which she (...) p^^ceiuing it was a Sonne^ she read it, and th^^ lo^king
earnestly on Eurymachus (...), and she with a friendly smile began to cross
him (...) this (...).

What Eurymachus (...) labors wipe away wanton Amors, nor thy sh^^pes care
prevent thy (...) love? I had thought fancy (...) not (...) on thy ^^ele, nor
affection presented any object ^o thine eye^ (...) now (...) the Cameli^n
cannot live without air, (...)^er without fire: so men (...) quiet in (...)
life, unless they acquaint them with l^ue: I see swaynes are not such swads
but they have thoughts and passions, and be they never so low they can look
at beauty. Corydon in his gray cassocke had his fair Phillis, and Menalcas
could court Galatea in his Shepherds cloak, and Eurymachus be he never so
homely will hazard, but at whom there lies the question.

At whom (quoth Eurymachus) ah Mirimida, at one that is too high for my
thoughes, and too beauteous for my fortunes: so that as I have soared with the
Hobby, I shall bate with the Bunting; and daring with Phaeton, I shall drown
with Icarus: mine eye was too proud, my thoughts too forward; I have stared at
a ^^arre, but shall stumble at a stone, and I fear because I have ouerlookt in
love, I shall be ouerlaid in love. With that he sighed, and Mirimida smiled and
made this reply. Why Eurymachus, a man or a mouse? what is there any Cedar so
high but the slowest snayle will creep to the top? any fortune so base but
will aspire; any love so precious but has his prize? What Eurymachus, a Cat
may look at a King, and a swaynes eye has as high a reach as a Lords look.
Vulcan in his leather suits courted Venus in her silks: the swayne of La^mos
w^ed Luna, both dare^, and both had their desires. What? Love requires not
wealth but courage, and parentage is not so high prizd by fancy as personage:
fe^^e not man, if thou have looked hie, follow thy though^s, and cry loves
favors, for denial is no dishonor. Eurymachus hearing Mirimida in such an
amorous humor, encouraged by her persuasions, thought now to strike while the
iron was hot, and therefore taking her by the hand began thus.

Truth Mirimida, Venus ^awes are bounded with constraint, and when love
leads the eye, desire keeps no compass: when Paris courted Helena, though
she were coy and denied, yet was she not discourteous and disdained; for she
answered thus mildly: Nemo etenim succens^t amanti. This ( Mirimida) makes me
hardy to take thee by the hand, and (...)

Nay (quoth Eu^ymachus) and he took her ^ast by the arm, if I were sure you
had power as Diana had to plague me with Act^^^^ punishment, you pass not
without a little more prattle; if I anger you, it is first a preparation ^o ^
good stomach, for ^holler is a friend to digestion: secondly, as the
Chrisocoll and the gold by long stri^ing together grow to be one metal; so
by o^e falling out we shall be be^ter friends: for Amantium i^ae amoris
redintegratio est.


Therefore (fair Mistress) si^ still and grant some favor to him that is ^e
pained with fancy, I will love you though I am poor, and a King can do but
so much: if you think my degree be to^ low for so high beauty, think of all
parte^ the mean is the mer^iest, and that the Shepherds gray has less
grie^e ^ho^ the Lordly estates: I know women must be coy, because they are
women, and they must have time to be won, or else they would be thought to ^e
wantons^ therefore whatsoever you say now I hold it not authent^call, yet for
that I would have some hope, goo^ M^rimida let me see th^e laugh. She could not
but smile to see the Shepherd so pleasant, and so Eurymathus rested content,
and from amor^us that they fell to talk of other matters till evening grew
on, and then they folded their sheep and with a friendly (...) parted.

Eurymachus was not alone thus (...) of the fal^^ Mirimida, bu^ all the
Shepherds of Thessalie wri^ Po^ms and D^^^es of her bea^^ie, and we^e ^ute^s
to her for favor; she like (...) held love in (...), and yet wa^ courteous to
all (...) other kind of conference. Amongs^ the rest, Venus (^e^^ke) willing
to be pleasant, had (...) one in the laborinth of love called Mullidor, a
^ellow^ ^h^^ was of honest patents, but very poor, and his person^^^ was as if
he had been cast in Esops moul^, his (...) like^ (...) of the largest life in
folio, able to furnish a Coble^^ (...) (...) sat down to his pottage and eat
off his (...) full, the old woman stumbles to the pot again for a fresh mess.
Ah mother (quoth he with a great sigh) no more br^ath ^o nigh^: with that she
clapped her hand o^ her knee, and swore her ^oy was not well that he forsook
his supping, yet he fell to a piece of bacon that stood on the board, and a
^ough barley pudding: but he rose before the rest and gat him into a corner,
where folding his arms together he sat thinking on his love. As Soon as the
rest of the swaynes were up from the table and turning Crabbes in the fire, she
took her son into the seller, and sitting down in her chair began thus.

Son Mullidor, thy cheeks are lea^e, and thou look like le^ton, pale and
wanne, I saw by thy stomach to night thou art not thine own man, thou had
alate (God save thee) a lovely fat pair of cheeks, and now thou look like
a shotte^ herring: Tell me Mullidor, and fear not to tell me, for thou tellest
it to thy mother, what aylest thou? Is it grief of body or of mind that
keeps thee on holidaies from frisking it at the footeball? Thou art not as
thou were wont, and therefore say what thou aylst, and thou sh^l^ see old women
have good counsel.

At th^se speeches of his mother, Mullidor fetch a great sigh, and with that
(being after supper) he brake winde^ which Callena hearing, oh son (quoth
she) it is ^he Collic^ that troubles thee; to bed man, to bed, and we will have
a warm p^tled. The Colic mother, no it is a disease that all the cunning women
in the Country cannot cure, and strangely it holds me for sometimes it pains
me in the head^ somewhiles in mine eyes; my heart, my heart, oh there mother it
plays the devil in a morter^ somewhile it is like a frost, cold^ sometimes as
a fire, hot: when I should sleep then it makes m^ wake; when I eat it
troubles my stomach; when I am in company it makes me sigh; and when I am
alone it makes me cry right out, that I ^an wet one of my new Lo^ker^^
^apkins w^^h weeping. It came to me by a great chau^^e^ for as I (...) on a
fair ^lower, a thing I know not what (...) in at (...) eyes, and ran round
about all my vay^^s, and at last ga^ into my heart, and there ever since has
remained, and there mother ever since so wring^ me, that Mullidor must dye, and
with that he fell on weeping.

Call^na seeing her son shed ^^ares, fell to her hemp^n apron and wipt her
bleared eyes, and at last demanded of him if it were not love. At that
question he hung down his head and fighthed. Ah my son (quoth she) now I see
it is love; for he is such a sneaking fellow, that if he bu^ le^^e in at the
eylid and diue down into the heart, and there rests as cold as a stone, yet
touch him and he wi^^ s^^ike: for t^ll me Mullidor, what is she that thou
lo^est and will not love thee? If she be a woman as I ^m, she cannot ^ut
fancy thee; for mine eye though it be now old (and with that up went her
apron and she wipt them clear) has been a wanton when it was young, and would
have chosen at the first glance the prope^est springall in the Parish: and
trust me Mullidor, but be not proud of it, when I look on thee I find ^hee
so lovely, that I count her worse th^n accursed would not ch^ose thee for her
Paramour. With these words Mullidor began to smile, and trou^led his mother
ere she had half ended he^ tale on this manner.

Mother, I may righ^^y compare the Church to a l^oking glass; for as man may
see himself in the one, and the^e see his proportion: so in the other the
wenches e^^s are a testificate; for vpp^^ whom you se^ all the girls look,
he for foo^e and fare carries away the bell, and I am sure for these two
years I never come in^o the Church and was no sooner set, but the wenches
began to wink one on another to look on me and laugh. Oh ware mother when a
dog wagges his tail he loves his master, and when a woman laughs, for my
life she is over the head and ears in love. Then if my fortune serve me to be
so well thought on, why should I not ^enter on her I love. It is (mother)
Seladors daughter Mirimida. Now Gods blessing on thy heart (quoth Callen^) for
loving such a smugge less, marry her (my son) and thou shall have my
benizon in a clowte. Mirimida? marie it is no mar^ell if thy cheeks are fallen
for her: why, she is the fairest b^ossome in all the town: to her son, to
her, trick thy self up in thy best reparrell, and make no bones at it but on
a woing: for women's desires, I may tell thee boy, are like childrens fancies,
won often with an apple when they refuse an Angel, and Mullidor take this with
thee and fear not to speed: A woman's frown is not ever an instance of
choler: if she refuse thee outwardly, she rega^ds t^ee inwardly; and if she
shake thee up and bid thee be packing, have the better hope, Cats and Dogs come
together by s^ratching: if she smile, then son say to thy self, she is
thine^ and yet women are wyl^e cattle, for I have seen a woman laugh with
anger, and kiss him she has desired to kill: she will be co^ ( Mullidor) but
care not for that, it is but a thing of course; speak thou fair, promise much,
praise her hig^ly, comm^nd her beauty above all, and her virtue more than all,
sigh often, and show thy self full of passions, and as sure as thy cap is of
wool, the wench is thine.

Mullidor hearing his mother give such good counsel, said he would ieopard a
joint, and the next day have a fling at her. With that he said his heart was
eased, and his stomach somewhat come down with her good persuasions:
where^pon the Am^rie was opened, and he turned me over the cantle of a Chee^e
and went to bed. The next morning up he rose, and his holy day roabes went on,
his stand ^ppes ^ewe black^, his cappe fair brush^, and a clean Lockeram
band. Thus ^etyred, away flings Mullidor to the field, and carried away his
sheep and led them into the playnes where Mirimida sought to feed her
flocks: coming there, he (...) that Venus fires as well warm the poor as
the rich, and that deformity was no means to abridge fancy: whereupon she
replied thus. Why Mullidor are you in love, and with me: i^ there none but
Mirimida that can fit your eye, b^ing so many beautiful damzels in Thessalie;
take heed man, look^ before you leap least you fall in the ditch: I am not
good enough for so proper a man as your self, es^e^ially being his mothers
only son: what Mullidor, let m^ counsel you, there are more maids than
Malkin and the country has such choice as may breed your better content: for
mine own part at this time I mean not to marry. It Is no matter quoth Mullidor
what you say: for my mother told me, that maids at first would be coy when
they were wooed, and mynse it as ^were a mare over a mouth full of This^les,
and yet were not a whit the worse to be likte, for it was a matter of custom.
Well then Mullidor quoth Mirimida, leave off for this time to talke^ of love;
and hope the best: to morrow perchance it will be better: for women are like
unto children, that will often refuse an Apple, and straight cry for the paring:
and when they are most hungry, then for fullennesse fast: This Mullidor quoth
she, is the frowardness of love: Marie then quoth he, if they have childrens
malladies, twere good to use childrens medicines, and that's a rod: for ^e they
never so froward, a ier^k or two will make them forward: and if that would
bring women to a good temper; my mother has a stiff cudgel, and I have a
strong arm.

Thus these two past away the day, till presently they espied a farr^ off a
Gentleman with a Ha^ke on his fist, to come riding toward them: who drawing
nie and seeing so fair a Nymph, raind his horse, and stood still, as Acteo^
when he gazed at Diana: at last he alighted, and coming toward her, saluted
her thus curteously^ Fair vi^gin when I saw such a sweet Saint with such a
crooked Apostle, I straight thought Venus had bee^ walking abr^ad^ to take the
^yre with Vulcan; but ass^ne as mine eyes began narrowly to make (...) of thy
b^^utie, I found V^nus ^lemishe with thy rare (...) sheep that are folded by
such (...) are the^e shephear^s that enjoy the presen^e of such a beauteous
creature: no marue^^^ if Apollo became a (...), o^ Mercury a ^eatheard, when
their (...) are recompe^st with such loves. My self fair damasell, if either
my degree were worthy, or my deserts any, wo^lde crave to have entertaineme^t
to become your dutif^l (...) wh^le Mirimida held down her head and blush^: at
last, lifting up her eyes full of modesty, and her face full of (...) colours^
such as flourish out the fronts of Dianas virgins she made the Gentleman this
answer. My servant sit (quoth she) (...), your worth is far above my wealth,
and your dignity (...) high for my degree, p^ore cuntrie Damo^^^^ must not aim
too hie at fortune, nor fly too fast in desires, least ^ooking at their ^eete
with the Peacock they let fall their pl^^es, and so shame at their own
follies: but if my gr^^ w^^^ so great as to enterteine such servants, I must
bestow upon (...) some changable liuorie, to show the ^arietie of the^^ minds^
for men's hearts are like to the ^oli^e, tha^ will (...) to all col^ors but
ble^, and their though^^s into all (...) but const^ncie^ In that sit, ^ou^
(...) ^azled and (...), for Venus, (...) Gentleman t^^s abu^e h^s patience, as
a man conceipted in his own propernesse, and especially before Mirimida,
thwarte^ him thus. You master meacock that stand upon the beauty of your
churmnilke face; as brag with your Buzzard on your fist, as a Sow under an
apple tree: know that we country swains as we are not beholding to Nature
for beauty, so we little account of Fortune. for any favor: Tush man, my
crook back harbors more honest conditions, than thy fleering countenance:
and these course suites, can fetch more pence than thy silks: for I believe
thou makst a sco^^e of the Mercers book: thou have made such sure entrance
there, that thou will never from thence till thou be come out by the ears.
Goodman courtier, though we have backs to bear your fr^mps; yet we have
queake stomack^ tha^ will hardly brook them: and therefore fine fool, be gone
with your foul, or I will so be labor you, as you shall feel my fingers this
f^rtnight: And with that Mull^dor heaued up his sheephook and bent his bro^^s,
so that the Gentleman gi^ing Mirimida the ^die^, he pu^ spurs to his horse and
went his way.

At this manly part of Mullidor, Mirimida laugh^ heartily; and he took a
great conceit, that he had showed himself such a ^all man: Upon this,
Mirimida gave him a Nosegay which stuck in her bosom for a favor; which he
accepted and gratefully, as though another had given him a tun of gold.
Night drew on, and they folded their sheep and departed, she to her Father,
and he toward old Callena, as joyful a man as Paris, when he had the
promise from Venu^^ he plodded on his way with his head full of passions and
his heartfull of new thoughts, and (...) eye was on the Nosegay, in so much
that he stood in a (...) whether it were Love or some other (...) worse (...),
that thu^ hincht him and pin^ht him: at la^^ he fell with himself (...) this
meditation. Now do I pe^^^iue that Love is a purgation, and searches every
v^ines tha^ though and ente^ at the ^ye, yet it runs to the heart, and then
it (...) old coil, where it works like a iuglers (...). Oh Love thou art
like to a flea which ^itest sore, and yet leapest ^way and art not to be found:
or to a pot of strong al^, that makes a man call his Father whoreson: so both
them bewitch a man's wits that he knows not a B. from a Battildore.
Unfortunate Mullidor, and therefore unfortunate, because thou art over the
ears in Love; and with whom? with Mirimida: whose eyes are like to sparks of
f^re, and ^hine like a pound of butter, like to be melted with her beau^y, and
to consume with the frieng flame of fancy. Ah Mullido^ her face is like to a
^ed and white Daisy growing in a green meddow, and thou like a be, that
come and suckest honey from it, and cariest it home to y^ hiue with a heave
and hoe: that is as much to say, as with a head full of woes, and a heart full
of sorrows and mala^ies. Be of good cheer, Mirimida laughes on thee, and thou
know a woman's smile is as good to a lover, as a sunshine day to a Ha^maker:
she shows thee kind looks, and ca^ts many ^ sheeps eye (...) thee: which
signif^es that she counts thee a man worthi^ to iumpe a ma^ch with her: nay
more Mullidor, she has given thee ^ Nosegay of flowers wherein as a top
gallant for all ye rest, is set in Rosemary for remembrance: Ah Mullidor cheer
thy self, fear not; love and fortune favors lusty (...) ^owards are not
friend^ to affection: therefore venter^ for thou has^ won her: else (...) she
not gi^en thee this no^egay. And with this remembering himself, he (...) up,
left off his am^rous passions and ^^udgeth home to his house; where coming i^,
old Calena stumbles to see in wha^ humor her son come ho^e: ^^^^lick he
was, and his ^ap on the one^ide, he asked if supper we^e ready: his mother
seeing his stomach was good, thought there was some hope of her Sons good
fortunes, and therefore said, there was ^ (...) in the po^ that is almost
enough: but son quoth she, what newes^ what success in thy loves? how does
Mirimida (...) Ah, ah, quoth Mullidor, and he smiled, how should I be used: but
as one that was wrape in his m^^hers smock when he was borne, Can the s^nne
want heat, and the winter cold: or a proper man be denied in his suites? No
mother, as soon as I began to circumglaze her with my Sophistry: and to fetch
her about with 2 or three venies: from mi^e eyes I gave her such a thu^p on the
breast, that she would scarce say no: I told her my mind and so wrap^ he in the
prodigallitie of my wit that she said an other time should: but then we
parted laughing, with such a sweet smile that it made me loose in the ha^t
like a dudgin dagger: she gave me this nosegay for a favor, which how I
est^emed it guess you^ thus have I used her in ki^dnesse, and she used me in
courtesy; and so I hope we shall make a friendly conclusion. By my troth son
quoth she, and I hope no less, for I tell you, when maids give gifts, they
mean well; and a woman if she laugh with a glauncing look wishes it were
neither to do nor undone: she is thine my son fear not: and with that she
laid the cloth and se^ victuals on the board where Mullidor tried himself so
tall a trencher man, that his mother perceived by his drift he would not (...)
for love. Leaving this passionate ^ubber, to the conceip^ of his loves ^ let us
return to the young cou^^yer called Radagon, who ^ro^ting a soft pace upon his
cours^r seeing the sun now bright and then ouershadowed with clouds, began to
^o^pare the state of the weather fantas^ically to the humor of his Mirimidas
fancies: saying, when Phoebus was eclipst with a vapor, then she lowred: when
he showed his glory in his brightness, the^ she smiled^ Thus he dallied in
an ^n^oth m^tion so long, that at last he began to feel a fire that fretted
to the heart. Ryding thus in a quandarie he entered into the consideration of
Mirimidas beauty whereupon frolickly in an extemperat humor he made this sonnet.

Radagons Sonnet.
No clear appeard upon the azurd Sky,
A val^ of storms had shadowed Phoebus face^
And in a sable man^le of disgrace:
Sat he that is ycleap^d heavens bright eye,
As though that he,
P^rplex^ for Clitia, meant to leave his place,
And wrapped in sorrows did resolve to di^;
For death to louer^ woes is ever me^
Thus foulded in a hard and mournful laz^
Distressed sat he.
A mistie fogge had thickened all ^he air,
Iris sat solemn and denied her showers
Flora in taunie hid up all her flowers
And would not diaper her meads with fair,
As though that she
Were armd upon the barren earth to lowre
Unto the founts Diana nild repair,
But sat as ouershadowed with despair
Solemn and sad within a withered bower
Her Nymp^es and she.
Mars malecontent lay sick on Venus knee,
Venus in dumps sat muffled with a frown
Juno laid all her frollick humors down,
And Jove, was all in dumps as well as she:
It Was Fates decree.
For Neptune (as he meant the world to drown)
Hea^d up his surges to the highest tre^,
And leagud with Eol, mard the Seamans gle^
Beating the Cedars with his billows down
Thus wroth was he.
My mistress deynes to show her sunb^ight face,
The air cleard up, the clouds did fade away,
Phoebus was frollick when she did display
The gorgious bewties, that her frunt do grace.
So that when she^
But walked abroad, the storms then fled away,
Flora did checker all her treading place,
And Neptune calmde the surg^^ ^ith his mace,
Diana and her Nymphs were bl^the and gaie,
When her they see.
(...) kill a thousand men. Indeed I cannot deny but often sub melle latet
venenum, that beauty without virtue is like a box of Iuorie containing some
balefull Aconiton, or to a fair shoe that wrings the too^e; such love as is
laid upon such a foundation is a short pleasure full of pain, and an affection
bought with a thousand miseries; but a woman that is fair and ve^tuous makes
her husband a joyful man; and whether he be rich or poor, yet always he may
have a joyful heart. A woman that is of a silent tongue, shamefast in
countenance, sober in behavior, and honest in condition, adorned with virtuous
qualities correspondent^ is like a goodly pleasant flower decked with the
colors of all the flowers of the garden: and such a one (quoth he) is
Mirimida, and therefore though she be poor I will love her and like her; and if
she will fancy me I will make her my wife. And upon this he resolved to
prosecute his suit toward her, in so much that as soon as he came home and had
rested himself a while, he stepped to his standish and wrote her a letter.

Radagon was not more pained with this passionate maladi^ than poor
Eurymachus, who could t^ke no r^st, although every day in her presence he fed
his eye with ye beauty of her face: but as the Hidaspis the more he drinks
the more thirsty he is; so Eur^machus the more he looked the more he loved, as
having his eye deeply e^amoured of the object; reveal any more his su^e he
durs^ not, be^^use when he began to that of love she sha^^ him off^ and either
(...) ^way in a rage, or else forced him to fall to other prattle; in so much
that he determined to discourse his mind in a letter^ which he performed as
cunningly as he could and sent it her^

Mullido^ that ass r^pt out his reasons diverse ^imes to Mirimida, until she
was weary of the (...) fooleries, and so with a sharp wor^ or two ^ip^ him on
the pate: whereupon asking his mothers counsel, she persw^ded him to write
unto Mirimida, altho^gh he and a p^n were as fit as an ^^^e and ^ harpe^ (...)
and stealing into the Churchyard under an Appletre^^ (...) in his muses he
framed a letter and sent it her.

Thus had Fortune (meaning to be merry) appointed in her secret synod that al
these three should use one means to possess their loves, and brought it so to
pass that the three letters from these three riuals were delivered at one
instant: which when Mirimida saw, she sat her down and laughed, wondering at the
rarenes of the chance yt should in a moment bring such a conceit to pass; at
last (for as then she was leading forth her sheep) she satte her down, and
looking on the superscription said to her self; what Adamants are fair faces
that can draw both rich, poor and fools to lodge in the laborinth of their
beauties: at this she sighed, and the first letter she broake open, because he
was her first lover, was Eurymachus. The contents whereof were these.

Eurymachus the Shepherd to Mirimida the Goddess of Thessalie.
WHen ( Mirimida) I sit by thy sweet self and wonder at thy sight, feeding as
the Be upon the wealth of thy beauties, the conceit of ^hine excellency
drives me into an ecstasy, that I became dumme with over much delight; for
Nature sets down this as an authenticke principle: Sensibile sensui suppositum
nulla fi^ sensatio.
If the flower be put in the nostrill there is no smell; the color clapped close
to the eye blemisheth the sight: so a lover in presence of his mistress has ye
organs of his speech tied, that he conceales with silence, and sighs out his
smoothered passions with sorrows. Ah Mirimida, consider yt love is such a fire
as either will burst forth or burn the house; it is such a stream as will
either have his course, or break through the banks and make a deluge, or else
force their heart strings crack with secrecy. The^ Mirimida, if I be lavish in
my pen, blame me not yt am so laden with love; if I be bold, attribute it to
thy beauty, not my impudency, and think what I over dare in, it grows
through the extremity of loyal affection, which is so deeply imprinted in my
thoughes, as neither time can diminish nor misfortune blemish. I aim not (
Mirimida) at thy wealth, but at thy virtues; for the more I consider thy
perfection, ye more I grow passionate, and in such an humor, as if thou deny,
there is no means to cure my malady but that salve which heals all
incurable sores, and that is ^eath. Therefore (sweet Mi^imida) consider of my
loves and use me as my loyalty deserves: let not my poverty put in any bar,
nor the baseness of my birth be^ any excuse of thy affection; weigh my
desires, not ^y degrees, and either send me a speedy pla^ster to salve my
^espairing passions, or a corasiue to cut off my lingering sorrows, either thy
favor with life, or thy denial with death, between which I rest in hope till
I hear thine answer.

Thine, who can be no others but thine, the Shepherd Eurymachus.


To the end of this letter (for that he would run des^ant upon his wit) he
set down a Sonnet written in the form of a Madrigale, thus.

Eurimachus in laudem Mirimidae, his Motto Inuita fortuna dedi vota concordia.
When Flora proud in pomp of all her flowers
Sat bright and gay,
And gloried in the d^aw of Iris sh^wers,
And did display
Her mantle checquered all with gaudy green:
Then I
Alone
A mournful man in Er^cine was seen.
With folded arms I trampled through the grass,
Tracing as he
That held the Throane of Fortune brittle glass,
And love to be
Like Fortune fleeting as the restless wind
Mixed
With mists
Whose dampe does make the cleerest eyes grow blind.
Thus in a maze I spied a hideous flame,
I cast my sight,
And saw where blythly bathing in the ^ame
With great delight,
A worm did lie, wrapped in a smokie sweat:
And yet
It Was strange
It careless lay and shrunk not at the heat.
I stood amazd and wondering at the sight,
While that a dame
That shone like to the heavens rich sparkling light,
Discourst the same:
And said, my friend this worm within the fire
Which lies
Content,
Is Venus worm, and represents desire.
A Salamander is this princely beast,
Decked with a crown,
Given him by Cupid as a gorgeo^s erest
Against fortunes frown,
Content he lies and bathes him in the flame,
And goes
Not foorth^
For why he cannot live without the same.
As he: so lovers lie within the fir^
Of fervent love,
And shrink not from the flame of hot desire^
Nor will not move
From any heat, that Venus force imparts:
But lie
Conten^
Within a fire and wast away their hearts.
Up flew the da^^ and vanished in a cl^wd^,
But there stood I,
And many thoughts within my mind did shrowde
Of love: for why,
I felt within my heart a scortching fire,
And yet
As did
The Salamander, it was my whole desire.
Mirimida having read this Sonnet, she straight (being of a pregnant wit)
conceip^ed the drift of his Madrigale, smiled and laid it by, and then next
took up Radagons letter, which was written to this effect.

Radagon of Thessalie to the fair Shepherdize Mirimida health.
I Cannot tell (fair Mistress) whether I should praise Fortune as a friend, or
curse her as a foe, having at unawares presented me with the view of your
perfection, which sight may be either the sun of my bliss, or the beginning
of my vale: for in you rests the b^llance either to weigh me down my (...)
with courte^^e, or my denial with ex^reame unkindness. Such as are pric^e with
the boanes of the Dolphin, hear music and they are presently ^eales of their
malady; they which are i^ne^ymed with the U^per, rub the so^e with R^barb
and feel^ a remedy, and those which drink Aco^iton are cured by Antidotes.
But love is like the sting of a Scorpion, it must be salued by affection; for
neither charm, hear^e, stone, nor mynerall has virtue to cure it: which made
Apollo excla^e this passion.

Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.
With the same distress (sweet Mirimida) am I pained, who lighting by chance
as Paris did in the vale of Ida upon Venus, have seen a brighter Danie than
Venus; but I fear me less courteous than Venus. I have no golden apple (fair
Nymph) to present thee with, so to prove thee supreme of beauty; but the
devotion of my thoughts is offered humbly at thy feet, which shall ever
confess none so beauteous as Mirimida. Then as Venus for reward gave Paris
Helena, so courteous Nymph be prodigal of thy favors and give me thy heart,
which shall be to me more dear than a hundred Helens.

But here perhaps thou will object, that men's pleas are like Painters pe^sels,
which draw no substance but shadows, that to the worst proportions give the
richest colors, and to the coursest pictures the finest glasses, that what we
write is of course, and when we feign passions, then are we least passionate,
having sorrowful pens when we have secure hearts, and louring looks when we
have laughing thoughts. I cannot deny (sweet Mistress) but that hot loves are
like a bauins blaze, and that men can promise more in a moment than they will
perform in a month. I know there was a Demophon that deceived Phillis, an
Aeneas that falsified his faith to Dido, a Theseus that forsook his Ariadne:
yet measure not all by some men's minds; of a few particular instances,
conclude not general axioms; though some have been fleeting^ think not all
to be false; try me, I refer your passions to my proof, and as you find me
loyal so reward me with love. I crave no authentical grant, but a
superficial favor: say ( Mirimida) that Radagon shall be welcome if he be
faithful, and then my hope shall comfort my heart. In which s^spence ^ rest
confused, at the bar of your courtesy. Farewell.

Mirimidas Radagon, though she will not be Radagons Mirimida.


This she read over twice and bl^sht at it, as feeling a little heat, but
straight she sighed and shake it from her heart, and had laid it by, but that
turning over the next page she espied certain verses, which was a Canzon per^
thus.

Radagon in Dianam Non fuga Tencrus amat: quae ^amen odit habet.
It was a valley gawdi^ green,
Where Dian at the fount was seen,
Green it was,
And did pass
All other of Dianas bowers,
In the pride of Floras flo^^^s.
A fount it was that no Sun sees,
Circled in with Cipres trees,
Set so nie,
As Phoebus eye
Could not do the Virgins seathe,
To see them naked when they bathe.
She sat there all in white,
Color ^i^ting her delight,
Virgins so
Ought to go:
For white in Armorie is plast
To be the color that is chaste.
Her ta^t a Cassocke might you see
Tucked up above her knee,
Which did show
There below
Legs as white as whales bone.
So white and chaste was never non^.
Hard by her upon the ground,
Sat her Virgins in a round
Bathing their
Golden hair,
And singing all in notes hye
Fie on Venus flattring eye.
Fie on love it is a toy,
Cupid witless and a boy,
All his fires
And desires
Are plagues that God sent down from hie,
To pester men with misery.
As thus the Virgins did disdain
Lovers joy and lovers pain,
Cupid nie
Did epsy,
Greeuing at Dianas song,
Slily stole these maids among.
His bow of steel, darts of fire,
He shot amongst them sweet desire^
Which straight flies
In their eyes.
And at the entrance made them start,
For it ran from eye to heart.
Calisto straight supposed love
Was fair and frolic for to love:
Dian she
Escaped not free:
For well I wot hereupon
She loved the swayne Endimion.
Clitia Phoebus, and Cloris eye
Thought none so fair as Mercu^ie:
Venus thus
Did discuss
By her son in darts of fire,
None so chaste to check desire.
Dian rose with all her maids,
Blushing thus at loves braids,
With sighs all
Show their thrall.
And flinging hence pronounce ^his saw,
What so strong as Lou^^ sweet l^w?
Mirimida having read the letter of Radagon, perceived that love was in his
eyes, and pe^haps had s^ylie touched hi^ heart: but she that was charie of her
choice, and resolute not to fetter her self with fancy, did pass over these
passions, as men d^^ the shadows of a painters pensell^ which while they view
they praise, and when they have praised, pass over without any more
remembrance: yet she could not but enter into the humorous ^each of his
conceit, how he checked the coy disdain of women in his Sonnet, she blushed,
and her thoughts went away with her ^loud, and so she lighted on the letter
that Mullidor had sent her, which drove her into a pleasant vain. The effects
of his passions were these.

Mullidor the malecontent, with his pen clapped full of love, to his Mistress
Mirimida greeting.
AFter my hearty Commendations remembered, hoping y^^ be in as g^^d health as I
was at the making hereof. This is to certi^^^ you, that love may well be
compared (...) a bottle of hay, which once set (...) or to a cup full of strong
ale, which when a man has once tasted, he never leaves till he has drunk it
all up: so Mistress Mirimida, after the furious flames of your two eyes had set
my poor heart on the coals of love, I was so scorthed on the grediron of
affection, that I had no rest till I was almost turned to a c^ale, and after I
had tasted of the liquour of your sweet phisnomie, I never left supping of
your amiable countenance, till with love I am almost ready to burst. Consider
with your self fair Shepheardize, that poor men feel pain as well as
Princes; that Mullidor is sick of such a malladie, as by no means can be
cured, unless your self lay a sea^ecloth to draw away my sorrows: then be
pitiful to me least you be counted disdainful, to put so trusty a lover out
of his right wits; for there is no ho but either^ I must have you, or else for
very plain love run mad. It may be ( Mirimida) you think me too base for
your beauty: why? when you have married me I am content to serve you as a man,
and to do al those endeavors that belongs to a servant, and rather to hold
you for my Mistress than my wife. Then seeing you shall have the soueraintie at
my hands, which is the thing that all women desire, love me sweet Mirimida,
and think this, if you match with me, old Callena my mother has that in a
^lowte that will do us both good. Thus hoping you will ponder my passions in
your mind, and be more courteous than to cast away a young man for love.
Farewell.

Yours half mad because he would be yours, Mullidor the malecontent.


Such a poetical ^urie took Mullidor in the brains, that he thought to show
his vain in verse, and therefore annexed to his letter this pleasant Dittie.

Mullidors Madrigale.
Dildido dildido,
Oh love, oh love,
I feel thy rage romble below and above.
In summer time I saw a face,
Trope belle pourmoy helas helas,
Like to a st^^nd horse was her pace:
Was eu^r young man so dismayed,
Her eyes like wax torches did make me afraid,
Trop belle pour moy voila mon trespass.
Thy beauty (my Love) exceeds supposes,
Thy hair is a nettle for the nicest roses,
Mon dieu aid moy,
That I with the primrose of my fresh wit,
May tumble her tyranny under my feet,
He donque ie sera un ie^ne roy.
Trope belle pour moy helas helas,
Trop belle pour moy voyla mon trespass.
Mirimida having read this humorous fancy of Mullidor, began thus to meditate
with her self. Listen not fond wench to love, for if thou do thou learnest
to loose, thou shall find grief to be the gains, and folly the paymistr^is
that rewards all amorous trauells. If thou web thy self to Radagon, thou
aimest beyond thy reach: and looking higher than thy fortunes, thou will repent
thy desires; for Mirimida affects beyond compass, have ofttime infortutunate
effects; rich roabes have not ever sweet consent, and therefore the mean
(...) the merriest honor. What then, mu^t Eurymachus of all these t^^^^ be
the man that must make up the match; he is a shepherd and harbors quiet in
his cottage, his wishes are not above his wealth, nor does his conceit climb
higher than his deserts. He has sufficient to sh^owde thee from wa^^, and to
maintain the state of an honest life. Shep^eards wrong not their wives with
suspicion, nor do country Swaynes esteem less of their loves than higher
^egrees. But Mirimida, mean men have frowns as wel^ as kings; the least hair
has his shadow, the Fly her spleen, the Ant her gall, and the poorest
Pea^sant his chol^er. Peasants can weld a cudgel better than a great Lord, and
dissension will have a fling amongst the meanest. (...) therefore marriage must
have her inconvenience, better golden gyues than iron fetters. What say thou
then to Mullidor? that he is Mullidor, and let that suffice to shake him off
for a fool; for it were thy discredit to have only a woodcock to keep the
woolfe from the door. Why then, meanest thou not to love? No fond less if
thou be wise; for what is sweeter than liberty? and what burden heavier than
the fist of a froward husband. Amongst many Scorpions thou look for one
E^le; amongst a hedge full of nettles for one flower; amongst a thousand
flatterers for one that is faithful; and yet when thou have him thy thoughts
are at his will, and thy actions are limited to his hum^^rs. Beware Mirimida,
strike not at a stale because it is painted; though honey be sweet Bees have
stings; there is no sweeter life than chastity, for in that estate thou shair
live commended and uncontrolled.

Upon this she put up the letters, and because she would not lead her Lovers
into a labori^th of hope, the appointed them all to meet her at the Sheepfolds
on one day and at one hour, where the Woers that ^^ood upon thorns to hear
her censure met without fail. After salutes post between Mirimida and them,
she began to parley with them thus.

Gentlemen, all riualls in love and ^^me^s at o^^ fortun^^ though you three
affect like desire to have M^rimidas favor, yet but one of you can were the
flower, and perhaps none, for it is as my fancy censures: therefore are you
content that I shall set down which of you, or whether none of you shall enjoy
the end of you^ suits, and who so is forsaken, to part hence with patience and
never more to talk of his passions. To this they all agreed and she made this
answer. Why then Radagon and E^^ymachus wear you two the Wil^owe Garland, not
that I hold either your degrees or deserts worthless of a fairer than
Mirimida: but that the destinies do so appoint to my desires, that your
affects cannot work in me any effects. At this, Radagon and Eurymachus
frowned, not so much that they were forsaken, but that so beautiful a creature
would wed her self to such a deformed ass as Mullidor, and the fool he
simpered it in hope to have the wench. Now (quoth she) Mullidor may hope to be
the man: but trust me as I found him I leave him, a dolt in his loves, and a
fool in his fortunes. At this they laughed and he hung the head, and she left
them all. Radagon taking his hawke to go fly the Partridge^ Eurymachus
marching with his sh^ephooke to the folds; Mullidor ^ying home to his mother to
recount his mishaps, and Mirimida singing that there was no Goddess to Diana,
no life to liberty, nor no love to chastity.

Francesco, Isab^l, and all the rest of the guests applauded this discourse of
the pleasant Host: and for that it was late in the night they all rose, and
taking their leave of Francesco departed, he and his wife bidding their Host
good night, and so going to bed, where we leave them to lead the rest of
their lives in quiet.

Thus (quoth the Palmer) you have heard the discovery of ^ouths follies, and a
true discourse of a Gentleman's fortunes.

But now courteous Palmer (quoth the Gentleman) ^t rests that we crave by your
own promise the reason of your pilgrimage to Venice. That (quoth the Palmer)
is discourst in a word: for know sir, that enioyning my self to penance for
the follies of my youths passions having lived in love, and therefore reap all
my loss by loue^ ^earing that of all the Cities in Europe, Venice has most
semblance of Venus vanities. I go thither not only to see fashions, but to
quip at fol^^es, that I may draw others from that harm that has brought me
to this hazard. The Gentlewomen of Venice your neighbors, but unknown to me,
have more favors in their faces than virtue in their thoughts; and their
beauties are more curious than their qualities be precious, caring more to be
figured out with Helen, than to be famozed with Lucrece; they strive to make
their faces gorgeous, but never seek to fit their minds to their God, and
covet to have more knowledge in love than in religion: their eyes bewray their
wantonness, not their modesty; and their looks are lures that reclaim not
Hawks, but make them only bate at dead stales: As the Gentlewomen so are the
men, loose livers and straight lovers, such as hold their conscience in their
purses and their thoughts in their eyes, cou^ting that hour ill spent that in
fancy is not misspent. Because therefore this great City of Venice is holden
Loves Paradize, thither do I direct my pilgrimage, that seeing their passions,
I may being a palmer, win them to penance, by showing the miseries that Venus
mi^eth with her momentarie contents: if not, yet I shall carry home to my
countrymen salues to cure their sores; I shall see much, hear little, and by
the insight into other men's extremes, return both the more wary and the more
wise. What I see at Venice (sir) and what I note there, when I return back, I
mean to visit you and make you privy to all.

The heedfull Host having iudiciallie understood the pitiful report of the
palmer, giving truce to his passions with the tears he spent, and resolved to
requite that thankfully which he had attended heedfullie, gave this
Catastrophe to his sad and sorrowful discourse. Palmer, thou have with the
Kitrell foreshewed the storm ere it comes, painting out the shapes of love as
lively, as the Grapes in Zeuxis Tables were pourtraied cunningly; thou have
lent youth Egle eyes to behold the Sun; Achilles sword to cut and recure,
leaving those medicines to salve others, that has lost thy self, and having
burnt ^hy wings with the (...) dallying too long with the ^^re^ thou have
bequeathe^ other^ a lesson with the Unicorne to prevent poison by preserues
before thou taste with the lip. The only request I make in requit^ll of my
attention, is, that thou leave certain testimonies on these walls, where^n
whenever I look, I shall remember Francescos follies and thy foresight.

The Palmer esteeming the courteous reply of his hos^, and desirous to
satisfy his request, drawing blood from the vain Cephalia, (on an arch of
white Iuorie erected at the end of an Arbor, adorned with Honysuckles and
Roses) he wrote thus with a pencell.

In greener years when as my greedy thoughts
Began yield their homage to ambitious will,
My feeble wit that then prevailed noughts,
Perforc^ presented homage to his ill:
And I in follies bonds fulfild with crime,
At last vnloosd: thus spide my loss of time.
As in his circuler and ceaseles ray
The year begins, and in it self retu^nes
Refresht by presence of the eye of day,
That sometimes ni^ and sometimes far soiournes:
So love in me (conspiring my decay)
With endless fire my heedles bosom burns,
And from the end of my aspiring sin,
My paths of error hourly does begin.
Aries.
When in the Ram the Sun renewes his beams,
Beholding mournful earth araid in grief,
That waigh^ ^eliefe from his refreshing gleames,
The tender flocks r^ioycing their relief
Do leap for joy and lap the silver streams.
So a^ my prime when youth in me was chief,
All Heifer like with wanton horn I played,
And by my will my wit to love betrayed.
Taurus.
When Phoebus with Europas bearer bides,
The Spring appears, impatient of delays
The labourer to the fields his plow swaynes guides,
He sowes, he plants, he builds at all assaies,
When prime of years that many errors hides,
By fancies force did trace ungodly ways,
I blindfold walked disdayning to behold,
That life does vade, and young men must be old.
Gemini.
When in the hold whereas the Twins do rest,
Proud Phlaegon breathing fire does post amain:
The trees with leaves, the earth with flowers is dressed:
When I in pride of years with peevish brain
Presumed too far and made fond love my guest;
Wi^h frosts of care my flowers were nipt amain.
(...) height of weal who bears a careless heart,
R^pents too late his over foolish part.
Cancer.
When in Aestiuall Cancers gloomie bower,
The greater glory of the heavens does shine;
The air is calm, the birds at every stowre
To tempt the heavens with harmony divine.
When I was first inthrald in Cupids power,
In vanei I spent the May-month of my time^
Singing for joy to see me captive thrall
To him, whose gains are grief, whose comfort small.
Leo.
When in the height of his Meridian walk
The Lions hold conteines the eye of day,
The riping corn grows yeolow in the stalk,
When strength of years did bless me every way.
Maskt with delights of folly was my talk,
Youth ripened all my thoughts to my decay:
In lust I sowde, my fruit was loss of time;
My hopes were proud, and yet my body slime.
Virgo.
When in the Virgins lap earths comfort sleeps,
Bating the furi^ of his burning eyes,
Both corn and fruits are firmd, and comfort creepes
On every plant and flower that springing rise:
When age at last his chief dominion keeps,
And leads me on to see my vanities;
What love and scant foresight did make me sow^
In youthful years, is ripened now in woe.
Libra.
When in the Balance Daphnes Lemman blins
The Ploughman gathers fruit for passed pain:
When I at last considered on my sins,
And thought upon my youth and follies vain;
I cast my count, and reason now begins
To guide mine eyes with judgment, bought with pain,
Which weeping wish a better way to find,
Or else for ever to the world be blind.
Scorpio.
When with the Scorpion proud Apollo plaies^
The wines are trod and carried to their press,
The woods are f^ld against winters sharp affraies:
When grauer years my judgments did address,
I began repair my ruins and decaies:
Exchanging will to wit and soothfastnesse:
Claiming from Time and Age no good but this,
To see my sin, and sorrow for my miss.
Sagittarius.
When as the Archer in his Winter hold
The Delian Harper tunes his wonted love,
The ploughman sowes and tills his labored molde;
When with advise and judgment I approve,
How Love in youth has grief for gladness sold,
The seeds of shame I from my heart remove,
And in their steads I set down plants of Grace
And with repent bewailde my youthful race.
Capricornus.
When he that in Eurotas silver glide
Does baine his tresse, beholds Capricorn,
The days grows short, then hasts the winter tide
The Sun with sparing lights does seem to mourn,
Gray is the green, the flowers their beauty hides:
When as I see that I to death was borne,
My strength decaide, my grave already dressed,
I count my life my loss, my death my best.
Aquarius.
When with Aquarius Phoebes brother stays,
The blythe and wanton winds are whist and still,
Cold frost and snow the pride of earth betraies:
When age my head with hoarie hairs does fill,
Reason sits down, and bids me count my days,
And pray for peace, and blame my froward will:
In depth of grief in this distress I cry,
Peccaui Domine, miserere mei.
Pisces.
When in the Fishes mansion Phoebus dwells,
The days renew, the earth regaines his rest:
When old in years, my want my death foretells:
My thoghts and prayers to heaven are whole addressed
Repentance youth by folly quite expells,
I long to be dissolved for my best,
That young in zeal long beaten wi^h my rod,
I may grow old to wisdom and to God.
The palmer had no sooner finished his circle, but the Host over read his
conceit, and wondering at the excellency of his wit, from his experience
began to suck much wisdom, and being very loath to detain his guest too
long: after they had broken their fast, and the goodman of the ^ouse
courteously had given him thanks for his favor, the Palmer set forward
toward Venice: what there he did, or how he lived, when I am advertised
(good Gentlemen) I will send you tidings. Mean while, let every one learn
(by Francescoes fall) to beware, least at last (too late) they be enforced to
bewail.

FINIS.

