MARKS AND NO MARKS, OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN: OR, A Treatise of things
Necessary, Unnecessary,
To the Kingdom of God.

By HENRY GREENEWOOD Master of Art, and Preacher of the Word of GOD.

Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not, etc. LONDON,
Printed by Eliz. All^de, and are to be sold by Michael Spark dwelling at the
blue Bible in Greene-Arbour. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT worthy and Worshipful Master ROBERT LEVYSTONE, Gentleman of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, all honor in this life, and Eternal glory in the life
to come.
IT was (worthy Sir) a chief care in Saint Paul the holy and gracious Apostle
(who was Gentium tuba, and Gods Organum electum, set apart to preach and
transveigh the liquor of life to the Gentiles, after he had laid down the
Foundation Christ Jesus, and the body of the truth, to keep the Corinthian and
other Churches from scisme, faction, strife and contention: as in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11.
He beseeches them by the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that they would all
speak one thing, and that there might be no dissentions among them, but to
be knit together in one mind, and in one judgment, and all this counsel for
unanimity was but necessary, seeing the fruits of contention are so bitter.

I desire to be an imitator of this blessed Apostle in this Christian endeavor,
considering what great quarrels and hot contentions are found in our British
Church about matters of nothing, mere circumstances and bare ceremonies, and
what a Rent it made among us by the same, to the great advantage of Satan's
Kingdom, and much damage of the Kingdom of Christ. Now to quiet these
unnecessary jarres and make peace about the same (peacemaking being a blessed
thing, Beati pacifi^i, Mat. 5.9. Mat. 5.9
) I have adventured to set forth in this portion of Scripture something about
things indifferent, That we being of one mind, may live in peace, and living
in peace, 2 Cor. 3.11.
the God of love and peace may be with us.

I know in your Country they are more stiff in contention about them, than
with us here in England: I have therefore made bold to present this subject of
things of a middle nature to your well-affected worship, not that I think you
any way troubled or irresolved about them, but that through your good
approbation of this plain dealing Tractate, many of your Countrymen may be
drawn to the like: that so England and Scotland giving over these frivolous
contentions about things of no moment, may join strongly together, ^ude 3.
and zealously contend for the faith and verity of the Gospel of Christ Jesus
against all the adversaries of the same: I would to God that we could all
learn that grave counsel of wise Solomon: ^rov. 20.3
It is a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling.
Accept then (I beseech you) of this (more than poor) present, being the lively
expression of mine unfeigned love and true thankfulness, for your kind
respect of me in Court and Country, and at your best leisure peruse gladly the
same.

Having passed things indifferent in the forepart of my Text, in the second I
proceed to matters of necessity for glory of our God, and the salvation of our
souls, a trinity of graces for number; righteousness, Peace, Joy: and
whosoever is not powerfully acquainted with the same, shall never be blessed
of the thrice blessed Trinity in the Kingdom of Heaven: Seek then (good sir)
righteousness not riches, peace not pleasure, joy not mundane pomp and
honor: that as you are honored to attend the presence of an unmatch-able
earthly King, so you may in Christ Jesus be exalted at the Day of Judgment to
stand with Gabriel and all the heavenly Host before the Throne and face of the
King of Kings, in glory everlasting.

Thus praying your good Worship to pardon my boldness in this Dedication, and
praying Gods best mercies to be multiplied upon you, I take my leave but never
leave to love and honor you, always resting,

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, H. GREENEWOOD.

MARKS AND NO MARKS OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.
ROMANS 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
OUr blessed Apostle in the former Chapters handled at large things necessary,
being either commanded or prohibited of God: but now he passes to things of a
middle nature, neither required nor prohibited in Divine Law, about which there
was hot strife and contention in Rome twixt the converted Gentiles: The Gentile
believers condemned the Jews because they were ignorant of their Christian
liberty purchased by Christ, and published by the Gospel, who by his death
abolished all Leviticall shadows: The Jewish believers condemned again the
Gentiles, because they were Apostates from Moses: the stronger despised the
weaker for their ignorance, the weaker contemned the stronger for contempt of
Moses Law.

Now that brotherly-love might continue, and these scandals be remooved, the
Apostle here shows, That the Kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: as if this heavenly Doctor
should say, The Kingdom of Heaven stands not in things indifferent, (as meats
and drinks, and days) therefore we ought not so stiffely to contend about
them, but the Kingdom of God consists in more weighty matters, as
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

The words read devide themselves into two parts negative, affirmative.


The negative part, in these words: The Kingdom of God is not meats and
drinks.

The affirmative part, in these words: But righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost.



By the Kingdom of God, sometime is understood the ministry of the Gospel;
because the Elect are admitted into the Kingdom of God by the ministry of the
Gospel, and God reigns in their hearts by the same: Thus it is taken, Math.
11.11. He that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than John: that
is, the least Minister of the Gospel of Christ can give a greater report of
Christ than John: we (the Ministers of the Gospel) are said to be greater than
John, not propter gratiam sed propter testimonium Christi: not for grace, but
for our testimony of the Lord Jesus: John indeed pointed out Christ to the
people, John 1.29. Ecce agnus Dei: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world: but he could not say (as we can say) that Christ dyed,
rose again, ascended and took possession of Heaven for his Elect: for John's
head was taken from him, before our Head the Lord Jesus suffered.

the Estate of grace in this life, whereby an entry is made into the Kingdom
of God. Thus it is taken in the Gospel of Luke, Luke 11.21. The Kingdom of
God is within you.

the estate of glory in the life to come, where God reigns more perfectly in
his Saints, and more fully, and therefore chiefly called the Kingdom of God.

And so it is taken, Ioh. 3.3. Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. All these (in my judgment) may safely stand with the words of
the text: for the ministry of the Gospel stands not upon things indifferent,
but of more serious and substantial matters, as righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost: And for Grace and Glory, it is not meats and matters of
indifferency, that brings us to Gods favor, or the Kingdom of Heaven:
therefore no such strife ought to be about them.

By meats and drinks, are understood all matters of a middle nature: as bread
at the Sacrament whither leavened or unleavened; as gestures at the Sacrament,
whither sitting standing, kneeling: There was a time that certain meats were
not of an indifferent nature, for they were peremptorily prohibited of God:
Levit. 11.4. as that which chewed the cud, and divided not the hoof (as the
Coney, the Camel, the Hare) and that which divided the hoof, but chewed not
the cud (as the swine:) But now by Christ our liberty is enlarged, and we may
without breach of the Law eat, Cony, Hare, Hog, as that voice from Heaven
(when the sheet was let down to Peter in a trance) plainly shows: Act.
10.15. esteem not that polluted which the Lord has made clean: now are they
made indifferent.

Text.
For the Kingdom of God is not meats etc.

Doct.
The Instruction then from hence will be this: That things indifferent (as
meats, and drinks, and days) are of no necessity to the service of God or
the salvation of our souls.

It is necessary to eat and drink, else life could not continue: but to
think that one kind of meat of it self is more pure than others, and that a
man pleases God by eating our kind of meat and not others is a fond and
foolish imagination: for as our Savior testifies, Math. 15.11. It is not that
which go^th into man that defiles him: and Paul also shows in the 1. Cor.
8.8. that (...) makes us not acceptable to GOD, whereupon S. Paul gives this
grave counsel, Heb. 13.9. be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines: for it is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, and
not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.

Me thinks that that of S. Paul 1. Tim. 4 4. should confound all idle opinions
about prohibition of some meats, and some times: for (says he) every creature
of God is good, and not to be refused, if it be received with thankesgiving.

The English Church has therefore (according to these scriptures) adjudged of
meats and days, as unnecessary to holiness or happine^^^ in their own nature:
as Anno ter^ia Eduardisexti: that one day or one kind of meat of it self is
not more pure tha^ another, and that al meats are lawful, so that they be not
used with vice but with liberty and thankfulness.

I know that gluttony and drunkenness, and abusing the creatures, may deprive
men of the Kingdom of God, but using them temperately they hurt not.

Meats are not materials of the worship of God, for a man does not please God
because he eats fish rather than flesh: or drinks Beer rather than Ale: or
that sits at the Sacrament rather than kneel.

This then serves to confute the Manichees, Use 10.
who say, some meats and drinks are evil, as eggs, flesh, wine, milk: they
say that wine is the gall of the prince of darkness: yet God says here, The
Kingdom of God is not meats, etc.

Also the Marcionites their Pue-fellowes are condemned, who say, that it were
as good to devour a soul as to eat and devour things that had blood and
life: yet God says here The Kingdom of God is not meats, etc.

The Jews would eat no hogsflesh, the Papists no flesh will eat on some
days, and in Lent, gross ignorance, so (God says here) The Kingdom of God
is not meats, etc.

The Papists say that to eat flesh in Lent, Ember weeks, fasting days, is as
great a fault as to kill a man: wise fools.

Thus we see what a brangle was among them of the new Church at Rome, about
matters of nothing.

So at Corinth, what factions and divisions were about their teachers and other
things, one would be of Paul, another of Apollo, dangerous dissentions,

And who is ignorant of what jarrs and strifes were between the Esterne and
Western Churches in Victors time, and all about keeping of Easter day?

Afterward whither the Lords Supper should be celebrated with Bread leavened,
or unleveaned?

The Churches of Lutherans in Germany are much to blame, which break off
society with the Churches of Calvinists (as they are termed for distinction
sake) because of dissension about the Bread in the Communion, whither it should
be eaten whole or broken?

So what a world of trouble has been stirred up in England about matters of
nothing, about ceremonies of the Church, Cross, Surplice, and kneeling at the
Communion?

For these indifferent things the knot of brotherhood is not to be dissolved,
nor Communion forsaken.

But he that is disobedient to authority, herein for his disobediedce, shall
bear his own burden, for lawful authority ought to be obeyed in things
indifferent, although the thing be indifferent yet to obey or not to obey in
such things is not indifferent. Disobedience unto lawful authority is against
him. Romans 13. But that these things fore mentiond are indifferents, it is
plain, for they are neither commanded nor prohibited by the word of God,
neither are these in their own nature good nor evil: they are neither Cum
verbo, nor contra verbum, sed praeter verbum: they are neither with the word,
nor against the word, but besides the word, as says an ancient Father: being
things indifferent, they may be done and God pleased, and they may not be done
and God pleased.

Yet what bitter censures are amongst us about these things? ignorant persons
censure others very headily which differ from them, and condemn every thing
they cannot reach to: as here the Jews weak in judgment, account the
believing Gentiles which use their liberty in meats and drinks, violators to
Moses Law, and rebels to God.

I would have all such as are so forward to censure their brethren in these
things of a middle nature know that in things of indifferency it is the intent
of the doer, that makes that good or naught that is done, for the things in
their own nature be neither good nor evil: (which makes against all those
that deny Adiaphora things indifferent, holding all things to be either evil
or good) now of the inward intention God alone is the discerner, so that in
these things he alone is to be the Judge: therefore abstains from judging,
lest thou be an usurper of Gods office.

Amongst us, he that sits will censure him that kneeleth, as idolatrous:
and he that kneeleth, censures him that sits as superbious: But Christians
should have a more charitable opinion one of another in these things
indifferent, done or not done: as Paul wishes, qui non manducat, manducantem
nc iudicet, To. 14.3. He that eats not, let him not judge him that eats.

But leave him unto him, who knows the intention of our hearts, but he that
out of pride, or filthymalice, or a superbious mind, shall oppose himself to
authority in things indifferent (established for the good of Gods Church) shall
as I have said bear his condemnation whatsoever he be.

Seeing then these ceremonies are neither parts of Law nor Gospel, what reason
have Christians to dissent for them, why do not private men, rather yield to
public authority among us. Indeed for such things as please or displease God
(as precepts of the Law, promises of the Gospel, faith and obedience toward
God) we are strongly to stand and earnestly to contend for such things, as in
Jude. 3. we are admonished: we have Paul also for example Gal. 2.11. but to
stand out for chips and feathers, is but folly. O that Gath and Ascalon had
never heard of the divisions of Ephraim, and Judah.

What will strangers say of us thus living in discord? These are the
Christians, they cannot agree, one holds one thing, another another, what
Religion call you this? As the Papists do hereby take occasion to blaspheme
our Religion, forgetting their own domestical contentions in more and more
weighty matters.

The maine reasons of this difference among us, are these two Man's infirmity.
Satan's malice.


Man's infirmity, which cannot endure to be crossed in our opinions, to which
we are too much wedded.

Satan's malice: delighting in the contention of brethren, being much to the
hurt of Christ's Kingdom and advancement of his own: for a divided house
cannot stand.

Let every soul therefore labor for unanimity and uniformity about these
things indifferent, and pray ye all for the peace of Jerusalem: I beseech you
as Paul persuaded the Corinthians 2. Cor. 13.11. be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

I think it not amiss to examine briefly the differences that are amongst us
about things indifferent, as the cross, surplice, and kneeling at the
Sacrament, and so make peace about them, if it be possible.

The main thing that makes our brethren stumble at these ceremonies is the
gross abuse of the Romish Church: for they most idely and superstitiously
ascribe power to the Cross, purity to the surplice, and fall down
Idolatrously to their breaden God: what if these things be thus grossly
abused in Rome, may they not without offense be used in England? What if they
abused their knees to Nabuchadnezars Idol, shall it not therefore be lawful
for Daniel upon his knees to pray unto his God and praise him. Dan. 6.10. These
things are not propounded to us for any superstitious use or end, but civilly
for Distinction, Decency, Convenience.


The Cross is used to distinguish us from Infidels that deride us, for
depending on Christ crucified for salvation.

In the Primitive Church Christians being derided for trusting on Christ for
Heaven that dyed on the Cross (for this was the taunting talk of Infidels to
such as converted, tu ne crucifixo credis? quae tua dementia? do thou
believe on a crucified wretch? who has bewitched, who has assalted thee?)
would not be outfaced, but gloried in him that so dyed, and set up wooden
Crosses at their doors, to show that they were not ashamed of their profession
and faith: afterward the cross was brought into the Church to distinguish (as
a civil badge, sign or ceremony) Christians from despising and deriding
Infidels.

The surplice is used as a garment of decency in the ministry of the word:
several robes are appointed for several callings: The Parliament Lords in
their Robes, the Judges in their Robes, the Ministers of the Gospel in their
Robes: what error can there be in all this? where is there the least glimpse
of superstition herein? It is true indeed, Jude forbids us to touch the
garment defiled with the flesh: Jude. 23. I confess a plague shirt is
dangerouos to be worn but if the plague be washed out and the shirt made
clean. no danger in the shirt: It is true the Surplice as it is used
Idolatrously in Rome. is the garment defiled with the flesh, and at no hand is
it in that kind to be received: but (blessed be God) the superstitious use of
it is taken away in England, and it is only appointed for decency and
destinctive order, therefore in this kind who can justly be offended at the
same.

Again for kneeling at the Sacrament, it is true, it is most wickedly abused
in the Church of Rome, but in our English Church there is no such use or end of
kneeling: we kneel not to the Bread, we believe no transubstantion, we do
it to testify our humble and hearty thakesgiving to the Lord for our
redepmtion in Christ Jesus.

Several Churches, several gestures: The German Church, app^inteth standing
imitating the eating of the passover in Aegipt: The Geneva Church uses
sitting, immitating Christ at his last passover: The English Church ordeineth
kneeling as a convement and fit gesture to express our humble thankesgiving to
God for our redemption by Christ Jesus: I hold no gesture more laudable in this
solemn serv^ce of God than this.

A misconceit of these things keeps back many from the intertainement of them:
a conceit taken is not easily removed. I once much doubted my self about
Cross, and Surplice, but the maine thing that troubled me was their base use
in Rome: but considering how (without wrong to the conscience*) they are
offered to us in England, I redified mine all opinion of them, and without
doubting received them: A man that is upon an high steeple if he looks
downward, trembles, but if he looks upward, his fear is put apart: So
when I looked upon the superstitious use of these things in Rome, it troubled
me, but when I looked upon the innocence of them in our English Church making
all to the glory of God: fear and horror forsook me. The Lord grant that all
Gods people may wisely and rightly judge of these things. And this counsel I
give all Gods people that they labor by all means to be thoroughly persuaded
of the indifferency of them, and so by consequence of the lawfulnes of them:
For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, (says the holy Ghost: and whatsoever
is done out of a doubtful mind is also sin. Romans 14.23. Ro^


But what is it (I pray) that is alleged against kneeling at the Sacrament?

The first objection made against kneeling is taken from Christ's example, for
(Christ says our irresolved brethren) sat at the Sacrament: Now omnis Crhisti
a^tio nostra d^^^^ esse instru^^^^ ^very action of Christ should be ^^^^^able
to Christians.

Ans. He sat at the long Supper of the Lamb, but when he gave the new
Sacrament of Bread and Wine, it is not erpressed whether he sat when he gave
it or no, or whether the Apostles were sitting still or no: for Christ made a
prayer before he gave it (he gave thanks says Mark) now whether he prayed
sitting or kneeling, I know not, but sitting formerly at the supper of the
Lamb, very likely he sat still: but his sitting was occasionably, not
purposely: we pray at the table sitting, but from the table kneeling, we have
no such induction to sit at this Sacrament as Christ had at that, therefore
Christ's example herein is not necessary to be followed of us.

Again we sit not as Christ sat we sit upright, but Christ lay on his side
upon a palate or upon the plancher: Math. 26.20. Recubuit (non sedebat) cum
duodecim: (...): and Luke 22.14. Discubuit, et duodecim Apostoli cum co: (...):
he sat down and the twelve Apostles with him: that is, he sat leaning or
lying on his side: this kind of gesture the Greek and Latin words import, and
not an upright sitting. And this was the ordinary gesture of the Jews at their
meats, a gesture that betokened great reverence and humility.

Again Christ after the Jewish manner put off his shoes, when he did eat
the passover: we do not so.

Again Christ celebrated the Sacrament in the evening, we do not so: we
have not that necessity for it, as Christ had: How then (all these things
rightly weighed) do those that stand for sitting at the Sacrament, immitate
Christ?

It is worthy delivered by Cirill: Christus in cana docuit quid ageret
Ecclesia, non quando non qualiter: Christ taught in his last Supper his Church
what to do, not when to do, neither in what manner.

Rome Idolatrously, therefore we must not imitate Idolaters, at the Sacrament.

Ans. If Papists will kneel to a breaden God, upon supposed
transubstantiation, shall not we humble our selves upon our knees to our great
and good God of H^a^en, when he seals us up in the Sacrament of his son to
life and salvation. I hope no man dares deny the knee to be given to God: we
kneel not to the Sacrament: They in Rome abuse their Temples also in their
superstitious dedications, in their Idols, and their idle and Idol service:
they abuse their Papists in their seditious and lying predications: the holy
Scriptures they most wickedly pervert: shall not we therefore visit the
Temple, preach and hear the Word: the abuse of ashing (as that ancient saying
is) takes not away the use of a thing: Abusus non tollit usum.



Ans. The Sacrament is no corporal banquet to fill the belly (for it is but a
poor banquet, to eat a bit of Bread, and drink a drop or two of Wine) then
sitting were convenient, but it is a banquet for the souls refreshing, for
which refreshing what Christian soul will not express thankesgiving:
therefore the gesture of kneeling is a suitable and meet gesture: And because
this banquet differs from our banquets at home, it is very requisite that the
gestures should be different also: and for my part, my soul never banquets
better than when I am upon my knees to my God.

Many other things are alleged against kneeling at the Sacrament, but I will
not spend too much time about them, but hasten to weightier matters as
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: For the Kingdom of God is
not meats, etc.

Only this Item I give all Gods Children, that they make not gestures at the
Sacrament materials of the Sacrament, but mere circumstances, and the
Sacrament may be done with them, or without them: but that gesture the Church
appoints, let that be submitted to: where the Church appionts standing, let
standing stand: where sitting, let sitting be: and where kneeling is required,
let every one embrace it, for the Church has power over things indifferent for
decency and orders.

This counsel being followed, will bring much credit to our English Church,
much peace to our British Jerusalem, and much comfort to our own souls.
Obedience and order two laudable things the ordered man is the ^ound man for
Heaven: Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his conversation aright will I show
mine own salvation, says the Lord. And God himself is the God of order and
not of confusion, as in all Churches of the Saints: that is a true Saint
Church, where order and peace with truth and holiness is maintained.

Thus much for the negative part of my text, and for the judgment of things
indifferent.

Text.
For the Kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, but righteousness, peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost. These words are the affirmative part of my text; the
scope of this Scripture is to show that the mark of a Christian is not in
observing of things indifferent, but in obteyning of righteousness, peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost.

First then for the first of those three, namely righteousness.

In that the Kingdom of GOD stands in righteousness, this will be our note
of observation: Doct.
All the members of Christ, are clothed with the righteousness of Christ: for
the Kingdom of God is righteousness: Math 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof: righteousness is all infallible mark of
salvation.

That Christians are clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, it is plain 1. Cor. 30. Christ is made of God to us
righteousness.

The righteousness of Christ is twofold Imputativ. Inherent.


The one in Christ, the other in Christians, but from Christ.

Non alias just facti sumus coram Deo, nisi exparticipat one exactae just^tiae
Christi: We are no otherwise made righteous before God, but by the
participation of the exact righteousness of Christ: for as Christ was made
sin by imputation, so by imputation of Christ's righteousness, we are made
righteous: for justus et justificans non est nisi Deus: for there is none just
and a justifier of others but God: ^^m. 5.18.
Romans 5.18. So by the grace of one shall many be made righteous: for Christ is
the wedding garment that covers our nakedness from being seen at the day
of judgment, faith is but the hand of the soul to put him on.

Secondly, Righteousness inherent, this cannot justify us, because it is not
perfect in us, yet this does justify that Christ's righteousness shall
justify us: he that has not inherent grace, cannot clame the complete and
imputative righteousness of Christ for his justification.

Every member of Christ is sanctified by Christ: he that is in Christ Jesus,
is a a new creature: John 1. out of Christ's fullness we receive grace for
grace.

As we received from old Adam a double hurt Imputation of his sin.
Derivation of his corruption.


So we receive from the 2. Adam a double bliss Imputation of his merits:
Derivation of his graces:


And no man shall be justified in his merits, that is not sanctified by his
graces.



Luke 12.18.19. was a fool in grain, that trusted in his grain, and never
looked for faith, no not so much as a grain of mastard-seede: rich people (if
they have not the riches of Christ) shall never enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: for my text says here, that the Kingdom of GOD is righteousness not
riches, peace, not pleasures joy in the holy Ghost, not carnal mirth and
laughter.

Psalm. 15.2. what if we have all the world and want sanctity, who can express
our infelicity? the Lord create in us all new hearts, the Lord (of his mercy)
renew in us all right spirits: unholy unhappy unholy unhappy.

David: Psalm. 12.1. help (Lord) help for good and godly men decay: what a
pity it is, that this world should be made for so many and the world to come
for so few.

and surest mark of a member of the Kingdom of God, then how far from
Heaven are such as mock men for righteousness, and despise such as precisely
seek to serve the Lord: O generation of vipers, how shall ye fly from the
anger to come? how shall ye escape the damnation of Hell?



Thus much for the first of the three Heavenly marks of our happiness, namely
Righteousness.

The second thing that prooves a man a member of Christ, a Citizen of the
Kingdom of God, is Peace.

The Kingdom of God is righteousness and Peace.

Peace is twofold, 1. Good. 2. Bad.


Good peace is fourefold, 1. With God, Romans 5.1. 2. With the Conscience. 3.
With our Brethren: 4. With our enemies, Psalm. 147.13.


Bad peace is an agreement in evil, as was the peace of Simeon and Levi: Herod
and Pilate: our peace must be joined with truth, Zachar. 8.16. and with
holiness, Hebr. 12.14.

The three first are here meant: whence let us observe this point for our
instruction: Doct.
That every member of Christ is at peace with God through Jesus Christ: from
whence springs a twofold peace of conscience with the Brethren.


This peace of conscience arises from the remission of our sins, and our
reconcilement with God through Jesus Christ: Christ therefore is called our
Peace: and the Prince of Peace: and Peacemaker: Ephesians. 2.24. Esaias 9.6. Colos.
1.8.

Concerning this inward peace I will propound these 4 questions.

First, how this peace is gotten?

By two 1. By grieving for our sins done against the Law. 2. By applying the
promises of the Gospel for reunission.


Secondly, how may this inward peace be preserved?

Ans.
By these three 1. By avoiding all, but especially known sins. 2. By doing
every duty uprightly, though not perfectly. 3. By often confessing our sins,
and craving pardon for them.


Thirdly, May this peace be lest or no?

Ans.
The sense of it may be lost for a time, but the thing it self never.

And it is lost by these three: 1. By some or other gross actual sin. 2. By
neglect of some or other duty. 3. By some or other strong fit of temptation.


It fares with the soul as it does with the body: sometime well, sometime
ill: faith has his swoones: and this state of the soul is lively resembled by
these: The Sun un^^^ a Cloud: a man in a trance: ^^ees dead in Winter.

Fourthly, Now is this peace got^^^ again, being once lost?

^y these ^^^e 1. By remembering Gods former mercies. 2. By companying with the
Godly. 3. By attending the public ministry. Ans.
4. By renewing our repentance more seriously. 5. By private and earnest prayer.


There is in the third place ano^^er peace, a famous mark of the ^hild of God:
and that is peace with ^^e brethren.

This peace Abraham sought with (...), when their servants fell foul ^^out
grounds, Genesis 13.8. David ^^ught to live peaceably with all ^^n: Psalm. 120.7
and persuades (...) men to peace: 34.14. seek peace ^^d ensue it: The like
does Paul. ^om. 12.18. As much as lies you, have peace with all men: God is ^
God of peace. Christ is the Pri^^^ of peace, the Gospel is the Gosp^^ of
peace, Heaven is a place of pea^^ therefore let us live in peace, t^^^ the God
of peace may be with us.

Romans 5.1. being ju^^^fied by faith we are at peace w^^^ God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ and on the other side, the case of a ^^probate is very miserable:
Esaias 5^ 21. There is no peace to the wi^^ed, says my God.

2 Let every man breathing lab^^^ to maintain the peace of a good ^^^science,
for this peace is a Iew^^ indeed, a continual feast: Th^^ Paul indevoured to
keep a clear conscience, both toward God and man Act. 24.16.

3. Such as live in strife and c^^tention, not in love and peace, a^^ members
of Satan. For the Kin^dome of God is righteousness a^^ peace. Let us then
embrace peac^ as we live together, let us love ^^gether, to this end, let us
take heed ^^ such things as may hinder peace.

^. Pride, for as we read in the ^roverbs, only by pride comes ^^ntention:
Prove. 13.10.

2. Malice, 3. Revenge, 4. Envy, ^. Fierceness, 6. Busi-medling, 7. ^ebate, 8.
Strife, 9. Whispering, 10. Backbiting, 11. Tale-bearing.

The Kingdom of God is peace: and joy in the holy Ghost. Text.


Righteousness brings peace, and peace joy: when we see God well pleased, and
reconciled with us, and made our loving heavenly friend through Christ, how can
we then ^ut joy?

By joy is meant the sweet motion of a Christian soul, cheered up and made
glad, partly by the present sense of Gods love shed into the heart, and partly
out of hope of the reward to to come: yea we are joyful in tribulation, Romans
5.3. In the holy Ghost.

It is called righteousness in the holy Ghost, peace in the holy Ghost, joy in
the holy Ghost. 1. to show that the holy Ghost is the effici^^^ cause o^ these
Heavenly graces ^^ our souls. 2. to destinguish Ch^i^^^an righteousness,
peace and ^^^ from carnal, worldly and unc^^stant,

For the Kingdom of God is j^^ in the Holy Ghost.

Doct.
Great is the joy, and unspeakeable the consolation of every live^^ member of
Christ: when a poo^^ soul shall see himself delivered from sin and Hell,
and made just and righteous in the Lord Jesus, and reconciled with God, and
given now to see his name written in the Book of Heaven, O what cause is there
of joy.

No marvayle therefore if the twelve men joyed, and joyed, and joyed, and joyed
when they found (by the star) the Lord Jesus Mat. 2.10. They rejoiced with an
exceeding great joy: they rejoiced, they rejoiced with joy, they rejoiced with
great joy, they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy.

No mervaile therefore, if the Apostle bids us rejoice in the Lord always, and
again (says he) rejoice: therefore great is the joy of the believer.

Our Savior when he saw the Apostles overjoyed in the casting out of Devils,
said, rejoice not in this that Devils are subdued unto you, but rejoice in
this, that your names are written in the Book of life, this is the ground of
true joy.

This joy Mary was filled with: My spirit rejoceth in God my Savior.

This is the joy that every Christian more or less injoyeth, and sometime or
other comfortably and sweetly seeteth.

This Heavenly joy differs from worldly joy, in these four.

1. Worldly joy is natural: this joy is spiritual.

2 Worldly joy arises from external things: this joy arises from God love
remission of sin, assurance of life everlasting.

3. Worldly joy makes men secure: this joy makes a man serve God more
earnestly and perfectly.

4. Worldly joy fades in adversity: this joy makes us rejoice in tribulation,
under the hope of salvation. Romans 5.3.

Object.
I never felt this joy in me (may some object) and yet I hope I am as good a
Christian as others.

Ans. If it be hidden, it is hidden to them that are lost: This is Abscondita
Manna, hidden Manna: Revel. 2.17. It is only known to them that enjoy it, and
to them that are elected: It is Gods own wine, laid up in Gods own Cellers,
for Gods own Spouse: the wicked of the World shall never lick their lips of
it.

1. O let us beg of God for this joy, this joy is Heaven upon Earth, this joy
is the earnest of our Heavenly inheritance: this joy is the enjoyment of Gods
backparts: this joy if it be perfited in us, is no less than life everlasting.

David's suite above all other was for this joy, Psalm. 4. The greater sort crave
worldly goods, and riches do embrace, but Lord show me thy countenance, thy
favor and thy grace: For thou thereby shall make my heart more joyful and
more glad, than they that of their Corn and Wine, full great increase have had.

Thus Moses prayed upon the Mount: Exodus 33.18. Lord show me thy glory.

The Lord grant us this joy unspeakeable and glorious, which the world can
neither give nor take away: Ioh. 16.22. This your ioyshall no man take from
you: that we tasting of the Heavenly comforts in the way, may enter into our
Masters joy in the end: with that blessed welcome, enter thou into the joy of
the Lord.

2. He that has tasted in any measure of this Heavenly Nectar, let him bless
GOD for these comforts: for these reioycings are given but to few: LORD what is
man that thus thou should rejoice him? or the best of the sons of men that
thus in mercy thou should joy them.

3. No life so comfortable as the Christian life: it is full of peace and joy:
there is never an holy duty holy performed, but brings meat in the mouth with
it, joy unspeakeable: When we pray, how are our souls refreshed? When we
preach and hear the holy Word of GOD, our hearts many times leap in our
bellies for joy.

The worldling thinks otherwise of it: It is true, to respect the outward
condition of a Christian, it is very miserable, therefore Paul says 1. Cor.
15.19. If in this life only we had our hope and our hap, of all men
Christians were most miserable: But to respect the inward estate of a
Christian, it is most joyful and comfortable: The sufferings of this life are
not worthy of the joys that are here and in Heaven prepared for us.

There is jointly joy and jointly sorrow in every Christian: sorrow upon
sins commission, but joy upon sins remission: sorrow because by our sins
we have killed Christ, but joy because by his stripes we are healed: Heb.
12.11. There is no afliction but is grievous: There is the part of sorrow: but
it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness: There is the part of joy and
gladness.

The Kingdom of God is joy in the holy Ghost.

4. If the estate of a Christian be so joyous, then surely the condition of
the wicked is restlesss and terrible: horror attends the wicked conscience
here, and hell hereafter: The very wicked in Hell confess no less: Wisdom 5
We have wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness, we have gone
dangerous ways, the way of peace we have not known: What has pride
proffited us or what has the pomp of riches done us good?

The Lord grant that we may fly all sin and wickedness, for there is no
peace to the wicked says the Lord.

5. Lastly if Gods people have such joy distilled and dropped into their souls
here in this World of sorrow, in this body of sin: O what are the joys
prepared in Heaven for them that love and fear him? neither eye has seen,
nor care has heard, neither can the heart of man conceive or imagine, of the
joys which the Lord has prepared in Heaven for them that love him. There is
great tranquillity, tranquil felicity, happy eternity, everlasting
blessedness, and the blessed trinity: o gaudium super gaudium, extra quod non
est gaudium, quando intrabo in te, ut Deum meum videam qui habitat in te. O joy
above all joys, without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee,
that I may see my God that dwells in thee: To which most blessed joys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Lord bring us all at the day of our departure, for
Jesus Christ's sake our only Lord and Savior: To whom with GOD the Father and
God the holy Ghost, be ascribed all glory and honor, power, praise, and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur modo intra duos Menses.

Rob. Austin
Martij 22.1633.

