PHILOMELA. THE LADY FITZVVAters Nightingale.

By Robert Green.

Vtriusque Academiae in Artibus magister.

Serosed serio.

Imprinted at London by R. B for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little
North door of Paul's. 1592.

To the right honorable the Lady Bridget Ratliffe, Lady Fitzwaters: Robert
Green, wishes increase of honor and virtue.
RIght beautiful and bountiful Lady, finding my self humbly devoted to the
Right honorable the Lord Fitzwaters your husband, not only that I am borne
his, but also for the gracious acceptaunce of a small Pamphlet written by an
other, and presented to him by me, I endeavored any way and every way that I
might, to discover my affectionate duty to him by some scoller-like labors
that I began to toss over the first fruits of my wits wrapped up as scollers
treasurs be, in loose papers that I might sift out some thing worthy his
honor, but finding all worthless of his Lordship, at last I lighted upon this
fiction of Venetian Philomela which I had written long since and kept charily
being pend at the request of a Countess in this land to approve wemens
chastity, as soon as I had red it over and reduced it into form lickinge it a
little as the bears do their whelps to bring them to perfection, I have
resolved to make good my duty to his Lordship in doing homage with my simple
labors to your Ladyship knowing service don to the wife is gratefied in the
husband) whereupon I presume to present the dedication of chaste Philomela to
your honor and to christen it in your Ladyships name, calling it the Lady
Fitzwaters N^ghtingalle as if I should insinuate a comparison twixt you and him
of equal and honorable virtues. Imitating heerin Master Abraham France, who
titled the Lamentations of Amyntas under the name of the Countess of
P^nbrookes Iuie Church: for herein your L^dyship had far more perfections
then years and more inward excelence then externe beutie, yet so beuti^ul as
few so fair though none more virtuous, I thought the legand of an honorable and
chaste Lady. Would be grateful to your honor whose mind is wholly delighted
in chaste thoughts, keeping herein a perfect decoru^ to appropriat the nature of
the gift to the content of the person. For such as offer incence to Venus burn
mirr mixed with Eringion. Those that glory Pallas give her a shield* Dians
present a bow: witty poemes are fit for wise heads and examples of honor for
such as triumph in virtue so that seeing there has few led more chaste then an
Italian Philomela I thought none only more fit to patronyse her honors then
your Ladyship whose chastety is as far spread as you are either known or spoken
of, if then my well meaning may not be misconstrued but my presumption pardoned
and my labors fauered with your gracious acceptance I have what I aimed at
and what I expected, in the hope of which courtesy setting down my rest I
humbly take my leave.

Your Ladyshipps in all duti^ull service Robart Green.

TO THE GENTLEMEN REAders, Health.
IF the contents of lines could at life discover the collar of the face, you
should gentlemen see my rudy cheeks manifest my open folies, but seeing paper
cannot blush, I will confese my falt and so humbly crave pardon I promised
gentlemen, both in my Mourning Garment and Farewell to Folies never to busy my
self about any wanton pamphlets again, nor to have my brain counted so adle
as to set out any matter that were amorous, but yet am I com contrary to vow
and promise once again to the press with a labor of love which I hatched
long ago^, though now brought fourth to light. If the printer had not been I
would have had it thrust out as an orphant without any name to father it: but
at his earnest entreaty I was content to subscribe, though I abide your hard
censures and angry frowns for a penance. Therefore since the work was writ
a^ore my vow and published upon duty to so hononrable and bewtifull a Lady: I
humbly sue for favor, and crave that you will bear with this fault, and hold
me every way excused: which courtesy if you grant me I have more than I
deserve, and as much as my desire every way can wish, and so farewell.

Yours, Robert Green.

The Lady Fitz-waters Nightingale.
THere dwelled in the City of Venice near the Rialto, an Earl of great
excellence, both for the descent of his parentage, and largeness of his
patrimony, called Il Conte Ph^llippo Medico, a gentleman every way, not only
by birth: as being by the mothers side of the Aemilii, but every way furnished
with civil virtues for peace, and martial valor for the wars as
polliticke at home as resolute abroad: reuerenst of all, not for his gray
hears for he was young, but for his many virtues wherein he ouerwent men of
age. This Conte Phillippo had by the favor of Fortune and his own
foresight, linked himself to a yoonge Gentlewoman in marriage called Phylomela
Celii, at that time the wonder of Venice, not for her beauty, though Italy
affoorded none so fair, nor for her dowry, though she were the only daughter
of the Duke of Millain: but for the admyrable honors of her mind, which were so
many and matchless, that virtue seemed to have plante^ there the paradise of
her perfections: her age exceeded not xvii. yet appeared there such a simmetry
of more then womanly excellence in every action of this Venetian paragon that
Italy held her life as an instance of all commend^ble qualities: she was
modest without ^ullennesse, and silent not as a fool, but because she would
not be counted a blab: chaste, and yet not coy, for the poorest of all held her
courteous* though she was young, yet she desired neither to gad nor to gase nor
to have her be^^tie made common to every bad companions eye* the vale she used
for her face was the covert of her own house: for she never would go abroad
but in the company of her husband, and then with such bashfulnesse, that she
seemed to hold her self faulty in stepping beyond the shadow of her own
mansion: thus was Philomela famous for her exquisite virtues, and Philippo
fortunate for enioyeng so virtuous a paramour. But as there is no Antidot so
precious but being tempered with Antimonie is infectious: nor no heart so
soueraign good, but art can make simply ill, so Phillippo was not so
commendable for some good parts, as afterward bad thought of for some unworthy
qualities. For th^ugh he had a wife every way answerable to his own wish,
both fair to please his eye, and honest to content his humor, yet in seeking to
quittance these virtues with love, he so ^uerloued her, that he pl^gued her
more with ielousy then recompenst her with affection, insomuch that with a
deep insight entering into the consideration of her beawty and her youth, he
began to suspect that such as frequented his house for trafike (for the
greatest men in Venice used merchandise) were rather drawn thither by a
desire to see his wife then for the special use of any other his commodities.
Feeding upon this passion that gnaweth like envy upon her own flesh, he called
to mind to which of his friends she showed the most gracious looks, upon
whom she glaunst the most smiling favors, whose car^er she would be at the
table, to whom she would drink, and who had most courteous intertainment at her
hands, these men he did both suspect and envy, as those to whom he thought his
wife for those granted savors most affectionate. Yet when he called to mind
her chaste virtues, and did ruminate the particularities of his loves toward
himself, he suppressed the suspicious flame of ielousy with the assured proofs
of her inuinsyble chastity, hammering these betwixt fear^ and hope he built
castles in the air and reached beyond the m^^ne: one while swearing all women
were false and inconstant, and then again protesting if all were so, yet not
all because Philomela was not so: In this gealous quandary he used to himself
this quaint discourse. If love be a blessing Philippo as yet proves in the
ends most bitter, how ^^est are they that never make trial of so sower a
sweet, a child ^^^nge with a be will fly from the hunnicombe, such as are
bytten with vipers, will fear to sleep on the grass* but men touched with the
inconvenience of fancy, hunt with sighs to enrich themselves with that
passion: what conquest have such as win fair women? Even the like vyctorie
that Alexander had in subduing the Scythians reconciled friends, who the more
they flattered him the more he mistrusted. Beauty is like the herb Larix,
cool in the water but hot in the stomach: precious while it is a blossom, but
prejudicial grown to a fruit: a iem not to be valued if set in virtue, but
disgrast with a bad foil like a ring of gold in a swines snowt: yet what
comfort is there in life if man had no solace: but man, women are sweet helps
and those kind creatures that god made to perfect up men's excellence. Truth
Philippo they (...) wonders of nature, if they wrong not nature: and admirable
angels if they would not be drawn with augels to become devils. Oh flatter not
thy self in flattering them for where they find submission, there they
proclaim contempt: and if thou make them thy mate, they will give thee such a
checkmate that happyly thou ^halt live by the loss all thy life after: what
needs this inuectiue humor against women, when thou have such a wife as every
way is absolute both for beauty and virtue? let such as have been stung with
the scorpion be warnd, speak the^ as thou find, and then thou will say that
women are creatures as excellent in mind, as they be singular in complexion:
as far beyond men in inward virtues, as they exceed men in exterior beauties
I grant all this, yet Philippo the juice of y^ Hel^bor^ns is poison, the greener
the Alisander leaves be, the more bitter is the sap, every outward
appearaunce is not an authentical instance, women have chaste eyes when they
have wanton thoughts, and modest looks when they harbor lascivious wishes:
the Eagle when he soareth nearest to the son, then he hou^rs for his preie,
the Salamander is most warm when he lies furthest from the fire, and then
are women most harthollowe when they are most lip-holie, and by these
premises, Philippo, argue of thy wives preciseness, for though she seem
chaste, yet may she secretly delight in change, and though her countenance be
coy to all, yet her conscience may be courteous to some one, when the son
shines most garish it foreshewes a shower, when the birds sing earlye, there is
a storm before night, women's flatteries are no more to be trusted than
Astronomers Almanackes, that proclaims that for a most fair day that
proves most clowdye, and so of Philomela. As thus the County Philippo was
iarring with himself about this humor of jealousy, there came to him while he
sat (for all this while he was in an Arbor in his Garden) a familiar friend
of his called Signeor Giouanni Lutesio, so private unto the Earl in all his
secret affairs, that he concealed nothing from him which came within the
compass of his thoughts, this Signeor Giouanni seeing the County in a brown
study, wakened him of his muse with a merry greeting, and ^ad a ^^nnie for his
thought* the Earl seeing his second self* ^is only repositorie of his
private passions, entertained him very courteously, and after some familiar
speeches v^ed betwixt them, Giouan began to question what the cause was of that
melancholy dumpe that he found him in: the Earl fetching a great sigh, taking
Lutesio by the hand, setting him down by him, began to rehearse from point to
point what a iealious suspicion he had of his wives beauty, and that for all
the show of her honesty, he somewhat doubted of her chastity. Giouanni who
with a reverent love favored the Countess, began somewhat sharply to
reprove the Earl, that he should admit of so foolish a passion as
jealousy, and misconster of her whose virtuous life was so famous thro^gh al
Venice: As suspicious heads want not sophistry to supply their mistrust, so
Philip at that time was not barren of arguments to prove the subtlety of
women, their inconstancy, how they were faced like Ianus, having one full of
furrows, the other of smiles, swearing he should never be merry at his
heart, till he had made an assured proof of her chastity, and with that he
broke with Signeor Giouanni Lutesio, that he should be the man to make
experience of her honesty, although the Gentleman were very unwilling to take
such a tas^ in hand, doubting least in dallieng with the flame, he might
burn his fingar, and so injury his friend, yet at the importunat entreaty
of Philippo, he promised to undertake the matter, and by all means possible to
assault the invincible Fort of her chastity, protesting that if he sound her
pliant to listen to his passions, he would make it manifest to him without
dissembling, Philippo ^lad of this, to grant Giouanni opportunity to court his
wife, would be more often abroad, and that he might drive her the sooner to
listen unto his suit, he used not that wo^n^ed love and familiaritye that he
was ac^ustomed to do, but quitted all her dutiful favors with uncouth and
disdaynfull frowns, so that poor Philomela who knew nothing of this compacted
treachery, began to wonder what had altered her husbands woonted humor, and
like a good wife she began to examine her own conscience, wherein she had given
him any occasion of offense, feeling her self guiltless (unless his own
conceit deceived him) she imagined that her husband affected some other Lady
more than her self, which imagination she concealed with patience, and
resolved not by revealing it, to retriue him from his new entertained fancy,
but with obedience, love, and silence, to recover her Philippo to savor none
but his Philomela. While thus her mind a little suspicious began to waver,
Lutefio began to lay his ^aites to b^tray this silly innocent. Now you must
imagine he was a young Gentleman of a good house, of no mean wealth, nor any
way made unfortunate by nature, for he was counted the most fine and courtly
Gentleman is al Venice. This Lutesio therefore seeking fit opportunity to find
Madame Philomela in a merry vain (for Time is called that Cappillata
Ministra, that favors Lovers in their fortunes) watched so narrowly, that he
found the Countess sitting al alone in her Garden, plaieng upon a Lut^ many
pretty Round^laies, Borginets, Madrigals, and such pleasant Le^^ons, al as it
were amorous love vowed in honor of Venus, singing to her Lute many pretty and
merry ditties, some of her own composing, and some written by some witti^
Gentlemen of Venice, thinking now time had smiled upon him by putting her in
such an humorous (...). At last he hea^d her warble out this (...).

Philomelas Ode that she sung in her Arbor.
SItting by a river side,
Where a silent stream did glide.
Muse I did of many things,
That the mind in quiet brings.
I began think how some men deem*
Gold their god, and some esteem
Honor is the chief content,
That to man in life is lent.
And some others do contend,
Quiet none like to a friend.
Others hold there is no w^lth
Compared to a perfect health.
Some man's mind in quiet stands,
When he is Lord of many lands.
But I did sigh, and said all this
Was but a shade of perfect blis.
And in my thoughts I did approve,
Naught so sweet as is true love.
Love twixt Lovers passes these,
When mouth kisseth and heart grees.
With folded arms and lips meeting*
Each soul another sweetly greeting.
For by the breath the soul fleeteth,
And soul with soul in kissing meets.
If Love be so sweet a thing,
That such happy bliss does bring,
Happy is Loves sugared thrall,
But unhappy maidens all.
Who esteem your Virgins blisses,
Sweeter than a wives sweet kisses.
No such quiet to the mind,
As true love with kisses kind.
But if a kiss prove unchaste,
Then is true love quite disgrast,
Though love be sweet, learn this of me,
No Love sweet but honesty.
As soon as Philomela had ended her Ode, Signior Lutesio stepped to her and
half mard her melody with this vnlo^kt for motion: I am glad Madam to find you
so full of glee, women's minds set on mirth, shows their thoghts are at quiet,
when Birds sing early there has been a sweet deaw, so your morni^ges Antheme
shows your nights content, the subject of your song, and the censur^ of my
thoughts argue upon conclusion, for lykelye it is you have found kissing
sweet that so highlye commend it, but as the old proverb is, such laugh as
win, and such as en^s favors may afford her incense, love is precious to such
as possess their love, b^t there is no hell if love be not hell to such as
dare not express their passions. Philomela seeing Lutesio took her napping in
singing so merry an Ode showed in the blush of her cheeks the vashfulnesse of
hi^ thoughts, yet knowing he was her husbands familiar she cared the less, and
smiling made him this pleasant answer. Signior Lutesio as I rellisht a wanton
song at randon, so I little looked your ears should have been troubled with my
music, but since you are a hearer ^f my hoarse dittie, take it as you find
it and conster of it as you please, I know mine own mening best. In that I
commend kissing, it argues me the more kind and my husband the more loving in
that I find lip love so sweet, women may be wantons in their husbands, yet not
immode^^: and wives are allowed to sport so their dallieng be n^^^ishonest: yet
had I known you had been so nie, I wound have been more silent, and at this
word she blushed again, discovering by her looks it grieved her any man
(though never so familiar) should hear her so extraordinary pleasant: but to
find fish in Signior Lutesios fingers because he glaunst at disdain in love
she followed her reply thus: yet since sir what is past cannot be r^^alde, I
will ouer^^ippe the conceit of mine own folly, and be so bold as to have you
under confession. What is the reason Lutesio you diversely descant of the
fruition of love, has that divine passion crept into your brains? Giouanni
hearing her harp on that string strained it a pin higher thus. Divine passion
call you it Madam, nay rather a fury fetched from hell, a madness ^rued in the
b^some of Tesiphon, an unbridled desire, a restless agony, a continual
anguish, thus do I value love, because my life is at an end by the wrongs of
love: such as are poisoned with rugwort count it fatal yet such as have the
plurisie drink it in potions the Mercuriall Moti was very much commended of
Ulysses though condemned of Cyres: men's poems follow their passions, and they
conclude as they are contented: then Madam if all the world say love is a
Heaven, yet must I say desire is a hell: not that the bewte^us saint, whom mnie
eye does worship, and my heart does honor, has quitted my affection with
disdain: but that in not daring discover my passions, I am put to a triple
torme^ting penannce. At this he fetched such a fained figh, that simple meaning
Philomela imagined the Gentleman was full of sorrow, and therefore began to
comfort him thus. Why Signior Lutesio have you soared so high, that you doubt
the scortching of your feathers? has your desires taken flight so far above
your degree, that you fear a fall? is the Lady whom you love so great of
birth, that you dare not be your own broaker? Love Lutesio if honest, is
lawful and may reap disdain, but not disgrace. Desire is the daughter of
destiny, and the simpathie of affections is forepointed by the stars:
Woemens eyes are not tied to high personages, but to exquisite perfections: and
the greater often times they be in degrees, the lower they prove in loves: be she
then Lutesio, the stateliest, the richest, the fairest in all Italy, fear not
to court her: for happily she may grant, and she at the worst can but say no:
When I entered into thy wonted humors, how honestly wanton thou have been
amongst women of high account: when I think of thy wealth, of thy virtues, of
thy parentage, of thy person: I flatter not Lutesio, for in my opinion a frumpe
amongst friends is petty treason in effect, I cannot but wonder what she is
that Lutesio dares not tell he loves, if without offense I may crave it, tell
me her name, that I may censure of her qualities: Lutesio with a face full of
discontent, made her this answer: Madame as I dare not discourse my loves, so
I will not discover her name: I regard her honor as my life, and therefore
only suffice it, I am as far unworthy of her as she is beyond my reach to
compass. Philomela who straight found the knot in the rush, began to imagine
that it was some married wife that Lutesio aimed at: and therefore charged him
by the love that he bare to Philippo Medico, that he would tell her whether it
was a wife or a maid that he thus earnestly affected. Lutesio briefly told
her that she was not only a wife, but maid to one whom she almost as
tenderly loved as he did the Earl her husband: A Lady of honor and virtue,
yet a woman, and therefore he hoped might be won if his heart would serve
him to be a woer. Philomela ^earing this, began to find a knot in the rush,
and to deem that it was some familiar of his that he was affected to: and
therefore with a gentle frown, as if she loved him, and yet mislikte of his
fondness in fancy, taking him by the hand, she began thus to school^ him.

Lutesio, now I see the strongest Oak has his say, and his worms: that
Ravens will breed in the fairest Ash, and that the musked Angelica bears a
deaw, that shining like pearl, being tasted is most preiuditiall: that the
holiest men in show are often the hollo west men in substance, and where there is
the greatest flourish of virtue, there in time appears the greatest blemish of
vanity. I speak this by all, but apply it to them who seeming every way
absolute, will prove every way dissolute. Has not Venice held thee more
famous for thy good parts than for thy parentage? and yet well borne, and
valued the more for living well than wealthely: and yet thy patrimony is not
small. Oh Lutesio darken not these honors with dishon^stie, nor for the
foolish and fading passion of lust, reach not at an everlasting pennanc^ of
infamy. As I mislike of thy choice, so I can but wonder at thy change to ^ee
thee altered in manners, that were erst so modest, who was est^^med amongst
Ladies for his civil conceits as Lutesio? thou were wished for amongst the
cha^test for thy choice qualities, amonges^ youth for thy wit, amongst age for
thy honest behauior, desired of all because offensive to none: and now if thou
prosecute this ^ad purpose, intend this base love, to violate the honor of a
Venetian Lady, look to be hated of all that are vertu^us because thou a^t
grown so suddenly vicious, and to be banished out of the company of all that
are honest because thou seek to make one dishohonest: then as thou love
thy fame leave off this love, and as thou valuest thine honor, so vale the
appetite of thy dishonest thoughts. Besides Lutesio enter into the
consideration of the fault, and by that measure what will be the sequel of thy
folly: thou attemptest to dishonor a wife, nay the wife of thy friend: in
doing this thou shall loose a sweet companion, and purchase thy self a fatal
enemy: thou shall displease God and grow odious to men: hazard the hope of thy
grace, and assur^ thy self of the reward of sin, adultery: Lutesio is
commended in none, condemned in all, and punnished in the end either with this
worlds infamy or heavens anger: it is a desire without regard of honesty,
and a gain with greater reward of misery: a pleasure bought with pain, a
delight hatched with disquiet, a content possessed with fear, and a sin
finished with sorrow. Barbarous nations punish it with death: m^^re Atheistes
in Religion avoid it by instinct of nature, such as glory God with no honor,
covet to glorify themselves with honesty, and will thou that art a Christian
than crucify Christ anew, by making the harbor of thy soul the habitation of
Satan? Oh Lutesio as thou blushest at my words, so bannish thy bad thoughts,
and being created by God, seek not to despise thy creator in abusing his
creatures: A woman's honesty is her honor, and her honor the chiefest essence
of her life: then in seeking to blemishe her virtues with lust, thou ^ymest at
no less disgrace than her death: and yet Lutesio this is not all, for in
winning her love, thou loosest a friend: than which, there is nothing more
precious, as there is nothing more rare: as Corruption vnius est generatio
alterius: so the loss of a friend is the purchase of an enemy and such a
mortal foe as will apply all his wits to thy wracks, intrude all his
thoughts to thy ruin, and pass away his days, cares, and nights slumbers,
in dreaming of thy destruction. For if brute beasts will revenge such brutish
wrongs as adultery, then imagine no man to be so patient, that will ouerpasse
so gross an injury: assure thy self of this Lutesio, if her husband hear of
your loves, he will aim at your lives: he will leave no confection untempered,
no poison unsearched, no mynerall untried, no Aconiton vnbrused, no herb,
tree, root, stone, simple or secret unsought, till revenge has satisfied the
burning thirst of his hate: so shall thou fear with whom to drink, with
whom to converse, when to walk, how to perform thy affairs, only for doubt
of her revenging husband, and thy protested enemy. If such vnlawull lust, such
unkind desires, such unchaste love procure so great loss, and so many perils
reuert it Lutesio as a passion most pernicious, as a shine most odious, and a
gain most full of deadly sorrows. Though this he much Lutesio, yet this is
not all: for many love that are never liked, and every one that woes is not a
winner: Diverse desire with hope, and yet their wishes are to small effect:
suppose the Lady whom thou love is honest: then is thy love as unlikely as
Ixions was to Juno: who aiming at the substance was made a fool with a
shadow. I tell thee it is more easy to cut a Diamond with a glass, to pearce
steel with a fether, to tie an Elephant with a thread of silk, than to
alienate an honest woman's love from her husband, their hearts be harbors of
one lou^, closets of one contents, Cel^es, whereinto no amorous Idea but one
can enter, as hard to be pearst with new fangled affection as the Adamant to be
made soft with fire. A Lady Lutesio that regards her honor will die with
Lucrece before she agree to lust, she will eat coals with Portia before she
prone unchaste, she will think every misery sweet, every mishappe content,
before she condescend to the allurementes of any wanton leacher. Imagine then
her wh^^^ thou love to be such a one: then will it qualify thy hope, cool
thy desires, and quench those unbridled thoughts that leads thee on to such
follies: for if she be a wanton, what do thou win her that many has
worn, and more than thy self may vanquish? a light huswife and a lewd minion,
that after she has yielded the flower of her love Thesius will marry with
Menelaus, and then run away with Paris: amorous to every one because she is
humorous to all: Then Lutesio seeing, if thou likest an honest Lady, thy love
is past hope: and if thou (...) a want^n, thou shall gain but what others have
left: leave both and become as hitherto thou have been an honest gentleman in
all men's opinions, so shall thou li^e well thought of, and die honorably: and
with that, smiling she asked him, if she had not played the preacher well. But
Lutesio wondering at her virtues, made no answer he was so amassed: but rested
silent, which Philomela perceiving, to waken him out of his dumpe, she took
again her Lute in her hand, and began to sing this following Oade.

Philomeloes second Oade.
IT was frostie winters season,
And faire-Floras wealth was geason:
Meades that erst with green were spread,
With choice flowers diapred:
Had tawny vales: Cold had scanted,
What the Springes and Nature planted:
Leauelesse bows there might you see,
All except fair Daphnes tree,
On their twigges no birds pearched,
Warmer couerts none they searched:
And by Natures secret reason;
Framed their voices to the season:
With their feeble tunes bewraying,
How they grieved the springs decaying:
Frostie Winter thus had gloomed,
Each fair thing that summer bloomed,
Fields were bare and trees vnclad,
Flowers withered, birds were had:
When I saw a shepherd fold,
Sheep in Coat to shun the cold:
Himself sitting on the grass,
That with frost withered was.
Sighing deeply thus began say,
Love is folly when a stray:
Like to love no passion such,
For his madness if too much:
If too little, then despair:
If too high, he beats the ay^e:
With bootlesse, if too low:
An Egle matcheth with a Crow.
Thence grows iarres thus I find,
Love is folly if unkind:
Yet do men most desire,
To be heated with this fire:
Whose flame is so pleasing hot,
That they burn, yet feel it no^
Yet has love another kind,
Worse than these unto the mind:
That is when a wantons eye,
Leads desire cleade awrie.
And with the Be does rejoice,
Every minute to change choice,
Counting he were then in bliss,
If that ^ch fair fall were his:
Highly thus in love disgraste
When the lover is unchaste:
And would taste of fruit forbidden,
Cause the escape is easily hidden.
Though such love be sweet in brewing,
Bitter is the end ensuing:
For the humor of love he shameth,
And himself with lust defameth:
For a minutes pleasure gayning,
Fame and honor ever stayning.
Gazing thus so far awry,
Last the chip falls in his eye,
Then it burns that erst but heat him,
And his own rod gins to beat him:
His choyccst sweetes turns to gall,
He finds lust is fins thrall:
That wanton women in their eyes,
Men's deceiuings do comprise.
That homage done to fair faces,
Does dishonor other graces:
If lawless love be such a sin,
Cursed is he that lives therein:
For the gain of Venus game,
Is the downfall unto shame:
Here he pausd and did stay,
Sighed and rose, and went away.
As Soon as Philomela had ended her Oade, she smiled on Lutesio and said,
hoping then that this private conference shall be a conclusion of your passions,
and a final resolution to reuerse your thoughts from this disordinat folly of
love: I will at this time cease to speak any more, because I hope you will
rest from your motion^ and so taking him by the hand, she led him into the
parler, where amongst other company they past away y^ day in pleasant that*
till that Lutesio found convenient oportuniti^ to discover to Philippo the
resolution of his wife, who thought every minute a month till he had heard
what answer she had made to Lutesio. At last they went both together walking
into a garden that adjoined to the house of Philippo: and there Lutesio who
revealed from point to point what he had motioned a far off to Philomela, and
how honorably and honestly she replied, rehearsing what a cooling card of good
counsel she gave him, able to have quailed the hotest stomach, or quenched
the most eager flame that fancy could fire the mind of man withal: entering
into a large and high commendation of the chastity, wisdom, and general
virtues of Philomela, auerring that he thought there was not a woman of more
absolute qualities nor honorable disposition in all Italy, Philippo the more he
drunk the more he thirsted, and the more he was persuaded to trust in her
honesty, the more he was suspicious, and doubted of her virtue: for he replied
still in his ielous humor that women's words were no warrantes of their truth,
that as the Onix is inwardly most cold, when it is outwardly most hot: so
women's words are like the cries of Lapwings, farthest from their thoughts, as
they are from their nests: they proclaim silence with their tongues, modesty
with their eyes, chastity with their actions, when in their hearts they are
plotting how to grant an amorous pleasure to their lovers: Tush says Philippo,
women's tongues are tipped with deceit: they can sing with the Nightingale,
though they have a prick at their breasts: they can lend him a cherrie lip
whom they heartily loathe, and fawn upon her husbands neck when she gives her
lover a wincke: Though my wife has made a fair show of virtue, it is no
authentical proof of her honesty, either she mistrusted or misdoubted of
your sorcerie, or else she would seem hard in the winning, that her chastity
might be holden the more charie for be she never so wanton she will seem
modest, and the most comman Curtesan will to a nouice seems the most coy
matron: they have their countenance at command, their words at will, their
oaths at pleasure, and all to shadow their scapes with the maskes of virtue
Rodope seemed coy to Psanneticus, else had a courtesan never conquered a king.
Hermia chaste to Aristotle, else had she not bewitched a Philosopher, Platoes
ouerworne trull true to him, else had she not been mistress of his thoughts.
I tell thee Lutesio they have more wiles then the sun has beams to betray
the simple m^ning of besotted lovers. Therefore though she uttered a legend of
good lessons believe her not. Though the Hare take squat she is not lost at the
first defaulte, apply thy wits, try her by letters, write passionatly and
here her answer, and assure thy self if thou cunningly cast forth the lure
she will soon be reclaimed to the ^st. Thus importu^ate was Philippo upon his
friend Lutesio, that at the last he craved license to depart for a while,
leauinge philippo meditating of his melancholy while he went into his
chamber, where taking pen and paper he wrote philomela this cunning letter.

Lutesio to the fairest Philomela, wishes what he wants himself.
IT is no wonder philomela if men's minds be subject to love, when their
eyes are the instruments of desire, nor is any blame worthy for affecting, when
as the sight of man is a sense that vieweng every thing must of force allow of
some thing, I speak not sweet lady philosophically as a scholar but
passionateli^ as a lover, whose eyes has been so lavish in over high looks,
that either they must have their longing or else I die through their
ouerliking: for as too sweet parfumes makes the sense to surfeit, and the most
bright colors soonest blemish the sight, so I in gasing on the choice
perfections of beauty, have dazelled mine eyes and fiered my heart with desire,
that none but the fruition of that blessed object, can save me from being loves
cursed abie^t. Now Madam, ^he rare Idea that thus through the applause of mine
eye has bewitched my heart is the beauteous image of your sweet self. Pardon
me if I presume, when the extremity of love pricks me forward. Faults that grow
by affection ought to be forgiven, because they come of constraint: then Madam
read with favor, and censure with mercy, for so long I dallied with the fly
about the candle, that I began to feel over much heat, would breed my harm, I
have played so long with the Mynew at the bait that I am stricken with the
hook: I have viewed your beautye with such delighte, and considered of your
virtues with such desire, that in your gracious looks lies the only hope of my
life. Ah Philomela were not my love extreme, my passions passing all measure,
my affection to full of anguish: I would have concealed my thoughts with
silence, and have smoothered my greefes with patience: but either I must live
by revealing it, or die by repressing it: I fear thou will hear object
Philippo is my friend, and then I am of little faith to profer him this wrong,
I confess this is a truth and were worthy of blame, were I not bewitched by
love, who neither admits exceptions of faith or friendship, if it be a
passion that controuleth the Gods, no wonder at all if it conquer and
command men. If sons disobey their Fathers to have their desires, it is more
tolerable to crack friendship for the conquest of love. Why then did Nature
frame beawty to be so excellent, if she had tied the winning of it within
exceptions. If that a friend may fault with his friend for a kingdom, no doub^
faith may be broken ^or love, that is a great deal more puissant then Kings
and much more precious then Diadems: chiefly if that the party be chary to have
regard of his mystresse honor, what the eye sees not Phylomela never hurts
the heart, a secret love impeacheth not chastity. Juno never frowned when
Jupiter made his escape in a Cloud. Private pleasures have never enjoined unto
them any penance, and she is always counted chaste enough that is chary
enoughe: then Madam let him not die for love, whom if you please you may
bless with love.

It may be you will replye, that Philippo is a Conte and a great deal my
superior and the supreme of your heart, therefore not to be wronged with an
arriual. Consider Madame kings do brook many unknown scapes: Love will play
the wanton amongst the greatest Lords: Women are not made such chaste nuns,
but they may let much water slip by the Mill that the Miller knows not of:
They may love their husband with one of their eyes, and favor a friend with
the other. Since then Madam I have been stunge with the Scorpion, and cannot
be helped or healed by none but by the Scorpion: that I am wounded with Achilles
lance and I must be healed with his Truncheon: that I am entangled and snared
in your beauty, and must be set at liberty only by your love. Look upon my
passions and pyttie them, let me not die for desiring your sweet self but
rather grant me favor, and enjoy such a lover, as will prise your honor
before his life, and at all times be yours in all dutyfull service whilst he
lives: expecting such an answer as is agreeyng to such divine beawtie, which
cannot be c^uell or according unto my d^stinie, which be it s^^ister will be my
death, farwell.

Yours ever though never yours, Geouanni Lutesio.


Having finished his letter thus amorousli^, he remembered himself, and
although philippo^ stayde for him in the garden, yet he ^tept once again to
his standishe and wrote under this fgllowing so^net:

Natura Nihil frustra.
On women Nature did bestow two eyes
Like Hemians bright lamps in matchles beuty shining,
Whose beams do soonest captiuate the wise
And wary heads made rare by Arts refining.
But why did Nature in her choice combining
Plant two fair eyes within a beautuous face?
That they might favor two with equal grace.
Venus did sooth up Vulcan with one eye
With the other granted Mars his wished glee,
If she did so whom Heimens did defy
Think love no sin but grant an eye to me,
In vain else Nature gave two stars to thee:
If then two eyes may well two friends maintain,
Allow of two, and prove not Nature vain.
Natura repugnare belluinum.
After he had ended this Sonnet he went and showed them to Signyor Philippo,
who liked well of his passionate humor, and desired nothing more then to
hear what answer his wife would make to these amarous poems: therefore that
he might grant Lutesio the fitter opportunity to deliver them, he took a
skiffe and went with sundry other Gentlemen his familiars to sollace himself
upon the waters. In the mean while Lutesio who was left alone by himself,
began to enter into the least disposition of a gelous man that would hazard
the honor of his wife to content his own suspicious humor: and whet on a
friend to a feigned fancy which in time might grow to an unfeigned affection: so
that smyling to himself he began thus to murmr in his mind. Is not he
worthy to find that seeks: and deserves he not many blows that craves to be
beaten? Since Philippo will buy the Buckes head, is he not worthy to have the
horns: and seeing he will needs have me court his wife in jest, were it not
well if he might have the Cuckoo in earnest. Knows he not that frumps amongst
friends grow at last to open anger: that pretty sportings in love, end
oftentimes in pretty bargains: that it is il gesting with edge tools: and of
all cattle worst cauilling with fair women: for beawty is a bait that will
not be dallied with. But I love him to well, and I honor the lady to much to
motion such a thought in earnest: Though he be foolish, I know her too
honest to grant love to the greatest Monarch of the world. While thus he was
musing with himself, Philomela came into the Garden with two of her waiting
women, who seeing Lutesio in a dumpe, thought he was devising of his new
love: whereupon she stepped to him, and began to ask him if he proceeded in his
purpose: I madame quoth he, if I mean to persevere in life, and with that the
water flood in his eyes, whether it was that he had an onion in his napkin to
make him weep, or that he had sucked that special quality from his mother to
let fall tears when he list I know not: but she perceiving he watered his
plants, began somewhat to pytty his passions, and asked him if yet he had made
the motion: No Madam quoth Lutesio, but here I have written her my mind, and
please it you you shall be my secretary, both to read my letter and see her
name, for I know you will conceal it, Philomela desirous to see what Lady it
was Lutesio was in love withal, as Natura Mulierum Nouitatis auida, took it
very kindly at Lutesios hands that he would participat his secrets unto her,
and promised not only to be silent, but to yield her opinion of the hope of his
success, so she took the letter and promised the next morning to give it him
again, and so they fell into other chat talking of sundry matters, as their
present occasions did minister, till at last Philomela with child to see the
contents of the Letter, took her leave and went into her Closet, where
vnripping the seals, she found lines far unfitting to her expectation. As
soon as she saw Lutesios love was meant to her, she rent the paper in a
thousand pieces, and exclaymed against him in most bitter terms, vowing her
Lord should be revenged upon him for this intended villainy, or else he should
refuse her for his wife, thus alone while she breathed out most hard inuectiues
against him, yet at last that she might aggrauate her husbands displeasure the
more against him, she gathered up the pieces, and laieng them together read
them over, where perceiving his passions, and thinking them to grow from a
mind full of fancy, having somewhat cooled her choler, she resolved not to
tell her husband, least if he should kill Lutesio she might be thought the
occasion of the murder, and so bring her unblemished honor in question, and
therefore she took paper and ink, and wrote him this sharp reply.

Philomela to the most false Lutesio wishes what he wants himself.
IF thou woonderest what I wish thee Lutesio, enter into thine own want and
thou shall find. I desire thou might have more honor and less dishonestie,
else a short life and a long repentance, I see now that Hemblocke wheresoever
it be planted will be pestilent, that the serpent with the brightest scales
shroudeth the most fatal venom, that the rubie whatsoever foil it has will
show red, that when nature hatcheth vicious, nurture will never make virtuous.

Thou art like Lutesio, unto the Hysope growing in America, that is liked of
strangers for the smell, and hated of the Inhabitants for the operation,
being as prejudicial in the one, as delightsome in the other: so thou in
voice art holden honest, and therefore liked, but being once looked into and
found lascivious, thou will grow into as great contempt with thy familiars,
as now thou art honored amongst strangers. Hadest thou none answerable to
thine appetite but Philomela? nor none to wrong but Philippo? can thou wish
me so much harm, or owe him so little Friendship, I honoring thee so
kindly, and he loving thee so deerelye, how can thou love the wife, that
betraiest the husband, or how shall I deem thou will prove constant in love,
that art false in thy faith, and to such a friend who next my self counts
thee second in his secrets. Base man that harbors so bad a thought, ransacke
thy thoughts and rippe up the end of thy attempt and then if that shame has
not utterly abandoned thee, thou will for fear of shame leave off thy lust,
and grow into more grace.

Tell me Lutesio, and if thou speak not what thou know, I defy thee,
wherein have thou seen me so light, or have my gestures been so lewd, that
thou should gather hope to gain thy love, has Venice suspected me for a
wanton, has Italy deemed me dissolute, have I granted unto thee or to any
other extraordinary favors? have I been froward to my Lord, or by any
wanton tricks showed the wrack of my chastity? if any of these blemishes
have disgraced me, speak it, and I will call for grace and amend them but
never a whit the more befriend them: for whereas I honorably thought of
Lutesio, unless I find thine humor changed I will aim at thy dishonor, and
proclaim thee an enemy to Ladies cause thou art a friend to lust. Ah Lutesio,
I would sooner have deemed the seas should have become dry, the earth barren,
and the sun without light, then thou would have sought to violate the
honesty of philomela, or blemishe the honor of philippo: phillippos wealth is
at thy will, his sword at thy command, his heart plast in thy bosom, he
reserueth of all that he has for thee, save only me to himself: and can
thou be so unkind to rob him of his only love that owes thee so much love, I
judge the best and I hope y^ I imagi^ truth thou dooest it but to try me: if
it be so I brook it with the more patience, yet discontent thou shoulde^^
trouble mine eyes with a wanton line: but if thy passionate humor be in
earnest, it contents me not to deny thee but to defy thee, I proclaim my
self enemy to thy life, as thou art envious of mine and my husbands honor. I
will incense philippo to revenge with his sword what I cannot requite with
words, and never live in quiet till I see thee die infamous traitor as thou
art, unless thy grace be such to cease from thy treachery, come no more in my
husbands house, least thou look for a dagger in thy bosom: feed not at my
table, least thou quaffe with Alexander thy fatal draught, to be brief: love
not phylomela if thou mean to live, but look up to Heaven, become penitent
for thy fond and foolish passions: let me see repentance in thine eyes, and
remorse in thine actions: be as thou have been a friend to phylippo, and a
favorer of mine honor, and though thou have deserved but meanly yet thou
shall be welcome heartyly, and whatsoever is past, upon thy penitence I will
pardon, and for this time conceal it from the knoledge of the Conty, otherwise
set down thy rest we will not both live together in Italy. Farewell.

Never thine, though she were not Philippoes, Philomela Media.


Having ended her letter, she resolved to answer hi^ sonnet as well to show
her wit, as to choke his wantonness, and therefore she writ this poem.

Quot Corda tot Amores.
Nature foreseeing how men would devise,
More wiles than Protheus, women to entise:
Granted them two and those bright shining eyes,
To pearce into man's faults if they were wise.
For they with show of virtue mask their vice,
Therefore to women's eyes belonges these gifts,
The one must love, the other see men's shifts.
Both these awayt upon one simple heart,
And what they choose it hides up without change,
The Emerauld will not with his portraite part,
Nor will a woman's thoughts delight to range.
They hold it bad to have so base exchange.
One heart, one friend, though that two eyes do chose him
No more but one, and heart will never loose him.
Cor vnum Amor vnus.
As Soon as she had sealed up her letter she brookt no delay, but sent it
straight by one of her waiting women to Lutesio, whom she found sitting alone
in his chamber reading upon a book: Interrupting his study, she delivered him
the letter, and the message of her Lady. Lutesio kind, gave the gentlewoman a
kiss: for he thought she valued a lip favor more then a piece of gold, and
with great courtesy gave her ^eaue to depart: she was scarce out of the
chamber but he opened the letter, and found what he expected, the resolution of
a chaste Countess, too worthy of so ielous a husband, praising in him self
the honorable mind of Philomela: he went abroad to find out Philippo, whom
at last he met near unto y^ Arsonale walking together to Lutesios house, there
he showed Philippo his wifes letter, and did comment upon every line,
commending greatly her chastity, and deeply condempning his suspicion: Tush
says Phi^ippo all this wind shakes no corn, Hellena writ as sharply to
Paris, yet she ran away with him. Try her once again Lutesio, and for my life
thou shall find calmer words, and sweeter lines: Lutesio with his eyes full
of choler made him this answer. Philippo if thou be so sottish with
Cephalus to betray thy wives honor perhaps with him, prove the first that
repent, thy treachery: When the wild boar is not chafed, thou may chasten
him with a wand, but being once endamaged with the dogs he is dismoll. Women
that are chaste while they are trusted, pro^e wantons being suspected
causeless: Jealousy is a spur to revenge. Beware Philomela hear not of this
practice least she make thee eat with the blind man many a fly: Can thou
not Philippo content thy self that thy Lady is honest, but thou must plot the
means to make her a harlot? If thou likest hunters fees so well, seek another
wood man, for I will not play an applesquire to feed thy humors. If Venice
knew as much as I am privy to, they would hold thee worthy of that thou have
not, and her a fool if she gave thee not what thou seek for: I am sorry I
have wronged her virtues by so bad a motion: but henceforth Philippo hope never
to get me in the like vain: and more if thou leauest not from being so vain,
I will abandon thy company, and renounce thy friendship for ever. Philippo
hearing his friend Lutesio so short, desired him to be content, patient and
silent, and he would race out the suspicious conceit that haunted him, and for
ever after grace his good wife with more love and honor: and with that
Philippo and he walked to the Rialto: but Lutesio would not for that night go
to the house of Philippo, least his presence might be offensive to Philomela,
and so drive him into some dumpish choler. Philippo coming home was welcome
to his Lady, and being somewhat late, they sat down lovingly to supper. The
first course was no sooner come in, but Phillippo said he marvelled that all
that day he had not seen Lutesio, this he spoke with his eyes on Philomelas
face, to see what countenance she would h^ld at his name, she little
suspecting her husband had been privy to her new ^ound lover, blushed and kept
her self silent. Philippo took no knowledge of any thing but past it over
smoothly, and used his former woonted familiarity to his wife. The next day
going abroad, Lutesio came to his house and went not in as his custom was
boldly, but walking in the hall asked one of the Earls Gentlemen if the
Countess were stirring: he maruelling at Lutesios strangeness, smiled and
said, sir what needs this question? my Lady is alone at her book, go up sir
and help her in her Muses. I pray you quoth Lutesio go to the Countess, and
tell her I am here, and would if her leisure served her gladly have a word
with her: the Gentleman though he wondered at these vnc^^th words of Lutesio,
yet he went up and told his Lady the message, who presently leaving her
book and company, all to avoid out of the chamber, sent for him up: who no
sooner came into her presence, but she saluted him with such a frown, that he
stood as mortified as if he had been strocken with the eye of a Baselisk.
Philomela seeing him in this passionate agony, began with him thus.

I cannot tell Lutesio, how to salute thee either with looks or speeches,
seeing thou art not as thou seemedst once my welwisher and my husbands friend.
The Lapidaries value the stones no longer than they hold their virtues: nor I
prise a Gentleman no longer than he regardes his honor. For as a Diamont with a
clowd is cast into the Goldsmithes dust: so a Gentleman without credit, is
carelessly holden for refuse. I red thy letter, and I answered it: but tell me,
how shall I take it? as thou reply so will I entertain: if to try me, thou
shall find the more favor: If to betray me, hope for nothing but revenge:
Lutesio hearing Philomela so honorably peremptory, with blushing cheeks made
him this answer.

Madam as my face bewrayes my folly, and my ruddie hue my rechlesse show, so
let my words be holden for witnesses of my truth, and think whatsoever I say
is s^^th, by the faith of a Gentleman then assure your self mine eye has ever
loved you, but never unlawfully: and what humble duty I have shown you, has
been to honor you, not to dishonest you. This letter was but to make trial
how you liked Philippo, to whom I owe such faith that it would grieve me he
should have a wife false: I know not Madam what humor drew me on to it. I
am sure neither your wanton looks nor light demeanours, but a kind of passion
destined to breed mine own prejudice, if your favor exceed not my deserts:
If therefore your Ladyship shall forget and forgive this folly, and conceal it
from the Earl, who perhaps may take it meant in earnest, enjoin me any
penance Madam, and I will perform it with patience. Philomela hearing Lutesio
thus penitent, began to clear up her countenance, and said to him thus: it is
folly to rub the skarre when the wound is almost whole, or to renew quarrelles
when the matter is put in comprimise: therefore omitting all Lutesio I pardon
thee, and promise neither to remember thy folly my self, nor yet to reveal it
to my husband, but thou shall be every way as heartily welcome to me as thou
were wont: only this shall be thy penance, to swear upon this bible never
hereafter to motion me of any dishonestie. To this Letusio willingly granted
and took his oath: so were they reconciled, and the Countess called for a cup
of wine, and drunk to him: and after to pass away the afternoon they fell
to chesse: after a mate or two, the Countess was called aside, by one
Margareta Stromia a Venetia^ Lady, that came to visit her, and Lutecio went
down to walk in the garden by chance, as he was striking through the Parlour,
he met the Duke whom he took by the arm: and let him into one of the privy
walks, and there recounted unto him what reconcilement was grown between him
and the Countess his wife, which highly pleased the duke, so that without any
more cross humors they past a long time in all contented pleasures. Til
Fortune whose envy is to subvert content, and whose delight is to turn
comicke mirth, into tragic sorrows: enter into the Theater of Philomelas
life, and began to act a balefull seane in this manner.

Philippo, who had not quite extinguished suspicion, but couerd up in the
scindars of melancholy, the glowing sparks of Jealousy began a fresh to
kindle the flame, and to conceit a new insight into his wives actions, and
whereas generally he mistrusted her before, and only thought her a wanton as
she was a woman. Now he suspected that there was too much familiarity
between her and Lutecio, and flatly that between them both he wore the
horns: yet accuse her he durst not, because her parentage was great, her
friends many, and her honestye most of all. Neither had he any probable
articles to object against her, and therefore was silent, but ever murmuring
with himself to this effect.

Philippo thou were too fond, to plot Lutesio a means of his love, granting
him oportunitye to woe, which is the sweetest friend to love, men can not dally
with (...), nor sport with affection: for he that is a suter in Jest, may be
a speeder in earnest: have not such a thought in thy mind Philippo, for as
Lutesio is thy friend, so is he faithful: and as Philomela is thy wife, so she
is honest: and yet both may join issue and prove dissemblous, lovers have
Argus eyes to be warye in their doings, and Angels tongues, to talk^ of
holiness, when their hearts are most lascivious: though my wife returned a
taunting letter to him openly, yet she might send him sweet lines secretlye,
her satiable answer, was but a cloak for the rain: for ever since they have
been more familiare and less asunder, nor she is never merrye if Lutesio
begin not the mirth, if Lutesio be not at table, her stomach is queasy, as
when the Halcirines hatch, the sea is calm, and the Phoenix never spreads her
wings, but when the sun beams shines on her nest. So Philomela is never
frolic but when she is matched in the company of Lutesio, this courtesy
grows of some private kindness, which if I can find out by just proof and
circumstance, let me alone to revenge to the uttermost.

In this iellouse passion* he passed away many days and many months, till
one day Lutesio being alone in the chamber which Philomela, the Erale coming
in and hearing they were together, went charily up the stairs, and peeping in
at the lock hole, saw them two standing at a bay window, hand in hand,
talking very familiarlye: which fight struck such a suspicious furye into
his head, that he was half frantic, yet did he smother what he thought in
silence, and going down into the garden, left the^ two still together: being
there alone by him self, he cast a thousand suspicious doubts in his head, of
Lutesio and his wives dishonesty, intending to watch more narrowly to take them
in a trap, while they poor souls little mistrusted his jealousy.

He had not stayed in the garden long, ^re Lutesio and the Countess went down
together to walk, where they found the earl in his dumps, but they two
wakned him from his drowsy melancholy, with the pleasant devices of Signior
Lutesio. Philippo making at all no show of his suspicion, but entertained his
friend with all accustomed familiarity, so that they past away that days with
all contented pleasures, till night the unfortunate breeder of Philomelas
misfortunes grew on: when she and the Earl went to bed together, for as she
lay talking, she started, being new quickened with child, and feeling the
imperfect infant stir. Philippo asking the cause, the ready to weep for Joy,
said: good news my Lord, you shall have a young son: at this his heart waxed
could, and he questioned her if she were with child, she taking his hand
laying it on her side, said: feel my Lord, you may perceive it move, with
that it leapt against his hand. When she creeping into his bosom, began
amorouslye to kiss him and commend him: that though for the space of ^ower
years that they had been married she had had no child, yet at last he had
played the man's part, and gotten her a boy. This touched Philippo at the
quick, and doubled the flame of his Jealousy, that as a man half lunaticke
helept out of the bed, and drawing his rapier, began thus to mannace poor
Philomela. Inc^^^uous stru^pet, more wanton then Lamia, more lasc^uious the^
Laius, and more shameless then Pasophane, whose life as it has been shadowed
with painted holiness, so it has been full of pestilent villainies, th^^ haste
sucked subtlety from thy mother, thou have learned with Circes to incha^t, with
Calipso to charm, with the Sirens to sing, and al these to to breed my
destruction: yet at last thy concealed vices are burst open into manife^t
abuses. Now is thy lust grown to light, thy whordomes to be acted in the
Theaters of Uenice, thy palpable dissolutions to be proclaimd in the provinces
of Italye, time is the mother of truth, and now has laid open thy life to
the world: thou art with Venus taken in a net by Vulcan, and though thou have
long gone to the water, yet at last thou art come broken home. I mistrusted
this of long* and have found it out at last, I mean the loves between the^
and that traitor Lutesio, which although I smothered with silence, yet I hid
up for revenge: I have seen with grief, and past over with sorrow many od
pranckes, thinking still t^^e would have altered thy thoughts, but now thou have
sported thy belly full, and gotten a bastard* and would ^o^ me off to be y^
father, no though I be blind I will not swallow such a Fly. For the time of thy
quickening, and his fresh acquaintance iumps in an even date, this four year I
have been thy husband, and could not raise up thy belly, and Lutesio no
sooner grew familiar with thee, but he got thee with child, and were it not
base strumpet, that I reserve thee to further infamy, I would presentlye
butcher thee and the brat, both with one stab, and with that he floung out of
the chamber, leaving poor Philomela in a great mase, to here this unlooked for
discourse: in so much that after she had lain a while in a trance, coming to
her self, she burst forth into abundance of tears, and passed away the
night in bitter complaints, whilst Philippo mad with the frantic humor of
Jealousy, sat in his study hamring how he might bring both Lutesio, and her to
confusion, one while he resolved to provide Galleys ready for his passage, and
the^ to murder both his wife and Lutesio, and so to flee away into some
foraine country, then he determined to accuse them before the Duke his near
kinsman, and have them openly punished with the extremity of the law, but he
wanted witnesses to confirm his Jealous allegations: being thus in a quandary,
at last he called up two genowaies his servants, slaves that neither regarded
God, religion, nor conscience, and them he suborned with sweet persuasions and
large promises, to swear that he and they did take Lutesio and Philomela, in
an adulterous action, although the base villains, had at all no sparks of
honesty in their minds, yet the honor of their lady, her courtes^e, to al her
known virtues, and special good qualities did so prevail, that they were
passing unwilling to blemishe her good name with their periuries, yet at last
the County cloyde the^ so with the hope of gold, that they gave free consent
to confirm by oath, what so ever he should plot down to them. Whereupon the
next morning the Earl gat him early to the Duke of Uenice who was hi^ cousin
german, and made solemn complaint of the dishonor offered him by his wife
and signior Lutesio: craving justice, that he might have such a manifest
injury redressed with the rigor of the Law. The Duke whose name was Lorenso
Medici, grieved that his kinsman was vexed with such a cross, and sorrowed
that Philomela, that was so famous in Italye for her beutye and virtue, should
dishonor her self and her husband by yelding her love to lascivious Lutesio,
swearing a present dispatch of revenge, and thereupon granted out warrantes to
bring them both presentlye before him.

Philippo glad of this, went his way to the house of Lutesio, well armd, and
every way appointed, as if he had gone to sack the strongest houlde in all
Italye, carrying with him a crew of his friends and familiars, furnished at al
points to apprehend the guiltles gentleman: as soon as they came to his house,
they found one of his servants fitting at the door: Who seeing the Earl,
saluted him reuere^tly, and merueiled what the reason should be, he was
accompaied with such a multitude. Philippo demanded of him where his master
was, walking may it please your honor, (quoth he) in his garden. Then says
the earl if he be no more busy, I will be so bold as to go speak^ with him,
and therefore follow me says he to the crew, who preasing in after the
Earl, encountered Lutesio, coming from his gardine to go into his chamber,
as soon as he spied Philippo, with a merrye look, as if his heart had commanded
his eyes, to bid him welcome, he saluted the Earl most graciously, but highlye
was astonished, to see such a troop at his heels.

Philippo (contrary as Lutesio offered to embrace him with his best hand)
took him fast by the bosom, and pulling forth his poineard, said: Traitor,
were it not I regard mine honor, and were loath to be blemished with the blood
of so base a companion, I would rip out that false heart that has violated the
faith once united betwixt us, but the extremity of the law shall revenge thy
villainy: and therefore Officers, take him into your custody, and carry him
presently to the Duke, whether I will bring straight the strumpet his
Paramour, that they may receive condign punishment for their heinous and
detestable treachery.

Poor Lutesio, who little looked for such a greeting of the Earl, woondred
whence this bitter speech should grow, so deeply amazed, that he stood as a
man in a trance, til at last gathering his wits together, he began humbly and
fearefullie to have replied, when the Earl commanded the officers to carry
him away, and would not hear him utter any word. He speeding him home to his
own house to fetch his sorrowful and faultles wife to hear the balefull
verdict of her appeached innocence: coming up into her bed chamber, he ^ound
her sitting by her bed side, on her knees in most hearty and devout prayer,
that it would please God to clear her husband from his iealosie, and protect
her from any open reproach or slander, uttering her Orisons with such heart
breaking sighs, and abundance of tears, that the base catchpoles that came in
with him took pity, and did compassionate the extremity of her passions:
But Philippo, as if he had participated his nature with the bloudthirstie
Caniball, or eaten of the seathin root, that makes a man to be as cruel in
heart as it is hard in the rynde, stepped to her and casting her backward, bad
her arise strumpet, and hastily make her ready, for the Duke stayed for her
coming, and had sent his officers to fetch her.

Perplexed Philomela, casting up her eye, and seeing such a crew of rake-hels,
ready to attend upon him, was so surchardged with grief, that she fell down
in a passion: Philippo let her lie, but the Ministers stepped unto her and
received her again as soon as she was come to her self, she desired
Philippo, that for all the love of their youth he would grant her but only
this one favor, that she might not be carried before the Duke with that common
attendance, but that she and he might go together without any further open
discredit, and then if she could not prove her self innocent, let her without
favor abide the penalty of the Law: although she craved this ^oone with
abundance of tears, yet Philippo would have no remorse but compelled her to
attire herself, and then conuayed her with this crew to the Dukes palace,
where there was gathered together all the Consigladiors and chief Magistrates
of the City, her passing through the streets, drove a great wonder to the
Uenetians, what the cause of her trouble should be: so that infinite number of
Citizens followed her, and as many as could, thrust into the common Hall to
hear what should be objected against Philomela.

At last, when the Judges were set, and Lutesio and Philomela brought to the
bar: the Duke commanded Philipo to discourse what article she had to object
against his wife and Lutesio. Phillippo with his eyes full of Jealousy, and
heart armed with revenge, looking on them both, fetching a deep sigh, began
thus. It is not unknown to the Uenetians (right famous Duke and honorable
Magistrates of this so worthy a City) how ever since I married this
Philomela, I have yielded her such love with reverence, such affection with
care, such devoted favors with affected duties, y^ I did rather honor her as
a saint, then regard her as a wife: so that the Uenetians counted me rather
to dote on her extremely, then to love her ordinarily neither can I deny
mighty Lorenzo, but Philomela returned all these my favors with gentle loves,
and obedient amors, being as duetifull a wif^ as I was a loving husband,
until this Traitor Lutesio, this ungrateful monster, that living has drunk
of the river Lethe, which makes men forgetful of what is past: so he,
obliuious of all honor I did him, was the first actor in this tragic
overthrow of the fame of the house of Philippo. I apeale to the Uenetians, eue^
from the magistrate to the meanest man, what honorable parts of friendship, I
have showen to Lutesio, how he was my second self, except Philomela, his
bosom was the Cell, wherein I hid up my secrets, his mouth was the Oracle
whereby I derected my actions, as I could not be without his presence, s^e I
never would do any thing without his counsel: committing thus my self, my
soul, my goods, mine honor, nay my wife, to his honor, only reserving her
from him: of all y^ I have private to my self, the traitor (oh listen to a
tale of rueth Uenetians) neither regarding God, nor respecting his friend,
neither moved with fear nor touched with faith forgetting all friendship,
became amorouslye to woe my wife, and at last dishonestly wan her: and now of
long time lasciuiously has used her, which I suspected as little as I trusted,
and affected them both deeply. How long they have continued in their
adulterous loves I know not: but as time hatcheth truth, and reuealeth the
very entralles of hidden secrets, so yesterday oh the balefull day of my
dishonor: Lu^esio and my wife being suspected of too much familiarity by my
servants, though never mistrusted by me^: were watched by these Genowaies, who
seeing them in the chamber together, shameless as they were, having little
regard of any privy priers into their actions, fell to these amorous sportes,
so openly that through a chincke of the door these were eye witnesses of there
adulterye. I being then in the garden, coming up and finding these two
peeping in at the door, stole secretly up, and with these poor slaves, was a
behoulder of mine own dishonor: My shame was so great, and my sorrow so
extreme: to see my wife so inco^stant, and my friend so false, that I stepped
back again into the garden, calling a way these varletes: and leaving them
still agents of these unkind villainies* when I came into the garden, such was
the love to Philomela, and so^ great the friendship I boar to Lutesio, that
trust me Uenetians, had my self only been a witness of their follies, I would
have smothered the fault with silence. But knowing that such base rascales would
at one time or other be blabbes, and so blemish mine honor, and so accuse me
for a wittolde to my own wife, I resolved to have them punished by law* that
has so peruersly requited my love: therefore have I here produced the^ in open
court, that my dishonors may end in their revenge, calling for justice with
extremity, against two persons of such treacherous ingratitude. And here
Philippo ceased driving all the hearers into a great mase, that the Duke sat
astonished, the Cons^gladiori musing, and the common people murmuring at the
discourse of Signior Philippo, and bending their envious eyes against the two
innocents, for wronging so honorable a County. To be brief, Lutesio and
Philomela were examined, and no doubt, they ^ould sundry tales to clear
themselves, but in vain, for the oath of the two slaves found them guilty,
whreupon a quest of choice Citizens went upon the^, and boath as guilty
condemned to death. When the fatal sentence should have b^^ne pronounced
against them, Philippo with a counterfeit countenance full of sorrow, kneeling
down, desired that they might not die, because it would grieve him to be
blemished with the blood of his wife whom he had loved, or of his friend whom
he had honored* at whose humble intreatye Judgment was given that Philippo and
Philomela should be deuorced: and he at free liberty to marry whom he lift, and
Lutesio for ever to be banished, not only out of Uenice but of all the
Dukedom, and territories of the same. As Soon as sen^ence was given, Lutesio
fetched a great sigh, and laying his hand on his bosom said: This breast
Philippo, did never harbor any disloyal thought against thee, nor once Imagine
or contriue any dishonor against thy wife. Whatsoever thou have wronglye
auerred, or the Duke hardlye conceived: for witness I appeal to none but God,
who knows me guiltless, and to thine own conscience: whose worm for this
wrong, will ever be restless. My banishment I brook with patience, in that
I know time will discover any truth in my absence: smoke cannot be hidden, nor
the wrong of Innocents escape with out revenge. I only grieve for Philomela,
whose chastety is no less then her virtues are many, and her honors as far
from lust, as thou and thy perjured slaves from truth: it boo^es not use many
words, only this I will say, men of Uenice has lost a friend which he will
miss, and a wife that he will sorrow for. And so he went out of the counsel
house, home to his own lodging, having the term of twenty one days
appointed for his departure. Philomela poor soul, knowing what was in
record, could not be reuerst: that her credit was cracked, her honor utterly
blemished, and her name brought in contempt: for all this abashed not outwardly,
what soever she conceited inwardly^, but seemed in her far more full of
favor and beautye then ever she was before: and her looks so modest and
grave, that Chastetye seemed to ^it in her eyes, and to proclaim the wrong was
offered unto her by these periurde persons. With this assured and constant
countenance, first looking on the Duke, on the Consiliadori, on the common
people, and then on her husband, she used these words.

O Philippo Medici, once the lover of Philomela though now the wrack of her
honors, and the blemish of her high fortunes. How can thou look to heaven
and not tremble? how can thou behold me, and not blush? how can thou
think there is a God without fear, or a hell without horror? can thou
blind the divine Maistiesty? as thou have led these Magistrates into a false
opinion of thine own dishonor, and my dishonestly Mill testes conscie^tia,
if these slaves the ministers of thy jealous envy should grow domme, and all
the world silent, yet will thine own conscience daily cry out in thine ears,
that thou have wronged Philomela. I am the daughter of a Duke, as thou art the
son of an Earl: my virtues in Uenice, have been as great as thine honors: my
fortunes and my friends, more then thine: al these will search into this cause,
and if they find out mine innocence, think Philippo worthy of great
pennaunce. But in vain, I use charms to a deaf Adder, therefore Philippo, I
leave thee to the choice of a new love, and the fortune of a fair wife, who if
she prove as honestly amorous toward thee as Philomela, then wrong her not
with suspicion, as thou have don me with jealousy: least she prove too
liberal, and pay my debts.

Yet Philippo, haste thou lost more in loosing Lutesio, then in forsaking me,
for thou may have many honest wives, but never so faithful a friend:
therefore though I be deuorced, be thou and he reconciled, least at last the
horror of thy conscience, draw thee into despair, and pain thee with too
late repentance. So Philippo ever wishing thee well, I will ever entreat that
neither God may lay the wrong of mine innocence to thy charge, nor my friends
triumph in thy unfortunate revenge, and so farewell.

With this she stepped forth of the Hall, leaving Philippo greatly tormented
in his conscience, and the Duke and all the rest wondering at her patience,
saying: it was pity she was drawn on to wantonness by Lutesio.

The rumors of this spread through al Uenice, of the lascivious life of
Philomela, some said all was not gould that glistered: that the fairest faces,
have often times the falsest hearts: and the smoothest looks, the most treacherous
thoughts: that as the Agate be it never so white without, yet it is full of
black strokes within, and that the most shining sun, breeds the most sharp
showers: so women the more chastety they profess openly, the les chary they
are in secret of their honesty: others said, it might be a compacted matter,
by the Earl to be rid of his wife: ^^me said, that the matter might be
mistaken, and made worse then it was. Thus dyuersly they did descant, while
poor Philomela being gotten to a gentleman's house, a friend of hers, sat
sorrowfullye resolving how she might best salve this blemish: one while she
thought to go hom^ to the Duke her father, and incense him to revenge, that
again she misliked, for by open Iarres, and civil discention, were she never
so innocent, yet her name should by such open brawl^s, grow more infamous: an
other while she thought to persuade Lutecio against him, and that he might
procure the slaves by torture to bewraye the subornation of perjury, and so
bring her husband within the compass of open trecherye.

Thus the secret love she b^re still to Philippo would not suffice, for she
had rather bear guiltless shame then bring her husband to perpetual infamy.
Thus did she plot in her mind sundry ways of revenge: but at last this was
her resolution, since her honor so famous through Italy, was now so highly
staind: she would neither stay^ in Italye, nor yet return to her father: but
go into some strange country, and there die unknown, that being absent from
the rumor of her bad report, she might live, though poorly, yet quiet: upon
this determination she set down her rest, and gathered all her clothes and
Jewels together: for the Earl sent her all whatsoever he had of hers, and
she returned him by the messenger a ring with a Diamond, whererein was written
these words, Olim meminisse dolebit. The Earl took it, and put it on his
singer, which after bred his further mise^ie.

But leaving him a contented man, though with a trobled conscience: for the
satisfying of his ielious revenge: Again to Philomela, who having packt up al
her jewels and treasures: listened for a ship, and heard of one that made to
Palermo in Sicilia. As the poor Countess was careless of her self, as a woman
half in despair, so she little regarded to what port of Christe^dom the bark
made, and therefore hired passage in y^ ship so secretly, that non^ but her own
self and a page did know, when or whether she meant to make her voyage: so
that on a sudden, having certain intelligence at what hour the ship would
warpe out of the Haven, she slipped away, and her Page with her, and getting
aboorde under sail, commit her self to God, the mercy of the Seas, and to
the husband of many hardfortunes. The Ship had not gone a Leage upon the
Seas, but Philomela began to be sick: whereupon the Master of the Ship
coming in to comfort her, found her in his eye one of the fairest creatures
that ever he saw, and though her color were something pale through her present
sickness, yet he could compare it to no worse show then the glister of the
Moon in a silent night and a clear sky, so that the poor Shippers
conscience began to be pricked, and love began to shake him by the sleeue,
that he sat down by her, and after his blunt fashion, gave her such sweet
comfort as such a swain could afford: Philomela thanked him and told him it
was nothing but a passion that the roughness of the Seas had wrought in her,
who heretofore was unacquainted with any other waters then the river Po, and
such small creekes as watered Italy. He^revppon the Master departed, but with
a Flea in his ear, and love in his eye: for he had almost forgot his Compass,
he was so far out of ^ompasse with thinking how to compass Philomela: in
this amorous humor, he began to visit often, the Cabin wherein Philomela
lay, which was a means rather to increase his fury, then to qualify the
^^re of love that began to heat him: For as he that plays with a Be may
sooner feel her sting then taste of her honey: so he that acquainteth
himself with love, may more easily repent him then content him, and sooner
inthrall himself in a Laborinth, then get an hour of quiet liberty. So it
fell out with Tebaldo, for so was the Master of the ship called: for he by
conuersing privately and familiarlie with Philomela, became so far in love,
that he held no happiness like the obtaining of this love: he noted the
excellency of her beauty, the exquisitnes of her qualities, and measured
every part with such precise judgment, that the small heat of desire, grew to
a glowing fire of affection. But for all this, he durst not reveal his mind
unto her, least happily by his motion, she should be moved unto displeasure:
But as by time, small sparks grow into great flames: so at last he waxed so
passionate, that there was no way with him but death or despair, if he didnot
manifest his thoughts unto her: resolving thus damnably with himself, that
howsoever love or fortune dealt with him, he would have his mind satisfied: for
if she granted, then he would keep her in Palermo as his Paramor: if she
denied, seeing he had her within the compass of his bark, he would have his
purpose by force, and so become Lord of his content by conquest. Thus resolute
he went toward the cabin of Philomela to bewray his affection unto her, when
drawing near the door, he heard her playing most cunningly upon a lute,
certain lessons of curious descant, slaying a while, least he might interrupt
so sweet music: at last she left of, and fell from her lute to this lamentable
complaint. Oh poor woman, worthy so termed, being brought to thy woe by a
man, now do thou see, that as such as are stung by the Tarentula, are best
cur^d by Music: so such minds as are vexed by sorrow find no better relief
then a sweet relish of comforting melody. Ah Abstemia, for so she now called
her name, the more to disguise herself, if music should be answerable to
thy martyrdom, or the excellency of descant comformable to the intent of the
distressor: Then must Apollo be fetched from heaven, Orpheus from his grave,
Amphio^ from his rest, the Sirens from their roks to qualify thy musings with
their musicks: For though they excel in degrees of sounds, thou exceedest in
diversities of sorrows, being far more miserable then musical: and yet they,
the rarest of all others: once Abstemia thou w^^t counted the fairest in Italy,
and now thou art holden the falsest: thy virtues were thought many, now thy
dishonors are counted nomberles: thou were the glory of thy parents, the hope
of thy friends, the fame of thy country, the wonder of thy time of modesty,
the peragon of Italy for honorable grace, and the pattern whereby women did
measure their perfections: for she that was holden less modest, was counted a
wanton: and she that would seem more virtuous, was esteemed too precise: But
now thou art valued worth less of all thy former honors, by the stain of one
undeserved blemish. Ah, had I bin false to my husband, perhaps I had been more
fortunate, though not in mine own conscience, yet to the eyes of the world
less suspected, and so not detected: but innocence to God is the swe^test
incence, and a conscience without guilt, is a sacrifice of the purest sa^or.
What though I be blamed? if my life be lent me, my honor will be recovered, for
as God will not suffer a murder to escape without punishment: so he will not let
the wrong of the innocent go to his grave without revenge? Though thou be
bannished Abstemia, yet comfort thy self, account each country thine own,
and every honest man thy neighbor: let thy life be mean, so shall thou not
be looked into: for envy creeps not so low as Cotages* reeds bend with the
wind, when Cedars fall with a blast: poor men rely lightly of fortune,
because they are to weak for fortune, when higher states feel her force,
because they nos^e in her bosom: acquaint not thy self with many, least thou
fall into the hands of flaterers, for the popular sorts have more eyes, and
longer tongues then the rich: seem courteous to al, but converse with few: and
let thy virtues be much spoken though thy self live never so private. Hold
honesty more deer then thy life, and be thou never so pore, yet be chaste and
choose rather to starve in the str^ets, the^ live daintily at a lechers table:
if as thou art beutiful Abstemia, any fall in love with thy favors, and what
he cannot win by suites, will seek to get by force, and so ra^ishe thee of
thy ri^hest glory: choose rather to be without breath, then live with such a
blemish. Thou art fraudlesse in Sicilia, and though thou complainest, thou
shall not be heard: might ouercomes right, and the weakest are still thrust to
the wall. To prevent therefore constraint in love in the greatest Prince: I
have provided (quoth she) a poison in the seal of my ring, as deadly as it is
little, resolving as stoutly as Haniball did, who held the like in the pomell of
his sword: and choose rather to die free, then fall into the hands of Scipio.
So, before any lea^her shall force to sa^isfie his passion, I will end my life
with this fatal poison. So Abstenia shall thou die more honorably, which is
more dear then to live disgraced: enough is a feast, poor wench, what needs
these solemn preachings? Leave these secret dumps and fall to thy Lute, for
thou shall have time enough to think of sorrow: and with that she tuned her
strings, and in a merry vain plai^d three or four pleasant lessons, and at
last sung to her self this conceit^d di^^ie.

An Ode.
WHat is love once disgr^ced?
But a wanton thought ill placed,
Which do blemish whom it paineth,
And dishonors whom it daineth.
Se ene in higer powers most,
Though some fools do fondly bost
That who so is high of kin,
Sanctifies his lovers sin.
Jove could not hide Ios escape,
Nor conceal Calistos rape.
Both did fault, and both were famed,
Light of loves whom lust had shamed.
Let not women trust to men,
They can flatter now and then.
And tell them many wanton tales,
Which do breed their after bales.
Sin in kings is sin we see,
And greater seen, cause great of gree.
Maius peccatum, this I r^ad,
If he be high that does the de^d.
Mars for all his Dietie.
Could not Venus dignifie.
But Vulcan trap her and her blame,
Was punished with an open shame.
All the Gods laughed them to scorn,
For dubbing Vulcan with the horn.
Whereon may a woman bost,
If her chastity be lost.
Shame await'h upon her face
Blushing che^ks and foul disgrace,
Report will blab, this is she
That with her lust winnes infamy.
If lusting love be so disgraced,
Die before you live unchaste.
For better die with honest fame,
Then lead a wanton life with shame.
Ass^^ne as Philomela had ended her ditti^, she laid down her Lute, and fell to
her book: but Tebaldo having heard all her secret meditation, was driven in
such a mase, with the conceit of her incomparable exc^llencie, that he stood
as much astonished to hear her chaste sp^^ches, as Acteon to s^e Dianas naked
beauties: entering with a percing insight into her virtues, and perceiving she
was some greater personage then he at the first took her for, his love was so
qualed with the rarenes of her qualities, that he rather endeavored to honor
her as a saint, then to love her as a paramour: desire now began to change to
reverence, and affection to an honest devotion: that he shamed be once thought
any way lust toward so virtuous a creature: thus Metamorphosed, he stepped into
her cabin, and found her reading, to whom he did show more then accustomed
reverence: which Philomela returned with equal courtesy. At last he told her,
how he had heard her lamentable discourse of her misfortune and the honorable
resolution of her honestye, which did so tie him to be devoted tow^^ds her,
that if when she came into Palermo, his poor house might serve her for a
lodging, it and all therein, with him self and his wife, should be at her
command. Philomela thanked him heartily for his kind and courteous pr^ffer,
and promised to her ability, not to be ungrateful.

Well, leaving her under sail toward Palermo, to S. Ganami Lutesio, who
harboring a hateful i^^ent of revenge in his mind against the County Philippo,
thought to pay him home pat in his lap, and therefore making as speedy a
dispatch as might be, of his affairs: he takes his journey from Uenice
toward the Duke of Millaines court, the father of Philomela, to whom he had
recou^ted what had happened to his daughter, what had chanced to him, and how
great dishonor was offered to him by her husband. The Duke although these
news touched him at the quick, yet dissembled the matter, and began in great
choler to vpbraid Lutesio, that no doubt the earl did it upon just cause, or
else neither would he have wronged a wife whom so tenderly he loved, neither
rejected a friend whom he so deerly honored, nor yet the duke and senate of
Uenice would have yielded so peremptory and hard a sentence, as either
banishment to him, or deuorce to her.

To this Lutesio made replye, that the Earl to prove his surmised articles
true, had suborned two slaves, that were Genouaies to periure themselves. He
showed the Duke the letter that past between him and his daughter, and the
reason why he wrote them: But all this could not satisfy the Dukes opinion, but
he charged his gentlemen to lay hands on Lutesio, and to carye him to prison,
until he had further trial of the matter, swearing if he found him to have
played false with his daughter, neither should his banishment excuse him, nor
her deuorce: for he would have both their lives, for offering dishonor to the
house of Millaine.

Upon this censure of the Duke, Lutesio was carried to prison, and the Duke left
mightelye perpelexed: who began to cast in his mind many doubts of this
strange chance, vowing in his heart, a fatal revenge upon Philipo for
blemishing his daughters honor with such open infamy. When thus the Duke was
in a heavy suspicion, one of the Genouaies, whose conscience tormented him,
ran away from Uenice, and came to Millaine: where coming to the Dukes palace,
he desired to speak with his Grace, from the County Philippo, being brought
straight unto him: as soon as he came into his presence, he kn^^led down,
trembling, and besought him of mercy. The duke astonished at the strange
terror of the man, demanded of him what he was, and from whence he came. The
slave told him that he was borne at Geneua, and hadd^ b^^ne servant to that
unfortunate Earl, the Countye Philippo Medici, and one of those perjured
traitors that had borne false witness against his daughter Philomela. At this
the Duke started out of his seat, and taking the fellow courteously up, bade
him not to fear nor doubt, for if he spoke nothing but the truth, he should
not only be freely pardoned, but highly rewarded.

Upon this the poor slave discourst from point to point* First the singular
chastity of his lady and Mistress, and then the deep Jealousy of Philippo,
who first as he had learned, caused his dear fr^end Signior Greuani Lutesio,
to try her, who finding her wise, virtuous, and constant, fell out with the
Earl, that he would wrong his wife with such causeles suspicion: after he
rehearsed how the County grew Jealous, that Philomela favored Lutesio, and
because he had no proof to confirm his mistrust, but his own douting head,
he suborned him, and a fellow of his to swear, that they saw Lutesio and the
Countes even in the very act of Adultery, which in them was perjury, and in
him letcherye: for both the Gentleman, and their Lady was innocent, and with
that falling down^ on his knees, and melting into tears, he craved pardon of
his life.

The Duke whose eyes were full of fire, as sparking revenge and hate, had him
be of good cheer, and pulling his purse out of his pocket, and gave it him
for an earnest penny of further freendship, and charged his Gentlemen to give
the Geneuaye good entertainment. And with that sent for Signior Lutesio out of
prison, and sorrowful that he had wronged him so much, told him how one of the
Genonais was come y^ gave false witness against his daughter, and had revealed
all: which ioyed Lutecio at the very heart, so that humbly and with watrie
cheeks, he desired the duke to revenge his daughters wrongs, but as little
booted his intreatye, as spurs to a swift horse. For the Duke gathering a
mighty army, made as much speed as might b^ toward Uenice, intending to quit
the wrong proffered to Philomela by suspicious Philippo, who then lived in all
de^^red content, in y^ his Ielious humor was satisfied: was determining where
to make a new choice for favor, when time chere this change of fortune, that
news was brought into Uenice, that not only the Millaine Duke was come
down, to waste and spoil the cities belonging unto the Signorie of Uenice,
but also meant to gather all the forces of his friends in Christendom, to
revenge the abuse offered to his daughter Philomela.

This news being come unto the ears of Philiypo, made him forget his woing*
and begin to wonder how he should shift of the misfortune ready to light upon
him, if any thing were proved of his suborning treacherye: he now began to
enter into con^ioeration with him self that if Lutesio were gotten to Millaine,
he would not only lay the plot of all mischief against him, but also discover
his treason, and incense the Duke to revenge, and upon this he thought grew the
occasion of his men in arms: then did he fear least the Genouaie that was run
away from him, should com to the Dukes court, and there confirm by autenticall
proof, what Lutecio upon his honor did affirm: thus diversely perplexed, he
remained in great du^ps, while the Duke and Consiliadiorie of Uenice gathering
into their senate house began to consult what reason the Millonians had to
invade their territories. And therefore to be fully satisfied in the cause, they
sent Ambassadors to inquire the reason why he rose in arms against the^?
whether it were for the sentence offered against Philomela or no? and if it
were, that he should herein rest satisfied. That as she was exiled by law, so
she was justly condemned for letcherie:

The Ambassadors having their charge, came to the Duke, lying then not far
of from Bergamo, and did their message unto him, which he reanswered thus: that
he was not come as an enemy against them, but as a private foe to Philippo,
and therefore required to approve his daughters innocence: not by arms, but
by witnesses in the Senate house of Uenice* and if she were found guilt^es, to
have condign punishment enioynde and executed against Philippo: This if they
did deny, he was com^ with his own blade, and his Soldiers to plague the
Uenetians for the partial judgments of their Magistrates: and if they meant
to have him come into Uenice, he craved for his assurance sufficient hostages.
The Ambassadors returned with this answer to the Duke and the Consiliadorie,
who held hi^ request passing reasonable, and thought it would be dishonor to
them and their estate, if they should stand in denial of so equal a demand:
and therefore the Duke, not only sent him his only Son, but six young
sons more, all the Sons of men of honor for hostage. Upon whose ariual, the
Duke of Millaine only accompanied with Lutesio, the Genouaies, and ten other
noble men went to the City, and was magnificently entertained by the Duke and
the Citizens: where feasting that day, the next morning they resolved to me^t
in the Senate house, to hear what could be alleged against Philippo, whom
they cited peremptorily to appear, to answer to such objections as should be
laid against him. The guilty Earl now began to feel remorse of conscience,
and to doubt of the issue of his treachery: and therefore getting into his
closet, he called the Genouaie to him, and there began to persuade him, that
although both Signior Lutesio and his fellow did bewray the subornation of
perjury, yet he should deny it unto the death, and for his reward he had him
take half his treasure and his freedom. The Genouay made solemn protestation
that he would perform no less then he commanded him: and thereupon as an
assumsit, took the signet of the Earl, for performance of all covenants. Thus
armed as he thought, in that he rested safly in the secrecy of his slave: the
next day he appeared in the Senate house, whether the Dukes of Millaine and of
Uenice came with all the Consiliadorie and chief Citizens of the town, to
hear how this matter should be debated. At last the Duke of Milaine arose
amongst them al and began thus to discourse: I come not Uenetians to enlarge my
territories with the sword, though I have burdened your borders with the
weight of armed men: I ri^e not in arms to seek martial honors, but civil
justice: not to claim other men's right, but mine own due, which is revenge
upon false Philipo for his ^^^cherie against my innocent daughter Philomela:
Innocent I term her, though injury has wronged her, and yet I accuse not
your Duke or Consiliadorie of injustice, because their censure past according
to the false evidence propounded by periurd Philippo: But I claim justice
without partiality against him, which if it (...) granted, I shall highly
praise your Senate, and be ever professed your friend: If it be denied, I am
come in arms to defend my daughters innocence, and with my blood to paint
revenge upon the gates of Uenice. If I speak sharply, blame me not, (...) mine
honor is touched with such a blemishe: the discredit of the daughter is a spot
in the parents browe, and therefore if I s^^ke to excuse her, accuse not me: I
do but what honor commands, and nature binds me to. For proof that I come not
to sanctif^e sin in my daughter, or shadow her scapes with my co^ntenance, I
have brought here not only Lutesio but one of their slaves which was by
Philippo induced to give false evidence to affirm as much as I auerre:
therefore I only crave they may be examined with equity, and I be satisfied
only in justice. Thus with his face full of wrath, he sat down silent: when
the Consiliadorie amazed at this brief and sharp speech of the Millanois,
began to examine the Genouaie, who confessed all the treachery: they hearing
this, demanded of Phillippo how he could answer the confession of his Slave:
he smilingly made this scornful reply. I hope worthy Duke, and honorable
Senate of Uenice, you will not be dashed out of countenance with the sight of
weapons, nor be driven from justice by the noise of armor, that though I be an
Earl, and am not able to equal the Duke of Milaine in multitudes, yet I shall
have as high favors as he with equity: in hope whereof I answer, that I think
there is none so simple here, but sees how Lutesio constrained through e^uie,
and the Duke compelled by nature, have suborned this poor slave, either by
gold or promises to receive what before by solemn oath he here protested. He
to recover his former credit, and liberty in his country this to salve the
blemishe of his daughters honor: but as such slaves minds are to be wrought
like wax with every fair word: so I assure my self, little belief shall
be given to such a base and servile person, that comes to depose against
his own conscience: this was partner with him in his evidence (pointing to the
other Genouaie, and this can affirne what I test^^^^, and therefore I appeal
to your equities: for by the verdict of this slave will I be tried.

At this the Duke of Ue^ice called the Genouai^ forth, and had him speak his
mind. When Lutesio rising up charged him, that as he was a Christian, and
hoped to be saved by his merits, he should impartially^ pronounce what he
knew. At this the Genouaie feeling a horror, a second hell in his conscience,
trembling as a man amazed, and touched with the sting of Gods judgment in his
heart, stood awhile mute, but at last gathering his spirits together, and
getting the liberty of his speech, falling down upon his knees, with his eyes
full of tears, he confessed and discourst the whole circumstaunc^ of the Earls
villainy intended against Philomela: whereat there was a great shout in the
Senate house, and clapping of hands amongst the common people: they all for joy
crying Philomela, innocent Philomela. At this the Senators sat silent, and
the Duke of Milaine^ vexed, and the County Philippo now feeling a dreadful ren^^
(...) in his conscience uttered these words with great resolution. Now do I
prove that true by experience, which erst I held only for a bare proverb,
that truth is the daughter of time, and there is nothing so secret, but the
date of many days will reueal it: that as oil though it be moist, quenches not
fire* so time though never so long, is no sure covert for sin: but as a spark
rakte up in cinders, will at last begin to glowe and manifest a flame: so
treachery hidden in silence, will burst forth and cry for revenge. Whatsoever
villainy the heart does work, in process of time the worm of conscience will
bewray: oh Senators, this may be applied to my self, whose jealous head
compassed this treason to Philomela, and this tretcherie to Lutesio, the one a
most honest wife, the other ^ most faithful fr^^nd.

It booteth little by circumstaunce to discover the sorrow I conceive, or
little need I show my wives Innocencye, when these base slaves whom I
suborned to periure themselves, have proclaimed her chastity, and my dishonor:
suffice it the^, y^ I repent though too late, and would make amends, but I have
sinned beyond satisfaction, for there is no sufficient recompense for unjust
slander. Therefore in penalty of my perjury toward Philomela I crave my
self justice against my self, that you would enjoin a pennaunce, but no
less then the extremity of death.

At these words of Philippo, the people murmured, and the Senate sat a while
consulting with themselves, what were best to do, at last they referred it to
the Duke of Millaine, to give sentence and censure against Philippo, seeing the
wrong was his daughters, and the dishonor his, who being a man of a mild
nature, and full of royal honor in his thoughts, rising up with a countenance
discovering a kind of satisfaction, by the submisse rep^nta^ce of Philippo,
pronounst that the Earl should abide that penalty was enjoined to his
daughter, which was, that he should be banished, that both the Genouayes
should^ have their liberty, and a thousand Duccats a piece: and that Lutesio
should have his judgment reuerst, and be restored to his former freedom.

At this censure of the Duke, they all gave a general applause, and Philippo
there with tears in his eyes, took leave, protesting to spend his exile
contentedly in seeking out of Philomela, and when he had found her, then in her
presence to sacrifice his blood as a satisfaction for his Lechery. Lutesio
likewise swore to make a queast for her, and so did the Genouayes, and the Duke
her father was as forward, and the Senate broke up, and the Duke of Millaine
forthwith daparted home to his own country: where leaving him going homeward,
and Philippo, Lutesio, and the Genouais seeking for Philomela:

Once again to the innocent Lady, who being arrived in Palermo, was not only
courteously entertained of the M. of the Ship, but also of his wife: who
noting her modesty, virtue, silence, and other good properties, and rare
qualities, was so far in love with her, that she would not by any means let
her depart out of her house, but with a simpathie of sweet affectiones, did
love like two sisters* in so much that Philomela was brought ot bed, and had a
young Son, called Infortunatus, because he was borne in the extremity of his
mothers misery: The M. of the ship and his wife being pledges of his
Christendom: living thus obscure, and yet famous in Palermo for her virtues,
she found that of all music the mean was the merriest, that quiet rested in
low thoughts, and the safest tontent in the poorest cottages: that the highest
trees abide the sharpest storms, and the greatest personages the sorest
frowns of Fortune: therefore with patience she brookt her homely course of
life, and had more quiet sleeps now in the ship-masters house in Palermo, then
she had in her palace in Uennice, only her discontent was when she thought
on Philippo, that he had proved so unkind: and on Lutesio, that for her sake
he was so deeply iniuried, yet as well as she might, she salued these sores, and
covered her hard fortunes with the shadow of her innocencye. While thus she
lived honorably in Palermo, not for her excellent behavior and good quality:
It fortuned that the Duke of Milaine and Lutesio both disguised like two
palmers, had passed through many places to seek Philomela, and to reduce her
from banishment, and at last aryued in Palermo, intending to soiourne there for
a while, and then ot pass up to Samagossa, and so through all Sicilia, to have
intelligence of the destressed Countess. While thus they stayed inquiring
diligently of her, and not hearing any news, since she was seldom seen
abroad, and beside that her name changed and called Abstemia.

It chanced that either by Fortune or destanie, there arrived at the same time
in Palermo, the County Philippo Medici, who having travailed through diverse
countries, to find out his innocent Countess, wearied at last not so much
with travail, as with the gnawing worm of a guiltye conscience that still
tormented him: he began more and more to enter into despair, and to think
his life loathsome unto him, wishing daily for death, so it might not come
through the guilt of his own hand, and yet resolving rather to be the
murderer of him self, then thus to linger out his days in despair. In this
perplexed passion, he gat him into a thick grove, there the better to
communicate in his melancholy, vowing if he heard not of Philomela in that
city, to make that grove the monument of his grave: thus desirous of death,
or of the recovery of his wife: It fortuned that Arnoldo Frozzo, son and
heir to the Duke of Palermo, being in love with a young gentlewoman, whose
lodging was distaunt some three leagues from the City, pricked forward by the
extremity of affection, thought to go visit her, although he was not only
forbidden by his father, but watched, least priuilye he might steal unto her:
yet as love can find starting hoales, he devised this policy: he carried a
slave that remained in his Fathers house abroad to the grove with him, where
Philippo lay lurking, and there changing apparel with him, he got him to his
desired Mistres, and bad the slave return covertly into the City, and meet
him the next day at the same place: parting thus, as he was going homewarde,
he was met by a young Sicilian gentleman, named Petro Salino: who bearing a
mortal grudge to the Dukes son, in that he affected the Gentlewoman whom he
so tenderly loved: seeing him alone, and thinking him to be Arnoldo Strozzo by
his apparel, and deeming he came now from his beloved Mistres, set upon him,
and slew him: and with his rapeir so mangled his face, that by no means he
could be discerned, and thereupon fled.

Arnaldos page missing his M. seeking abroad for him in the fields, for that
he desired often times to be solitary, light upon the dead body of the slave,
and iudgeing it to be his M. because he was in his apparel, cried out, and ran
home and carried news thereof to the Duke his Father: who as a man distraught
of his wits, commanded straight search to be made, to find out the actor of
the Tragedye, causing the dead corpse to be conveyed with much grief and many
tears.

All the Courtiers, gentlemen and others, sought abroad to seek out the author
of this murder: and not far of where the slave was slain, found Philippo
walking up and down untrust, his hat lying by him, and his rapier in his hand:
the courtiers seeing a man thus suspicious, made inquiry what he was: why
quoth the County, I am the man you look for: Art thou then said the Cousin of
Arnaldo, that bloody traitor, that haste slain the Dukes son? The County
glad he had so sweet an occasion to be rid of his life, resolute, and breefely
said, I Marry am I, and I will kill his father too, if ever I reach him: with
that they laid hold upon him and carried him to prison, and as he went by
the way, they examinde what he was, but that by no means he would reveal
unto them: only he said he was an Italian, purposelye come from Uenice to act
it. News straight was carried to the Duke, that the murderer was taken, who
was highly glad thereof, and resolved the next day with the states of the
country, to ^it in judgment* as fame and report cannot be silent, so it was
straight noysed abroad through Palermo, that the Dukes son was slain by a
Uenetian, and how he was taken, and should the next day be arraigned and
executed.

Philomela hearing that he was a Uenetian that had done the deed: desirous
to see him, took the Master of the ships wife with her, and went to the
prison, and there by favor of the Gayler, saw him through a window, as soon
as Philomela had a view of him, she saw it was Philippo Medici her husband
disguised, and having in his face the very signs of despair. This sight of her
husband drove her into a maze, yet to conceal the matter to her felf^, she
said she knew not the man. As thus she was standing talking with the Gayler,
there came a Uenetia^ that was resident in Palermo, and desired that he might
see the Gentleman that had done the murder, but the Gayler would not suffer
him, but inquired what country man he was? he answered a Uenetian, and that is
the reason quoth he, that I am desirous to have a sight of him. Philomela
hearing that he was a Uenetian, asked him what news from Uenice: The Sayler,
for so he was, discoursed unto her what late had chanced, and amongst the
rest, he discovered the ^ortunes of Philomela and how she was wrongfully
accused by her husband the Earl, how her Father came to Uenice, and having her
accusers two slaves examined, they confessed the Earl suborned them to the
perjury: whereupon Philippo was banished, and now as a man in despair, sought
about to find out his wife.

Philomela hearing these news, thanking him, took her leave of the Sailer and
went home, where getting alone into her chamber, she began thus to meditate
with her self: now Philomela thou may see heavens are just, and God
impartial, that though he defers, he does not acquit: that though he suffer
the innocent to be wronged, yet at last he persecuteth the malicious with
revenge: that time hatcheth truth, and that true honor may be blemished with
envy, but never utterly defaced with extremity: now is thy life laid open in
Uenice, and thy fame revived in spite of Fortune: now may thou triumph in
the fall of thy Ieliouse husband, and write thy chastity in the characters of
his blood, so shall he die disgraced, and thou return to Uenice as a wonder:
Now, shall thine eye see his end, that has sought to ruinate thee, and thou
live content and satisfied in the just revenge of a perjured husband.

Oh Philomela, that word husband is a high term easily pronounced in the
mouth, but ^euer to be banished from the heart, know thou not that the love
of a wife must not end, but by death: that the term of marriage is dated in
the grave, that wives should so long love and obey, as they live and draw
breath: that they should prefer their husbands honor before their own life,
and choose rather to die, then see him wronged. Why else did Alcest die for
Admetus? Why did Portia eat coals for the love of Brutus, if it were not that
wives ought to end their lives with their loves?

Truth ( Philomela) but Philippo is a traitor, he has imblemisht thy fame,
sought to ruin thine honor, aimde at thy life, condemnd thee both to divorce
and banishment, and lastly has stainde the high honors of thy Fathers house.

And what of all this Philomela? has not every man his fault? Is there any
offense so great, that may not be forgiven? Philippo did not work thee this
wrong because he loved some other, but because he ouerloued thee: it was
Jealousy, not lasciutousnes that forced him to that folly: and suspicion is
incident only to such as are kind hearted lovers. Has not God reuengde thy
injury, and thy Father punished him with the like penalty that thy self do
suffer? and will thou now glory in his misery? No ( Philomela) show thy self
virtuous, as ere thou have been honorable, and heap coals on his head, by
showing him favor in extremity. If he has slain the Dukes son, it is
through despair: and if he had not come hither to seek thee, he had not
fallen into this misfortune. The Palm tree the moreit is pressed down, the more
it sprowteth up: the Camomill the more it is trodden, the sweeter smell it
yields: even so ought a good wife to be kind to her husband midst his
greatest discourtesies, and rather to venture her life, then suffer him incur
any prejudice, and so will I do by Philippo: for rather then he shall die, in
the sight of Philomela I will justify him with mine own death, so shall my
end be honorable, as my life has been wonderful.

With this she ceased and went to her rest, till the next day morning, that
the Dukes, and the states gathered together to sit in judgment: whether came
Lutesio, and the Duke of Millaine disguised, to see what he was, that being a
Uenetian committed the murder, and there also was Philomela, and the sailors
wife. At last the County Philippo was brought forth, whom when the Duke of
Millaine saw, iogging Lutesio with his hand, he whispered and said, see
Lutesio, where man favors, yet God does in extremity revenge: now shall we see
the fall of our enemy, yet not touched with his blood* whispering thus
amongst themselves:

At last the Duke of Palermo began to examine him, if he were he that slew his
son, he answered that he was the man, and would with his blood answer it:
what moved you says the Duke, to do the murder? an oulde grudge quoth he,
that has been between him and me ever since he was in Uenice, and for that
cause revenge was so restles in my mind, that I came from thence, purposly to
act the tragedy, and am not sorry that I have contented my thoughts with his
blood: at this his manifest confession, the Duke full of wrath arose and said,
it was booteles further to impannell any Iurye, and therefore upon his words he
would pronounce sentence against him. Then Philomela calling to the Duke, and
desiring she might be heard, began thus to plead.

O mighty Duke stay the censure, least thy verdict wrong the innocent, and
thou condemn and earl through his own disparing evidence: I see, and with
trembling I feel, that a guiltye conscience is a thousand witnesses. That as
it is impossible to cover the light of the Sun with a Curtain: so the
remorse of murder ca^ not be concealed in the closet of the most secret
conspirator.

For standing by, and hearing thee ready to pronounce sentence against the
Innocent, I even I that committed the deed, though to the exigent of mine own
death: could not but burst forth into these exclamations to save the
sacklesse: Know therefore that he which stands here before the Judgment
seat, is an Earl, though banished: his name is County Philippo Medici, my
husband, and once famous in Italy, though here he be blemished by Fortune: At
this, all the company looked upon her. Philippo as a man amazed, stood staring
on her face, the tears trickling down his cheeks to see the kindenes of his
wife, whom so deeply he had injured: and the Duke of Millaine her Father with
Lutesio were in as great a wonder. Last she prosecuted her purpose thus: It
were too long worthy Scicilians to rehearse the wrongs this Philippo has
used against me distressed Countess, through his extreme jealousy, only let
this breefely (...), he subor^ed his (...) to swear I was seen in the act of
Adultery: they were believed, I deuorced and banished: and here ever since, I
have lived in contented patience. But since my exile, time that is the reuealer
of truth, has made the slaves bewraye the effect of the matter, so that this
present Earl is found guiltye, mine honor saved, he banished, and now
extremely distressed.

Consider the Sicilians, if this County my husband has offered me such wrong,
what reason I had to plead for his life? were it not the guilt of mine own
consci^nce, forces to save the innocent: who in a dispairing humor weary of
his life, confesses himself author of that murder which these hands did
execute. I am the woman the unfortunate Countess (Sicilians) who suborned by a
Sicilian gentleman, whom by no tortures I will name: first practiced by
witchcraft Arnaldos death: but seeing that would not prevail, I sought to meet
him alone, which I did yesterday by the grove, and there offering him a humble
supplication, and he stouping to take it courteously: I stabd him, and after
mangled him in that sort you found him.

This is truth, this is my conscience, and this I am by God informed to
confess. Then worthy Duke save the innocent Earl, and pronounce sentence
against me theoffender. I speak not this in that I love the County, but that
I am forced unto it, by the remorse of mine own conscience.

Here she ended, and all they stood amassed: and Philippo began again to
reply against her, that she did it to save him: but in vain were his words,
for she alleged such probable reasons against her self, that the Duke was
ready to pronounce sentence against her, and the Duke her father at the point
to bewray himself, had it not been that Arnaldo Strozzo the Dukes so coming
home, and meeting certain plain countrymen heard this news how the Duke was
sitting in Judgment against one that had murdered his son, which news as
it drove him into a wonder, so it made him ha^te speedily to the place, to know
the effect of the matter: and he came thither just at the beginning of
Philomelas oration.

Seeing therefore two pleading thus for death, he himself being alive, and
his father ready to condemn the innocent: he commanded the company to give
way, came and showed himself, and said: may it please your grace I am here,
whom these confess they have slain.

At this the Duke start up, and all the ^^anders by were in a mase. At last
to drive them out of their du^ps, he toulde them that he thought that the man
that was murdered, and taken for him, was a slave with whom the day before he
had changed apparel.

The Duke for joy to see his son, was a great while mute: At last he began
to examine the matter, why these two did plead themselves guilty? Philippo
answered for despair, as weary of his life. Philomela said, for the safety of
her husband, choosing rather to die, the^ he any ways should suffer prejudice.

The Sicilians at this, looking Philomela in the face, shouted at her woundrous
virtues, and Philippo in a sound between grief and joy, was carried away
half dead to his lodging: where he had not lain two hours, but in an ecstasy
he ended his life. The Duke of Millaine discovered himself, who by the Duke of
Palermo was highlye entertained.

But Philomela hearing of the death of her husband, ^ell into extreme
passiones, and although Arnaldo Strozzo desired her in marriadge: yet she
returned home to Uenice, and there lived the desolate widow of Philippo Medici
al her life: which constant chastety made her so famous, that in her life she
was honored as the Paragon of virtue, and after her death solemnly, and with
wonderful honor intombed in S. Marks Church, and her fame holden canonized
until this day in Uenice.

FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by E. A. for Edward White, dwelling at the little North
door of Paul's Church, at the Sign of the Gunne. Anno. 1592.


