GREENES GHOST HAVNTING CONIECATCHERS. Wherein is set down, The Art of
Humouring. The Art of carrying Stones. Will. St. Lift. Ia. Fost. Law. Ned Bro.
Catch. and Black Robins Kindness.
With the conceits of Doctor Pinch-backe a notable Makeshift. Ten times more
pleasant then any thing yet published of this matter. Non ad imitandum, sed ad
euitandum.

LONDON, Printed for R. Iackson, and I. North, and are to be sold in
Fleetstreete, a little above the Conduit. 1602.

TO ALL GENTLEMEN, MERchants, Apprentises, Farmers, and plain countrymen,
health.
IT is most true, Gentlemen, and woeful experience daily teaches us, that the
more careful Princes are in erecting and establishing good laws, for the
rooting out of vice in the common wealth, the more repugnant (the devil
altogether predominant over them) do evil disposed persons, caterpillars, and
the off-scumme of the world (and therefore to be rejected and excommunicated
from the fellowship of all honest men) oppose themselves against God and good
government, and in steed of an honest and civil carriage (which the Law
prescribes them) betake them to a most hateful, vicious, and detestable life:
Who, as they may well be compared to vipers, most venomous and spiteful
beasts, that for their venime and poison are hated and shunned of all men, as
most prejudicial creatures: so these base people, not once thinking of an
honest course of life, trusting upon their own mother wits, daily devise new
shifts and policies, to fleece the plain dealing man, and by that means grow
into more hate amongst honest men, then do the hated Jews at this day: and the
name of Conicatchers is so odious, that now a days it is had up, and used for
an opprobrious name for every one that shows the least occasion of deceit.
The books that were not long ago set forth, concerning Coniecatching and
crosse-biting, and the discovery of each (if any spark of grace were) might
have been so many restraints and bridles to call them from that abominable
life, but they that are given over to their own hearts lust, with all their
might inueigh both against them and their Author.

I have therefore, Gentlemen, as one enforced ( amore patriae) taken in hand to
publish this little Pamphlet (which by a very friend came by a chance to my
hands, and adding somewhat of mine own knowledge, and upon very credible
information) most necessary in my mind for the good of the common wealth, both
for all men to see, what gross villainies are now practiced in the bright
Sunshine, that thereby they may be forewarned to take heed how they
converse with such cosoning companions: as also a just check and control to
such wicked livers, that they perceiving their goodness set abroch, may with
remorse and penitencie forsake their abominable course of life, and betake them
to a more honest and civil behavior. If any with the spider here seek to
suck poison, let such a one take heed, that in practicing his villainy he
chance commence Bachelor in Whittington College, and so in good time take his
degrees and proceed Doctor, and thence with a solemn procession take
possession of doctor Stories cappe; to which some of the worshipful company
of Conicatchers have worthily heretofore attained.

In this Treatise (loving countrymen) you shall see what shifts this crew of
helhounds have put in practice since the books of Conicatching came forth
under these names. viz. The Art of Humoring. The Art of carrying stones; W. St
Lift. Ia. lame. Ned Br. catch, and Black Robins kindness: Wherein are
manifested the nature of Humorists, such as can insinuate themselves into
every man's company: and as they see him addicted, so will they verse upon
him, what policies they have to purloine goods out of shops under the pretense
of plainness, what shifts they have to cosen poor Alewiues, by the art of
carrying stones, what inconvenience may come by following slattering strumpets,
I know not I what should be the cause why so innumerable harlots and Curtizans
abide about London, but because that good laws are not looked unto: is there
not one appointed for the apprehending of such hellmoths, that eat a man out of
body and soul? And yet there be more notorious strumpets and their mates
about the City and the suburbs, then ever were before the Marshall was
appointed: idle mates I mean, that under the habit of a Gentleman or serving
man, think themselves free from the whip, although they can give no honest
account of their life. I could wish, and so it is to be wished of every honest
subject, that Amasis law were received, who ordained that every man at the
years end should give an account to the Magistrate how he lived, and he that
did not so, or could not make an account of an honest life to be put to death
as a fellon, without favor or pardon: What then should become of a number of
our vpstart gallants, that live only by the sweat of other men's brows, and
are the decay of the sorwardest Gentlemen and best wits? Then should we have
fewer conicatching strumpets, who are the very causes of all the plagues that
happen to this flourishing common wealth. They are the destruction of so many
Gentlemen in England. By them many Lordships come to ruin. What dangers grow
by dallying with such unchaste Libertines, and what inconvenience follows by
their inordinat Pleasures, let those that have had woeful experience and
master Surgeon together testify: nay, they not only endanger the body by
lothsom diseases, but ingraue a perpetual shame in the forehead of the party,
and finally consume his soul and make him fit for the devil.

To leave these base companions (that can by no wholesome counsel, nor advised
persuasions be dissuaded from their lothsom kind of lise, nor called to any
honest course of living) in the dregs of their dishonesty. Would it please
the honorable and worshipful of the land to take order for the cutting off of
these cosoners, and consuming cankers of this common wealth, they should not
only cause a blessing to be powered on this flourishing state, but have the
prayers of every good subject for their prosperous health: and welfare. And
thus Gentlemen, I conclude with this farewell: God either convert or confound
such base companions.

Yours to use, S. R.

To the Reader.
Use and peruse not with a curious eye,
For Truth oft's blamde, yet never tells lie.
I tell not I, what foreign men have done,
But follow that which others have begun.
No learned Clearke in Schools that use to write,
But Envy makes their labors some to spite.
What then shall I, that write a homely style,
Think but to have a homely scoffing smile.
But these and those that either mock or skorne,
Would they might wear (fair sight) Acteons horn.
But you kind friends, that love your countries wealth,
Vouch of my labors, good fortune guide your health.
To pleasure most, and profit all is my end,
My greatest care to please both foe and friend.
Read then kind friends, my travel here you have,
I look for naught, naught but your loves I crave.
GREENES GHOST haunting Conicatchers.
THere has been of late days published two merry and pithie Pamphlets of
the art of Conicatching: wherein the Author has sufficiently expressed his
experience, as also his love to his Country. Nevertheless with the Authors
leave, I will ouerlooke some law terms expressed in the first part of
Conicatching: whereunto, as the Author says, is necessarily required three
parties: The setter, the Verser, and the Barnacle. Indeed I have heard some
retainers to this ancient trade dispute of his proceedings in this case, and by
them in a full Synod of quart pots it was thorowlie examined and concluded,
that there were no such names, as he has set down, nor any cheating Art so
christened as Conicatching. Marie, in effect there is the like underhand
traffic daily used and experienced among some few start up Gallants
dispersed about the suburbs of London, who terms him that draws the fish to
the bait, the Beater, and not the Setter: the Tavern where they go, the Bush,
and the fool so caught, the Bird. As for Conicatching, they cleape it
Batfowling, the wine the Strap, and the cards the Limetwigs. Now for the
compassing of a woodcocke to work on, and the fetching him into the wine bench
of his wrack, is right beating the bush. The good ass is he will be dealt
upon, stouping to the lure if he be so wise as to keep aloof, a Haggard: and
he whom he makes Verser the Reiciuer, and the Barnacle the Pothunter.

But all this breaks no square, so long as we concur in eodem subiecto: yet
I wish, that as he has looked into these wicked actions opened therein, so he
had also looked into other gross sins, which are seeded in the hearts of
sundry persons. Extortion had been a large theme to have wrought upon: and
with the Usurers bags full of gold he might have handled another pretty
Treatise: He might have brought forth Justice weying bread, and the Baker
putting his ears in the balance to make even weight. He should have
personated the Thames most pitifully complaining, what monstrous havoc the
Brewers make of her water, without all remorse or compassion: and how they put
in willowe leaves and broom buds into their woort in steed of hoppes. So
likewise a Christian exhortation to mother Bunch would not have done amiss,
that she should not mix lime with her Ale, to make it mighty, or cozen the
Queens liege people of their drink, by fubbing them off with these ^ender
wasted black pots and Cannes, that will hold little more then a ^ring. A
profitable Treatise might have also been published for such companions to
look into, as for good fellowship will not stick to lend two or three false
oaths to defeat the widow and fatherless of ^ir right, ^ough in short space
after they lose their ears for ^ir labor. A persuasion against pride had
been veri^ profitable: and an exhortation against swearing had been a thing
commondable, if he had in a pleasant ^atise showed the folly of young. you^s and
^ole queanes; which entering into the service of sundry honest persons,
continue there no longer then they can cleanly convey some sufficient carriage
for their present maintenance. Then had he done well, and peradventure given
such light to sundry honest householders, that they would be careful what
persons they ^ad received into their hou^s or put in trust about ^ir business.

There ^ght have also been co^piled a d^able and pleasant Tr^atise of the
abuse committed by such as sell bottle ale, who to make it fly up to the top of
the house at the first opening do put gunpowder into the bottles while the ale
is new. Then by stopping it close, make the people believe it is the strength
of the ale, when being truly ^ted it is nothing indeed but the strength of the
gunpowder that works the effect, to the great heart-burning of the parties
that drink the ^ante. I would have had him touch the contrariety of apparel,
and set down reasons to dissuade men from wearing French peake^, because they
are good for nothing but to stab men, as also told the use of the terrible cut,
and the Swallow tail^ slash.

To leave daliance and come to the matter. I will inform you what policies
have been practiced since the books of Conicatching were set forth. These
Batfowlers or Conicatchers having lost a collo^ of their living, by
communicating their secrets with babbling companions, have now invented a new
trick to fetch in the pence. They disguise themselves like Apparitors or
Sumners, and come to a young Gentleman, Merchant, or old pinchcrust, as it may
fall out, that has gotten a maid, a man's daughter, or this widow or ordinary
woman with child, or at least have been more near with them then they should:
and them they threaten with process, citations, the whip, or the white sheet
at least, until they come to compositio^. The timorous souls fearing to be
made a byword of shame to the whole City, bribe them with all that ever they
can rap and rend, to hold their peace, and save their honesty. They will urge
the strictness of their oath, and the danger of the law in such cases of
concealment, until they can see them come off roundly: then they will hamme
and han^ke, and safe they are not every body, and so take their money, and
return laughing in their sleeves, to think how they cosoned them.

Within short time after they send another of their copesmates after the same
sort, and he gives them the like pluck. And (...) two or three one after the
other, shall never leave a^licting his ghost, till they have made him as bare
as a birds tail, so as he has not one penny more to save him from hanging,
if need were. A monstrons abuse of authority, and hindrance to the courts of
Justice, that haue-the oversight of such offenses.

Other there be that do nothing but ride up and down the country, like young
merchants a wooing, and they will marry every month a new wife, and then
fleece-her of all she has, that done run away, and learn where another ^ich
widow dwells, and serve her after the same sort: so rounding England, til
they have picked up their crummes, and got enough to maintain them all their
life after.

But exceeding all these are the fine sleights of our Italian humourists, who
being men for all companies, will by once conuersing with a man so draw him to
them, that he shall think nothing in the world too dear for them, nor once be
able to part them, until they have spent all (...) have on them.

If he be lasciuiously addicted they have Aretines Tables at his fingers ends,
to feed him on with new kind of filthiness: they will come in with Rowse the
French painter, and show what an unlawful vainehe had in ba^drie: not a whore
nor a queen about the town but they know, and can tell her marks, and
where, and with whom she hosts.

If they see you couetously bent, they will discourse wonders of the
Philosophers stone, and make you believe they can make gold of goose-grease,
only you must be at some two or three hundred pound charge, or such a small
trifle, to help to set up their stilles, and then you need not care where you
beg your bread: for they will make you do little better, if you follow their
prescriptions.

Discourse with them of countries, they wi^ set you on fire with tra^elling:
yea what place is it they will not swear they hau^ been in, and I warrant you
tell such (...) sound tale, as if it were all Gospel they spoke. Not a corner
in France but they can describe. Uenice, ^y? It is nothing, for they have
intelligence of it every hour, and at every word will come in wi^ Siado
Curtizano, tell you such miracles of Madame Padilia and Romana Impia, that you
will be mad till you be out of England: and if he see you are caught with this
bait he will make as though he will leave you, and feign business about the
Court, or that such a Noble man sent for him, when you will rather consent to
rob all your friends then be severed from him one hour. If you request his
company to traueile, he will say, In faith I cannot tell, I would sooner spend
my life in your company, then in any man's in England. But at this time I am
not so provided of money as I would: therefore I can make no promise: and if a
man should adventure upon such a journey without money, it were miserable and
base, and no man will care for us. (...) money say you (like a liberal young
master) take no care for that, for I have so much land, and I will sell it, my
credit^ is worth so much, and I will use it. I have the keeping of a Cosens
chamber of mine, which is an old counselor, and he this vacation time is gone
down into the country, we will break up his study, rifle his chestes, diue
into the bottom of his bags, but we will have to serve our turn, rather
then sail we will sell his books, pawn his bedding and hangings, and make
riddance of all his household stuff to set us packing. To this he listens a
little, and says, These are some hopes yet, but if he should go with you, and
you have money, and he none, you will domineere over him at your pleasure, and
then he were well set up to leave such possibilities in England, and be made a
slave in another country. With that you offer to part halfes with him, or put
al into his custody, before he should think you meant otherwise then well with
him. He takes you at your offer, and promises to husband it so for you, that
you shall spend with the best, and yet not wast half so much as you do. Which
makes you (meaning simply) to put him in trust, and give him the purse. Then
all a boon voyage into the low Countries you trudge, and so traueile up into
Italy, but per varios casus, and tot discrimina rerum, in a town of garrison
he leaves you, runs away with your money, and makes you glad to betake your
self to pro^ant and become a Gentleman of a company. If he fear you will
make after him he will change his name: and i^ there be any Gentleman or other
in the country, he will borrow his name and creep into his kindred, or it
shall cost him a fall, and make him pay sweetly for it in the end, if he take
not the better heed. Thus will he be sure to have one Ass or other a foot to
keep himself in pleasing.

There is no Art but he will have a superficial sight into, and put down
every man with talk: and when he has vttred the most he can, make men b^ue
(...) knows ten times more then he will put into their heads, which are
secrets not to be made common to every one.

He will persuade you he has twenty rece^s of love powders, that he can frame
a ring with such a devise, that if a wench put it on her finger she shall not
choose but follow you up and down she streets.

If you have an enemy that you would be (...) rid of, he wi^ teach you to
poison him with your very looks: to stand on the top of Poules with a burn^g
glass in your h^nd, and cast the same with such a force on a man's face that
walks under, that it shall ^rike him stark dead, more violently then lightning.

To fill a letter full of needles, which shall be laid after such a
mathematical order, that when he opens it, to whom it is sent, they shall
spring up and ^ie into his body forcibly, as if they had been blown up with
gunpowder, or sent from a Ca^uers mouth like small shot.

To conclude, he will have such probable reasons to procure belief to his
lies, such a smooth tongue to deliver them, and set them forth with such a
grace, that he should be a very wise man did not swallow the Gudgin at his
hands.

In this sort have I known sundry young Gentlemen of England trained forth to
their own destruction, which makes me the more willing to publish this
discourse, the better to forewarne other of such Batfowling companions; as also
for the rooting out of these insinuating moth-wormes that eat men out of their
substance unseen, and are the decaie of the forwardest Gentlemen and best wits.

How manis have we about London, ye to the disgrace of Gentlemen live gentleman
like of themselves having neither money nor land, nor any lawful means to
maintain them, some by play, and then they go a mumming into the country all
the Christmas time with false dice, or if there be any place where Gentlemen
or merchants frequent in the Citis, or any town corporate, thither will they,
either disguised like to young merchants, or substantial Citizens, and draw
them all dry that ever dealt with them.

There are some that do nothing but walk up and down Paul's, or come to
shops to buy wares, with budgets of writings under their arms: and these will
urge talk with any man about their suits in law, and discourse unto them how
these and these men's bands they have for money, that are the chiefest dealers
in London, Norwich, Bristow, and such like places, and complain that they can
not get one penny. Why, if such a one ^oth owe it you (says some man that
knows him) I durst buy the debt of you, let me get it of him as I can. O says
my budgetman, I have his hand and seal to show, look here else: and with
that pluckes out a counterfeit band (as all other his writings are) and reads
it to him. Whereupon for half in half they presently compound, and after that
he has that ten pounds paid him for his band of twenty besides the
forfeiture, or so forth, he says, Faith these Lawyers drink me as dry as a
sieue, and I have money to pay at such a day, and I doubt I shall not be able
to compass it: here are all the leases and evidences of my land lying in such
a shire, I would you would lend me forty pounds on them till the ne^t term,
or for some six months, and then either it shall be repayd with interest, or
I will forfeit my whole inheritance, which is better worth then a hundred marks
a year.

The wealthy retailer, citizen, merchant, Gentleman or young nouice that has
store of crowns lying by him, greedy of such a bargain, thinking perhaps by
one clause or other to defeat him of all he has, lends him the money, and takes
a fair statute merchant of his lands before a Judge, but when all comes to
all, he has no more land in England then seven foot in the Church yard,
neither is his inheritance either in Posse or Esse, then a pair of gallows in
a green field, nor do any such occupiers know him, much less owe him any
money, whereby the covetous person is cheated forty or fifty pounds thick at
one clap.

Not unlike to these are they, that coming to Ordinaries about the Exchange
where Merchants do table for the most part, will say they have two or three
ships of coals late come from Newcastle, and wish they could light on a good
chapman that would deal for them altogether. What is your price, says one?
What Is your price, says another? He holds them at the first at a very high
rate, and sets a good face on it, as though he had such traffic indeed, but
afterward comes down so low, y^ every man strives ^o shall give him earnest
first: and ere he be aware, he has forty sh^ings clapped into his hand, to
assure the bargain to some one of them. He puts it unquietly, and b^ds them
inquire for him at such a sign and place, where he never came, signifying also
his name, when in troth he is but a cosoning companion, and no such man to be
found. Thus goes he clear away with forty shillings in his purse for
nothing, and they unlike ever to see him again.

There is a certain kind of cosonage called horsecoursing, which is when a man
goes to the Cariers of Cambridge, Oxford, Bury or Norwich, or any great town
of trade, and hires a horse to ride down with them, as these odd companions
wi^ do: and what does me he, but as soon as he has him, ^eps aside into some
blind town or other, and there lies till he have eaten him out lim by lim in
wine and capons, and then when he can get no more on him, he sends (...) Carier
word where he is; who in the end is feign to pay some fifty shillings or three
pounds for his ^uals that hired him ere he can have him. ^ochester hackneymen
do know what belongs to this trade, for they have been often times ^ced by
these rank riders, who coming to a town with a cloke-bag of stones carried
after them, as if they were men of some worth, hire a horse to Canterbury, and
ride quite away with him.

There be certain mates called Faunguesis, who if they can find a fit Anui^ to
strike on, will learn what acquaintance he has in the country, and then they
will come to him, and say, I am to do commendations to you from a friend of
yours, and he gave me this bowed six pence to drink a quart of wine with you
for his sake: and if he go to the tavern, they ^ill not only make him pay
for the wine, but for all he drinks in besides.

^o was one in Aldergate-streete lately served, who drawn to the tavern after
such a like order called for a pint of wine, the drawer brought it him, and a
goblet with it, and set them both on the table, and went his way: ^hie, quoth
this Fawneguest, what a ^let has the fellow brought us here, it will not hold
half (...) draught? So ho (quoth he) no attendance given here? ^e carry it to
him my self, since no body will come: for of all things I love not to drink
in these squirting cups, so down the stairs, forth of the doors he goes with
the goblet under his cloak, and left his new acquaintance and small
remembrance to pay three pound for a three-penie shot.

Such Fawneguests were they, that meeting a prentise, who had been to receive
a hundred pound for his master, suddenly in the midst of Cheapside in the
day time, and open market stepped to him, as if they had bin familiarly
acquainted with him, and suddenly cast the hinder skirt of his cloak over his
face, making as though they had (...) with him, and seeming to ^ust their cold
hands in his neck, one of them thratled him so sore by the windpipe, that he
could make no noise, but sovainly sunk to the ground mu^ed in his cloak, while
the other took from him the bag with the money which he had under his arm,
which done, they ran away laughing, as if that the deed were done in ^est.

Soon after the market folks and people passing by to and fro perceiving the
youth lie still on the ground and not stir up, stepped to him, and seeing in
what state he was, rubbed and chafed him, and gave him Aqua vitae, so that
soon after he came again to himself: then looking about him, and seeing the
people so gathered together, he cried unto them, O, where is my money! They
wondering to hear him talk of money, told him both how his companions left him,
and they found him, whereby the people knowing how he was deceived, made a^er
them, but they were never heard of till this day.

But these are Gentlemen Batfowlers in comparison of the common rablement of
Cutpurses and pickpockets, and no man that sees them but would imagine them to
be Caualiers of very good sort. Marie there be a band of more needy mates,
called Terme^s, who travel all the year from ^aire to fair, and have great
doing in Westminster hall. These are the Nips and Foists; whereof the first
part of Conicatching entreats, and these have their cloyers and followers,
which are very troublesome to them, for they can no sooner draw a bung but
these come in for their tenths, which they generally term snapping, or
snappage.

Now if the Cutpurse deny snappage, his cloyer or follower forthwith boyles
him, that is, bewrayes hi^, or seazeth on h^s cloak, which the Nip dares not
withstand, so Richard Farrie a notable Lift of sixty years of age was served,
who being dogged or followed by a Cloyer called John Gibson, who having seen
him pierce (...) hogshed in the beginning of a fair challenged him for
snappage: which old Farrie denied, because Gibsons wife (as he then said) was
a pickpocket, and yet would part with nothing. Then did Gibson swear that he
should not buy one peniworth of ware that day (which is the right cutpurse ^ase
of getting a purchase) and thereupon he shadowed him up and down, and mard his
market quite, as he had before promised.

In revenge whereof the said Richard Farrie at Wayhill fair last, hearing
where Gibson had p^osned a purse with thirteen nobles in it, sent alustie
^ellow of his prosession, a young dealer in the art of cloying or following
named James Roades, that was since hanged at Dorchester, who being apparelled
like a seruingman, came to demand his mistress purse of Gibson, which he said
he saw him unlawfully take away, as if indeed he had been the Gentlewomans
man that had the gleeke. Which Gibson at the first utterly denied, but
afterward being further threatened with danger of his life, yielded the purchase
unto Roades, which was immediately shared betw^ne him and old Farrie.

This thing s^ne after came to Gibsons ear, who was thoroughly laughed to
scorn for his labor.

Many there be of these wicked persons, and also lew^ Officers who like
shadows or cloyers, do nothing all day long but follow the Lifts up and down,
pinc^ing them for snappage: and not one of them that has the right dexteritis
in his ^ngers, but they know, and will conceal and patronize if need requir^.
Marie, if ther^ be a (...), that has not made himself known to their
congregation, he shall soon be smelt out, and have no remission, unl^ ^ee
purchase it by (...) (...).

These Cutpurses of Sturbridge sell their lugg^ge commonly at a town called
Bot^am, where they keep their hall at an odd house, bowzing and quaffing, and
ha^ their tr^^es attendant upon them so (...) as may be.

How a Cheesemonger had his bag cut out of his Apo^^^ hanging before him.
AT this ^a^e it was, thougt long (...) that (...) (...) monger had h^^ pocket
cut out of his apo^^^, (...) all the whole College of Cutpurses had assayed,
which none but one could bring to pass, and he indeed was a doctor in his
art: for going to the Cheesemongers boothe to buy a cheese, he gave him money
for one of the greatest, and desired him to cut it in pieces, and put it behind
him in the cape of his cloak. He did so, and the (...) he was thrusting it in,
he cut his rocket with twelve pounds out of his apron before him: for which
dred^ he lives reno^ed in the Cutpurse chronicles, (...) for his sake they
yearly make a feast, and drink to the soul of his deceased carcass.

There be diverse sorts of Nips and Foysts both of the city ^d country: these
cannot one abide the other, but are at deadly hatred, and will boil and
discover one another, by reason one is hindrance to the other. And these the
former books have omitted. There are also sundry other Laws, not heretofore
spoken of, namely James Fosters Law, or James Fosters Li^: which grew thus.

How a cosoning Life stole a cloak out of a Scriuenersshop.
THis fellow came into a Scriueners shop to have a letter wr^ten to his wives
mother, signifying that his wife was run ^waie with another knave, and had
(...) away all that he had, and that he had rather be hanged then be troubled
any longer with such a whore. But it must ^be written in haste, for his own
father does carry it, and he goes away straight. All the while he is telling
his tale, he cast a l^ing ^ye about the shop, to see if there (...) (...) a
cloak upon a by-settle, or (...) other (...) that he might transport unseen
under his own cloak. By chance (...) espied one, so he lea^ against the wall
where it lay, and with his hands behind him, he gathered it up cleanly by
little and little: ^en suddenly starting up, (...) (...) (...) my father that
would carry it, and I will (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) he with all speed,
having the cloak under his arm, crying, Ho father, father, leaving the
Scriuener yet writing his letter, who mist not his cloak till a great while
after, that he saw him not return again.

There is a cunninger kind of List, when a Batfowler walking in an evening in
the streets, will feign he has let fall a ring or a Jewel, and come to a
shop well furnished with wares, and desire the prentise of the house to lend
his candle to look it: he suspecteth no guile, lends it him: and the Batfowler
goes poaring up and down by the doors, as if he had lost something in deed,
by and by he lets the candle fall to and it goes out. Now I pray you good young
man, says he, do so much as light me this candle again: so goes the fellow in
to light the candle, while he steals what he will out of the shop, and gets
him going while the light comes.

There is a Lift called Will. St. Lift, whose manner is to go up and down to
Faires in a blew coat, sometimes in his doublet and hose, and sometimes in a
cloak, which commonly he puts off when he comes thither: this fellow waits
diligently when any rich yeoman, Gentleman, or gentlewoman goes into an Inn to
lay up his cloak, capcase, sauegard, Portmantua or any other luggage, so
following them, marks to whom they are delivered: then comes he within half an
hour after puffing and blowing for the cloak, capcase, portmantua, sword, or
such like, and in his masters name demands it, giving the wife, maid,
tapster, hostler, or some of the house two pence or a groate for laying it up.
Which having received, he is soon gone, and never returns. This fellow will
sometime stand bareheaded, and offer to hold a Gentleman's stirop, and very
diligently attend upon him when he alighteth at any great Inn, and seems so
serviceable, as if he were an hostler or chamberlain belonging to the house:
yea and sometimes follow him out of doors as his man, and attend upon him to
the Fair very orderly: within half an hour after, when he sees his new
master is so bu^e in the Fair, that he cannot hastily return to his lodging
before him, he will come back to the Inn running, and tell them his Master
has sent him to them for his clokebag or Portmantua in all haste: for he is
upon payment of money, and must needs have it. They thinking him verllie to be
the Gentleman's man, because at his coming he was so necessary about him, they
deliver unto him whatsoever the Gentleman left with them, who notwithstanding
when the true owner comes, they are ^aine to answer it out of their own
purses.

A sly trick of Cosonage lately done in Cheapeside.
BEsides this, there is a kind of Lift called Chopchain, as when a Gentleman
like a batfowler has hired a chain for a day or two upon his credit, or has
some of his friends bound for the restoring of it again, goes to S. Martines,
and buys for a little money another copper chain, as like it as ma^e be: then
comes he to the Goldsmith, and upon the right chain offers to borrow twenty
pounds: the Goldsmi^ touches it to see if it be counterfeit or no: ^en finding
it good, he tendereth him his money: which the (...) he is doing, and that both
money and chain lies yet upon the (...), what does me (...), but ^mbles and
plays with the linkes carelessly, as if he minded another matter, so by a fine
trick of Legerde maine gathers it up into his hand and chops the copper chain
in place, leaving him that pawn for his twenty pounds.

How a man was cosoned in the evening by buying a guilt spoone.
VVHilest I was writing this, I was given to understand of another like exploit
nothing (...) to any of the former. A fellow like a clown that knew all
points in his tables, and had been master of his trade many years together,
walking through Silver street in London suddenly in the dark spurned a fair
gilt spoone (as it seemed) being wrapped up in a paper, which before he purposely
let fall: the people thinking some other had lost it, and that it had been his
good luck above the rest to find it, began to flock about him for to look on
it, and admired his fortune in meeting with it, he counterfeiting the simple
fool as well as he could: Now a Gods will what shall I do with such a Gugaw?
would some other body had found it for me, for I know not what it is good for.
Why, said one of the standers by, will thou take money for it? I, quoth he, I
would I had a crown for it. And I will come somewhat near you, says the
other, for thou shall have all the money in my purse, which is four shillings,
so forth he drew his purse, and gave him the money. And very well content
with the bargaiue, he put it up, and said I marie, this money will do me more
good then twenty spoones, and let them keep such toies that list, for I had
rather have one groat in my purse then a cart load of such trumperie. So away
he went laughing in hi^ sleeue, to think how he had cosoned him that thought
to ouerreach him: and he that was so cosoned, as it were triumphing at his
bargain, could never look enough on the spoone, but went presently and carried
it to the Goldsmith, to know what it was worth. Birlady sir when he came
thither, the spoone was found to be but brass fair gilded over, and worth but
seven pence at the: most, if he should sell it, which was a heavy cooling card
to his heart, and made him swear, that for that spoones sake he would never be
in his plate again while he lived.

Thus every day they have new inventions for their villainies, and as often as
fashions alter, so often do they alter their stratagems, studying as much how
to compass a poor man's purse, as the Prince of Parma did to win a town.
Neither is this ^neselling the gainfullest of their arts, although in one day
they made away a dozen so. I but it is a trick by the way for a supper or a
breakefas^ fast, which no man at the first can descrie. Ouerpassing this
catalogue of Lifts and Cutpurses, Gentlemen, I will acquaint you with a strange
new devised art of stone-carying, wherein is contained the right use of the
chalk and the poast, as also a necessary cave ate for victuallers and
nickpots, how to beware of such insinuating companions.

The Art of carrying stones.
FIrst and foremost you must note, that leaving an Alewife in the lurch, is
termed making her carry stones, ^ich stones be those great Oes in chalk that
stand behind the door: the weight of every one of which is so great that as
many ^hillings as there be, so many times she cries O, as groaning under the
weight thereof. Now sir, of these Oes twenty shillings make a lust load, and
ten pound a bargeful. But here lies the cunning, how to compass an honest
A^e that will undertake such a burden: first this is a general precept
amongst them, that he must be some odd drunken companion that they deal upon,
and his wife a good wench, that so she may be fallen in wi^, and wipe off her
guests scores, if so he have no money to discharge it: a thing that many women
of that kind will willingly do to have sport and save their honesty. Yet if
this cannot conveniently be brought to pass, or that in, respect of her age
she is not worth the taking up, then will they be sure their goodman host must
be a certain kind of bawd, or a receiver of cutpurses, pickpockets, or such
like, whereby it so falls out, that if he and they square about crowns, they
may stop his mouth with threatening to betraie him to the Beadle of Bridewell,
or telling Hind of ^ewgate what hospitality he keeps. Nay further, they will
observe if he a^ any time rail against ante severe Justice that has the
punishment of such notorious persons, and if he do (as in some drunken humor
or other he will ouershoote himself in that kind) then will they conceal it,
never disccoer it, but do^neere over them, thro^ the pots against the wall, for
he and his house is forfeit unto them. Again, it may so happen that hospes
meus may be an old seruingman, who has belonged in his days to some famous
recusant that has long since broke up house, and now being turned out of
service, he has no trade to live on, but must marie a whore, and keep
victualling ^ither in Westminster, or in the suburbs of London. Then co^ a
hoope, they are better then ever they were. For if he be of the right stamp he
will be exclaiming against the state, or those that heepe his master, or he
will enter into commendations of the old Religion: and this is the only thing
they desire, they never wish a finer fellow to feed on. A Gods name let him set
forth his beef and brewes, and trudge every day to the market to buy Capons
and rabbets: for if they run never so much in his debt, if they tell him of a
purseuant, he will never threaten the^ with a sergeant. A number more of these
observations do appertain to stone carrying, as namely at their first coming
to their lodging they be as free as an Emperor, and draw all the acquaintance
that they can procure to spend their money there before another place, so that
the host and hostess may conceive great matter of hope of having their house
customed by their lying in it, and eat no meat but have either the good man or
the good wife still with him at dinner or supper, which will pluck the stones
on his shoulders the faster, if so he suffer his guests to run on the score.
And this in any case they set down for a general rule, that they lie not
above two months in one place, for longer the alescore is not able to hold
out, and the poor man ouerpressed so excessiuely, in a malecontent humor will
rather grow desperate, and not care for any danger they can bring him to, then
suffer more then flesh and blood can endure, or not rather have his will on
them for using him so badly.

How say you my masters, you think there is no deceit in a pot of ale, and
that there are no cosoners but Conicatchers, but that is not so, for London is a
lickpenis, and every man hash not a mint in his pocket ^at lines in it, some
must practice witcraft, that have not the gift in keeping a lanes end with a
sword and a buckler, or at the least are so crazed with the Italian bone-ache,
that they ar^ afraid to be crushed in pieces, if they should earne their living
in a crowde. But to be brief, I will tell you a n^rie story how this name of
Stone-carying first came up, and thus it follows.

How a Carier of Norwich was made to carry stones.
A Gentlewoman that made a show as if she had been of good credit, came to the
carier of Norwich, and told him she was to remove household, and went to dwell
in the country, wherefore she craved his friendship in safe transporting of her
things to Norwich: and so it is (quoth she) that most of my substance consists
in linen, money, Jewels, and plate, which I put altogether in a great chest,
which she brought thither: As for other trash I Will never trouble my self wish
removing. I pray you have a great care to it that it be safely laid in the
midst of your cart, where thieves may not easily come at it, (...) that it
be kept from rain or wet in any case, promising to content him for the
carriage with more then ordinary (...). After it was seen to come to three
hundred weight, be laid it up immediately in his carte, nor would she depart
till she saw it safe packed. About an hour after she came to the carier again,
telling him that she was afraid she should be constrained to have recourse to
her chest, by reason she had a few trifles to buy ere she departed, ^d that she
wanted some ^ue or six pound. The Carier loa^ to unload for so small a matter,
bid her take no care for money, for what she needed she should have of him,
till she came down into the co^ntrey. So fire pounds (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) with him she goes with her man as (...) (...) (...) (...) be. But coming
to (...), (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) ^er no more: Home went the
Carier, and laid up the chest very safe in his storehouse, daily looking when
the Gentlewoman would come for it. After a month was past, and hearing no
words of her, fearing he was co^en, he sent for the Constable and sundry other
of his neighbors, and before them brake up the chest, finding nothing in it
but small soft freestone lapped in straw, mixed wi^ Flints and such like stuff,
being very special things to give the Carier his loading. Alas, kind man,
this was but heavy tidings for him: for besides the money that he had laid out
of his purse, he lost the carriage of other luggage, which would have returned
him greater profit. Yet could not this nor ten times as much undo him, but
setting light of it, in a merry humor he reported to some of his friends the
circumstance of all his carriage of stones. And ever since the jest has been
taken up by odd companions and Ale-knights.

I would be loath by this my published Discoueri^ to corrupt the simple, or
teach them knauerie by my book, that else would have been honest, if they had
never seen them: for that were all one as if a Surgeon that teaches men
what the plague is, that they might eschew it, should bring his patient that
has a plague sore, into the market place, and there lance it, whereby all men
that look on, in steed of learning to avoid it, should be most dangerously
infected with it. But my meaning in this is, but to chase the game which others
have rowsed; and execute them outright whi^ Conicatching only has branded: and
although I do not spend many leaves in inueighing against the vices which I
reckon up, or time and paper in urging their o^ousnesse so far as I might: yet
you must not think, but I hate them as ^dly as any, and to make manifest my
hatred to them, have vnderlooke this Treatise. But imagine the Reader to be of
this wisdom and discretion, that hearing some laid open, he can discern it to
be sin, and can so detest it, though he be not cloid with a common place of
exhortation. And sooth to say, I think every man to be of my mind, that when
they see a fellow leap from the subject he is handling, to dissuade them by
stale arguments from the thing they already detest, they should skip it over,
and never read it, ga^cope him at the next turning point to his text.

To dismiss this parenth^sis and return to circa quod. I care not since this
occasion of Stone-carying has brought me from talking of the cosonage of men
to the trea^erous sub^ie of women if I rehearse you a tale or two ^ore of
Cr^ngs lately ^one by such detestable strumpets.

A Tale of a whore that crosbit a Gentleman of the Innesof Court.
A Certain queen belonging to a close Nunnerie about Clarkenwell, lighting in
the company of a young Punie of the Innes of Court, trained him home with her to
her hospital: and there couenanting for so much to give ^im his ^seroome all
night. To bed they went together like man and wife. At midnight a crew of her
copelmates kept a knocking and busling at the door. She starting suddenly out
of her sleep, arose and went to the window to look out: wherewith she crying
out to him, said, that a Justice was at the door with a company of bills,
and came to search for a seminary Priest, and that there was no remedy but
she must open unto them: wherefore either he must rise and lock himself in a
study that was hard by, or they should be both carried to Bridewell. The poor
silly youth in a trance, as one new start out of sleep, and that knew not where
he was, suffered her to lead him whither she would, who hastily thrust him
into the study, and there locked him, and went to let them in. Then entered Sim
Swashbuckler, Captain Gogswounds, and Lawrence Longsword-man, with their
appurtenances, made inquiry as if they had been Officers indeed, for a young
Seminary Priest that should be lodged there that She simpered it, and made
courtesy, and spoke reverently unto them, as if she had never seen them
before, and that they had been such as they seemed, and told them she know of
none such, and that none lay there but her self. (...) that through signs
that she made, they spied where his clothes were fallen down between the
chest and the wall: Then they began to rail upon her, and call her a thous^nde
whoores, saying they would make her an example, I mary would they, and use her
like an Infidel for her iying, nor would they stand searching any longer, but
she should be constrained to bring him forth: And that they might be sure he
should not start, they would carry away his clothes with them. As for the
closet, because it was a Gentleman's out of the town, they would not rashly
break it open, but they would set watch and ward about the house till the
morning, by which time they would resolve further what to do. So out of doors
go they with his clothes, doublet, ^ose, hat, rapier, dagger, shoes,
stockings, and twenty marks that he had in his sleeue, which he was to pay
upon a band the next day for his father, to a merchant in Canning str^te, and
le^ Nicholas Nouice staruing and quaking in that doghole. The morning grew on,
and yet she young (...), though he was almost frozen to death, stood still and
durst not stir, till at length the good wise of the house came and let him
out, and bad him shift for himself, for the house was so (...), that it was
not possible for him to escape, (...) that she was utterly undone through his
coming thither. Aster many words it grew to this vpshot; that he must g^ue
her a ring worth thirty shillings, which he then had on his ^nger, only to
help him out at a back door, and in so doing she would lend him a blanket to
cast about him. Which being performed, like an Irish beggar he departed on
the backeside of the fields to his chamber, vowing never to pay so dear for
one nights lodging during his life.

How a Curbar was dressed with an unsavory perfume, and how a notable whore was
crosbitten in her own practice.
A Notable whore of late days compact with a hooker, ^om conicatching English
calls Curbar, bargained with a country Gentleman or Tearmer aforesaid, to tell
her tales in her ear all night: and according to appointment he did so. The
Gentleman having ^pt, and ready to go to bed, she willed him to lay his
clothes in the window, for (quoth she) we are so troubled with rats in this
place (which was in Peticote lane) that we cannot lay any thing out of our
hands, but they will in one night be gnawne to pieces, and made worth nothing:
but her intent was this, that the Curbar with his crome might the more
Conveniently reach them; not that she cared so much for his apparel, as for
his purse, which she knew was we^ stored wi^ crowns, and lay in the sleeue of
his doublet: whereupon he was ruled by her, and so entered the lists. Within two
hours after, he being sore troubled with a laske, rose up and made a double
use of his chamberpot, which going to throw it out at the window, he removed
the clothes from before it, and set it in the place till he had opened the
casement. At that instant the spring of the window leapt open of the one
accord. Whereat being amazed, he ^ept back with a trice, leaving the
chamberpot standing still: ^en fearing the devil had been at hand, by and by
he spied (...) fair iron instrument like a nut came marching in at the window
very solemnly, which in steed of the doublet and the hose that he ferretted
for, arrested that homely service in the member vessel, and plucked goodman
Jordan with all his contents down pat upon the Corbars head and shoul^ders.
Never was gentle Angler so dressed: for his face, his neck and apparel were all
besmeared with the soft Sirreuerence, so that I warrant you he stunke worse
then a Jakes-farmer. The Gentleman hearing one cry out, and seeing his mess
altogether thus strongly taken away, began to gather courage to him, and looked
out to see what it was: where, to his no small contentment he might behold the
Curbar lying along almost brained, almost drowned, and well near poisoned with
the tragical event of the pispot: whereat he laughed merrily, and suspecting
his Leman to have a share in that conspiracy, and that for ten pounds it was
her motion to have him l^e his clothes in the window, to the end he might have
lost them and his money, she being a sleep in the bed all this while, he
quietly removed his own apparel, took her gown and peticoat and laid them
in the steed. Forthwith the Curbar revived, in came the hook again very
manerlie, and clapped hold on those parcels, which together went down with a
witness. All which consorting to his wish, he went round to bed, and in the
morning stole away early, neither paying da^e Lechery for her hire, nor
leaving her one ragge to put on.

Here was wily beguily rightly acted, and an aged Rampalion put besides her
schoole-trickes. But simply, these Crosbiters are necessary instruments now
and then to ta^e such wanton youths, as will not let a maid or a wife pass a
long the streets but they will be meddling with her: what they do they learn
of the tumbler, who lies squat in the brakes till the Conie be come forth out
of her burrow, and gone a gossipping over the way to her next neighbors, and
then he goes between her and home, and as she returns with two or thr^,
fleshly minded Rabbets or Simplers with them, with whom it may be she has
made a bargain to go a bucking, then out ^ies the tumbler like y^ crosbiter and
seazeth on them all for his pray. I marvel that the book of Conicatching had
not him up in his table, since by his first example he corrupted the Christian
people. But you will say, he is animal irrationale, and therefore to be borne
withal, because he does but his kind. Kind me no kind, there is more knauerie
in Cauilier Canis then you are aware of, as you shall perceive by his discourse
following.

A notable Scholerlike discourse upon the nature of Dogs.
NOw Gentlemen, will you give me leave to dally a little for your further
recreation, and I will prove unto you that a dog is a dangerous man, and not
to be dealt withal: yea he is such a kind of creature that he may well be
master and governor over all ordinary beasts: for first and foremost, there is
no man of experience that will deny but dogs do excel in outward sense, for
they will smell better then we, and thereby hunt the game when they see it not.
Besides, they get the fight of it better then we, and are wonderful quick of
hearing. But let us come to speech, which is either inward or outward. Now that
they have outward speech I make no question, although we cannot understand
them, for they bark as good old Saron as may be; yea they have it in more
dainty manner tha^ we, for they have one kind of voice in the chase, and
another when they are beaten, and another when they fight. That they have the
inward speech of mind, which is chiefly conversant in those things which agree
with our nature, or are most against it, in knowing those things which stand us
most in steed, and attaining those virtues which belong to our proper life, and
are m^st conversant in our affections, thus I prove; first and foremost he
chooses those things that are commodious unto him, and shunneth the contrary:
He knows what is good for his diet, and seeks about for it. At the sight of
a whip he ranneth away like a thief from a hue and cry. Neither is he an idle
fellow that lives like a tren^her Fly upon the sweat of other men's brows, but
has naturally a trade to get his living by, as namely the art of hunting and
Conicatching, which these late books go about to discredit. Yea, there be of
them as of men of all occupations, some Cariers, and they will fetch; some
watermen, and they will diue and swim when you bid them; some butchers, and
they will kill sheep; some cooks, and they turn the spit. Neither are they
void of virtue, for if that be Justice that gives every one his deserts, out of
doubt dog^ are not desttrute of it: for they fawn upon their familiar friends
and acquaintance; they defend those from danger that have deserved well of
them, and revenge them of strangers, and such as either have, or go about to do
them injury. Then if they have Justice, they have all the virtues, since this
is an Axioma in Philosophy, that one virtue cannot be separated from another.

Further, we see they are full of magnanimity, in incountring their enemies.
They are wise, as Homer witnesses, who entreating of the return of Vlysles to
his own house, affirms that all his household had forgotten him but his dog
Argus, and him neither could Pallas by her s^btill art deceive in the
alteration of his body, nor his twenty years absence in his beggars weeds
delude any whit, but he still retained his form in his fantasy, which as it
appeared was better then any man's of that time.

According to Chrysippus, they are not ignorant of that excellent faculty of
Logic, for he says that a dog by canuasing and study does obtain the
knowledge to distinguish between three several things, as for example, where
three (...) meet, and of these three hash staid at two of them, by which he
perceives the game has not gone, presently without more ado he runs
violently on the third wa^e: which does argue (says Chrysippus) as if he
should reason thus. Either he went this way, or that way, or yonder way: but
neither that way, nor yonder way, therefore this way. Again, when they are
sick, they know what disease they have, and devise how they may ease
themselves of their grief; if one strike them into the flesh with a stake,
this policy they use to get it out. They traile one of their feet upon (...)
ground, and gnaweth the flesh where the wound is round about with their teeth,
until they have drawn it clean out. If they chance to have any ulcer,
because ulcers kept foute are hardly cured, they lick the sore with their
tongues, and keep it clean. And wonderful well do they observe the precept
of Hippocrates that the onel^e medicine for the fo^e is to rest, for if they
have an^e hurt in their feet, they bear them up, and as much as lies in them,
take care they be not stirred: when unprofitable humors trouble them, they
eat an herb, whereby they vomit up all that is offensive unto them, and so
recouers their health again. How think you my masters, are these unreasonable
creatures, that have all this natural reason in them? No, though they are
beasts, yet are they not as other are, inhumane: for they have more humanity
then any other beasts whatsoever. But of them I have said enough, and therefore
I will proceed to my former argument: wherein for your better delight, I will
acquaint you with a true story ^atelte performeo in Poules Church by a couple
of Cutpurses. The matter was of such truth, as I could for need set down the
Gentleman's name, and also the names of all the actors therein, but I crave
pardon, because the Gentleman was of good place and credit, and for more
assurance my self was present: the whole matter fell out as follows.

How a Country Gentleman walking in Poules had his purse cut by a new kind of
conueyance, and in the end by the like wily beguily got it again.
ACountrie Gentleman of some credit walking in Powles, as tearmers are wont
that wait on their lawyers, was seen by a couple of light ^ngred companions,
that had got some gentlemanship upon them by priu^e biting in ye dark, to have
some store of crowns in his purse coacht in a fair trunk slop, like a
boulting hutch. Alas, they were mortal, and could not choose but be tempted
with so glorious an object. For what may not gold do with him that has
neither money nor credit? Wherefore in very zeal of a bad spirit, they
conspired how to make a breach in his pocket, and possess themselves of their
pray. In the end it was concluded (as necessity is never with out stratagems)
that the one should go behind him, while the other gave she stroke that should
divide life and soul. As they determined, so they brought it to pass, for the
good old fellow walking very soberly in one of the side Isles, deu^sing where
to dine to save the odd three pence, suddenly one of them stepped behind him and
clapped his hands before his eyes, saying: Who am I? Who am I? while the other
gave the purse the gentle ^erke, and beguiled his purse of the gilt: which
done, he went sneaking away like a dog that had wearied a sheep. The good
minded Gentleman that was thus muffled, thinking that it had bin one of his
acquaintance, that played bo peep wish him after that sort, cried to him, Now
for the passion of God, who are you? who are you? Tell me I prate you who are
you? For I shall never reckon while I live. O, quoth the Cauallero Cutpurse,
you shall know by and by, and therewith plueking away his hands, looked him
full in the face and laughed, but by and by starting aside, as if he had
committed an error, God forgive me (quoth he) what have I done, I cry you
heartily mercy, I have mistaken you for my acquaintance, one that is so like
you, as one peaze is like another: and therefore I pray you pardon me. No harm
done, no harm done, quoth the Gentleman, and so they departed. Sinior who was
to divide his bootle where his companion attended him, and my neighbor
Mumpsimus to tyrannize on Bulls pudding-pies for his sire pence: short tale to
make, his hungry body being refreshed, and every one satisfied, there entered
in a dumb show, the reckoning with a clean tren^er in his hand very
orderly, as who should say, Lay your hand on the book. On him attended a well
fed Lapster in a shining suit of well liquored fustian, whereon was engraven the
triumphs of many full platter, with his apron on his shoulder, and his knife
under his girdle. At which sight every man began to draw, (...) my honest
penifather thought to drop testers with the rest: but woe alas, his breeches
were like the bottomless^ pit o^ hell, for ther^ was not one cross to be
found. Then began he to fume and chafe, and run up and dow^ like a mad man,
saying, Well a bay y^ ever I was borne! Who am I? who am I? Where at she rest
of the Gentlemen wondering, hc up and told them the whole stor^e of his
misfortune, as is before recited. And said, now I know who it was that said, Who
am I? who am I? for in troth he was a cutpurse. But here did he not cease or
spend much time in singing a De profundis over his empty pocket, where was
naught else save Lent and desolation, but iumbled his brains together like
stones in a bladder, and tossed over his thoughts as a Tailer does his shreds
when he has lost his needle, to find out some means to fetch home his straied
purse, and to be even with those undermining Pioners. In the end his pillow and
present poverty put this policy into his head. The next day early in the
morning he went into Poules in the same apparel, and walking just in the same
place where he lost the maine chance the day before, having bought him a fair
new purse with white strings and great tassels, and (...) the same with brass^
counters, and thrust it into the stop of his hose, as he was wont, letting the
strings thereof hang out for a train. Well, so it ^ell out, that he had scarce
fetched three turns, but a poor woman that had the shaking ague in her head
came to ask his charity: he glad of any occasion to boa^ his counterfeit
wealth, to entrap the eyes of those hungry espials, ga^ her a penie, and there
with drew forth a number, of counters, making show as if they had been French
crowns: which was presently perceived by Timothy touch and take, that had
been in the action the day before, who sitting (...) a (...), leaning like one
twixt sleeping and wa^ng, fell into a great longing, how he might have that
purse also to bear the other compan^. Still the old Snudge went plodding in
one path, and ever looked under his ouerhange^ moss^e eye-broines, to see who
came near him, or once over to fustle him. He had bes^de at either end of the
I Will on of his men to watch, for fear any more, who am I? should come behind
him. At last out step^ my nimble (...), and running hastily by him like some
prentise, that had been sent of an errand, he sliced it smoothly away, so as
the gentleman never perceived it. But one of his men who had his senses both of
seeing and feeling better then his master, marked when he gave him the gentle
gleeke, and whither he went when he had obtained his booty: whereupon dogging
him to a Cooks shop in Thames sireet; to which place also the Gentleman
followed (...) off. He there laid hands on him, and challenged him for a
Cutpurse, saying, he had seen him do such a thing in Poules, and told him
also from whom he took it. He swore and stated, and stood at utter defiance
with him. And the better to outface the matter, his partner, who being then
lodged in the same house, came down and fell in terms of doing the Gentleman
wrong, and that he should answer him, (...) any man else. And (quoth he) if thou
were well served thou should be stabd for offering to discredit him thus at
his lodging. Mean while that these matters were thus disputing, and the poor
seruingmans death with many oathe^ vowed, in came his master, who spying, who
am I? to stand upon his pantofles so prondly, straight took him aside, (...)
told him a tale in his ear, that did him small good at the heart, and said
flatly he was the man, and no other whom he sought for, and either he would
have restitution for his purse at his hands, or they would try a conclusion at
Lyborne. At (...) speech their courage was somewhat abated: and in the end it
so fell out, to a^oid further trouble they restored him both the purses with
qu^etnes, and made him a sufficient recompense for the trespass. Thus at that
time they escaped, and all parties were pleased^ but shortly after they were
taken for such an other fact, for which they were both condemned and executed
at Lyborne.

Now Gentlemen, have you not heard a pretty pranke of wily beguily, where the
cunning Cutpurse was (...) in his own practice? sure I think never was poor^
(...) so nipt before. Wherefore I wish all those that are of that faculty to
be careful of the right Nip, who if he be never so cunning in his art, yet
at one time or other be ma^e hap to meet with Bull, and his sturdie Jade, on
whom if he chance to ride with his neck snarled in an hempen halter, he is
like to receive so sharp a nip, that it will for cuer more mar his drinking
place.

A notable exploit performed by a Lift.
THere was not long since one of our former profession, having intelligence of
a Citizen that invited three or four of his friends to dinner, came a little
before dinner time, and marked when the guestes were all come: when they were
all come, as he ^hought, knowing the goodman of the house safe (for he was not
yet come from the exchange) steps up the stairs boldly, and comes into the
room where the guests were: when he comes in he salutes them, and asks if his
cosen were not yet come from the Ex^hange. They told him no. No (says he) me
thinks he is very long, it is past twelve of the clock. Then after a turn or
two, In faith Gentlemen (quoth my new come guest) it were good to do something
whereat we may be^ merry against my cosen comes home, and to that intent I will
take this Salt and hide it, that when he misseth it, we shall see what he will
say to my cosen his wife: so he took the Salt, and put it in his pocket, and
walked a turn or two more about the room, within a while when y^ other guests
were bus^e in talk, he steps down the ^taires faining to make water; but when
he was down be turned down Theenes (...), and never returned again. The
Citizen when he came home bid his friends welcome, and anon he mi^ the Salt
that should be set on the table, called his wife to know if there were never a
Salt in the house: His wife busle about dinner, took her husband up, as women
at such times will do, when they are a little troubled (for a little thing
troubles them God wot) and asked him if he had no eyes in his head. No, nor you
wife (quoth he) if you say there be any now: So there past many shrewd and hot
words between them. At length the guests unwilling they should disagr ee on so
small a tri^e, they up and told how one came in and asked for his cosen, and
took away the Salt, meaning to make a little mirth at dinner. But when they
saw he returned no more, they contented themselves with patience, and went to
dinner, as men at such times use to do, with heavy hearts and cold stomachs.

THere are a certain band of (...) Prentises about the town, that will abuse
any upon the smallest occasion that is, and such men (whom they never came to
the credit in all their lives to make clean their shoes) these dare never
meet a man in the face to avouch their rogarie, but forsooth they must have
the help of some other their accomplices. Of this base sort you shall commonly
find them at Playhouses on holy days, and th^re they will be playing their
parts, or at some ^out, as ^he pulling down of Baudie houses, or at some good
exploit or other, so that if you need help, or you think your self not able
to make your part good with any that you (...) a grudge to, no more but
repair to one of these, and for a can of Ale they will do as much as another
for a crown: and these make no more conscsence to beat or lame one, whom they
never before saw nor knew, then ^he knights of the poasts when they are feed
out of Poules to swear ^lsly.

There are another sort of Prentises, that when they see a Gentlewoman or a
countriman minded to buy any thing, they will fawn upon them with their cap
in ^and, with what lack you Gentlewoman? what lack you Countriman? See what
you lack. The Gentlewoman (...) diverse commodities, flndeth nothing that
perhaps likes her: then going away, they come off with their over worn frumps.
Will you buy nothing Gentlewoman? Its no marvel you should see such choice of
good ware. Then they begin to discommend her person to their next neighbo^, as
god as themselves, and at next (...), Send a (...) (...) gra^er her. These ms^
(...) ^ke (...) (...) (...) (...), that ^hen (...) comes into the house will
^awne upon him, but before he goes (...), if he take not ^eed, will catch him
by the ^nnes. But if they meet with a countrie-man, he is the (...) man in the
world to deal upon. They (...) ask him ^ust (...) so much as the wa^ is
worth. The plain simple man offers within a (...) little of his price, as they
use in the country: which (...) Apprentise takes, and swears it was not his
for that money, and so makes the poor man a right Conte. I think few in the
Exchange will account this for a (...) trick. But if the countriman leaves
them and goes his wa^e without buying any thing, either for that ^ee likes not
the ware, or that it is of too high a price: then will they come off with, Do
you hear Countriman, will you give me (...) much, and leave your blew c^te for
a pawn for the rest? or they will bid him sell his sword and buy a pair of
shoes for such like sco^ing girds, that the poor man sometimes could find at
his heart to give all the money in his (...), that he had the^n (...) fields,
that he might re^enge himself on them for abusing him: a very great abuse to
their ma^ters and chapmen.

To ^is society mate be coupled also another fraternity, viz. Water-rat^,
Watermen I mean, that will be read^e (...) very diligent for any man, until
they can get them to their b^ates, but when they come to^and to pay their
fare, if you pai^ them not to their own contentinents, you shall be sure of
some gird or other, yea and perhaps if they know they have an (...) to deal
with, stop his hat or his cloak, till he have paid them what they list; but
these are most commonly servants and apprentises: for the order is, that for
every twelve pence they earne their ma^ster allows them two pence, so then
the more they get, whether by hook or crook, ^he more think they their gain
comes in. But this sort now and then meet with their mates, who in steed of a
penie more in silver, send them to the Chirurgians with two penie worth of
sorrow.

But what need I to spend time in deciphering these common companions? These
few I have particularly named, but think you there are no more of this kind?
But I let pass Carmen and Dreymen, as verse knaves as the rest, because these
are better known then I can set them forth: I mean not at this time, nor in
this Treatise to set forth the guiles and deceits accustomed in all trades and
mysteries from the chiefest trade to the basest, but will content my self for
this time, with that that has been already dilated, intending in some other
Treatise, at one time or other to relate in brief what has been at large too
long put in practice.

In the mean time courteous Citizens, let me exhort you to become good examples
to your family: for as the master is, so commonly is the servant, as witness the
old verses in the Sheppards Calender in September.

Sike as the Sheppards, sike been her sheep. And be sure, if thy servant see
thee given to spending, and unchaste living, there look thy servant, when thou
think he is about thy business, not only spends his time vainly, but that
money, which by thy care in staying at home thou might have saved. Such
iollie shauers, that are deep ^^ashers of others, men's hides, have I known
(more is the pity) to sit by all night, some at Cards and Dice, some quaffing
and swillng at the Tavern, and other among their tru^^es, spending in one
night some twenty shillings, and thirty shillings often: some again that can
maintain to themselves a wench all the year, and then they must filch and
purloine whole pieces of stuff for their gowns and peticoats, besides great
store of money: But these are such that can with a wet finger, and by reason of
abundance of ware purloine their masters goods, and not easily be espied. But
be sure at one time or other such villains wilcome forth: for the pot goes so
often to the water, that at last it comes home cracked. And take this for a
principle and general rule, that whosoever he be that gives himself to this
damnable sin of l^st, let him be assored, as sure as he had it already, that
a great punishment hangs over his head. Therefore it behooues the master to
be wise in governing his servants, that they may be as marks for their
servants to shoot at, to see how their servants be addi^ed and given, and not
to be stern and severe toward them, but rather keep them in, that they
wander not abroad more then necessity forces, remembering that rule that Ovid
gives,

Parce puer stimulis and fortius vtere loris. Spare ^he whip, rain them hard:
for such as are grown to years will hardly endure blows, wherefore ^he
raining them from their desires is the next way in my mind to bring them to
good.

But ^ere is the grief that those that should give light are dark; those that
should be guides have need to be lead; those that should instruct to (...), are
inducers to vanity, according to those verses in Ma^e,

Those faitors littell regarden their charge,
While they letting their sheep run at large,
Passen their time that should be sparely spent,
In lustiness and wanton meriment.
Thilke same be Sheppards for the devils steed,
That playen, etc.
Again, that conscience they use in bargaining and selling, witness ^he whole
world, according to Diggon in September.

They setten to sale their shops of shame,
And maken a market of their good name.
The sheppards there robben one another,
And layen baits to beguilde her brother.
And again,

Or they bine false or sull of couetise,
And casten to compass many wrong emprise.
In fine, to conclude with that which we have so long stood upon, namely with
uncleanness, how hard it is for men to be reclaimed from it: and as it is
pernicious to all generally, so particularly to young men that have newly set
up for themselves, and have as it were newly entered into the world, soon may
they cast away them selves, except they look the better about them: but most
odious for such that have wi^es, with whom they may solace themselves. Pity it
is that such cannot be noted above the rest, it shows an inordinate lust. And
now it comes in my mind, I will impart with a trick served upon a married man,
and a tradesman by a good wench, as they call them, reported and heard from her
own mouth not long since. The parties names I will conceal, because some of
them are of some credit, although somewhat blemished by this skarre: and it
was on this manner.

How a Citizen was served by a Curtizan.
THere was one Mounsieur Libidinoso (...) at she sign of Incontinencie, having
cast up his accounts for the week past (for it was Saturday night) after
supper resolved with himself to walk, which way he cared not, but as his
(...) fell, so would he wend: by chance it fell Westward, and Westward he went,
until he came to Whitestiers. When (...) came thither he be thought himself,
and held it a deed of charity to see some of his old acquaintance, whom he
had not visited a long time before: But they according to the ancient custom
were removed, for they use not to stay long (...) a place. He hearing that,
made no more (...) but fell aboard with one that came next to hand, (...) good
as the best, one that had been tried, (...) (...) a one as would not shrink
at a shower: little entreaty serves, and (...) they go. When after their
^eastly sport and pleasure Mounsieur Libid. heat of lust was somewhat assuaged,
(...) ready to go, feeling his pocket for a venereall remuneration finds
nothing but a Lester, or at least so little, that it was not sufficient to
please dame Pleasure for her hire. He protested and vowed he had no more about
him now: for (said he) when I came forth I neur thought what money I had about
me. My Lady would not belee^e Mons. Libid. a great while, but searched and
feeled for more coin, but at that time she was frustrate of her expectation:
she seeing no remed^e, set as good a countenance on the matter as she could,
and told him she would be contented for that time, hoping he would be more
beneficial to her hereafter. They were both contented: where no sooner he is
gone down the stairs, but she whips off her gown, and puts on a white
wastcoate with a trice, and so dogs M. Libidinos. home to his house, and taking
a perfect view of his house and sign, returns back again. On Monday morning
she came to his house very orde^ly in her gown with her handbasket in her
hand, where she found Mons. Libid. and his wife in the shop: when she came in
she called for this sort and that sort of lace, until she had calle^ for as
much ware as came to twenty shillings: when she was ready to go, she
whispered my Gentleman in the ear^, and asked him, If he be remembered how
slightly such a time he rewarded her kindness, but now I am satisfied for
this time. M. Libid. was in a wonderful straight, and gave her not a word for
an answer, fearing his wife should know an^e thing. His wife noting her
whispering in her husbands eat, and seeing no money paid, asked her husband
when she was gone, who she was. (...) very smoothly told her, she was a very
honest cutters wife, and that he knew her a long time to be a good
paymaister. This answer contented his wife: but full well I know he was not
contented in his mind all the day after.

See here how a man may be unawares overtaken by these (...) Pitchbarrels.
Then let this example teach th^e to forgo their allurements, least thou in
time be defiled with the like blot, or ouerplunged in a deeper bog: Remember,

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula ca^tum. For these night birds not unlike
the Sirens, ^he more you frequent them, the more you shall be entangled,
according to these verses, Diggon in Sept.

For they been like foul wagmoires ouergrast,
That if thy gallage once sticks fast,
The more to wind it out thou do swincke,
Thou might ay deeper and deeper sincke,
Yet better leave of with littell loss,
Then by much wrestling to leese the gross.
These may be motives to all to avoid such infectiou^ plague-sores: but how
hardit is to get up a tired (...) when he is down, especially in the dirt
enery man knows, and men will have their swinge do all what they can, according
to Thenot in February.

Must not the world wend in his common course,
From good to bad; and from bad to worse;
From worse unto that is worstof all,
And then return to his former fall.
But for my part I am resolved and wish all men of the like mind sticking my
sta^e by Peirse in May.

Sheppard, I list no accordance make
With sheppard that does the right way sorsake,
And of the twain if choice were to me
Had lever my foe then my friend to be,
THE NOTABLE, SLY, and deceitful pranks of Doctor Pinchbacke.
ANotable fellow of this trade well stricken in yeares^ one that was free of
the Nitmongers, traveled with his boy into Yorkshire. And having no money in
his purse, nor other means to rel^eue himself but plain shifting, grew into
vitter despair of his estate, by reason he had worn all cosonages thread
ba^e, and made the uttermost of his wit that was possible. Wherefore
complaining himself to his trusty page, that had been patner with him bo^ in
weal and woe, and whom he had brought up in his occupation, and taught to ^e
as subtle as himself: ut Master (quoth he) take no care, for when all is
gone and nothing left, well fare the Dagger with the ^udgeon haft. I am young
and (...) crochets in my head: I warrant you, while I have my five senses we
will not beg. Go you and take up your l^dging in the ^airest Inn in the
town, and call in lustily, sparing for no cost, and let me alone to pay for
^ll. With (...) resolution they went into (...) (...), where (...) a verse
(...) Lauern, ready to outface the^, according to the boys abusse, they put
into it, and called for a room, and none might content them but the best
chamber in the house. Then ^acke of the clock house summoned the Chamberlain
before him, and took an inventory what extraordinary pro^tsion of victuals
they had for dinner, telling them his master was no common man, nor would he
be pleased with ani^ gross kind of fare. The Tapster, who hoping of gain,
seemed very serviceable, and told him he should want nothing. And although
they had at that time sundry strangers, by reason the chief (...) of the
shire sat there the same day about a Commission, yet promised to give what
attendance he might. ^hus did the Crack-rope triumph, and walking in the yard
while dinner was preparing, ha^mered in his head, and cast an eye, about the
house to see if any occasion were offered for him to work upon. At last going
up a pair of stayres, he spied in a fair great Chamber where the
Commissioners sat, a side settle, whereon good store of plate stood. Yea,
thought he? and it shall go hard but I Will make up my market. So into the ^hamber
closely he stepped, not being perce^uedly by any man, covertly conveyed away
under his cloak one of the greatest gilt goblets, and went immediately on the
backside of the house, where spying an old well, he flung the same, and went
his way up to his master, to whom ^ee discovered what he had done, entreating
him the better to furnish out the Pageant, to change his name, and call
himself Doctor Pinchbacke.

This done, he went down into the kitchen to see if dinner were ready: where
the goodman of the house began to question with him what his Master was, and
who they called him. Sir, quoth he, Doctor Pinchbacke. What, is he a Doctor of
Physic quoth the host? Yea marie, quosh the boy, and a special good one.
With that answer he cease^ questioning any further, but sent up meat to his
dinner, and went up himself to did him welcome.

Dinner being done and the other g^ests ready to rise, the Goblet suddenly was
missed, and great inquiry made for it, but at no hand it would be found: all
the servant were examined, the house was thoroughlie searched, none of the
Gentlemen had it. This news found Doctor swear he saw it not, the boy den^d
it also, yet still the goodman and the good wife kept a great stir for it,
and were ready to weep for very anger that they should keep such knaves
about them as had no more care, but (...) let a cup of nine pounds be
stolen, and no man knew which way. Then the host made great offers to have it
again, which the boy hearing, said, if they could entreat his Master to take
the pains, he could cast a figure, and fetch it again with heave and ho. But
not a word (quoth he) that I told you so.

The good man hearing that, ran up in all have, and besought Master Doctor
for the passion of God to stand his friend, or else he was undone. So it is,
quoth he, that I understand of your great learning and knowledge, and that by a
special gift in Astronomy that God has given, you can tell of marvelous
ma^ers, and help again to things that are lost. I pra^e you as ever you came
of a woman show me a little feate about my cup: and though I have but small
(...) of money, yet will I bestow^ forty shillings on you for your labor.
Master Doctor at the first made strange of the matter, and seemed very loath
to deal in it, by reason of the danger of the law: yet for that he seemed to
be an honest man, and it (...) him that any such thing should happen whilst
he was in his house, he would strain a little with his cunning to relieve
him in the best sort, not so much for his money as for his friendship, and
swore he would not do it for any other for a hundred pounds, therefore he
destred him to leave him to himself, and to take or^er that no man came to
trouble him for some two hours space, and he should see what he would do for
him.

Two hours he stayed alone by himself tosting him by a good fire till he
sweat again, then painting his face with a deadish color, which he carried
always about with him for such a purpose, and then calling up the host, told
him that he had labored sore for him, and almost indaungered himself in
undertaking the action, yet by good fortune he had finished his business, and
found where the cup was. Have you not a well (quoth he) on the back side of
your house that stands thus, and thus, for mine own part I was never there
(that I can tell of) to see. Yes that I have, said the Host. Well (said
Master Doctor) in the bottom of that well is your cup: wherefore go search
presently, and you shall find my words true. The goodman with all expedition
did as he willed him, and drew the well dr^e: at last he spied his Goblet
where it lay. It was no need to bid him take it up, for in his own person he
went down in the bucket: and full lightly to Master Doctor Pinchpackes
chamber be trudged, and carried him forty shillings, offering him besides a
mone^hs board in requit all of his great curteste. This counterfeit forsooth
would seem to refuse nothing, but there lay and fed upon the stock, whilst
my goodman host did nothing but till the country with his praise.

Not many days passed but a Gentleman of good credit drawn thi^her by the
ordinary report, came to vi^t him, who desirous to make trial of his cunning,
he craved to know of him (his wife then being big with child) whether it was
a man child or a woman child she went withal? He answered he could say
little thereto except he saw her naked.

The Gentleman although he thought it was no usual thing for a man to see a
woman naked, yet Physicians have more privilege then others, and they as well
as Midwiues are admitted to any sec^ets. Wherefore he persuaded his wife to
disclose her self to him, and to dispense with a little inconvenience, so they
may be resolved of so rare a secret. But this was Doctor Pinchbackes drift, he
thought to have shifted the Gentleman off by this extraordinary imposition,
thinking he would rather have surceased his suit, then any way have suffered
him to see his wife naked. In conclusion a chamber was prepared warm and
close, in which she showed her self, and twice walked up and down the chamber
naked in the presence of M. Doctor and her husband, who demanded M. Doctors
answer to his former question, which was as follows: Quoth he, from meward it
is a boy, and to me ward it is a girl: other answer they could get none of
him. Wherefore the Gentleman was greatly offended against him, calling him
Ass, Dolt, Patch, Cockescombe, Knave, and all the base names he could devise.
But away went master Doctor as skillful in those cases as a blind man when he
throws his staff: and durst not answer the Gentleman one word. And the
Gentleman greatly repented him that he had been so foolish to show his wife in
that sort before so sottish a companion.

About four days after the Gentlewoman fell in labor, and was delivered of a
boy and a girl: whereat the Gentleman remembering the blunt answer of the
Doctor, and finding it to be true, was greatly astonished, supposing indeed he
had mightily wronged the Doctor: to whom he went immediately craving pardon for
his former folly, showing himself very sorrowful for his fault, and offered
him in recompense of amends all the favor he might possibly do him, granting
to him his house at commandment, and his board for so long time as he would
continue with him. Whereupon in sign of love and amity he went and soiourned
at the Gentleman's house: Whereupon the Doctors credit still more and more began
to increase, so that all the country round about told no small tales of the
great running of Doctor Pinchbacke, to whom they resorted early ano late.

It fortuned soon after shere was a Fair near to the Gentleman's house, where
the people diversely talked of the Doctors skill and cunni^, and that he could
do any thing, or tell any thing that was done in any place. Naie (quosh a
plain Countriman) I will venture twenty Nobles that he shall not do it. I
will my self go personally to him, and hold something in my hand, and if he
tell me what it is I will lose my money. I take you, said one or two, and the
wager being laid, away they went toward the Gentleman's house: and passing
thorough a meadow, the man took up a Grasshopper out of the grass, and put it
into his hand, so close that no man might perceive it. Then forward they went,
and met with Master Doctor, and they desired him to satis^e them of that
secret which was upon his credit^, to tell them what one of the company held
in his hand. Whereunto the Doctor was loath to answer, considering he had no
such skill as people bruted abroad: never the less he cast in his mind, how
he might excuse the matter by some pretty slight, if he should guess amiss,
and therefore concluded in this ^st, he called to mind that his own name was
Grasshopper, and if (quoth he) I take him by the hand, I may say he has a
grasshopper in his hand, and yet I may ^ustly defend it for a truth. Whereupon
the Doctor taking him by she hand, said he had a Grasshopper in his hand: which
being opened was found true. Whereat the Cuntrimen wondered, and went their
ways. Some said he was but a cosoning knave: others reported what wonders he
could perfor^: Some said he could g^e round about the world in a moment, and
that h^ walked every night in the air with spirits: some said he had a
familiar: thus the people gave their cen^ure; some liking, and others mi^king
him. And in a word, so many men, so many minds, but the greater part of the
country admired his deep knowledge, and published his ex^ellent learning, so
that he became ^amous amongst the people, and the Gentleman not a little proud
of so worthy a guest: in so much that having one only daughter, whom he loved
most ^ntierlie, and as parents most desire their children should match the
themselves with sucg, by whom they hope preferment should come, on a day brake
his mind to the Doctor in his daughters behalf, assuring him he should not
only find her a loving and (...) wife, but would give him four hundred
pounds, and make him assurauce of all his land, which was worth (say^ he)
better then two hundred marks a year after (...) decease, if so it would
please his worship to accept hi^ kind offer, which he assured him proceeded of
(...) love. The Doctor a while coylie refused the Ge^ tlemans offer, but
being earnestly entreated of the Gentleman, he answered him to this effect.

Sir, for your great friendship hitherto and unexpected kindness, at this time
I cannot but confess^ my self much indebted to you: and because you are so
importunate with me to marie your daughter (although I protest it is not for my
profit) I do willingly take her to my wife: for I have (says he) refuse^
many fair and personable Gentlewomen in mine own country with large dowrtes:
but to make you part of amends for your (...) (...), I here am content to yield
to your request. The Gentleman humbly thanked him, and prolonged not the time I
warrant you, but with great expedition ha^ed the marriage day: where with great
feasting and joy with his friends they passed that day with much pleasure and
music.

The Doctor about a moucth after desired the Gentleman for his wives portion,
which the Gentleman willingly paid him. When two or three days were passed he
told the Gentleman he would go into (...) own country to see his friends,
and withal prepare and make ready his house (which was let forth to farm)
for himself to inhibite, and that he would come again when all things were
ready and fetch his wife. The Gentleman was very unwilling to leave the
Dctors company; but seeing the Doctor so importunate, at last yielded, and so
lent the Doctor and his boy two of his best geldings: who as soon as they were
on horseback, never minding to return again, took their journey into
Devonshire, and there so long as his four hundred pounds lasted made merry
with their companions, till at last having spent all, began to renew his old
trade, and after being taken in company with some suspected persons was
apprehended, and by the law (as I heard) was condemned to be hanged for a
murderer.

Thus although pexaduenture he was not guilty of the murder, yet it was a
^ust punishment for his villainy before practiced.

The Gentleman after a quarter of a year was past, began to look for the
Doctors coming home again, but in vain; so he passed a twelve month,
expecting his son in laws return: at last as hap was one of the
Gentleman's acquaintance having been at his house, and seeing the Doctor there,
brought word home to the Gentleman that he saw the Doctor for certain
executed at Exceter in (...), for a muder. In what a melancholy humor the
Gentleman was in, and what grie^e and sorrow the young Gentlewoman took to
heart at these heause tidings, I refer it to the Reader, and none but those
that have tasted of those griefs do sufficiently know.

FINIS.

