NEWS FROM ITALY OF A SECOND MOSES OR, THE LIFE OF GALEACIVS CARACCIOLVS the
noble Mar quesse of Vico.

Containing the story of his admirable con uersion from popery, and his
forsaking of a rich Marquess dome for the Gospels sake.

Written first in Italian, thence translated into latin by reverend Beza, and
for the benefit of our people put into English: and now published BY W.
CRASHAVV Batcheler in Divinity, and Preacher at the Temple.

In memoria sempiterna erit Iusius.
PSALM. 112. The just shalf be had in an everlasting remembrance.

Printed by H. B. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetestreete. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MY VERY GOOD LORD, EDmund Lord Sheffeild, Lord
Lieutenant in the North, and Lord President of his Highness Counsel there, of
the noble order of the Garter: and to the right honorable and religious
Ladies, the Lady Dowglasse his mother, and Lady Vrsula his wife, and to all the
virtuous offspring of that noble race, Grace and Peace, etc.
GIVE me leave (right Honorable) to put you all in one Epistle, whom God and
nature have linked so well together: Nature in the nearest bond, and God in the
holiest Religion. For a simple new-yeares gift, I present you with as strange a
story, as (out of the holy stories) was ever heard. Will your Honors have the
whole in brief, before it be laid down at large? Thus it is.

Galeacius Caracciolus son and heir apparent to Calantonius, Marquess of
Vicum in Naples, bred, borne, and brought up in Popery, a Courtier to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, nephew to the Pope Paul the fourth, being married to
the Duke of Nucernes daughter, and having by her six goodly children; at a
Sermon of Peter Martyrs was first touched, after by reading Scripture and other
good means, was fully converted: labored with his Lady, but could not
persuade her. Therefore that he might enjoy Christ, and serve him with a quiet
conscience, he left the lands, livings, and honors of a Marquesdome, the
comsorts of his Lady and children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the
Emperor, his kindred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the love of Jesus
Christ, came to Geneua, and there lived a poor and mean, but yet an
honorable and an holy life for forty years. And though his father, his Lady,
his kinsemen; yea the Emperor and the Pope did all they could to reclaim him,
yet continued he constant to the end, and lived and died the blessed servant of
God, about fifteen years ago, leaving behind him a rare example to all ages.

This (right Houourable) is a brief of the whole, and it is a story admirable
and imitable if any other in this later age of the world.

Some use to crave of great personages, not to respect the gift but the giver:
but in this case I contrariwise entreat your honors, not to respect the giver
but the gift: of the giver I say enough if I say nothing; but of the gift, I
mean of noble Galeacius, I say too little, when I have said all I can. But
this I must needs say: So religions, so noble, so virtuous was the man, so
resolute, so holy, so heroical was the fact, so strange the beginning, so
admirable and extraordinary the perseverance, as if the story were not debased
by the rudenes of my translation; I durst say, none so great but might read
it, nor so good but might follow it. I may say much rather Genes. 47.
then Jacob, Few and evil have my da^^s been: Yet in these few days of mine
something have I seen; more have I read, more have I heard; yet never saw I,
heard I, or read I any example (al things laid together) more nearly seconding
the example of Moses then this, of this most renowned Marquess Galeacius.
Moses was the adopted son of a Kings daughter: Galeacius the natural son,
and heir apparent to a Marquess: Mosesa Courtier in the Court of Pharaoh:
Galeacius in the Court of the Emperor Charles the fifth: Moses by adoption a
kin to a Queen: Galeacius by marriage a kin to a Duke: by blood, son to
a Marquess, nephew to a Pope: Moses in possibility of a Kingdom: he in
possession of a Marquesdome: Moses in his youth brought up in the heathenisme
of Egypt: Galeacius noo^eled in the superstition of Popery: Moses at last saw
the truth and embraced it, so did Galeacius: Moses openly fell from the
heathenisme of Egypt* so did Galeac us from the superstition of Popery. But all
this is nothing to that which they both suffered for their conscience. What
Moses suffered Saint Paul tells us: Moses when he was come to years refused to
Heb. 11.
be called the son of Pharaohs daughter: and chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; steeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt: Nay Moses had rather be a base bricke-maker amongst the oppressed
Israelites, being true Christians; then to be the son of a Kings daughter in
the Court of Pharaoh amongst Idolaters. In like case noble Galeacius, when he
was come to years and knowledge of Christ, refused to be called son and
heir to a Marquess, Cup*hearer to an Emperor, Nephew to a Pope; and chose
rather to suffer affliction, persecution, banishment, loss of lands, livings,
wife, children; honors, and preferments, then to enjoy the sinful pleasures
of Italy for a season; esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the
honors of a Marquesdome without Christ: and therefore seeing he must either
want Christ or want them, he dispoyled himself of all these to gain Christ.

If (right Honorable) the wife fools of this world might have the censuring
of these two men and their actions, they would presently judge them a couple of
impassionate and stoicall fellows, or else melancholic and brame-sicke men,
to refuse Marquesdomes and Kingdoms for scruple of co nscience: but no matter
as long as the men are Saints in heaven, and their actions honored of God and
his Angels; admired of good men, and neglected of none, but those who as they
will not follow them on earth, so are they sure never to follow them to heaven.
So excellent was the fact of Moses, and so heroical, that the holy Ghost
vouchsafes it remembrance both in the old and new Testament, that so the
Church in all ages might know it and admire it: and does Chronicle it in the
Epistle to the H brewes, almost two thousand years after it was done. If God
himself did so to Moses, shall not Gods Church be careful to commend to
posterity this second Moses? whose love to Christ Jesus was so zealous, and so
inflamed by the heavenly fire of Gods spirit, that no earthly temptations could
either quench or abate it; but to win Christ, and to enjoy him in the liberty
of his word and Sacraments, he delicately contemned the honors and pleasures of
the Marquesdome of Vicum. Vicum one of the Paradises of Naples: Naples the
Paradise of Italy: Italy of Europe: Europe o*the earth: yet all these Paradises
were nothing to him, in comparison of attaining the celestial Paradise, there
to live with Jesus Christ.

If any Papists (musing as they use, and measuring us by themselves) do suspect
the story to be some fained thing, devised to allure and intise the peoples
minds; and to set a flourish upon our Religion, as they by a thousand false and
fained stories and mirables use to do. I answer, first in the general; far
be it from us and our Religion to use such means, either for our selves, or
against our adversaries: No, we are content the Church of Rome have the glory
of that garland: Popery being a sandy and a shaken, a rotten and a tottering
building needs such proppes to underset it: but truth dare show her self, and
fears no colors. But for the particular, I answer: cunning liers (as many
Monks were) framed their tales of men that lived long ago, and places a far
off and unknown; that so their reports may not too easily be brought to
trial. But in this case it is far otherwise; the circumstances are notorious;
the persons and places famously known: Vicum, Naples, Italy, Geneua, are
places well known: Calantonius his father, Charles the fist, his Lord and
Master, Pope Paul the fourth his uncle, were persons well known: examine
either places or persons, and spare none; truth seeks no corners; disprove the
story who can, we crave no sparing: neither is the time too far past, but may
soon be examined. He was borne within these hundred years, and died at Geneua
within these twenty years: and his sons son at this day is Marquess of
Vicum. Let any Papist do what he can, he shall have more comfort in following
the example, then credit in seeking to disprove the story.

In the course of my poor reading (right Honorable) I have often found
mention of this noble Marquess, and of his strange conversion; but the story
it self, I first found it in the exquisit Library of the good gentleman Master
Gee; one that honors learning in others, and cherishes it in himself; and
having not once red it, but often perused it, I thought it great loss to our
Church to want so rare a jewel; and therefore could not but take the benefit of
some stolen hours to put the same into our tongue, for the benefit of my
brethren in this Realm, who want knowledge in Italian and Latin tongues. And
now being translated, I humbly offer and consecrate it to my holy mother the
Church of Fngland; who may rejoice to see her Religion spredding it self
privily in the heart of Italy; and to see the Popes nephew become her son.
And next of all unto you (right Honorable) to whom I am bound in so many bonds
of duty, and to whom this story does so fitly appertain. You (my honorable
good Lord) may here see a noble gentleman of your own rank in descent, birth,
education, aduancements like your self; to be like you also in the love and
liking of the same holy Religion. And you good Madam, may here conceive and
judge by your self, how much more happy this noble Marquess had bin, if his
Lady Madam Victoria had bin like your self. I mean, if she had followed and
accompanied her Lord in that his most holy and happy conversion. And you all
(right Honorable) in this noble Marquess as in a crystal glass, may behold
your selves: of whom I hope you will give me leave to speak (that which to the
great glory of God you spare not to speak of your selves) that you were once
darkness, but now are light in the Lord: Blessed be that God the father of
light, whose glorious light has shined into your hearts: Behold (right
honorable) you are not alone; behold an Italian; behold a noble Marquess has
broken the ice, and trodden the path before you: In him you may see that Gods
Religion is as well in Italy as in England: I mean that though the face of
Italy be the seat of Autichrist, yet in the heart thereof there is a remnant of
the Lord of hosts. You may see this noble Marquess in this story now after his
death, whom in his life time so many noble Princes desired to see. His body
has lien in the bowels of the earth these seventeen years, but his soul
lives in heaven in the bosom of Jesus Christ, and his Religion in your hearts,
and his name shall live for ever in this story. Accept it therefore (right
honorable) and if for my sake you will vouchsafe to read it once over, I dare
say that afterward for your own sake you will read it over and over again:
which if you do, you shall find it will stir up your pure minds, and inflame
your hearts with a yet more earnest zeal to the truth: and will be an
effectual means to increase your faith, your fear of God, your humility,
patience, co^stancy, and al other holy virtues of regeneration. And for my
part, I freely and truly profess I have bin often ravished with admiration of
this noble example; to see an Italian, so excellent a Christian, one so near
the Pope, so near to Jesus Christ; and such blessed fruit to blossom in the
Popes own garden; and to see a noble man of Italy forsake that for Christ, for
which, I fear, many amongst us would forsake Christ himself. And surely (I
confess truth) the serious consideration of this so late, so true, so strange
an example, has bin a spur to my slownes, and whetted my dull spirits, and made
me to esteem more highly of Religion then I did before. I know it is an
accusation of my self, and a disclosing of my own shame to confess thus much;
but it is a glory to God, an honor to Religion, a credit to the truth, and a
praise to this noble Marquess, and therefore I will not hide it.

And why should I shame to confess it? when that famous and renowned man of
God, holy Calvin freely confesses (as in the sequel of this story you shall
hear) that this noble man's example did greatly confirm him in his Religion,
and did revive and strengthen his faith, and cheer up all the holy graces of
God in him. And surely (most worthy Lord, and honorable Ladies) this cannot but
confirm and comfort you in your holy courses, and as it were put a new life
unto the graces of God in you, when you see, what; not the common people, but
even such as were like your selves have suffered for Religion; and when you see
that not only the poor and baser sort of men, but even the mighty and
honorable (as your selves are) do think themselves honored by embracing
Religion. Pardon my plainenes and too much boldness with your honors, and
vouchsafe to accept it as proceeding from one who much tendreth your
saluations, and rejoices with many thousands more, to behold the mighty and
gracious work of God in you. Go forward right noble Lord, in the name of the
Lord of hosts, still to honor that honorable place you hold, still to defeat
the vain expectation of Gods enemies; and to satisfy the godly hopes and
desires of holy men: still to discountenance Popery and all prophanenes: still
by your personal diligence in frequenting holy exercises, to bring on that
backward city: by your godly discipline in your family, to reform or to
condemn the dissolutnes and disorder of the most great families in this
country: still to minister justice without delay; to cut up contentions, and
save the lawyers labor: still to relieve the fatherless and the widow, and
help the poor against their oppressors: and which is all in all, still to
supplant superstition, popery, ignorance, and wilful blindness; and to plant
and disperse true Religion in that city, and these Northern countries. By all
these means still showing your self an holy and zealous Phinehes (under the
great Phinehes our most worthy Sovereign) to execute Gods judgment, and to
take vengeance on the Zimri and Cozbi of our nation: namely, on Popery and
prophanenes; the two great sins which have pulled down Gods plagues on our
land, and the due and zealous punishment whereof, will be the means again to
remove them.

But I wrong your Honors to trouble you with these my too many and too ragged
lines: and I wrong this noble Gentleman to cloth his golden story with this my
rude and homespun English style: and I wrong you all to keep you so long from
being acquainted with this noble Marquess, so like your selves; at whose
meeting and acquaintance I am sure there will be so much rejoicing, and mutual
congratulating at the mighty and gracious work of God in you all. The same God
and merciful father I humbly beseech, and ever will, to accomplish his good
work in you, as he did in that noble Marquess: and as he has already made
you so many ways blessed; blessed in your selves, blessed one in another,
blessed in your conuersions, blessed above many, in your many and religious
children: so at last he may make you most of all blessed in your ends; that so
after this life, you may attain the eternal glory of a better world, whither
this noble Marquess is gone before you.

From my study, Ian. 12. 1603. Your Honors in all Christian duty, W.
CRASHAVV.

TO THE CRISTIAN and courteous Reader.
GOOD Reader, conceive I pray thee, that this translation being made diverse
years ago, and communicated to my private friends; I thought to have
suppressed it from spreading further: but being pressed by importunity, and
urged with unavoidable reasons, I have now yielded to let it pass in public:
the rather considering, that though at this day almost every hour yeeldes a
new book, yet many ages afford scarce one example like to this. I have
divided it into Chapters for thy better ease in reading and remembering: and
seeing I find in other Authors often mention of this noble Marquess, and his
heroicallfact: I have therefore not tied my self precisely to the words of the
Latin story, but keeping the sense and scope, have sometime enlarged my self
as the circumstance seemed to require, or as I had warrant and direction from
other stories. Read it with an holy and an humble heart, and prayer to God,
and account me thy debtor, if thou think not thy labor well bestowed. And
when thou find a blessing, and reapest spiritual comfort hereby, then
vouchsase to remember me in thy prayers.

Temple, Septem. 30. 1608. Thy brother in Christ, W. CRASHAVV.

CHAP. 1.
Of the lineage, birth, and infancy of Galeacius Caracciolus the noble Marquess
of Vico.
My purpose is to commit to writing the life of Galeacius Caracciolus: as being
a rare example of a most strange and seldom seen constancy in the defense of
Godliness and true Christian Religion.

HE was borne at Naples, a renowned City in Italy, in the month of January,
in the year of Christ 1517. The very year when Luther began to preach the
Gospel.
His fathers name was Calantonius, who was descended of the ancient and noble
house of the Caracciolies in the Country of Capua. This Calantonius even in his
youth, was not only well respected, but highly esteemed, and a familiar friend
of that noble Prince of Orarge, who after the taking and sacking of Rome, was
placed in the room of the Duke of Borben: yea his faithfulness and industry
was so well approved to the Prince (as often times before, so especially) at the
siege of Naples, what time it was assaulted by Lotrechius, as that afterward,
when the Emperor Charles the fist of that name, (who then was at Rome to
receive the Imperial crown and other ornaments of the Empire) did appoint the
said Prince with certain forces, to go and besiege the City of Florence; he
thought it needful to take the said Calantonius with him, for his wisdom and
grave counsel. From whence when that service was ended, he being sent to Casar
himself, he did so wisely demean himself in all his affairs, and did so
sufficiently satisfy the Emperor in all things, that he made good in every
point, that worthy testimony which the Prince had given of him; whereupon he
being at that time most honorably entertained of the Emperor himself, was by
him not only advanced to the state and title of a Marquess, but also equally
joined in commission with the Viceroy of Naples (for his wisdom and
experience in all kind of affairs) to be assistant unto him, and fellow with
him in swaying the Scepter of that Kingdom. In which office and function he
so carried himself, as he won the good will of both small and great, as well
of the Nobles, as of the Commonalty: yea insomuch as he was deeply invested in
the favor of the Emperor Charles and king Philip his son. And so he
continued in this dignity till the last day of his life, which was in the
month of February, in the year 1562. he being himself more then three score
and ten years of age.

Such a father, and no worse had this Galeacius. As for his mother, she was
descended of the noble family of the Caraffi: and her own brother was
afterward That is, Pope Paul the fourth.
Pope of Rome. Which I affirm notto that end, as though this in it self was any
true praise or honor to Galeacius, but that his love to true Religion, and his
constancy in defense thereof, (even against such mighty ones) may appear the
more admirable to all that hear it, as it hereby did to all that knew him.
Ofwhich his love to true Religion, we shall speak more anon.

Galeacius being twenty years old, and the only son of his mother, who was
now deceased; his father Calantonius being desirous to continue his name, to
preserve his house and posterity, and to maintain his estate and patrimony,
whose lands amounted to the sum of five thousand pounds a year and upward;
did therefore provide him a wife, a Virgin of noble birth, called Victoria,
daughter to the Duke of Nuceria, one of the principal Peers of Italy, with
whom he had in name of portion or dowry six thousand five hundred pounds. He
lived with his wife Victoria unto the year 1551. at which time he forsook
house, family, and country for Religions sake: and in that time he had by his
wife six children, (four sons and two daughters.) His eldest son died at
Panorma, in the year 1577. leaving behind him one son and one daughter: the
son obtaining by inheritance the Marquesdome of Vicum* (amongst diverse other
things) married a wife of noble birth before his grandfather Galeacius died. By
whom, as I hear, he has two children, to whom this Galeacius is great
Grandfather.

Now all these particulars do I thus set down to this end, that the
perseverance of so great a man may appear the better by all these
circumstances, which is no less then a most glorious victory over so many
temptations.

CHAP. II.
Of his preferment at Court, and the first occasion of his conversion.
THe Marquess Calantonius seeing so good hope of the continuance of his house
and posterity, desiring not to preserve only, but to increase and augment the
dignity of his house, purposed therefore that his son Galeacius should seek
further honor and follow the Court. Wherefore making offer of him to the
Emperor Charles, he was most kindly entertained into the Emperors house and
service, and soon after was made the Emperors Gentlemansewer. In which place
and office within short time, he both won the favor of the Nobility, and the
rest of the Court, and grew to be of special account even with the Emperor
himself: for all men's opinion and judgment of him was, that there was not one
of many to be compared with him, for innocence of life, elegancy of manners,
sound judgment and knowledge of many things. Thus Galeacius was in all men's
opinions, in the high way to all honor and estimation: for the Prince whom he
served was most mighty, and the Monarch of the biggest part of the Christian
world. But all this was little: for God, the king of kings, of his singular
mercy and grace did purpose to call him to far greater dignity, and to more
certain and durable riches. And this so great and rare a work did the Lord
bring to pass, by strange and special means. So it was that in those days a
certain Spaniard, a noble man, did soiourne at Naplcs, who had to name
Johannes Waldesius: this Gentleman being come to some knowledge of the truth of
the Gospel, and especially of the doctrine of Justification; used often to
confer with, and to instruct diverse other noble men his companions and
familiars, in points of Religion, confuting the false opinions of our own
inherent Justification, and of the merits of good works, and so consequently
detecting the vanity of many Popish points, and the fondness of their
superstitions: by which means he so prevailed, or rather the Lord by him, that
diverse of these noble Gentlemen began to creep out of Popish darkness, and
to perceive some light of the truth: Amongst these, was there one Johannes
Franciscus Caesarta, a noble Gentleman and kinseman to this our Galeacius.

Of this Gentleman first of all did Galeacius hear diverse things in
conference, which seemed to him much contrary to the course of the vain world;
yea much to cross even his age and estate, and course of life; as namely of
the true means of our Justification, of the excellency and power of Gods word,
of the vanity of the most of Popish superstitions, etc. For Galeacius esteemed
and used this Gentleman as his familiar friend, both being near of his blood,
and especially for that he was* a Gentleman of very good parts. Now although
the speeches of this gentleman did not at the first so far prevail with him,
as to make him forsake the vanities of this life; notwithstanding it was not
altogether in vain: for that God which had ordained him to be a special
instrument of his glory, would not suffer so good seed to perish, though it
seemed for a time to be cast even amongst thorns: neither will it be beside
the purpose to set down particularly the means, which it pleased God to use
for the working of this strange conversion: amongst which this was one.

CHAP. III.
Of the means of his further Sanctification.
AT that time Peter Martyr Vermilius a Florentine, was a publik Preacher and
Reader at Naples. This man was a Canon regular (as they call them) a man since
then of great name, for his singular knowledge in Christian Religion, his godly
manners and behauiours, and for his sweet and copious teaching; for he
afterward casting away his monks coule, and renouncing the superstitions of
Popery, he shone so brightly in Gods Church, that he dispersed and strangely
drove away the darkness and mists of popery. Galeacius was once content at
Caeserta his motion to be drawn to hear Peter Martyrs Sermon; yet not so much
for any desire he had to learn, as moved and tickled with a curious humor, to
hear so famous a man as then Martyr was accounted. At that time Peter Martyr
was in hand with Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, and as he was showing
the weakness and deceitfulnes of the judgment of man's reason in spiritual
things, as likewise the power and efficacy of the word of God, in those men in
whom the Lord works by his spirit; amongst other things he used this similie
or comparison: If a man walking in a large place, see a far off men and women
dancing together, and hear no sound of instrument, he will judge them mad, or
at least foolish; but if he come nearer them, and perceive their order and
hear their music, and mark their measures and their courses, he will then
be of another mind, and not only take delight in seeing them, but feel a
desire in himself to bear them company and dance with them. Even the same
(said Martyr) betides many men, who when they behold in others a sudden and
great change of their looks, apparel, behavior, and whole course of life, at
the first sight they impute it to melancholy or some other foolish humor; but
if they look more narrowly into the matter, and begin to hear and perceive
the harmony and sweet concent of Gods spirit, and his word in them, (by the
joint power of which two, this change was made and wrought, which before they
counted folly,) then they change their opinion of them, and first of all begin
to like them, and that change in them, and afterward feel in themselves a
motion and desire to imitate them, and to be of the number of such men, who
forsaking the world and his vanities, do think that they ought to reform
their lives by the rule of the Gospel, that so they may come to true and sound
holiness. This comparison by the grace of Gods Spirit wrought so wonderfully
with Galeacius, (as himself has often told See how the first step of a man's
conversion from popery, is true and sound mortification of carnal lusts, and a
change of life. See also how the first means to bring a man out of error to
the truth, is study of holy Scriptures.
his friends) that from that hour he resolved with himself, more carefully to
restrain his affections from following the world, and his pleasures, as before
they did, and to set his mind about seeking out the truth of Religion, and the
way to true happiness. To this purpose he began to read the Scriptures every
day, being persuaded, that truth of Religion and soundness of wisdom was to
be drawn out of that fountain, and that the high way to heaven was thence to
be sought. And further, all his acquaintance and familiarity did he turn into
such company, as out of whose life and conferences, he was persuaded he might
reap the fruit of godliness and pure Religion. And thus far in this short
time had the Lord wrought with him by that Sermon: as first, to considerwith
himself seriously whether he was right or no: secondly, to take up an exercise
continual of reading Scripture: thirdly, to change his former company, and
make choice of better. And this was done in the year one thousand five hundred
forty and one, and in the four and twentieth year of his age.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the strange censures the world gave of his conversion, and how the better
sort rejoiced at it.
But when this sudden alteration of this noble and young Galeacius was seen and
perceived in Naples, it can be scarce set down how greatly it amazed his old
companions, which as yet cleaued to the world* and to the affections of the
flesh: many of them able to render no cause of it, could not tell what to say
of it; some judged it but a melancholicke passion; others thought it plain
folly, and feared he would become simple and doting and that his wit began by
some means to be empaired Thus every one gave his verdict and censure of him,
but all wondered, and doubted what it would turn to. But the better sort of men
and such as feared God, and had their mind enlightened with some knowledge of
Religion, as they wondered no less to see so great a change in so great a man,
so likewise they were surprised with exceeding joy to see it: for they were
persuaded that God had some great and extraordinary work in it; that a young
gallant, a noble man of such wealth, and honor as he was, living in such
delight and pleasures, in so general a corruption of life, both in court and
country, but especially this age, nobility, wealth and honor being joined
with the wanton deliciousnes of the courtly life: I say, that such a man should
be endued with the spirit of holiness, and so far affected with repentance,
as that he should contemn all those in respect of heaven; they esteemed of it
(as it was indeed) a rare matter and seldom seen in the world: and therefore
they greatly rejoiced at it, and praised the Lord on his behalf. Amongst those
men that thus rejoiced at his conversion, was one Marcus Antonius Flaminius a
scholar of great name, and an excellent Poet, as his Paraphrase on the Psalms,
and other very good Poems do sufficiently testify. Galeacius about this time
received a letter from this Flaminius, wherein* he did congratulate and rejoice
with him, for the grace and gift of God, which was besto wed on him in his
conversion. This letter I thought good to insert into the body of this story,
(as being worthy of no less) to the end that it might be a witness in times to
come, of the good opinion which such men had conceived of him, who knew the
foundation of true Justification, though they were yet possessed with other
errors, as about the Sacraments, and of the Mass, etc. which alas as yet they
were not able to discern of, as after by the greater grace of God this
Galeacius did. The copy of the letter is this.

CHAP. V.
Marcus Antonius Flaminius a great scholar in Italy, writes to Galeacius, and
congratulateth with him, for his holy and happy change.
To the right honorable Galeacius Caracciolus.
RIght noble Lord, when I consider seriously these words of Paul. *Brethren you
see your calling, that not 1. Cor. 1. 26, 27.
many noble, not many wise, according to the flesh, not many mighty are
called: but God has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise, and weak things to confound the mighty, and base things in the world,
and things not accounted of, and things that are not, to bring to naught things
that are. When I say, I consider of these words so often, I admire at that rare
blessing of God, which he has vouchsafed to you a noble and mighty man:
namely, that he should grace you with that true and incomparable nobility,
which is attained by true faith in Christ Jesus, and a holy life. As much
greater as this blessing is, so much the more holy and sincere ought your life
to be, and so much the more uprightly are you to walk with your God; lest that
your thorns (that is, riches, pleasures, and honors,) should choke the seed
of the Gospel which is sown in you. For this I am sure of, that God has
begun some great work in you, which he will finish to the glory of his own
name, and will bring to pass; that as heretofore you had care so to live a
noble man, amongst noble men, that you might observe the decorum and maintine
the dignity of nobility: so hereafter that you may employ your whole self in
this, that you may defend and uphold the honor and dignity of the children of
God; whose duty it is to aim at the perfection of their father with all
endeavors; and in their life upon the earth to resemble that holy and heavenly
life, which they shall lead in the world to come. Call to mind continually (my
good Lord) in all your words and deeds, that we are graced with this honor to
be made the sons of God by Jesus Christ: for that mediation will by the help
of the holy Ghost, work this care in us, that we never commit any thing
unworthy of that holy name of Christ, by which we are called. And yet alas,
such is our estate, as that if we do endeavor to please Christ, we are sure to
displease men, and must be content to contemn the vain glory of the world,
that we may enjoy heavenly and eternal glory with God; for it is impossible
(as Christ says) for him to believe in God, which John.
seeks the honor and praise of men. I mean of the men of this world, which
as the kingly Prophet says, are lighter and Psalm.
vainer then vanity it self. And therefore their judgment is little worth,
and less to be esteemed; but rather the judgment of God, who sees not all
our actions only, but even our most hidden thoughts and purposes. Which being
so, were it not folly and madness to displease such a God, to please so fond a
world? It were a shameful thing if a wife should endeavor to please other men,
rather then her husband. How much more then unworthy is it if our souls should
rather aim to please the vain world, then their most holy spouse Christ
Jesus? If the only son of God was content, not only to be reviled, yea and
scourged; but even to die upon the cross as a cursed malefactor, and all for
us: why should not we much more bear patiently the taunts and mockes, yea even
the slanders of Gods enemies? Let us therefore arm our selves as it were with a
holy pride, and (in a sort) scorn and laugh at their mockes: and putting upon
us mercy and pity as the feeling members of Christ, let us bewail so great
blindness in them, and let us entreat the Lord for them, to pull them out of
that palpable darkness into his true and marvelous light, lest Satan bind
them to himself in his everlasting prentishippe; and so being his bondslanes,
and hired sworn servants of his black guard, do send them out to persecute
Jesus Christ in his members. Which when they have done all they can, and all
that the devil their master can teach them, though the devil himself should
burst with malice, and they for anger grind their teeth; yet shall it all tend
to the magnifying of Gods glory, which they labor to obscure, and to the
furtherance of their salvation whom they so disdained: yea to the increase of
their glory in a better world, whom in this world they thought worthy of
nothing, but of all disgrace. And surely (my most honorable Lord) he that is
possessed with the certainty of this faith, will without doubt make open war
with the corrupt affections of his own nature, and with all the world: yea
even with the devil himself, and will not doubt but in time even to overcome
them al. Therefore let us humble our selves to our God and Father everlasting,
that he would increase that says in us, and bring forth in us those most
blessed and sweet fruits of faith in our hearts and lives, which he uses to
work in them whom he has elected: that so our faith being fruitful of good
works, may appear to be not a fained but a true faith: not a dead but a living
faith: not a humane but a divine work in us: that so it may be to us an
infallible pledge of our salvation to come. Let us labor to show our selves
the legitimate and undoubted children of God, in seeking above all things, that
his most holy name may be sanctified in our selves and others; and in imitating
his admirable love and gentleness, which makes his sun to shine on good and
badde. Let us worship his heavenly Majesty in spirit and truth: and let us
yield up the temple of our heartsto Christ Jesus as an acceptable sacrifice
unto him: yea letvs show our selves members of the heavenly high Priest Christ
Jesus, in sacificing to God our own bodies, and in crucifying the flesh with
the affections and the lusts thereof; that sin being dead in us, the spirit
of God may create in us a spiritual life, whereby Christ Jesus may live in us.
Let us die to sin, and die to our selves, and to the world, that we may live
blessedly to God and Christ Jesus: yea let us acknowledge and show by our
lives, that we were once ^^ad; but now are raised to the life of grace, by the
power of Christ Jesus. Let our conversation be heavenly, though we live on the
earth: let us begin that life here which we hope to lead in heaven: let the
image of God shine bright in us: let us disgrace and wear out the old image
of sin and satan, and labor to renew the image of Christ Jesus, that all
that see us may acknowledge Gods image in us. Which holy image of grace, as it
is beautiful and glorious in all Gods Saints; so in you (my good Lord) it
shall be so much more glorious, in as much as you go before others in birth,
nobility, honor, and high place. O what a pleasant sight is it to all true
Christian men; yea to the Angels; yea how acceptable to the Lord himself, to
behold a man of your place and estate, so far to forget the world and deny
himself: so deeply to consider the frailty of his own nature, and the vanity
of all temporal things as to say with Christ, I am a worms and no man: and to
cry out with David, turn thy face to me and have mercy upon me, for I am Psalm.
desolate and poor? O happy and true rich man, which has attained to this
spiritual and heavenly poverty, and can give a farewell to himself, and the
world, and all things that he has for Christ's sake, and can freely renounce
and forsake carnal reason, humane learning, company and counsel of friends,
wealth, honors, lord ships, pleasures of all sorts, delight of the court,
high places and preferments, dignity and offices; yea favor of Princes; yea
his owneselfe! How welcome shall he be to Christ, which can deny all those for
Christ's sake? Such a one may go for a fool in the world; but he shall be of the
Almighties counsel: such a man knows that felicity consists not in any thing
that this world can afford, and therefore in the midst of all his wealth and
abundance, he cries out to God as though he had nothing, even out of the
feeling of his heart; Give us this day our daily bread. Such a man prefers
the rebuke of Christ before the honor of the world, and the afflictions of
Christ's religion, before the pleasures of the world: and because he despises
all things in respect of Christ, and his righteousness, and is possessed and
grounded with Gods spirit; therefore he sings with true joy of Psalm.
heart, with the kingly Prophet; The Lord is my shepherd, therefore I can want
nothing: neither will I fear hunger or any outward thing* he feeds me in
green pastures, and leads me forth besides the water of comfort. This man
distrusts himself and all the creatures in the world, that he may trust and
cleave only to God: neither aims he at any pleasure, any wisdom, any
honor, any riches, any credit or estimation; but such as comes from God
himself: and therefore Psalm.
he professes with the same Prophet, I have none in heaven but thee alone, and
none in the earth do I desire but thee: my slesh consumes with longing after
thee, and thou Lord art my heritage and portion for ever. He that spoke thus
was a wealthy and mighty King, yet suffered he not the eyes ofhis mind to be
blinded or dazzled with the glittering glory of riches, pleasures, or honor, or
ought else that a kingdom could give: for he knew well that they al came of
God, and were held under God, and must all be used to his glory, and that he
that gave them has far better things to give his children. And therefore
that King and Prophet makes 1. Chron. 28.
his heavenly proclamation before al his people; Blessed art thou O Lord God
our father for ever and ever: thine O Lord is greatness, and power, and glory,
and victory: all that is in heaven and earth is thine, thine is the kingdom
Lord, and thou excellest as head over all: riches and honor come of thee, and
thou art Lord of all: in thy hand is power, and strength, honor, and dignitis,
and kingdoms are in thy disposition: therefore we give thee thanks O God,
and we extol thy great and glorious name. But who am I, and what is my people,
that we should promise such things to thee? For we are strangers before thee,
and soiourners as all our fathers were; our days are like a shadow upon the
earth, and here is no abiding.

See how David cannot content himself in abasing himself, and extolling the
Lord: and in how many words his affections utter themselves. This was David's
meditation, and let this be your looking-glass; and into the looking-glass of
this meditation look once a day, and pray daily that God would still open your
eyes to behold your own vileness; and his incomprehensible power and love to
ye, that with King David you may humble your self under the mighty hand of
his Majesty, and acknowledge all power and glory to belong to God alone, that
so you may be made partaker of those heavenly graces, which God bestows not
on the proud and lofty, but on the humble and meek. Remember that ordinance of
the eternal God, that says: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor
the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his Jeremy.
riches, but let him that glories, glory in this, in that he understands
and knows me, that I am the Lord which do mercy and justice on earth: for
these things please me, says the Lord. (Therefore my good Lord) if you list to
boast, boast not as the world does, that you are rich, or that you are of noble
birth, or that you are in favor with the Emperor and other Princes, or that
you are heir apparent of a rich Marquesdome, or that you have married so noble
a waman: leave this kind of boasting to them, who have their minds glued to the
world, and therefore have no better things to boast on: whose portion being
here in this life, they can look for nothing in heaven. But rather rejoice you
in that you are entered into the kingdom of grace; glory in this that the King
of kings has had mercy on you, and has drawn you out of the misty darkness
of errors, has given you to feel his endless love and mercy in Christ, has
made you of the child of wrath* his own son; of a servant to finne and the
devil, an heir of heaven; and of a bondslaue to hell, a free denision of the
heavenly Jerusalem; and glory in this, that even Christ Jesus himself is given
you, and made your own, and with him all things else. So that as Paul says,
All are yours, whether the world, or life, or death, things present or things
to come, all are yours in and by Christ, who is the only felicity of our
souls; and therefore whosoever have him, have with him all thing else. This is
the true glory and the sound boasting of Christianity: for hereby is Gods mercy
extolled, and man's pride trodden under foot, by which a man trusting too much
to himself, rebelleth against God. This glorious boasting makes us humble even
in our highest honors: modest and meek in prosperity: patient and quiet in
adversity: in troubles strong and courageous: gentle toward all men: joyful
in hope: fervent in prayer: full of the love of God, but empty of all love of
our selves or ought in the world: yea it makes us Christ's true beadsmen, and
his sworn servants, and maks us yield up our selves wholly to imitate and
follow Christ, and to esteem all things else as frail and vain; yea Phillip.
dung and dross that we may win him.

Right honorable and my good Lord, you see that I am so willingly employed in
this service of writing to your honor, and in conferring with you of heavenly
matters, that I have forgot my self, or rather your honor, in being so
tedious, which in the beginning I purposed not. I am privy to my self and of
my owneignorance; and guilty of mine own insufficiency, as being fitter to be
a scholar then a teacher; and to hear and learn my self, rather then to
teach others: and therefore I crave pardon of your honor. Farewell. The most
reverend Ambassador desires in his heart he had occasion to testify indeed,
that true good will which in his soul he bears you: In the mean time he
salutes you, and so does the illustrious Princess of Piscarta her highness;
and all other the honorable personages which are with me* all which rejoice
for this good work of God in you, and in all kindness do kiss your hands; and
they do all earnestly entreat the Lord for you, that he that has begun so
great a work in you, would accomplish the same to the end: and the richer you
are in temporal goods, in lands, and lord ships, that he would make you so
much the more poor in spirit; that so your spiritual poverty, may do that
which your worldly riches and honor cannot: namely, bring you at last to the
eternal and never fading riches of the world to come: Amen. Farewell. From
Viterbium.

Your honors most humbly addicted, and most loving brother in Christ, M.
Antonius Flaminius.


CHAP. VI.
Of the many temptations the devil used to pull him back, as by his father,
his wife, and by noble men of his acquaintance.
BY this and other holy means Galeacius was confirmed in the doctrine of the
truth, and went forward constantly in the course of Gods calling, and the way
of godliness. But the more courageously he went on, the more fiercely the devil
raged against him by his temptations; endeavoring thereby to hinder him in that
happy course: yea and if it were possible to drive him back again, which
course lie commonly takes against those, who have propounded to themselves to
tame the rebellion of the slesh, and to relinquish the vanities of the world.
And first of all, this zealous course of his in Religion procured him an
infinite number of mockes, and made him subject to most vile slanders; yea made
him incur the hatred of a great number, but especially did he herein
displease and vex his father, as one that was not only of a contrary religion,
but one who only intended the honor of his house, and the advancing of his
posterity, which in respect of Religion Galeacius cared not for at all: and
therefore he did often sharply chide him, and charged him with his fatherly
authority, to put away those melancholy conceits (as he termed them.) No
doubt but this was most grievous to him, who always was most submisse and
obedient to his father. But another grief did more inwardly afflict him, which
was in respect of his wife Victoria. Who though she was always a most kind and
dutiful wife, as also very wise, yet she would by no means yield to this
motion and change of Religion; because she thought and feared it would breed
infamy and reproach, to her self and her house; and therefore was continually
working on him by all means and devices she could: laboring to move him by
tears and complaints, and by all kinds of entreaty that a wife could use to
her husband: and withal sometimes urging him with such vain and fond reasons
as commonly women of that Religion are furnished withal. What a vexation this
was, and what an impediment to his conversion, such may judge easily, who are
cumbred with husbands or wives of a contrary Religion. And no little grief and
temptation was it to him, besides all these, that the most part of the noble
men in and about Naples (being either of his blood, or kindred, or his familiar
friends) used continually to resort unto him, to follow their old and ordinary
sports and pleasures. Alas how hard a thing was it to shake off all these on a
sudden, and to take upon him a direct contrary course of life to that he had
led with them before; which he must needs do if he would go on as he had
begun? And further, it was no little vexation to his soul to live in the
Court, when his office and place called him thereunto: for there he might
hear of any thing rather then of Religion: and not a word by any means of
Gods word, but talk enough of common and worldly preferments and pleasures,
and devising of means for the most cruel handling and dispatching out of the
way all such as should depart from the Romish faith. Any Christian heart may
easily conceive how deeply those temptations and hindrances vexed his
righteous soul in this his course toward God: insomuch as a thousand to one,
they had turned him back again; and doubtless they had done so indeed, had
not God assisted him with special grace.

CHAP. VII.
How he escaped the snares of the Arrian Anabaptists, and* after of the
Waldesians: and of his resolution to leave his country, hono urs, and livings,
to enjoy the liberty of Gods Religion.
But above all these, Satan had one assault strongest of all, whereby he
attempted to seduce him from the true and sincere Religion of God. About that
time the Realm of Naples was sore pestred with Arrians and Anabaptists: who
daily broched their heresies amongst the common people, coloring them over
with glorious shows. These fellows perceiving Galeacius not fully settled as
yet in Religion, nor yet sufficiently grounded in the scripture, tried al
means they could to entangle him in their errors and blasphemous fancies:
wherein the mighty work of God was admirable toward him: for he being a
youth, a gentleman, but a mean scholar* and little studied, and but lately
entered into the school of Christian Religion; who would have thought that ever
he could have resisted and escaped the snares of those heretics; many of them
being great and grounded scholars, and thoroughly studied in the Scripture?
Notwithstanding, by the sincere simplicity and plainness of Gods truth, and
the inspiration of the holy Ghost, he not only descried the fondness of
their heresies, but even untied the knots, and brake their nets, and delivered
himself, and mightily confuted them: yea such was the working of God, as being
sometime in their meetings, he was strongly confirmed in the doctrine of the
truth by seeing and hearing them. Thus by Gods mercy he escaped and was
conqueror in this sight.

But the devil had not so done with him, for another and more dangerous
battle presently followed. The Waldesians, of whom we spoke before, were at
that time in Naples in good number. With them did Galeacius daily converse,
their courses of life and study being not far unlike. These disciples of
Waldesius knew as yet no more in Religion but the point of Justification: and
misliked and eschewed some abuses in Popery; and nevertheless still frequented
Popish Churches; heard Masses, and were present ordinarily at vile Idolatries.
Galeacius for a time conuersed with these men, and followed their way: which
course doubtless would have spoiled him, as it did a great sort of them; who
afterward being taken and committed for the truth, were easily brought to
recant their Religion, because they wanted the chief and the most excellent
points, nor were sufficiently settled: and yet afterward again, not daring to
forsake their hold in Justification; and therefore coming to it again, were
taken as relapsers and backsliders, and put to extreme torments and cruel
death. In the like danger had Galeacius been, but that the good providence of
God otherwise disposed, and better provided for him: for his office and place
that he bare in the Emperors Court, called him into Germany, and so withdrew
him from his companions the Waldesians: for the Lord had a greater work to
work in him then the Waldesians were able to teach him: for there in Germany
he learned (that he never knew before) that the knowledge of the truth of
Justification was not sufficient for salvation; whilst in the mean time a man
wittingly defiled himself with Idolatry, which the Scripture calls spiritual
whordome: and of no man did he reap more sound and comfortable instruction
then of Peter Martyr, of whom we spoke before, whom God had lately called out of
Italy, and confirmed him in the truth. This Martyr instructed Galeacius
soundly, in the way of the truth, and made it plain unto him, by private
conferences as well as public reading: for he was at that time public
professor of divinity at Stransbrough in Germany. Galeacius furnished with
those holy instructions, returned to Naples, and presently resorting to his
companions, the Waldesians, amongst other points, conferred with them about the
eschewing of Idolatry, and delivered his judgment therein. But they not
enduring scarce to hear it, presently forsook him, for they would by no
means entertain that doctrine, which they knew was sure to bring upon them
afflictions, persecutions, loss of goods and honors, or else would cause them
to forsake country, house, and land, wife, and child, and so every way
threatened a miserable estate to the professors thereof. Now this their
forsaking of him, and telling him of the danger of this profession, was another
strong temptation to keep him wrapped in their Idolatry, and to make him
content himself with their imperfect and peeced Religion. But GOD which had in
his eternal election predestinate him, that he should be a singular example of
constancy to the edification of many, and the confusion and condemnation of
lukewarm professors; gave him that excellent resolution, and that heavenly
courage, as he escaped at last conqueror over all those temptations and
assaults of Satan; and nothing could suffice or content him but the pure
Religion, and also the profession of it: and therefore seeing no hope of
reformation in Naples, nor any hope to have the Waldesians join with him, and
seeing plainly that he could not serve God in that country; he resolved
undoubtedly that he would forsake the country, and seek for Christ and his
Religion wheresoever he might find them; and that he would rather forsake
father, wife, children, goods and lands, offices and preferments to win
Christ, then to enjoy them all and want Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the grievous combats betwixt the flesh and the spirit, when he resolved of
his departure.
NOw heree by the way it may not be omitted, what kind of cogitations he has
often said came into his mind, as he was deliberating about this great matter.
For first of all, as often as he looked on his father, which he did almost
every hour, who decrely loved him, and whom again he respected in all duty
and reverence: so often doubtless he was stricken at the heart with
unspeakable grief to think of his departure; his mind no doubt often
thinking thus: What, and must I needs forsake my dear and loving fathr, and
cannot I else have God my Father? O miserable and unhappy father of my body,
which must stand in comparison with the Father of my soul! And must I needs
fail in duty to him, if I perform my duty to God? O miserable old man! for
what deeper wound can pierce him, then thus to be deprived of the only staff
and comfort of his old age! Alas shall I thus leave him in such a sea of
troubles; and shall I be the only means to strike into his heart the deepest
wound of griese that yet ever pierced him in all his life? This my departure is
sure to make my self the obloquy of the world: yea to breed reproach and shame
to the Marquess my father, and to my whole stock and kindred. How is it
possible that the good old man can overcome or endure so great a grief, but
rather he must needs be swallowed up of it, and so with woe and misery end his
life? Shall I then be the cause of death to my father, who would if need had
been redeemed my life with his own death? alas what a misery is this like to
be either to me, or him, or us both? yet must I care less for bringing his
gray head with sorrow unto the grave, then for casting my own poor soul with
horror into hell. And no less inwardly was he grieved in respect ofhis noble
wife Victoria: for having no hope that she would renounce Popery, and go with
him, therefore he durst not make known unto her the purpose of his departure;
but rather resolved for Christ's sake to leave her and all, and to follow
Christ. She was now as he was himself in the prime of youth, a Lady of great
birth, fair, wise and modest; but her love and loyalty to her husband
surpassed all. How was it possible patiently to leave such a wise, so that his
perplexed mind discoursed on this fashion when he looked on her: And shall I so,
yea so suddenly, and so unkindly leave and forsake my wife, my most dear and
loving wife, the only joy of my heart in this world, my companion and partner
in all my grief and labor; the augmenter of my joy, the lessener of my woe?
And shall I leave her, not for a time, (as hertofore Idid when the Emperors
service called me from her) but for ever, never again to enjoy her: yea it may
be never to see her? And shall I deprive my self of her, and thereby deprive
my self ofal others also, and of all the comfort of the coniug all life and
married estate? And shall I so leave her desolate and alone in that estate and
age whereof she is? Alas poor Lady, what shall she do, what shall become of
her, and of her little ones when I am gone? How many doleful days without
comfort, many waking nights without sleep, shall she pass over? What will she do
but weep and wail, and pine away with grief? And as he cast these things in
his mind, he thought he even saw his wife, how she took on with her self,
sighing and sobbing and weeping; yea howling and crying, and running after him
with these pitiful outcries: Ah my dear Lord, and sweet husband; whither
will you go? and will you Ieaue me miserable woman, comfortless and
succourlesse? What shall become of me when you are gone: what can honors,
pompes, riches, gold, silver, jewels, friends, company, all delights and
pleasures in the earth; what can they all do to my comfort when I want you? And
what joy can I have in my children without you, but rather my grief to be
doubled to look on them? And how can I or the world be persuaded that you care
for them, and for my self? Is this the love that thou have so often boasted
of? Ah, miserable love which has this issue! either never did thou love me,
else never had true love so strange an end as this of yours has, And yet which
is worse then all this, you never showed me cause of this your strange
departue; had I known cause, it would never have grieved me half so much:
But now that the cause is not known, what will the world judge, but that the
fault is in me? at least, if they cannot condemn me for it; yet how
reproachful will it be to me, when even every base companion dare lay it in my
dish, and point at me with their fingers when I go by, and say, this is that
fond woman who married him with whom she could not live, and whom her husband
disdained to live withal? This is that simple fool, who is desolate having a
husband; and a widow, her husband yet being alive. Either shall I be counted
wicked, which have caused thee to leave me; or foolish, miserable, and unhappy,
who chose so fondly, as to take him, whom I could not be sure of when I had
him. In a word, I shall be deprived of thee: yea of all possibility of having
any other, and so having a husband, I shall live in all misery altogether without
a husband. These two cogitations of his father and his wife greatly tormented
him, and the more because he labored to keep close this fire, which burned
and boiled in hisheart: namely, to conceal his departure, lest by being known
it might have been hindered, which he would not for a world.

Yet there was a third and special care that pinched him, and that was for his
children, which were six in all; goodly and towardly children, and worthy of
so noble parents: the more grief was it, in that they were so young, as that
they could not yet conceive what it was to wanta father; the eldest was scarce
fifteen, and the youngest scarce four years old: he loved them with most
tender and fatherly affection, and was again loved and honored of them. It is
wonderful to think, how when his wife the Lady did give into his arms his
youngest child to play withal (as oftentimes wives use to do) how it were
possible for him, and what a do he had with himself to contain from floods of
tears; especially because his eyes seeing them, and his hands holding them,
and his heart taking delight and pleasure in them, his mind could not but
discourse on this manner: And shall I within these few days utterly forsake
these sweet babes, and leave them to the wide and wicked world, as though they
had never been my children nor I their father? Yea happy had I bin if I had
either never had them, or having them might enjoy them. To be a father is a
comfort, but a father of no children, and yet to have children, that is a
misery. And you poor Orphans, what shall become of you when I am gone? your hap
is hard even to be fatherless, your father yet living: and what can your great
birth now help you? for by my departure you shall lose all your honor, all
your living and wealth, and all dignity whatsoever; which otherwise you had bin
sure of: nay my departure shall not only deprive you of all this, but lay you
open to all infamy, reproach, and slander, and bring upon you all kind of
misery: and thus miserable man that I am, shall the time be cursed that ever
they had me to their father. And what can your woeful mother do when she
looks on you, but weep and wring her hands, her grief still increasing as
she looks upon you? Yet thus must I leave you al confounded together in heaps
of grief, weeping and wailing one with another, and I in the mean time
weeping and wailing for you all. Many other griefs, temptations, and
hindrances assaulted him, though they were not so weighty as these formerly
named, yet which might have been able to have hindered any man's departure,
being in his case; as to leave the company of so many gallant noblemen and
gentlemen, his kindred and acquaintaince; to lose so honorable an office and
place as he bare in the Emperors Court; to leave for ever his native soil the
delicate Italy; to deprive himself and his posterity of the noble tittle and
rich living of a Marquesdome; to undertake a most long and tedious journey; to
cast himself into exile, poverty, shame, and many other miseries without hope
of recovery for ever: to change his former pleasant life into all hardness,
and to give a farewell to all the delicacies of Italy, wherein he was brought
up; to leave that goodly garden of his father the Marquesses, which once
should be his own; the goodliest garden almost in all Italy or all
Cristendome; which was furnished with plants of all sorts; and these not only
of all such as grow in Italy, but even such as were to be got out of all other
countries: this garden and Orchard was so exquisite both this way, and in
diverse other sorts of elegancies, that a great number of men of all qualities
resorted daily out of all countries to see it. But this and all other the
pleasures and delicacies of this present life could do nothing with him to
remove him from his purpose; but he renounced them all, and resolved to leave
them all to follow Christ: so strong and admirable was the constancy of this
noble Gentleman.

CHAP. IX.
How after all the temptations which flesh and blood laid in his way to hinder
his departure, he consulted with the Lord, and from him received grace to
overcome them all.
But it may be asked, whereupon was grounded so great vnmoueablenesse of this
purpose, or whence came it? If we ask the world and common judgment, they
will answer, that doubtless melancholic humors prevailing in him, spoiled
the man of his judgment and natural affections, and empaired common sense and
reason; and thence proceeded this obstinate and desperate purpose, as the world
judges of it. But if a man lift up his eyes higher and behold the matter more
seriously, he might have manifestly seen that it came to pass by the
merciful blessing and strong hand of God, who from al eternity had
predestinate him, that he should stand so immovable against all temptations,
and continue in one tenor steady and steadfast, until he had made void all
the attempts of Satan, and removed all the stumbling blocks which his flesh
and blood and carnal reason could cast in the way; for the which purpose the
spirit of God enabled him to reason with himself on this sort: Thou Lord art
he who drew and deliueredst me out of the thick and misty darkness of
ignorance, and have enlightened my mind with the light of thy holy spirit, and
with the heavenly knowledge of thy truth: thou have made known to me the way
of salvation, and have ransomed me to thy self by the blood of thy Son. Now
therefore good Lord and holy father, I am wholly thine, and consecrated to thy
glory; and as I am thine, I will follow thee, and obey thee, and walk in the
way of thy will whithersoeuer thou shall call me. Not my father, nor my wife,
nor my children, nor my honors, nor my lands, nor my riches, nor all my
delicacies and pleasures shall hold or hinder me one hour from following thee.
I deny my self O Lord, and I deny this whole world for thee and thy sake: O
Lord thou know me, and the readiness of my mind to wait upon thee; and how
that my heart is inflamed with the fire of thy love: yet thou see again how
many enemies compass me, how many hindrances lie in me way, and how many
temptations and impediments lie upon me, so that I am scarce able to move or
lift up my head unto thee: O Lord I am now in the depthes of those troubles,
out of which the holy Prophet David once cried to thee as I do now; O Lord
have mercy on me and deliver my soul. And although Satan and my own flesh do
affright me in this my purpose, whilst they set before my eyes, the cross, and
the infamy, and the poverty, and so many miseries, which I am like in this my
new profession to undergo: notwithstanding O Lord, I lift up my self in the
contemplation and beholding of thy infinite Majesty; and therein I see and
confess that that cross and affliction is blessed and glorious, which makes
me like and conformable to Christ my head; and that infamy to be honorable
which sets me in the way to true honor; and that poverty to be desired, which
depriving a man of some temporal goods, will reward him with an heavenly
inheritance, then which, there is nothing more precious: I mean O Lord with
thy own self, and thy glory O everlasting God, and that by thy only son
Jesus Christ; that so I enjoying thy glorious presence, may live for ever with
thee in that heanenly society: O blessed and happy these miseries which pull me
out of the worlds vanities, and sink of sin; that I may be made heir of an
everlasting glory. Welcome therefore the cross of Christ, I will take it up O
Lord, and will follow thee: With these and such like holy meditations and other
holy means, he overcame at last all the attempts of Satan, al his own natural
and carnal affections: yea and the world it self, and verified that in
himself which Paul affirms of Gods true elect, that they that are Christ's
have crucified the flesh with the affections and the lusts: that is, have
crucified their souls for Christ, who crucified himself for them. O Satan,
Gods enemy and his childrens, how vain were all thy attempts, and how light al
thy assaults? In vain do thou set upon those for whom Christ vouchsafed to
die, and suffer on the cross: upon which cross he so brake thy head and thy
power, and so trampled over thee, that now thou shall not be able to touch the
least hair of the head of any of those for whom he died. And as for Galeacius,
he had builded his house on the rock, and founded it so sure, that no wind,
no rain, nay no floods of griefs, nor tempests of troubles, nor whirlewind of
temptations could once remove him: and so he continued resolute as a Christian
soldier and conqueror; fully minded to leave his country at the next
opportunity he could take: his mind I cannot tell whether more ravished with
joy one way, or more perplexed with grief another way; but betwixt joy and
grief he still continued his purpose, until at last his spiritual joy
ouercomming his natural and carnal grief, he fully concluded that in despite
of the devil and all impediments in the world, he would surely go.

CHAP. X.
How he performed his heroical resolution, leaving all for Christ, and going
to Geneua.
WHereupon making known his mind but to a few, and those his most familiar
friends, and of whom he hoped well for religion; he wrought upon them so far, as
that they promised and vowed that they would accompany him in this voluntary
and Christian banishment, that so they migh enjoy the true liberty and peace of
conscience in the true Church of God. But how deep and unsearchable the
judgments of God are, the event afterward showed: for diverse of them (though
not all) who for a time seemed to be endued and led with a most earnest zeal
of Gods glory in this action; when they came to the borders of Italy, and
considered what they forsook, and to what they now took themselves: first
began to look back again to Italy; afterward went back again indeed, and
so turned again to the vomit of their pleasures. But this ingratitude to the
Lord for so great a favor offered them, the Lord pursued with a just revenge:
for purposing to serve God in their pleasures, and in the midst of Popery, they
were after taken by the Spanish Inquisition; and so publicly recanting and
abiuring Christian Religion, they were afterward subject to all misery and
infamy; neither trusted nor loved of the one side nor the other. This fearful
desertio^ and backsliding of theirs, doubtless was most grievous to Galeacius;
and verily the devil hoped hereby yet once again to have diuerted him from his
intended course, in making him be forsaken of those by whose company and
society he hoped to have been greatly comforted in this discomfortable voyage.
But notwithstanding all this, Galeacius continued resolute in his purpose, and
at last finding opportunity, attempted his departure, and made fit for it; yet
made no show of any such matter; but rather colored and concealed his intent,
lest the authority of his father might any ways hinder his so godly a
purpose: and so gathering together some thousand marks of his mothers goods
which she had left him: on the one and twentieth of March, 1551. in the year
ofhis age the four and thirtieth, he departed from Naples in manner as he was
wont to do before, making it known that he purposed to go into Germany to the
Emperor; who at that time held his court at Auspurge: and thither indeed he
went accordingly, and stayed serving in his place and office till the six and
twentieth of May in the same year: Upon which day* leaving the court and the
Emperors service, and his honorable office which there he bear; and taking
his last and everlasting farewell at the court, and all worldly delights, (and
yet departing in ordinary sort as before, and in purpose to go into the Low
countries, as some thought) he took his journey straight towad Geneua, and
thither came by Gods good hand the eight of June, and there rested his weary
body, and reposed his much more wearied conscience, with a full joyful heart:
yea with the greatestioy that ever came to him in all his life, but only at
the time of his conversion.

CHAP. XI.
Of his arrival at Geneua, and his entertainment there: and especially his
acquaintance and friendship with Calvin.
In the city of Ceneua (though there was a Church of Italians who likewise were
come thither for the Gospel) yet he found not one whom he knew, save one
Lactantius Rangonius, a noble man of Siena in Italy: this Gentleman had been
one of his familiar acquaintance when they were at home, and now was preacher
of Gods word to the Church and Congregations of the Italians, who were then at
Geneua, Now when he saw that the mercy of God had granted him to ariue at this
quiet and happy haven, where he might with liberty of conscience serve God,
free from the corruptions of the world, and the abominable superstitions and
Idolatry of Antichrist; presently he joined himself in friendship, and yielded
himself to the instruction of Master John Calvin, the chief Minister and
Preacher of that Church. Calvin being a man of deep insight and exquisite
judgment, perceiving him to be a man of good knowledge and experience, of a
moderate and quiet spirit, of an innocent and upright life, and endued with
true and sincere godlinesle; did therefore most kindly and lovingly intertaine
him into his fellowshippe: for the good man of God in his wisdom foresaw that
such a man as this, would doubtless become a special instrument of Gods
glory, and a means of the confirmation of many (but especially of Italians) in
the knowledge and love of Religion: this holy love and Christian friendship
thus begun, was so strongly grounded betwixt this noble Marquess and
renowned Calvin, that it continued till the year 1564. which was the last
year of Caluines pilgrimage in the earth, and the entrance into his heavenly
rest. The Church and people of Geneua can testify of their true and constant
friendship; but it needs not: for there is extant at this day a special
testimony thereof, even from Calvin himself in a Preface of his; wherein he
dedicates to Galeacius, his Commentary upon the first Epistle to the Corinths;
which I thought good here to set down word by word, that thereby it may
appear how greatly Calvin esteemed ofhim.

CHAP. XII.
Caluines Epistle to Galeacius, congratulating his holy and happy conversion.
To the noble Gentleman, and as well honorable for his excellent virtues, as
for his high descent and lineage, Galeacius Caracciolus, the only son and
heir apparent to the Marquess of Vicum: John Calvin sends greeting in our
Lord.
I Wish that when I first put out this Commentary, I had either not known at
all, or atleast more thoroughly known that man, whose name I am now constrained
to blot out of this my Epistle: Yet I fear not at al, lest he should either
vpbraid me with inconstancy* or complain of injury offered him, in taking
thatfrom him which before I bestowed on him; because it was his own seeking,
both to estrange himself from me, and from all society with our Church:
wherefore he may thank himself and take the blame on his own neck: for, for
my own part I am unwillingly drawn thus far to change my accustomed manner,
as to race out any man's name out of my writing. And I bewail that the man has
thrown himself down from that seat of fame wherein I had placed him: namely,
in the forefront of my book, where my desire was he should have stood, thereby
to have been made famous to the world. But the fault is not in me, for as then
I held him worthy, so since then he has made himself unworthy; and therefore
let him be as he is, and he for me buried in oblivion: and so for the good
will I once bare to him, I spare to speak any more of him. And as for you
(right honorable Sir,) I might seek excuse why I put you now in his room,
but that I am so sufficiently persuaded of your great good will and true love
to me; the truth whereof can be testified by so many witnesses in our Church.
And that I may make one wish more, I wish from my heart that I had known you
as well ten years ago, for then I should have had no cause to have altered the
dedicatio^ of my book, as now I do. And as for the public estate of the
Church, it is well that it shall not only lose nothing by forgetting that man,
whose name I now blotte out, but by your coming into his stead, shall receive a
far greater gain, and a sufficient recompense. For though I know you desire not
the pub lick applause of the world, but rest contented in the testimony of
Gods spirit in your conscience: (neither is it my purpose to publish your
praises to the world) notwithstanding, I think it my duty to make known to
the readers some things concerning you, and whereof my self and this Church
and City are daily eye witnesses: and yet not so much for your praise, as for
the benefit and instruction of the readers. And this is it that I would all men
should know and make use of; that a Gentleman, a Lord, so well and highly borne,
flourishing in wealth and honor, blessed with a noble and virtuous and loving
wife, and many goodly children, living in all peace and quietness at home and
abroad, wanting nothing that nature could desire, and every way blessed of God
for all things of this life, should willingly and of his own accord leave al
those, and forsake his country, a rich and fruitful and pleasant soil; so
goodly a patrimony and inheritance, so stately a house, seated so commodiously
and so pleasantly, to cast off al domestical delight and joy which he might
have had in so good a father, wife, children, kindred, affinity, and
acquaintauce, and all that for this only, that he might come and serve Christ
Jesus in the hard and unpleasant warfare of Christianity; and should deprive
himself of so many alluring delights of nature, and to content himself with
that sle^der measure of al things which the distressed estateof our Church is
able to afford, and from all the superfluities of a Courly and Lordly life,
here amongst us to betake himself to an easy rate and frugal kind of life,
even as though he were no better then one of us: and yet I so recite all this to
others, as I let it not pass without use to my self. For if I do set out your
virtues in this my Epistle, as on the top of a Tower for all men to see them;
that so they may conform themselves to the imitation of them; it should be
shame for my self not to be much more nearly and inwardly touched with a love
of them, who am continually an eye witness of them, and daily behold them, not
in an Epistle, but in the clear glass of your own life: and therefore
because that I find in experience how much your example preuailes in me, for
the strengthening of my faith, and the increase of godliness in me (yea and all
other holy men who dwell in the city, do acknowledge as well as I, that this
your example has been greatly to their edification in all grace) I thought it
therefore a necessary duty to impart this rare example of yours to the world;
that so the profit and benefit of us might enlarge it self, and spread out of
this city into all the Churches of God; for otherwise it were a needless
labor to make known to the furthest parts of Christendom, the virtues of
such a man, whose nature and disposition is so out of love with pride, and so
far removed from all ostentation. Now if it shall please God that many others
(who dwelling far off, have not hitherto heard of you;) shall by the
strangeness of this your example address themselves to the imitation of it,
and leave their pleasant nests, whereto the world has settled them so fast; I
shall think my self bountifully rewarded for these my pains: for out of
question it should be common and usual amongst Christians, not only to leave
livings and lord ships, and castles and towns, and offices and promotions,
when the case so stands that a man may not enjoy both Christ and them: but even
willingly and cheerfully to despise and shake off whatsoever under the Sun
(though it be never so dear and precious, so pleasant and comfortable) in
respect and comparison of Christ. But such is the slownesse and sluggishnesse
of the most of us, that we do but coldly and formally profess the Gospel:
but not one of a hundred, if he have but some little land, or piece of a
Lordship, that will forsake and despise it for the Gospel, sake: yea not one of
many, but very hardly is drawn to renounce even the least gain or pleasure, to
follow Christ without it: so far are they from denying themselves and laying
down their lives for the defense of it. I wish these men would look at you,
and observe what it is you have forsaken for love of Christ; and especially I
wish that all men who have taken upon them already the profession of Religion,
would labor to resemble you in the denial of themselves, (which indeed is the
chief of all heavenly virtues:) for you can very sufficiently testify with
me, as I can with you, how little joy we take in these men's companies; whose
lives make it manifest, that though they have left their countries, yet they
have brought hither with them the same affections and dispositions which they
had at home: which if they had also renounced, as well as they did their
countries; then had they been indeed true deniers of themselves, and been
partaker with you of that true praise; wherein alas, you have but few
compartners. But because I had rather the Reader should gather the truth and
strangenes of this your example, then I should go about in words to express
it; I will therefore spare further speech, and turn my self to God in prayer,
desiring of his mercy, that as he has endued you hitherto with an heroical
courage, and spiritual boldness; so he would furnish you with an invincible
constancy to endure to the end: for I am not ignorant how strangely the Lord
has exercised you heretofore, and what dangerous pikes you have passed ere you
came to this: by which former experience your spiritual wisdom is able to
conclude, that a hard and toilsome warfare does still remain and wait for
you; and what need there is to have the hand of God from heaven raught out to
assist us, you have so sufficiently lea rned in your former conflicts, as I am
sure you will join with me in prayer, for the gift of perseverance to us both:
and for my part I will not cease to beseech Jesus Christ our King and God (to
whom all power was given of his father, and in whom are kept all the treasures
of spiritual blessings) that he would still preserve you safe in soul and body,
and arm you against all temptations to come, and that still he would proceed
to triumph in you over the devil and all his vile and wicked faction, to the
magnifying of his own glory, and the enlarging of his kingdom in your self,
and others of his children.

9. Call. Feb. 1556. at Geneua. Your honors most assured in the Lord, JOHN
CALVINE.


CHAP. XIII.
News of his departure to Geneua came to Naples, and the Emperors Court: and
how the old Marquess his father and other his friends were affected with the
news.
AND thus (to return again to our story) Galencius settled himself down at
Geneua as at a joyful resting place. But when the news of so sudden and
strange a departure, and so wilful an exile came to Naples, and were made
known in the Emperors Court: it would scarce be believed or thought, how
strangely it affected and moved all that heard it. All men wondered at it, and
the most could not be persuaded it was so; but when it was certainly known
and out of doubt, it was strange to see, how every man gave his verdit of the
matter: some one way, some an other, as the course of men in such cases is. But
above all, it so abashed and astonished his own friends and family, that
nothing was heard or seen amongst them, but cries and lamentations, most
bitter tears and pitiful complaints. And surely to have beholden the state of
that family, how miserably it seemed at that time to be distressed: a man
would have thought it even a lively pattern and picture of all woe and misery.
But none was more inwardly pinched then the Marquess his father, whose age and
experience being great, seemed to assure him of nothing to follow hereupon but
infamy and reproach, yea the utter undoing and subversion of his whole estate
and family; notwithstanding, passing over that fit of sorrow as soon and as
easily as he could, the wretched and careful old man began to bethink
himself by what means he might prevent so miserable a ruin and fall, which
seemed to hang over him and his. One thing amongst other came into his mind,
which also had once caused many grievous temptations to Galeacius, and had much
troubled his mind before his departure. It was this.

CHAP. XIIII.
The first means used by his father the old Marquess to recall him home
again: he sent a kinsman of his, whom he knew his son dearly loved, to
persuade him to return, but he could not prevail.
GAleacius had a cosen-german, whom always he esteemed and loved as his
brother: this Gentleman so tenderly loved of Galeacius did the Marquess send
to Geneua to his son* with commission and letters full of authority, full of
protestations, full of pitiful complaints, full of cryings and intreatings
that he would come home again; and thereby cheer up his old father, and make
happy again his unhappy wife; be a comfort to his distressed children, a
rejoicing to his kinsfolks, and to the whole city of Naples, and save his
whole house and posterity from that extreme ruin, which otherwise it would
be sure to fall into. Thus this Gentleman was dispatched away and hasted to
Geneua, with great hope for their ancient and faithful love to have prevailed
with Galeacius. Where by the way we are to remember that Galeacius did always
so love him, that the gentleman was not so sorrowful for his departure: but
Galeacius was much more sorrowful that he could not win him to have gone with
him, in this holy pilgrimage for religions sake; but he so much feared to have
bin hindered himself, that he durst not deal with this gentleman his dearest
cofin, no nor with his wife, to persuade them to have gone with him. The
gentleman coming to Geneua inquired after Galeacius. At that time Galeacius
dwelt in an ordinary and mean house which he had taken to his own use, having
no more attendance, but only two servants: the gentleman at last found him
out, and presented himself into his sight: It had bin a pitiful spectacle to
have seen the meeting of those two gentlemen: their first meeting and
imbracings were nothing at all, but sighs and sobs, and tears, and
unutterable signs of grief: such unspeakable sorrow did their natural
affections breed in them, that for diverse hours they could not speak a word
one to other: but at last the gentleman, burning in desire to enjoy again his
dearest Galeacius, brast forth into speeches, and mixing tears and sobs with
every word, delivered his letters, till he could come to more liberty of
speech: and at last having obtained of his affections leave to speak, he added
to his letters, exhortations, strong persuasions, earnest entreaties, and
withal plenty of tears, that he would have respect to the overthrow of his
house, the grief of his old father, the desperate estate of his wife and
children, the continual complaints made by all his friends and kinsfolks: all
which notwithstanding were not so past cure, but that yet they might be
remedied by his return again. This was the substance of his message. Galeacius
taking not long time to advise himself, in this which the world would think
so weighty a case, addressed him immediately this answer in brief: that he
perceived very well* al to be true that he said; but as for his departure it was
not done rashly, nor upon any fond conceit, but upon mature deliberation; that
the Lord was the author of the action, that Gods grace was the cause moving
him, and the means whereby he brought it to pass: which grace of God, he
said, had opened his eyes, and enlightened his mind with the knowledge of the
truth; and made him see and discern the cosenages, and superstitions and
Idolatry of Popery, which by an impious and sacrilegious distribution divides
the glory of God (which is inco^municable) and imparteth the same with fained
and filthy Idols: he likewise told him that he well foresaw all the infamies and
miseries which would ensue upon this his conversion: and all the danger and
damage which thereby his house and children were likely to incur. But he said,
that seeing one of those must needs be chosen, either to stay at home with a
conscience burdened with a heavy heap of errors and superstitions piled
together by the sleight of satan's art, and every moment to sin against the
Majesty of God so many thousand ways; or else to leave his house, his goods
his family, his country, yea the world and all the glory of it, and thereby
purchase liberty of conscience to serve the Lord according to his word: that
therefore he resolved of the two evils to choose the less, and of the two good
to choose the greater, and rather to shut his eyes at all these, then the sight
of them should hinder him from yielding to the call and voice of his Savior
Christ: who says, That a man is not worthy to be his disciple, who leaves not
father and mother, and children, and brethren, and sisters; yea and his own
life, in comparison of him. And this he said was the cause, why he did forsake
parents, and wife, and children, and all his friends, and had renounced all his
wealth and dignities: because he could not enjoy both Christ and them. And as
for them all, he was sorry that either they would not come to him, or that he
might not more safely live with them, thereby to comfort them. But as for
himself, he said, he had riches, and honor, and joy enough: yea all
sufficient happiness, as long as (with these two servants and his little
cotage) he might live in the true Church of God, and might privily serve him,
and might enjoy Gods word and sacraments, not being mixed and defiled with the
superstitious devises of man's brain; and as long as he might live in the
company of godly men; and have time and liberty to meditate by himself, and to
confer with them of the great blessings which in his conversion his good God
had vouch* safed to him: that so he might with true contentation and perfect
peace of conscience, aim and aspire at that immortal glory which Christ Jesus
has prepared for all his children: yea he concluded, that his want was
abundance, his poverty pleasant, and his mean estate honorable in his eyes,
as long as he endured them for these conditions.

This his answer was as hardly entertained of his kinsman, as it was unlooked
for before it came: but seeing he could not reply with any reason, nor answer
him with any show of argument; and perceived it hard, or rather impossible to
remove the man one jot from his resolution; for that he had grounded it, not on
any reason or will of man, but upon the holy word of God, and his powerful and
irresistable calling; therefore with a sorrowful heart he held his tongue,
bitterly complaining within himself of his so hard hap, and uncomfortable
success: and so resolved to return home again; heartily wishing he had never
taken that journey in hand: and so at last he went indeed and took his leave
of his beloved Galeacius, but not without plenty of tears on both sides, with
many a woeful cry and pitiful farewell. And no marvel: for besides neerenes
in blood, their likeness in manners and daily conversation together, had
linked them in a sure bond of friendship: but there wanted in one of them the
surest link in that chain, that is, Religion, and so it could not hold: and
therefore the world pulling one of them from Christ, and Christ pulling the
other of them from the world: so these two friends left each other, being in
fear never to see one the other again.

CHAP. XV.
Of his cosens returue to Naples without success, and how Galeacius was
proclaimed Traitor for his departure.
ANd thus at last he came home to Naples with heavy cheer. Whose approach
being hard of, there was running on all sides to hear good news: but when he
had delivered his message; alas how all their sorrow was redoubled upon them;
and how his father, wife, children, and al his friends were overwhelmed with
grief: and the rather, because as at the same time an edict was published,
wherein Galeacius was proclaimed guilty of high treason: and therefore al his
goods coming to him by his mother, were confiscate, and himself, and all his
posterity utterly cut off and excluded from all right of succession in his
fathers Marquesdome; which thing (above all other) grievously affected the old
Marquess, and grieved the good old man at the very heart; the advancing and
honoring of his posterity being the only thing he had aimed at all his life.
Whereupon he bethought himself as old as he was to make a journey to Caesar
the Emperor, and thereby if it were possible to prevent this mischief;
purposing to make but this suit to his Majesty, that his sons departure from
the Roman Church, might not prejudice nor hinder the succession and honor of
his children and posterity, but that he himself might only bear the
punishment of his own fault.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the second means used to recall him: his father sent for him to come and
meet him at Verona; but all he could do by himself or others whom he set on,
prevailed nothing at all.
AND whilst he was resolving of this purpose, he bethought him of another
remedy and means, whereby he hoped to remove his sons mind from his purpose,
and withdraw him from the company of these heretics of Geneua, as he and the
world accounted of them. Therefore in have he dispatched away a messenger with
letters to his son, commanding him by the authority of a father to meet him
at a certain day appointed at the city of Verona in the Dominion of the
Venetians; at which town he promised to stay for him, as he went to wards
Germany to the Emperor: and for his sons more security, he procured a safe
conduct from the Duke and Signory of Venice; that his son might go and come
without danger of life or liberty. Galeacius receiving the letters, and being
resolved by his own conscience, and them to whom he imparted the matter, that
he might not any way with good conscience disobey so reasonable a request and
lawful a commandment of his father, answered that he would go; although he
feared that by this meeting, and talk of his father and him, his fathers mind
would but be more vehemently exasperate against him: for he firmly resolved
before he went, that all the threatenings, entreaties, counsels, and temptations
that his father could devise, should not stir him one inch from that course
of Religion, whereby he had begun to serve the Lord. With this purpose he
departed Geneua, Aprilis 19. 1553. furnished with heavenly fortitude, assisted
(...)aiers of the Church, and armed with constancy, and with the sword of Gods
word; whereby he hoped to sustain and beat back all the darts of temptations
whereby he knew he should be assaulted. Coming to Verona, there he found the
Marquess his fafather, who received and used him kindly, though he could not
but manifest in his countenance the inward anger and grief ofhis heart. After
a few salutations, the father began with all his cunning to deal with him
about his return home again, laying open to the full that perpetual in famy,
which was sure to fall on his house and posterity, unless that Galeacius did
prevent so great a mischief: which (says he) thou easily may do, and of
right ought to do: and I know thou will do, if there be in thee but one
spark of natural affection to father, wife, or children. Galeacius the son
with such reverence as was due to his father, answered with all sub^^^sion that
his body and estate is his fathers, but his conscience is the Lords: and tells
him he can by no means return home, but he should make shipwreck of a good
conscience: he proves it to him by good reasons, and such as his father could
not resist; and therefore humbly entreats his father, that seeing his desire
is only to obey the Lord, and save his soul; that therefore he would not urge
him to respect more the good estate of his children, then the glory of God, and
his own souls health. The Marquess perceived he labored in vain to remove
his son from his resolution, which he judged to be nothing but a perverse
stubbornness against the Catholic Religion, as he thought: and therefore with
grief ofminde ceased that suit; and imparted to him the cause ofhis journey to
the Emperor; strictly enioyning him that he should not return to Geneua, but
abide in Italy till he had obtained his suit at the Emperors hand, and was
returned out of Germany; which thing Galeacius promised and performed: for he a
bode in Italy until August: at what time he had notice that his father had
prevailed in his suit bfore the Emperor. During which time, one Hieronymus
Fracastorius, Hieronymus Fracastorius.
a notable Philosopher, Physician, and Poet (being procured and set on by the
Marquess) dealt with Galeacius with all his might and eloquence, to persuade
him to yield to his father; adding withal, that that new sect (as he termed)
was false and deceitful, and not worthy to be believed. Galeacius heard all he
could say, and answered him point by point: and finally, by the pure simplicity
of the word of God, he so satisfied him (though he was both wise and learned)
that he willingly held his tongue; and at last friendly entreated him, that he
would not be angry for that his importunity and boldness with him.

CHAP. XVII.
Of his return to Geneua, where he founded and settled a form of discipline in
the Italian Church.
THus Galeacius hearing of his fathers success, returned with a joyful heart
toward Geneua; for that he saw his father delivered from the fear of that
infamy, which the confiscation of his goods, and forfeiture of his lands, might
have brought upon his family: and therefore he hoped he would be the less
moved against him. Whereupon settling himself down again at Geneua, and
devising how to spend his time in doing good; he began to consider seriously of
settling the discipline in the Church of the Italians, which was then at Geneua
(for thither had a great number of Italians transported themselves and their
families for Religions sake, flying the tyranny of the unholy inquisition.) And
about that time it fell out fitly that Calume going Ambassador from Geneua to
Basil in causes of Religion and other matters; entreated Galeacius to bear
him company: whereunto he willingly condescended. At Basil he found an Italian
called Celsas, whose right name was Maximilian, and was descended of the noble
house of the Earls of Martinongo in Italy: this man had got a great name in
Italy amongst the Papists for his eloquency and speech, and lately by the mercy
of God was escaped out of the mite of popish superstitions. Galeacius right
glad of him, persuaded him to break off the purpose that he had for England,
and go to Geneua with him, where he might live in the fellowship of a great
number of his country men Italians, and enjoy the benefit of the company,
conference and familiarity of many worthy men, but especially the most sweet
acquaintance of that great Calvin, and al those, with the liberty of a good
conscience. The good gentleman yielded, and so they coming to Geneua by their
industry and good means (together with the help and direction of Calvin in
all things) that form of discipline was established in the Italian Church,
which at this day stands and florisheth in the same church, and remains
recorded in a book for that purpose: and Maximilian the Earl, of whom we spoke
before, was the first Pastor elect of that church, and undertook the charge,
purely to expound the word of God, and to administer the Sacraments that Christ
left behind him, and to watch over that flock and people: certain Elders
were joined as assistants to him, to whom was committed the care of the Church,
to look to the purity of doctrine and life in all estates; the principal of
the Elders was Galeacius himself, unto whom the honor is due of bringing to
pass so worthy an enterprise, and the rather for that by his authority,
diligence and watchful care, he preserved the same in good and sure estate all
his life time; and after him it has continued, being derived to others, to the
great good and profit of many souls. And thus he passed this year 1554.
withioy and comfort.

CHAP. XVIII.
The third temptation to draw him away: liberty of conscience offered him by
his uncle, Pope Paul the fourth: which after many temptations of flesh and
blood to the contrary, at last by the assistance of Gods grace he refused.
NExt succeeded in order the year 1555. wherein Satan assauted him with new
stratagems and devices: for that year his uncle which was Paulus quartus, his
mothers brother, attained the feate of the Papacy of Rome, whereby the
Marquess his father conceived good hope, by this means either to draw his
son home again, or at least to procure him liberty of conscience, and leave
to live in some City of Italy, where he might enjoy the society of his wife
and children, and they of him. Whereupon having occasion of business to travel
that way, he sent letters to his son to Geneua, commanding him to meet him
at Mantua in Italy, and for his easier dispatch he sent him provision of money
for the journey. Galeacius obeying again his fathers will, took his journey
from Geneua, and came to Mantua the fifteenth of June, where he was
entertained by his father with more then ordinary kindness, and in more
loving manner then heretofore was accustomed. And at last he opened his mind
unto him, the substance and effect whereof was: that he had obtained of his
uncle, who now was Pope* a dispensation for him; whereby liberty was granted
him, to live in any City within the iuristiction of the Venetians, wheresoever
he would without any molestation to be offered him, about his Religion or
conscience. His father tells him that if he do this, this will be a greater
solace to his old age, then his departure and absence has been grief unto
him: besides all this, the good old man most earnestly entreated him (though
he was the father and spoke to the son) that he would gratify him in this
his request: and added many beseechings, who in any lawful thing might by his
authority have commanded him: and every word that he spoke was so seasoned, as
coming from the affection of a father; and at last with many strong reasons
persuaded him, not to reject this so extraordinary a favor offered him by the
Pope in so special and rare clemency, whereby he might without hurt of his
conscience live more commodiously then ever before, and be restored to his
former honor, and place, and estate: and recover the former love and
estimation of all his friends: yea and of many strangers, who hearing of this
his obedience to his father, would love him for it, unto which obedience to me
(says the father to his son) thou art bound both by the bond of nature, and
by the law and word of God, which thou so much talkest of and vrgest to me:
therefore, says he, if there be in thee either spark of natural affection,
or any Religion and conscience of thy duty, thou will yield unto me in this,
especially seeing thou may do it without hurt or endangering of thy
conscience and Religion. This talk and request of the Marquess diversely
affected Galeacius: for the thing he requested, and the reasons he urged seemed
to be such, as he could with no good reason contradict them; and yet he durst
not presently entertain the motion: besides that, the presence, authority, and
reverent regard of his father, the vehemence and affection of his mind, and
especially the natural bond and obligation, wherein the son stands tied to the
father in things law full and indifferent (especially when by that obedience no
violence is offered to good conscience) all these did greatly move him. Also
natural and carnal reason for their parts, assaulted him no less violently
with such kind of arguments, as for the most part prevail with all men. For
his father offered him yearly revenues, competent and fit for his estate, the
solace of his children, and society of his wife: which two things he desired
above all other in the world. So that to this motion and request of his father
the Marquess, Galeacius knew not well what to answer on the sudden, but stood
for a time musing and doubtful what to say; and the rather, for that he then
wanted his special friend, faithful Calvin, with whom he might consult in so
weighty a cause. It seemed to him impious and ungodly, not to yield to his
father in so lawful and reasonable a request, and he saw no way how he might
deny it, but he must needs incur and undergo his fathers extreme
displeasure: and yet how he might yield to it with safety of conscience he
much doubted; for he feared that more danger to his profession and Religion,
and consequently more hurt to his soul might hereupon ensue, then he could
presently perceive: so that he stood altogether unresolved in his own reason
what to do; therefore in this extremity he denied himself and renounced his
own wit, and in humble and fervent prayer betook himself in this difficulty
to the blessing and direction of his God and Savior, the author and true
fountain of wisdom and constancy: humbly craving of the Lord to assist him
with his holy spirit, that in this extremity he might advise and resolve of
the best and safest course, for Gods glory and his own sound comfort. (O how
truly sung that sweet singer of Israel King David, when he said, How happy
and blessed are they that fear God, for God will teach them the way they
should walk!) Galeacius found it most true in his own experience; for upon
this his submission and prayer, the Lord from heaven resolved him in this sort:
That seeing the Pope did (Antichrist-like) directly oppose himself to Christ*
and his Religion and Church; that therefore he might by no means sue for, or
accept any favor at his hands, nor be by any means beholden to him at all.
Because what show of service soever was done to him by the enemy of Christ,
seemed to be taken from Christ himself. Further, Gods spirit persuaded him it
carried too great a show of Apostasy, or backsliding; to forsake the company of
godly professors, and the fellowship of Christ's Church; and to live amongst
Idolaters in the midst of all abominations. The same spirit of God set before
his eyes that scandal and offense, which this fact of his would breed in the
minds of the faithful* which would think that he had taken his farewell at
Religion, and would now shake hands again, and renew his acquaintance with his
old friend the world: that he had lightly esteemed the spiritual blessings and
heavenly jewels of graces, which God distributeth daily in his Church; and
would now betake himself again to the old affections of his flesh. The same
spirit resolved him, that thus to forsake the ordinary means, and deprive
himself of the true use of the word and Sacraments, and to live in a place
where was nothing but Idolatry, was to tempt God in the highest degree. God
likewise opened his eyes, that he perceived the sleight of Satan by this his
fathers d^^t: namely, to entangle him again in the net of worldly cares, to
wrappe his mind in the snards of Italian pleasures; and so to dazzle his eyes
with the honors, and pleasures, and sensual delights* which once he had bin
brought up in, that his Religion might decay by little and little and that all
godliness might by the heat of these new pleasures, fall and melt away like as
wax before the fire: and lastly, the Lord upon his prayer granted him the
wisdom of his holy spirit, to answer al his fathers objections, and confute
all his arguments. And amongst many other, he earnestly entreated his father
that he would not do that unto him, which afterward he would repent that ever
he had done: namely* that he would not be a means to make him a prey to the
Papists; which had confirmed for a law, and ratified it by many examples, that
promise, faith, nor oath is to be kept with any man whom they call heretics.
Whereupon, said he, it is better for me, and more joy to you, to live as I do
with this poor estate, then with hope of better to endanger my life, and so
our whole posterity. By these, and such like persuasions it pleased God so to
work upon the Marquess, that he was overcome in this suit, wherein he
supposed to have prevailed; and therefore he yielded against his will: and so
with a sorrowful heart he returned to Naples. And as he went, he certified the
Pope the obstinacy of his son, and so the father and the uncle bewailed
together their ill success.

CHAP. XIX.
Of his acquaintance with Franciscus Portus, and the Religious Duchess of
Ferrara in his return home to Geneua.
But in the mean time Galeacius after he had accompanied his sorrowful father
somewhat on the way, returned with a full glad heart; and came to the city of
Ferrara* where he was joyfully received of Franciscus Portus, a noble and
renowned man for learning, and who afterward taught publicly at Geneua many
years, and read the Greek Lecture with great profit to the audience, and
praise to himself. This Portus bought Galeacius into acquaintance with the
noble Duchess of Ferrara, who entertained him honorably: and after much
conferrence had with him of the alteration of his Religion, of the success of
his long voyages, and tedious iourneies; of the Church of Geneua, of Calvin,
and of many chief points of Christian Religion; she dismissed him, and left
him to his journey; but not without all courtesies that she could afford him:
and namely for one, to relieve the length and tediousnes of the way, she lent
him her own chariot: and thus Galeacius was conveyed in the chariot of so
great a Princess as far as to the town of Francolium: from whence having a
pleasant tide down the river of Po, or Padus, he came by water into Venice:
where taking ship and crossing the sea, he went through Switzerland to Geneua,
and thither came the foureteenth of October in the same year, the whole
congregation, and especially his chief friends, rejoicing with joy
unspeakable, for the safety of his return. And thus this cruel tempests thus
being ouer-blowen and now quieted, and Satan seeing he prevailed not by any of
those forcible assaults; yet thought to try him with one more, and therefore
came upon him a fresh, like as a second fit of an ague stronger then the
first: and by this Satan feared not but to give him the overthrow* and to bring
him home again into Italy: and thus it was.

CHAP. XX.
The fourth assault that Satan used to bring him back again, was by his wife,
who by her letters won him to come and meet her in Italy: which he yielded
unto, and gave her meeting.
HIS wife Victoria burned in long love and hearty affection toward her husband
Galeacius, so that it cannot be uttered how vehemently she desired his company:
whereupon she never ceased writing to him, and entreating him to return again
to her and his children. But when she saw her womanly arguments and vain
scribbling did no good, at last she in all earnest manner desired him to meet
her in some City within the territory of the Venetians, not far from the
kingdom of Naples. To this motion Galeacius yielded: and thus the husband and
wife promised to meet; but the ends that they aimed at were diverse: she hoped
by her slattery and fair speeches, her tears and lamentations, to win her
husband home again: on the other side he was much more busy in devising how
he might persuade her to deliver her self out of the filth of Popery, and come
and dwell with him. With these resolutions they both going forward, she came
to Vico, to her father in law the Marquess. He came from Geneua to Laesina, a
city in Dalmatia. This Laesina is distant from Vicum an hundred Italian miles
by water; and stands just over against Vicum; and the sea called the Venetian
gulf lies betwixt them. Galeacius here abode and expected Sinus Adriaticus.
his wife: but at that time she came not as she had promised, and he expected.
Yet he could never learn the cause of her staying at that time, nor what it was
that moved her so to disappoint him; yet though she came not her self she sent
two of her eldest sons to their father; whose sight was most welcome, and their
company most comfortable to Galeacius: but one way it grieved him the more;
because the sight and company of them more affected him with the absence of his
wife; for whose sake and company especially he had taken so long a journey:
therefore sending them soon after home again, he went away sorrowful to
Geneua. Where he had rested but a few days, but another packet of letters came
posting from his wife, beseeching him not to think much at her former
negligence, and to vouchsafe once again to come to the same place; where,
without all fail, she would most gladly attend him, and solemnly vowed with
largeprotestations she would not disappoint him. The request was very
unreasonable, and it was a hard case for Galeacius thus to spend his time, and
weary his mind and body in so long and dangerous iournies, and to so little
purpose as hitherto he had. Notwithstanding, one thing moved him to yield
even to this motion also: namely, a persuasion that he had, that when he first
forsook his country, he did not fully discharge his duty, in laboring to
win his wife to have gone with him; by explaining to her the chief heads of
Christian doctrine, whereby she might possibly have received some taste, and so
have taken some liking of true Religion: desiring therefore now if it were
possible to make amends for his former negligence, he yielded to go. And so
obtaining for his better security in going and returning, a pasport or
safe conduct from the high Court of Rhoetia; he departed from Geneua the
seventh of March, in the year 1558. and came to Laesina in Dolmatia, over
against Vicum: where he had intelligence that the Marquess his father, his
wife, his children, and his uncles son (he of whom we heard before) were
already come to Vicum, with purpose to have been by that time at Laesina with
Galeacius; but they could not, by reason that a mariner of Venice had broken
promise with them, and disappointed them: by reason whereof, and of other
dangers of the sea, they could not as yet take shipping, nor durst venture over
the water. Whereupon Galeacius not enduring patiently so long delays, resolved
to go himself over to Vicum. Such was his faith in the Lord, and his love to
his friends, that he respected not the imminent danger: but constantly relied
on the Lords protection; knowing that no fleshly affections drove him to his
journey, but a sincere zeal to Gods honor, and the souls health of his
kindred, and the discharging of his own duty unto them; whereunto he was
persuaded that he had a special calling.

CHAP. XXI.
Of his arrival at Vico, his fathers chief house, and his entertainment
there: and what means were used to seduce him: and how his wife refused not
only to go with him, but even to lie with him, because he was an heretic:
being thereto, as she said, commanded by her Confessor.
AND so arriving by Gods mercy on the coast of Italy, not far from Vicum, he
gave intelligence of his approach to his father the Marquess; who presently
sent his children to meet their father: and all his retinue to attend him into
the castle; at whose entrance, it cannot be expressed how great joy was in all
that house and noble family; and how all the Nobles and Gentlemen of his
kindred and acquaintance rejoiced at his return; and began to cheer up their
hearts with a new hope which hitherto had been cast down and oppressed with
grief and despair. But above all other his wife (Madam Victoria) surpassed in
joy and new conceived delight; hoping she had now recovered her most dear Lord
and beloved husband, the only comfort and the sweet solace of her life. All
(but Galeacius) exceedingly rejoiced at this meeting here; though indeed it
greatly ioyed his natural affection, to enjoy the company of his friends, so
many, so near, and so dear unto him: yet his joy was tempered and allayed
with a certain doubting fear which ran in his mind night and day. for the
wise Gentleman well foresaw, that the fruition of that pleasure was but to last
a while, and soon would have an end* for the end of his coming was not that
which they imagined: and every day new matters ran in his heads the
consideration whereof did not a little trouble him. He has often since
discoursed un to his friends, that all those days he lived in continual
fear, to be suddenly apprehended, and cast into some filthy prison; where he
should spend his days in languishing and lamentations, without any solace of
his friends: yea and be utterly debarred of the comfortable reading of Gods
holy word. But return to the matter. At his first arrival he was entertained
with much joy on all sides, and many cherefull countenances and kind welcomes.
But alas, within a few days all this mirth and joy was turned into tears and
lamentation, and unmeasurable grief: for when once he had opened to his father
the Marquess his constant purpose to persevere in the truth of that Religion
he had begun to profess; and that he would rather die in the defense of
it, then be drawn from it; then alas, what fighing, what crying, yea what
doleful lamentation did it move in them all! But then let the Christian reader
judge what a troubled spirit and woeful heart that good man had in this so
fearful a combatte betwixt the grace of God and his natural affections; and
what a torment it was unto him, to see them all so near and dear unto him,
labor to withdraw him from God; and to see his constancy in Religion so to
grieve them, which was the joy of his own heart. Yet taking up with himself
as well as nature could, and comforting himself in his God, he afterward dealt
with his wife in all loving and yet earnest manner that she would follow him
her husband, and delay no longer time, but come and live with him according as
the law of God and nature required: which if she would do, he promised her
liberty of her conscience and Religion, to live as she would* But for his own
part, he told her aforehand, as she should after find; namely, that he was
firmlie esolued to live and die in that Religion, which (by the hand of God
leading him) he had undertaken; and for the which he had forsaken country,
kindred, and all those excellent and comfortable blessings of thus life, which
God had given him. Here I leave it to the reader, but especially to the hearts
of such women, as being wives, do truly love their husbands, to judge with
what sobs and heartbreaking the silly Gentlewoman heard these words of her
husband, whom she now saw past all hope to be persuaded to stay with her; which
she desired above all worldly things. Yet it appears it was but in mere carnal
and worldly respects, as the consequent showed: for though she loved him and
desired his company never so much; yet being a wise, worldly, wilful, and
indeed a right Papist, she answered him plainly (though with many tears) that
she would never go with him to Geneua, nor to any other place, where was any
other Religion, but that of Rome; and that she would not live with him as long
as he was entangled with those heresies (as she called them) whereby it appears
that she was a carnal politic Papist. She loved him, but where? in Italy; and
there would line with him, but not at Geneua: and why? for in Italy he might
advance her to the state of a Marchioness; in Geneua he could not: there she
might live with him a life full of al delights; but in Geneua a hard, base, and
obscure life, and subject to many outward dangers and miseries. In which
respects it was that she was so instant upon him to stay with her. But the
conclusion was, her desire was to enjoy him and Italy both: but rather then she
would leave Italy and the delicacies thereof, she chose plainly to forsake him;
and to withdraw the duty of a wife from him. For it may in no case be omitted
(which afterward he imparted to some his intierest and most inward friends)
that she even then and there denied him that duty which a wife is bound to
yield to her husband by the law of God and nature: that is, she would by no
means give him due benevolence, nor consent to lie with him as man and wife:
and gave this reason; that she was expressly forbidden of her Confessor, under
pain of excommunication, because he was an heretic. Where behold Popish
Religion what it is, that can separate man and wife for disparity in Religion;
and can discharge men and women from those duties of marriage with which God
has charged them. How this monstrous unkindness and unwomanly answer pierced
his heart, let any Christian man judge, whom God has honored to be an husband.
Yet he overcame and even devoured all these tormenting griefs, and bear them
with an invincible constancy and quietness of mind. Yet he purposed not to bear
so great an injury for cuer, but to redress and help it if it were possible:
and therefore he further proceeded with her, and openly and plainly denounced
to her, that unless she would yield him that matrimonial duty, which by Gods
law she ought: namely, to eat, and lie, and live with him; it would be a cause
to make him sue out a divorce against her, and so procure a final separation;
which if she were the cause of, she might thank or rather blame her self, who
withdrew her neck from that yoke of duty toward him which marriage required,
and which he for his part said, he would never have done to her, though her
Religion was so far differing from his. Yet notwithstanding* he said, that
she first refusing him, he had then just cause to refuse her, who had first by
refusal of that duty refused her self as it were, and denied her self to
be his wife. And so he concluded with her, that unless she would be his wife,
he would no longer be her husband. This protestation no doubt, amazed and
troubled her not a little, and vexed the silly woman's mind; especially for that
he was and had always been such a husband to her, so good and kind, and every
way so well deserving, that she loved him as her own eyes (therefore more was
she to blame, that she esteemed him not as the light of her eyes:) but though
this troubled her sore, yet it moved her not to her duty; so good a scholar
was she in this Popish learning, that she would rather incur her husbands, yea
Gods displeasure then her Confessors; and rather break their commandments so
holy and just, then his, which was so ungodly, and so unreasonable: and it
also less prevailed with her because she imagined he would not so do (though
he spoke so) but only did it to fear her, and so in fear hereof to make her
yield unto him.

CHAP. XXII.
Seeing he could not reclaim his Lady, he resolved to return to Geneua: and
of the grievous temptations he endured: where he took his last farewell of his
father, wife, children, and friends: and of his heavenly courage, in bearing
and passing through them all.
WHen therefore the good gentleman saw all things so far amiss, that even
his wife was against him of all other, and gave him a deeper wound then all
other his friends; denying him that society and fellowship which the bond of
marriage yields, and seeing that the time passed without any good doing, but
rather to the increasing of grief on all sides; he theerfore resolved to
depart, and so calling his wife Victoria again, he iterated unto her his
former protestation; and so bad her take it as his last warning. The doleful
day of his departing being come, he held on his purpose, and so entered into
the chamber of his father the Marquess to do his duty unto him, and to take
his leave: Who seeing his son thus past al hope of recovery, quenching his
fatherly affection in fury and raging madness, like a frantike or desperate
man, reviled him in most dispitefull terms, and at last gives him his farewell
with many a heavy and bitter curse. This so strange and extraordinary
persecution, did this good gentleman suffer for Christ's sake; and it is
marvel that it did not cause him to look back again, and turn his course.
But it was Gods doing that his father should use these extreme and violent
curses, rather then to go about to win him by allurements and gentle
persuasions: for he has often used to tell his friends, that this monstrous
inhumanity and unnaturalness of his father did rather confirm and settle his
mind; his nature being rather to be led then drawn, and rather to be won
by friendlinesse and fair means, then to be urged by extremities. But God
would have his servant to be tried by both means: namely, the allurements of
his wife and the minacings of his father. Thus God would purge him in the fire
of all kind of temptations. And thus by the power of Gods grace having passed
through this fire, behold a hotter is to be ventured on. Departing his fathers
chamber, with that burden of curses (which the Lord turned into blessings) he
came into the great chamber, and so into the hall; where he found his wife, his
children, his uncles son (before spoken of) diverse noble gentlemen his
kinsfolks, and some his ancient familiars and domestic friends: all fraught
with grief, and making heavy cheer; nothing was heard but sighs, and sobbes,
and cries; nothing was seen but tears and wringing of hands: his wife
embracing him, and taking him about the neck, beseeched him in most loving and
most pitiful manner, that be would have care of himself, of her, and of all
his children, and whole house; and not so wilfully to cast them all away. His
young children all upon their knees, with arms stretched ou t, and hands holden
up, and faces swollen with tears, cried unto him to have pity on them his own
bowels; and not to make them fatherless before the time. His cosen and other
kinsmen with heavy countenances and watrie eyes looked rufully on him; and
though for grief they were not able to speak one word to him; yet every
look, and every countenance, and every gesture was a loud cry, and a strong
entreaty, that he would stay, and not leave so ancient and noble a house in
such wosull and desolate case. No words can suffice to express the grief of
that doleful company, nor that lamentable departure that there was to be seen.
Unutterable was the grief on their side, and unspeakable was the torment and
temptation which the noble gentleman felt in this agonv, when he must either
leave Christ Jesus or leave all these for him. But amongst and above al, there
was one most lamentable sight, which would even have wrung tears from a heart of
flint. Amongst al his children he had one daughter, a towardly and goodly young
gentlewoman of xij. years old, who crying out amain and wallowing in tears,
fell down, and catching fast hold about his thighs and knees, held him so
hard as he could by no means shake her off: and the affection of a father
wroght so with him, as he could not offer with violence to hurt her; he labored
to be loose, but she held faster; he went away, but she trailed after, crying
to him not to be so cruel to her his child; who came into the world by him.
This so wonderfully wrought with his nature, he being a man of a most loving
and kind affection; that he has often reported he thought that all his bowels
rolled about within him and that his heart would have burst presently, and there
instantly have died, his child so having him fast about the legs. But
notwithstanding all this, he being armed with a supernatural and heavenly
fortitude, he brake through al these temptations, and treading under foot
whatsoever might hinder him from Christ, he escaped out ofthis perilous
battle a glorious co^querer; and so leaving that sorrowful house and dolorus
company, he came with speed to the shore: where presently taking shipping, he
caused them to hoist up sails toward Laesina with a turmoiled and distressed
mind, one way surcharged with sorrow to remember the manner of his departure;
another way surprised with joy to remember that he had escaped. And even as a
ship in a te^pestuoussea, the boisterous waves tossing it up and down, is
thrown about, sometime touching the clouds* sometime plunged into the depth: So
no doubt the noble mind of this young marquess was no less distracted with
contrary cogitations; being as it were in a labyrinth of distempered affections:
sometimes he could not but remember that lamentable estate wherein he left his
father, wife, and children: he often imagined he was still amongst the^; he
thought he hard them cry and call upon him; thought he still felt his little
dear daughter clasping him about the legs and trailing after him; neither
could he contain but break out into tears; neither could he for his life but
often look back at that princely house, with all those goodly orchards,
garde^s, granges, fields and teritories: to al which he was the only heir
appare^t; yet al which he saw he must leave for Christ sake. But one thing
pierced his heart to see his wife, and children, and other his alliance
standing on the shore; who when they could not speak to him, looked at him;
and when they could not see him ceased not to look after the ship as long as
it was in sight; neither could he refrain but with a woeful countenance look
at them again as long as he could discern them: and withal he called to
mind the bitter words and heavy farewell which the Marquess his father gave
him at his departure; all which cogitations running in his head, did doubtless
wring from his sorrowful heart many a deep sigh and heavy groan, and many a
bitter tear from his watrie eyes: and yet notwithstanding all these, the
spiritual strength and courage of his mind was constant and invincible. And
even as a good Pilot in a raging sea, when clouds and darkness, thunder and
lightnings, storm and tempest run together, and toss the ship from wave
to wave, as lightly as a ball from hand to hand; yet for all that he sits still
at the helm, with undaunted courage, and marks his compass; and by his
courage and skill together keeps on a right and steadfast course through all the
rage of sea and weather: even so this our thrice noble Galeacius taking hold of
the holy and heavenly anchor; namely, a lively faith in Christ, and a steadfast
hope in God, he surmounts the clouds, and fixes those anchor-holdes in heaven,
and looking steadfastly with a spiritual eye, at the true load star: namely,
Christ Jesus and the hope of eternal happiness; he directs his course toward
the same with an heroical spirit, and heavenly resolution through the
tempestuous waves of those fearful temptations: and the ship that carried
his body, did not so fast transport him from delicate Italy toward Dalmatia,
as the ship of heavenly constancy and love of God withdrew his mind and
meditation from all natural respects and worldly delights, and made it mount
alost in holy contemplation. And thus the presence and grace of Gods spirit,
having overcome the power of natural affections; he began to cheer up
himself after this tempest: and first of all, bending the knees of his heart
to the eternal father in heaven; he yielded his Majesty most hearty thanks,
for that he had furnished his soul with such a portion of his grace, as to
withstand and conquer Satan in such a perilous battle: and for that he had
delivered him from the danger of Popish thraldom, from the inquisition, and
from that perpetual imprisonment both of conscience and body which the Popish
Church would have brought him unto, had he not thus escaped their hands. He
likewise praised God unfeignedly, that he vouchsafed to give him time,
opportunity, and grace to discharge that duty to his wife the young
Marchioness, which at his first departure he had omitted, and which oftentimes
he had with great grief bewailed, and that he had enabled him to omit nothing
which might have persuaded her to have left Sodom, and to have undertaken with
him this blessed pilgrimage toward the heavenly Jerusalem. The remembrance of
these things much refreshed his troubled mind. It also much contented and
satisfied his conscience, that upon that monstrous and undutiful behavior of
his wife toward him (spoken of before) he had made that protestation which
he did: namely, that he would use the lawful means to be divorced from her,
who had first of al divorced and cut off her self from him, by denying that
duty of love, which the wife may not deny to the husband, nor the husband to
the wife: he persuaded himself that this protestation would work well with
her, and make her more confirmeable to her duty, when she had advisedly
thought of it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of his journey home again by Venice, and through Rhoetia, Switzerland: and his
safe arrival at Geneua: and of the great joy he brought to the Church by his
safe return.
Reviving his troubled spirits with these cogitations, he arrived at Lasina in
Dalmatia, which is the country over against Italy; from whence he passed in a
very quiet passage, and calm sea to Venice: where he found many faithful
servants of God, and good Christians; who having heard before that he was gone
to Vicum, were exceedingly afraid for that imminent and inevitable danger they
saw he was in, either to have his conscience a slave to Popish vanity, or his
person a prisoner to Popish cruelty; therefore they ceased not to pray for him
night and day: and yet for all that they feared greatly what would become of
him. But when now at last they saw him return, both sound in conscience, and
safe in person; and such a glorious conqueror over Satan, and over so many
strong temptations with which the world and natural affections had assailed
him: their fear was turned into comfort, their sorrow into joy, and they all
glorified the Lord for him. And so after mutual comfort given and received, he
departed from Venice, and traveled through Rhoetia and Switzerland; where he
visited the Churches of the Protestants, and comforted them greatly with his
presence, and by telling them what great things the Lord had done for him: and
so by the good hand of his God upon him, he came in safety to Geneua the fourth
of October in the year 1558. His safe arrival brought exceeding joy to the
whole Church there; but especially to the Italian Congregation: for his long
absence had brought them into some suspense and doubt, not of any alteration of
his Religion, but of some cruel and false measures to have been offered him by
the deceitful Papists. But when they saw him so safely returned, untouched in
conscience, and unhurt in his person; and that he had passed so many pikes of
temptations which they knew had been pitched against him; they gave great
thanks to the Lord for him. But when he had discourst unto them particularly
the whole course of the proceedings: first, what a strong battry of temptations
and assaults the devil and the world had planted against him, then how
manfully he fought and withstood, and at last overcame them all; they fell into
admiration of so rare constancy, and thought him worthy of all honor, to whom
it is given (as the Apostle says) to suffer so much for Christ and for
Religions sake: and in all earnest manner they magnified the singular grace and
mercy of God toward him, and toward the whole Church in him; which had not
suffered his servant (this noble Galeacius) to be seduced out of the way of that
holy calling whereto the Lord had called him: and who had delivered him from so
subtle a train, laid by the policy of the enemy Satan, to have intrapt his
soul and conscience, by ouerturning him in the race of his Religion: and they
all acknowledged that this noble and godly Gentleman found it verified in
himself, which the kingly Prophet says in the Psalm: Because he has trusted
in me, therefore I will set him free: I will be with him in his troubles, I
will deliver him, and crown him with honor: and in another place, he that
trusts in the Lord shall never be confounded. And thus the Church received a
double benefit by him: for first, his practice was an example unto them all of
a most extraordinary and heavenly constancy in the love and profession of true
Religion: secondly, the merciful dealing of the Lord with him, was a notable
confirmation of their faith, and an encouragement to them to persevere and
stand to the truth, with assurance that the Lord himself would stand by them.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Certain years after his return to Geueua, he begins to feel in himself a
necessity of marriage: he delivers his case to Calvin, who refused to consent:
the matter is referred to the Churches of Switzerland, and by them he is
resolved that he is free from his first wife, and may marry again.
AND thus with unspeakable contentment in his own conscience, and with
public joy and thanksgiving of the whole Church, he settled himself at Geneua
in his former private and quiet life. Where after a few years he began to find
in himself some reasons which persuaded him to think it needful for him to
live in the estate of marriage: and therefore having thus long waited and
expected a more wise and duetiful answer from his wife; and perceiving by her
not answering, that she still persisted in that monstrous and unnatural
wilfulnes, which her blinded Popish mind had formerly undertaken by the
persuasion of her blind and Popish guides; he therefore purposed to take such
course for his remedy, as by the law of God and his Church should in that case
seem allowable: namely, to be divorced from her; who for her part had broken
the bond and untied the knot of matrimony. And first of all he imparted his
mind and purpose to M. Calvin, and craved his godly and wholesome counsel in a
case of so great importance. His counsel was first of all, that it was more
convenient and less scandalous to the enemies of Religion, if he could
abstain. But the Gentleman replied, that the case was so with him, as he could
not abstain, and gave him many weighty reasons which drew him to marriage; and
withal participated unto him some secret reasons: for the which he affirmed it
was altogether necessary for him to marry. Holy Calvin as he was a man endued
from God with sharpness of judgment, and a wise and discerning spirit: so he
foresaw plainly that many would speak evil of the fact, others would take
offense at it, some would plainly condemn it, and speak evil of Religion
for it; and the rather because (as he truly said) very few did rightly
conceive the full truth in the doctrine of diuorcement: but fewest of all would
or could know the whole circumstance of this particular fact. He likewise
wisely considered that the like president was seldom seen, especially in the
Italian Church, whereof this Gentleman was a principal member, and of special
account, both for his nobility, birth, and descent, and for his zealous love to
Religion. All which considerations, with diverse other, made reverend Calvin
not too easily to subscribe to this purpose and motion of Galeacius.
Notwithstanding, when the Gentleman urged him out of the word of God and good
conscience, with arguments which he saw and confessed he could not sufficiently
answer; therefore lest he should burden and trouble the conscience of so good
a man, which alleged for himself, that he was driven by necessity to that
course; he yielded thus far to him: that if he would repair unto the learned
and reverend Divine Peter Martyr, and ask his opinion, and the opinions of all
the learned and chief Divines of Rhoetia, and Switzerland; and desire them
seriously to consider of it (as in a matter of such moment, and of so great
consequence, it was requisite) and then set down their judgments in the
matter, and the reasons moving them thereunto; he promised that he would also
subscribe unto them, and most willingly yield unto him, what liberty soever
they did allow him: always provided, that he also should submit himself unto
their censure, and stand to the trial of their judgments in this case.
Galeacius most willingly yielded hereunto, as who desired nothing, but that
which the Lord by his word, and by the voice of his Church, should allow unto
him; and so taking the course that Calvin had advised him, he caused letters
to be drawn and sent to Zurich, Berue, and other the Churches of Switzerland;
opening the whole circumstance of the matter, and expounding the case truly
and fully; and humbly craved the judgment of the Church in a case of
conscience so great and doubtful. The chief Preachers and most learned
Divines yielded to his honest and godly request, and assembled about it: the
matter was much and long debated, and argued at large on both sides: and after
mature deliberation, and sufficient consultation had; it was concluded and
agreed on by them all with one consent^, that he might with safe conscience,
depart from that wife, which had first of all on her own part broken the bond,
and dissolved the marriage knot: and for the proof of this their opinion, many
causes and reasons were alleged and laid down out of the Scriptures, Fathers,
Councels, and out of the Civil law, which is the law almost ofal countries in
Christendom. All which (both their conclusions and their reasons) were put in
writing, and are registered and safely recorded; and are kept to this day ready
to be showed to whomsoever and whenever need shall so require: for it was
thought good by the Church so to do; both for that the case was extraordinary,
and would be sinisterly spoken of, and censured by many; who knew not
sufficiently how it stood: and especially for the preventing of any slander or
cavil, which the enemies might object against our Religion.

CHAP. XXV.
By public sentence of the Church and judgment of the law, he is divorced
from his former wife: and after a time he marries a French Gentlewoman, a
widow of about forty years of age, himself then being about three and forty.
GAleacius having thus laid his foundation* proceeded further; but still with
the consent of the Church, and observing the due form of Law, and the ordinary
course of Justice in such cases, he craved publicly of the Magistrate that he
might be divorced, that is, that he might be pronounced to be free and
discharged from that wife, who had already cut off her felfe from him. The
Magistrate considering the truth and circumstance of the case, together with
the judgment of the Divines, whereunto also was agreeable the judgment of the
Law, granted unto him, as by his advocates it was required; and so in publik
Court, and by sentence definite, and irreuocable he was divorced, and was
pronounced to be free, and discharged of his former wife Victoria; and that it
was lawful for him and in his choice to live unmarried, or to marry as he
himself would. After which liberty obtained, he imparted the matter to his
friends, and applying himself to think of another wife, he asked their
aduices in this point also. And herein he took that course, which generally
men in the world take, not; for in his choice he respected not so much wealth,
birth nor beauty, but only to find a fit companion of his life, and such a
one, as with whom he might lead that which remained of his life, in a
comfortable contentment, in tranquillity of mind and peace of conscience; that
so he might the more cheerfully serve the Lord, and wait for the coming of
Jesus Christ. Which course of his is more to be noted, especially in so great a
man, and so honorably descended; and the rather to cross and control the
carnal and worldly courses, which men for the most part and women also observe
in their marriages; respecting those things first, which should be last, and
that last or not at al which should be first and above all. Galeacius
continuing this his purpose, and looking about for his choice, the providence
of God (which does neuerfaile his children, especially in so great matters) did
offer unto him a fit opportunity. For so it was that at the same time, a
certain gentlewoman of France, a wido we came from Roan to Geneua, for true
religions sake, which she loved and professed, and for the love of it left her
country, and came thither for liberty of her conscience. She was a matronelie,
and a grave woman, and well reported of for her modesty, honesty, fear of God,
and for manifold good qualities: her name was Anna Fremeria, and was about
forty years of age. All which circumstances Galeacius well observing, thought
her a fit and convenient wife for him: and so with the consent and liking of
other his good friends, he took her to wife, and married her the sixteenth day
of January, in the year 1560. and in the three and fortieth year of his age;
and they lived together many years after with much comfort one of another, and
in an excellent agreement, being both of the same Religion, and of one mind;
always drawing in one yoke, and bearing one burden; dividing it betwixt them;
whether it was joy or sorrow: so that the unquietness of his life past, was now
recompensed with a life full ofall contentment; and so loving her, and being
truly loved ofher, they spent their days in all mutual comfort, solacing
themselves in their quiet and private life, and ioying in the mutual
faithfulness and loyalty which one performed to another. Lo thus shall the man
be blessed that fears the Lord.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of his course of life after his marriage: his frugality.
NOw being married, he labored to deliver and disburden himself of worldly
cares; and therefore he prescribed to himself a sparing and frugall course of
life; resolving to keep himself within the compass of his revenue* which
although it was as much again as it was before, by his wives dowry: yet by
many other hindrances was far less then heretofore it had been. And first
for his household, his care was to have it little as might be, and therefore His
servants, but two.
for his service and attendance, he only kept two maidseruants: and for
himself, he led his life in great sobriety, and in very mean estate, yet
always free from sordid baseness, and always keeping a seemly decorum; never
His attire plain, but comely.
wanting any thing that was necessary, nor having much that was superfluous.
His attire was plain and homely, but always comely, clean and handsome: and
he that in his own country might have been Lord of so many tenants, and
commander of so many servants, did now walk the streets of Geneua alone, often
not having the attendance of one man: yea he would not disdain to come himself
into His humility and lowly mind.
the market, nor think scorn to provide himself of necessaries: and sometime
would buy and carry home fruits, herbs, roots, and such other things. And this
course of life, together with liberty oftrue Religion, he esteemed greater
happiness then the Marquesdome of Vicum. And although by this course of life he
could scarce be discerned from an ordinary man, and from the common sort of
people: notwithstanding Evidences of nobility shining in his actions and
behauiours.
in his countenance appeared that gravity in his gestures, behauiours, and in
his whole body shone that comely majesty; as any wise man to have seen him,
and well considered him, would have presently judged that he came of noble
race; and that he had been fit for the greatest employments of the world:
which also was so much the greater, because that with his excellency of birth
and person, and perfection of all gentlemanly behauiours was joined true
godliness, and the fear of God; which of it self is of such force as it is
able even to honor him, who wants these worldly ornaments and outward
perfections. How much therefore did it magnify him, who had it in so great
measure, and accompanied with so many true complements of gentry and honor? By
alwhich it came to pass that so many parts of the chiefest excellencies
meeting in that one man, made him to shine above other the members of the
Church, even as the moon amongst the stars. So that the Italian Church, though
but little of it self; yet by the virtues and worthiness of this one noble
gentleman, seemed worthy to be compared with the whole Church of Geneua. And as
he was a credit How greatly he was esteemed in Geneua.
and honor unto that Church, so was he again most honorably esteemed of that
Church: yea not only of that Church, but of the whole Church and State of
Geneua: for not one Senator nor Magistrate of the City, not one of the
Preachers and Ministers of the church was to be found, which had not always in
their mouths, the commendation of noble Galeacius: yea he was honored and
highly esteemed of bythem all, and it was hard to say whether he was more
loved, or admired amongst them. In a word, he was loved of all men, looked at of
all men, spoken of by all men, magnified and extolled, yea wondered at of all
men; and though he knew not many himself, yet all men labored to know him.
No public meeting was appointed, no solemn feast was made, whereto this our
Galeacius was not most solemnly called: yea every man was desirous of him, and
happy was he that might have his company: yea they thought their meetings
graced, and their houses honored with his presence; and in all assemblies the
chiefest and highest room was offered him: yeawas thrust upon him, though They
still called him by the title of Marquess.
he nothing at all respected it. And although he refused the name and title of
Marquess; because, he said, the Emperor had cut off his succession, and
deprived him of that honor because of his Religion: notwithstanding, do what
he could, he was called byno other name al his life long, and that not by some
few his friends and favorites, but by all sorts of men, even strangers
themselves, and such as were not of his Religion. For all men thinking that he
had injury to be deprived of his lawful succession; therefore though they could
not give him the living and estate, yet they gave him all they could* that is,
the name and title. Such were his noble and gentlemanly qualities (besides his
Christian virtues) that they won the love and liking of all men; and caused
them to honor him far above that he desired or He was always visited by
strangers, and travelers, especially Princes and noble men.
cared for: yea every one labored to show any service or to perform any duty
of love and kindness toward him: nay strangers themselves were desirous to see
him, and were drawn into an admiration ofhim: insomuch as whenever any of
the nobility or Princes of Christendom, especially of Italy, did travel to
see foreign nations; and for the most part taking Geneua in their way (which
place generally all travelers have a great desire to see) they would by no
means omit to see and visit Galeacius. Thus did Francis and Alphonsus the young
Dukes of Ferrara, Octauius the Prince of Selerum: and thus did Fernesius the
Duke of Parma, and diverse other: who in their travel coming by Geneua
entertained him in all the complements of courtesy and of honor, no less
then if he had been at Naples in his former glory; or if he had still been a
courtier in the Emperors Court, as heretofore he had been. In a word, no
Noble man, no Ambassador, no great scholar, no man of note, of any foreign
nation came that way, but presently they used means to have a sight of this
noble Marquess; and for the most part desired to have some company and
conference with him: So that he was resorted unto continually by men of all
sorts; as though he had not been a private man, keeping a mean estate and
dwelling in a little house; but rather as though he had been a great Prince in
the Court, or one near in place to the Emperor himself. But though all men
desired his acquaintance and company, and he again was not curious in that
point, but courteous to His company and conversation.
all as occasion was offered: yet for the most part, his most familiar
conversation was with the men of his own nation: namely, with his countrymen
the Italians, of whom there was a flourishing Church at Geneua at the same
time; and which also flourished the better by his means, as heretofore has
been declared. Amongst whom though he behaved himself, it is doubtful
whether more ciuilly, or more humbly; yet for all that he was honored of them
all, and used more like a Lord then a private man: which although he in every
respect deserved, yet by no means desired. And so besides all his worthy and
excellent parts, his humble mind and His courtesy and affability.
friendly conversation made him more honorable. And to speak but truth of
him, out of all question he was not only a good Christian, but (which is not
always seen) a perfect and an absolute man: yea a man can hardly name any of
those good parts and amiable qualities; which for His rare perfections.
the most part do win a man love in the world; which were not to be found in
this noble gentleman. For besides his noble birth and Princely education, his
Religion and true fear of God; he was also humble minded, affable, courteous
and friendly to all men: he was wise, discreet, of good His eloquence and
ability of speech.
conceit, and of an excellent speech and discourse. It would have delighted a
man to have heard him speak; for as his memory was exceeding good, so his
natural eloquence, his smooth style, his easy, quiet and seemly delivery,
made his speech to be greatly commended of all that heard him. A man would have
wondered to have seen how many, even of the best sort, would have labored to
have bin in his company, and as it were have caught up and eaten his words from
his mouth, when it pleased him to discourse of some of those exploits and
adventures, which had fallen within the compass of his own knowledge: as of the
Emperor Charles the fifth his voyage into Prouence, and of his wars which he
waged in Gelderland, against the Duke of Cleeue, and of many other great
affairs and special employments. Neither was he only a fit companion for
gentlemen and men of His mildness to his inferiors.
estate, but such was the mildnes of his nature and disposition, that he was
also kind and courteous to men of lower place, and most ofall to the poor,
amongst whom, if they were godly and honest he would converse as familiarly, as
with his equals, or with men of greater place. He was also of a free and
liberal heart, no poor or distressed man did ever His charity to the poor.
require his assistance, or crave his help, but presently he would reach vuto
them his helping hand, and relieve them by all means he could, yea the want of
his former wealth and loss of his Marquesdome, did never grieve him, but when
he had not wherewithal to exercise his charity, toward the poor souls of
God: it was his joy and delight to be lending and giving to those that wanted,
and in that respect only he often wished himself as great a man in Geneua as
he was in Italy: but to his power and ability his good works did far exceed
the proud and pharisaical papists, His good works and charitable deeds.
who glory in their works, and will be saved by them. Prisoners and men in
danger did often feel his bounty; he omitted not to visit his sick
brethren, and that most diligently: such as were poor he relieved; yea the
richest and learned of all, did think themselves in their sicknesses happy
to have him with them; his presence and His ordinary exercises of Religion,
public and private.
company, but especially his talk and Christian exhortations were so
comfortable unto them. His ordinary exercises were these; every day he
repaired to the Church and heard divine service, and missed not to be present
at prayers with the congregation, especially he never omitted to hear the
Sermons and the word preached; which he did always with wonderful devotion and
reverence to the word of God; for he judged and esteemed that the true happiness
of a man, and the only sweet and pleasant life consisted in living holily, in
walking in Gods ways, in meeting with Satan's temptations, in bridling the
corruptions of his nature, and in serving God truly and sincerely without
hypocrisy: unto all which steps of happiness he thought he could never attain,
but by the preaching of the word; whereunto he also adjoined a daily course of
reading the Scripture; thus laboring out of the Scriptures to lay the
foundations of his own salvation, which he applied to the profit and comfort,
not ofhimselfe, alone, but of many others with him.

Besides all this, for the love he bear unto the Church, and the desire he had
to do al good he could; he took upon him His particular and personal calling.
the office of an Elder in the Church: the duty whereof he supplied daily,
carefully observing and inquiring into the manners and lives of professors;
allowing and encouraging the good, and censuring the offenders, which he did
with great care and conscience, lest that scandals and offenses might arise His
courage and justice.
in the Church, whereby either the quiet and good estate ofthe Church at home
might be disturbed, or the enemy might have any occasion to slander the
profession of Religion. Neither stayed he here, but beside this public care
and His love of peace, and continual ending of contentions, and setting men at
unity that were at variance.
labor, he also was daily well occupied in more private matters: for where
ever he saw, observed, or heard of any dissensions, suits in law, or
controversies amongst Christian neighbors, he was exceeding careful to end
and compass them; and for that end, as he had a ripe wit and a good conceit
and deep insight, so he would employ them all to the finding out the truth
and state of the cause: and having found it, he would use all his authority,
yea he would make himself beholden to men, on condition they would yield one
to another, and (...) in peace. In a word, his whole course of life sauoured of
grace, and did show him to to be a sanctified man; yet doubtless he thought
himself borne not for himself, but for God and for the Church; and he thought
no time so well spent, nor any business so well dispatched, as that wherein, not
any private gain, or pleasure to himself was sought or obtained, but only Gods
glory advanced, his Church edified, religion maintained, and the good work of
Gods grace confirmed in himself and others.

CHAP. XXVII.
Being aged he falls into a long and languishing sickness.
ANd thus he lived at Geneua many years full of joy and quietness, comfort, and
contentment: far from all worldly ambition, and as it were forgetting what he
was, and what he was borne to in this world, only respecting what he was to
inherit in the world to come; and as he had begun, so he continued in a
loathing and detestation of all popish superstition, and impieties. But with
this great quietness of mind and conscience there wanted not some outward and
corporal vexations: for after his long peace, new afflictions and storms came
upon him, whereby the Almighty would yet better try him, and make his faith,
his hope, his patience and perseverance to shine more gloriously; that so
afterward he might receive a more excellent reward, and a more glorious crown.
For first of all, he fell sick of a grievous, doubtful and dangerous disease,
which had bred upon him by abundance of rheum, whereby he became so short
winded that he could hardly draw his breath; by force of such weakness he was
exceedingly tormented night and day: for the good gentleman was constrained
oftentimes to sit up whole nights together and was feign to be removed from
room to room, and from one place to another, to see if by any means he might
take some sleep, which by the vehemence of this disease was almost quit gone
from him. This disease had grown upon him by reason of his many and long and
sore iournies, which he had taken by sea and by land for his conscience sake:
and of the great distempers and alterations of the state of his body, which for
his souls sake he had undergone.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A new temptation assaults him: a Jesuit is sent from his friends in Italy to
reclaim him, by offering him great sums of money, and to*make his younger
son a Cardinal: but he valiantly scorneth it all, and sends him back with
shame.
But this languishing sickness did not so much afflict his weak and aged
body as Satan labored by another device, and a new temptation to trouble and
vex his righteous soul. For it came to pass that about the same time, when
this disease had seized upon him, there came to Geneua out of Italy a nephew of
his, the natural son of his own sister, with letters to him from his former
wife Victoria the Marchioness, as also from his eldest son the young
Marquess: unto which letters this young gentleman being also a scholar, added
many words of his own to little purpose; laboring to persuade and allure him
with much and vain babbling, that now at the last he would acknowledge his
error, and return home again to his own country to his former Religion, and
to his ancient inheritance, that goodly Marquesdome. The principal cause both
of their writing, and his coming so far was this: because that if he would
now at last return again, hereby he said that out of all doubt he might
advance his youngest son Charles, either to the princely State of a Cardinal,
or at least to be some great Bishop. For, says he, whereas your son is now
admitted into holy orders, and is (for his great friends and alliance, and for
his special towardlines) in possibility of so great preferment, your pertinacy
and obstinate peruersenes, in following and defending a new found and vpstart
Religion; and condemned (as he said) by all the great estates of Italy, is the
very only hindrance of your sons preferment. These kind of news how highly they
offended the holy and Christian soul of this thrice noble Galeasius, who from
his heart abhorred, and in his soul detested those vain and ungodly and
profane dignities in the popish Church; I leave it to be judged by the
Christian reader. And therefore having with much grief of mind hard thus much
of this unsavory and unpleasant message, and not ablelonger to forbear, lie
first of all took the letters, and before his face that brought them, threw
them into the fire; and then briefly, but gravely, wisely, and zealously he
shaped him his answer by word of mouth: thinking so badde and base a message
unworthy the time and labor of writing. And first of all he told him, that
there could not have come to him more heavy and unwelcome news of his son
then these; that he was so blind a Papist, that for the hope of this worldly
advancement he would venture the ruin and subversion of his soul. And bad him
tell his son that he would hinder him in that ungodly course by all means he
could: and he said, he knew not whether it more grieved him to see the vanity
of his sons proceeding, then it rejoiced him that it lay in his power any ways
to hinder him in the same: Yea, says he, know thou, and let that my seduced
son know, that you could have used scarce any argument unto me so forcible to
make me persist in my Religion, and to detest Popery, as this; that in so doing
I may hinder my son from the abominable dignities of the Popish Church: and
therefore, says he, return my son this answer; that in stead of helping him
to these preferments, I will pray for ever to the Lord for him, who is the
father of his soul and mine, that he would open his eyes to see the truth, and
that he may have grace after the example of me his father to see the
horriblesuperstitious idolatries and impieties of Popery, and seeing the^ to
abhor and detest them: and renouncing the vanities of al worldly pomp and
honor, to direct his foot steps to the Lord, and embrace his holytruth, and
yield his soul and conscience obedient to the heavenly calling, and so become
the servant and child of the most high God: whereby he may aspire and attain
to the true and highest dignity; which is to enjoy the favor and comfortable
presence of God, and his holy grace; to love God, and to be loved of him; and
so at last to be advanced to that heavenly and eternalglory which is prepared
for them who in this world do forsake themselves and their own desires, that
they may in true holiness serve the Lord. With these and such like holy speeches
he answered the disholy and dishonest demand of this carnal Papist. But for
all that this importunate and unreasonable Jesuit (for he was of that sect)
ceased not to be troublesome to this noble and holy Gentleman* still urging him
with fond and frivolous reasons, and pressing him with rediculous arguments: as
this especially for one; he promised him a huge sum of money, if he would
return home: which, says he, lies ready at Lions for you, and the Brokers and
Exchangers there are prepared to pay it. And he further assured him, that if he
would come again into Italy, they had procured him liberty of his conscience
and Religion at Turing: and there also (he said) he should find a great sum
of money ready for him. But when this importunatefellow presumed to press the
good conscience of this resolute Gentleman with such base arguments* and began
to weigh Religion in a pair of gold weights; then the noble heart of this holy
Christian could not but show it self moved, and therefore in a holy zeal and
an ardent love of his Savior Christ Jesus, he cried out, Let their money perish
with the^ who esteem all the gold in the worldworth one days society with
Jesus Christ, and his holy spirit: and cursed, says he, be that religion for
ever, which shall wed men to the world, and divorce them from God. Go home
therefore, says noble Galeacius, take away thy silver again, and make much of
that dross of the earth, together with your dregs of popery, lock the^ up
together in the chest (...)And as for me, know it, that my Lord and Savior
Christ, has made me enamored of far more precious jewels and durable riches.
But the heavenly constancy of this holy man, drove this frantike papist from
his bias, into an extreme choler, for he according to the nature of his Popes
holy religion thought that when all arguments had failed, yet money would have
won him, and therefore seeing him so highly to scorn, and so disdainfully to
contemn so great offers, he thought it very strange; and therefore seeing all
his labor lost, and his best hold prove so weak, he fell from money to mere
madness; and forgetting himself, and his duty, brake out into ill words, and
reproohfull terms: But when the Magistrate was informed of it, and saw that
this arrogant papist durst so far abuse the patience of so honorable a man,
therefore by their authority, they forbad him the City (as the manner of that
place is in such cafes) and so this news bringer had his pasport to be
packing, and to go home and count his silver; and there to brag of his good
success; for he now could say by good experience, that so much money as was
enough to lead an hundred popish friars to and fro whither a man would, like
Bears by the nose, could not touch the conscience of one protestant, much
less make him a papist.

CHAP. XXIX.
Being delivered from the importunity of the Jesuit: not long after, came a
Monk, nimble witted and learned, a kinsman of his own, who had a strong
conceit that he could have reclaimed him: but he came too late, the Marquess
being dead before he came.
AND thus it pleased God to deliver this sick gentleman from this troublesome
tempter, and this messenger of Satan which came to have buffeted him; but he
buffeted, yea and vanquished him, and Satan in him; and he might report at
home, that he found the Marquess sick in body, but whole in mind, yea that
he never saw in all his life so resolute a conscience, and so courageous a mind
in so weak a body. And thus the Lord doubtless did in mercy to him; that
being from this disquiet companion* he might with more comfort and less
grief, bear the burden of his sickness, which now grew upon him more and
more, and left him not till it made him leave the world, and till it had
translated him from this his pilgrimage, to his eternal rest; and till it had
made him of a poor Marquess upon earth, a glorious King in heaven. Whose
death as it was wonderfully lamented of the whole Church for the unrecoverable
loss they had of him: so it was a merciful blessing, and a welcome messenger
of God to him: for it freed and delivered him from many storms of new
temptations which the Devil was raising against him; for within a short time
after his death, there came to Geneua a certain Monk, a good scholar, a
gentleman by birth* and near a kin to Galeacius; who being puffed up with
Monkish pride, and a conceit of his own ability for such an enterprise,
thought so far to have prevailed with Galeacius by his nimble wit and
eloquent tongue, as to have persuaded him now at the last, either to have
relinquished his Religion, or at least to have left Geneua and to have returned
into Italy (where his uncle had been lately Pope) that so by his presence and
countenance, and the help of his great friends (which he had both in the Popes
and the Emperors Court) his children might be in more possibility of those
high dignities and great places in the world, which they and their other
friends aimed at: and for the attainment whereof, nothing so much hindered them
as their fathers Religion, and course of life. But he returned home a proud
fool as he came, and ashamed of his proud and insolent spirit; which persuaded
him by his vain babbling he could have overcome him whom he found when he came
to Geneua to have overcome the world, and all spiritual enemies, and now to be
triumphing in the glory of heaven. And so leaving him and all other his Popish
carnal kindred, gnashing their teeth for anger to see his admirable constancy;
let us return again to our sick gentleman, whose end now hasting on, will
also hasten an end of this strange story.

CHAP. XXX.
His long and languishing sickness grew and increased upon him in such measure,
as his pain was most grievous; but he bare it all with an heroical and
heavenly courage: so that it might manifestly appear that even the Lord from
heaven did lend him strength; and as the torments and pangs of the disease
increased, so hisfaith and patience and all heavenly virtues shone in him more
and more: so that it was most true of him which the Apostle says, as the
outward man perished so the inward man was renewed daily. His body pined away,
buthis mind and soul grew from strength to strength: and as a by-stander
feels not the pains of him that is tormented or racked before his eyes: so
his soul and mind stood as it were a far off, beholding the pains and
vexations of the body; and being untouched it self, did as it were laugh at
Satan, sin, death, and damnation; who by all their joint power could do no
more, but only to vex and rack this poor carcass with bodily disease, but
were not able to touch the soul, to vex the mind, or wound the conscience.
If any man ask the reason why his mind and conseience were so quiet in this so
great torment of the body: the reason was* for that his mind was employed in
holy meditations, as of the singular love of God his father unto him in Christ
Jesus; whereby he assured himself undoubtedly of salvation, of the manifold
holy graces, wherewith God had adorned him: by the force whereof, he said, he
had borne off so many buffets of Satan, had passed so many pikes of troubles,
and come away conqueror in so many fearful fights, as had opposed themselves
against him in his conversion. These gifts and graces of God he weighed with
the crosses of his sickness, and found them far heavier; and he compared these
momentany and light afflictions, with that exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, which, he said, he knew was laid up for him in heaven. These and such
like meditations cheered up his spirit more then the force of his sickness
could appall him.

But above al things he felt unspeakable comfort and sweetness in his prayers to
the Lord; which he (...) fervently, and with a zealous and faithful heart.
(...) often say, that in the midst of his prayers, his soul seemed to him to
be even ravished out of himself, and to taste of the blessed joys of heaven.
So that the saying of the blessed Apostle was verified in him, As the sufferings
of Christ abounded in us, so consolation by Christ abounded much more. In his
sickness he wanted no help of the Physicians, for they came to him out of all
parts of the city: and willingly did they all do their diligence about his
body; whose soul they knew had Christ Jesus to be the Physician for it. His
friends also continually visited him, who were of the chief men in the city;
and they were all welcome to him rich and poor: and it is hard to say whether
he received more comfort by them, or they more spiritual edification by him;
his speeches and behauiours were so full of patience, and so well seasoned with
all grace. All his friends performed to him what duty soever was in their
power, but especially his worthy wife did then show her self most loving and
loyal, for she was never from about him, and saw that he wanted nothing which
the world could yield for the recovery of his health. But all was in vain,
for the time of his dissolution was at hand, and he had run the royal race
of a most holy Christian life; and now nothing remained but a blessed death. He
might say as the Apostle did with much joy of heart: I have run my race, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which Christ the righteous Judge will give to me, and to
all such as wait for his appearing.

After few days the violence of his sickness was such, as it overcame all
power of physic; so that it was manifest, that that blessed hour approached,
wherein the Lord had appointed to accomplish his own good work in him;
therefore he sequestered himself altogether from any more care of his body, and
from al worldly cogitations; he renounced the world and all in it; he took his
farewell of his wife, and all his Christian friends, and said, he should lead
them the way to heaven. He fixed all his thoughts upon his soul, and
(...)ixed on the Lord in heaven: and cried to (...)hat as he had sought him al
his life, so he would ^^ him, and acknowledge him for his own. And thus as all
his friends sat about him, and as the Preachers and Ministers were occupied in
holy prayers and reading of the Scriptures, and applying to him the heavenly
consolations of God* word, in the performance of these exercises he ended his
dales, wherein he had taken* delight all his life long: and as he rejoiced to
have them in this life, so it pleased the Lord that he should have them at his
death. And so in the midst of all his friends, in the presence of the
Ministers, even in the fight of them all, he peaceably and quietly yielded up
his spirit, and rendered his soul into the hands of his merciful God and
faithful Creator, of whom he had received it; who immediately by the ministry
of his holy Angels receiving it at his hands, and washing it pure in the blood
of Jesus Christ, crowned it with the crown of eternal and heavenly happiness.
And thus this holy man was translated from a noble man on earth, to be a noble
Saint in heaven: and of a Marquess on earth in bare name and title, he was
advanced to be a glorious and triumphing King in heaven: where he now reigns
in glory with that God whom he so faithfully served on earth. That God and
mereifull father grant that all we that read this admirable story, may be
allured to take upon us the same most holy profession, that this thrice noble
Marquess did; and may renounce and cast off what ever in this world we see
does hinder us from the holy fellowshippe of Christ Jesus; and strengthen us
that we may be faithful to the end: that so we may obtain the crown of life
in that glory, where this noble Galeacius and all the heavenly host of Gods
Saints do wait for us. Amen. This was his life, this was his end: let thy life
be like his, and thy heart walk in the same way* then shall thy soul die his
death, and thy latter end shall be like his.

O Lord how glorious art thou in thy Saints!
FINIS.

