Morando The Tritameron of Love: Wherein certain pleasant conceits, uttered
by diverse worthy personages, are perfectly dyscoursed, and three doubtful
questyons of Love, most pithely and pleasauntly discussed: Showing to the wise
how to use Love, and to the fond, how to eschew Lust: and yielding to all
both pleasure and profitt.

By Robert Green, Master of Arts in Cambridge.

At London Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
little North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gunne.

1584.

To the Right Honorable, Phillip Earl of Arundell, Robert Green wishes
increase of honor, with the full fruition of perfect felicity.
THE Emperor Domitian (Right Honorable) made him nets to catch flies, least
happily he might be found idle. Caligula being wearied with weighty affairs,
would (to pass away the time) gather Cockles. The Persian Kings semetimes
shaued sticks. Virgill chose rather to r^ade rude Ennius, then to be found
without a book in his hand. Time wishes rather to be spent in vain toys,
then in idle thoughts, the one drives away fantasies, the other breeds
Melancholy. Mercury vouchsafed once to drink of Philemons Earthen pot.
Apollo gave Oracles at Delphos, as well to the poor man for his mite, as to
the rich man for his treasure. Phillip thought well of the water which a poor
shepherd offered to him, in a greasy Bottle: duty binds the Subject to
present, and courtesy the Prince to accept, in the one, will is an excuse, in
the other, courtesy a bountiful reward. Apelles (right Honorable) presented
Alexander with the counterfaite of Campaspe, the face not fully finished,
because he liked the picture: and I offer this pamphlet unto your Lordship, not
well furnished because you are a lover of learning.

Zewxes paynting Triton, drew only his face, the rest he hid with the
tumbling waves of the Sea. And I setting forth Morandos discourse, show only
his bare talk, the rest I rudely shaddowe with an imperfect tale. The Persians
caused their Apes always to mask in cloth of Gold, to cover their
deformetie. Timocles caused his Popingay to perke under a Dragon of Brass,
that the portrature might defend her from the Vultures tyranny: and I seek to
shrowde my simple work, under your Honors wings, thinking one dram of your
Lordships favor, sufficient to fence me from the venomous teeth of those
biting Vypers, who seek to discredit all, having themselves no credit at
all. Achilles made it not strange to take a view of Phidias clownish work,
because it was the image of Mars: and I hope your Honor will vouchsafe to cast
a glaunce on this silie Book, for that it represents the discourse of diverse
worthy personages, although of it self, it is like Zewxes counterfaits, which
seemed at a blush to be Grapes, but being thoroughly viewed, were bare shaddowed
colors. The Physicians prescribe in their diet, that sometimes bitter Pills,
do as much profit the sto^acks, as sweet Potions. Augustus sometimes would
solace himself, as well with Ennius dross, as with Maros Gold: and it may
be your Honor passing over many learned works, will at the last stumble at
this fond toye, and laugh as Sigismonde did at the Pomegranat, not that he
smiled at the fruit, but at the simple meaning of the man which presented him
with so small a gift^ Resting upon this point, I commit your Lordship to the
Almighty.

Your Honors humbly to command Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers Health.
DEmosthenes Gentlemen) always sought to win the goodwill of the Senate, by
unfolding the equity of the caze, and I seek to obtain your favor by
appealing to your courtesy, hopeing to find you as ready to grant me the
one, as the Senate to grant him the other. Protagenes found the more favor
in setting forth his simple Pictures, in that he did what he could, and I
hope to find the more freendshipp at your hands for this imperfect work, in
that I do what I can. Yet I know I shall be compared of some to Damides
Parrat, which prated nothing but that she heard her master speak. Well
though some be Savage, all are not Satyrs, though diverse be sturdie, all are
not Stoickes. Let flearing Sycophants carpe at my want, yet I doubt not but
courteous Gentlemen will account of will, and as it is folly to reject the
favor of the one, so it is fondnes to respect the freendshippe of the other.
But to them that shall pardon my offense, and spare to spite at my fault. I
wish them such prosperous hap, as they can desire, or I imagine: to the rest,
I will to them as they wish to me, and yet I bidd them both farewell.

Robert Green.

The Tritameron of Love.
THere dwelled in Bononia a certain Knight called Signior Bonfadio, whose
Prowess in Martial exploites, did not only win him wealth to maintain his
worship, but also honor to countenance, and counteruaile his substance: and
immortal glory as the only guerdon due for such a doubtie Champion. So that
he was generally honored of al for his valerous magnanimity, and particularly
loved of each one for his bountiful courtesy, being no less liberal to the
poor to defend them from want, then courageous for his country to maintain
them in weal. This Bonfadio shrouded thus under Fortune, and shrined up by
Fame, tried at last by proof, which long before he had heard by report, that
the stiffest Metal yeldeth to the stamp, the strongest Oak to the Carpenters
axe, the hard Steel to the file, and the stoutest heart does bow, when Nature
bids him bend, that there is no Adamant, such which the blood of a Boat can
not make soft, no Tree so sound which the Scarabb fly will not pearce, no
Iron so hard which rust will not fr^t, no mortal thing so sure which time
will not consume, nor no man so valiant which comes not without excuse when
Death does call. The Phoenix has black pens as well as glistring feathers,
the purest Wine has his Lecs, the luckliest year has his canicular days.
Uenus had a Mole in her face, and Adonis a skarre upon his chin, there was
sometime Thunder heard in the Temple of Peace, and Fortune is never so
favorable but she is as fickle: her prosperity is ever sawsed with the sower
soppes of adversity, being const^nt in nothing but in inconstancy. Scipio
escaped many foreign broils, but returning home in triumph was slain with a
tyle. Caesar conquered the whole world, yet cowardly slain in the Senate. So
Bonfadio having by his Prowess long prevailed against his foes, was at last
most vnluckelie slain by his supposed friends. For as in an evening he passed
through a blind lane of the City, he was suddenly shot through with a
Pistol: which murder was so secretly committed, that the perfourmer of so
deuillish a fact could never be detected. But the report of this ruthlesse
Tragedy being come to the ears of Lady Panthia (for so was his wife called)
she forthwith fell into such perplexed passions, and was so surprised with
sudden sorrow, that before the tale could be half told she fell down in a
trance, being hardly brought again to life by the company. Yet at last being
come to her self, after she had wept so long that the very fountain of her
tears was dried up with continual pouring out of sorrowful plaintes, she
then (womanlike) began somewhat to listen to the comfortable counsel of her
friends, and to apply to her sore that salve that might soonest mittigate her
malady. For through their friendly persuasions very shortly she began to
consider, that as to wish for an impossible thing was but a sign of small
wit: so to sorrow without ceasing for that which could not be redressed did
importe but mere folly: the one being a foe to desire, and y^ other a friend
to death. She therefore resting upon this point, thought with most solemn
Obsequies to celebrate her husbands Funerals, that both the sequel of her
works might confirm her former words, and her tears be^ ^ought to come more
of care then of custom. Whereupon she framed a very sumptuous Sepulcher,
intombing her husbands bones with such pompous magnificence, that al Italy
thought Bonfadio happy for so good a wife, and her worthy of so good a
husband. The Funerals finished, Panthia for a time lived more sorrowfully
being a widow then merely being a wife, till at last seeing her mourning Weed
began to wax bare, she thought best both to cast away her outward coat and
her inward care, wisely waighing with her self that it is in vain to water the
Plant when the root is dead, to ask counsel when the case is distrust, to
wish for rain when the Corn is ripe, and to sigh when no sorrow can
prevail. The Cedar tree remains without leaves but twelve days, and the
Date tree but seven. Cyrces love never continued above one year, and the
Tapers in the Temple of Ianus burned only but nine nights, the call of a
Quail continues but one quarter, and a widows sorrow only two months: in
the one sad for her old mate, and in the other careful for a new match.

Panthia in this state having past this term (I do not say with like
affection) thought now she had a greater care and more charge being a widow
then a wife. For she had by Signior Bonfadio three daughters, the eldest named
Lacena, the second Sostrata, and the youngest Fioretta, all so adorned with
beauty and endowed with bounty, so framed in body and fourmed in mind, each
of them being both in outward complexion and inward constitution so singular,
as hard it was to judge which held the Supremacy. Panthia placing all her
felicity in the exquisite perfection of her three daughters, sought to bring
them up so charily and chastely, that all men might like them for their beauty
and love them for their virtue, imitating the good Lapidaries, which in the
purest gold set the most precious stone. While thus solitarily and sadly she
past away the time amongst her children, Signior Morando a Knight, who in his
life time had often served in the wars with Bonfadio, between whom there had
long been a perfect League of amity, willing to show in the brood h^ well he
loved the old bird, was so friendly to Panthia as familiar with Bonfadio,
comforting her as a desolate widow, and counselling her as his friends wife,
driven to the one by conscience, and to the other by courtesy. Seeing therefore
she did wholly absent her self from company, which made her dream on sondrie
melancholy motions, he did inuit her and her three Daughters to a graunge
house of his seven miles distant from Bononia, whether also diverse gentlemen
were bidden, thinking this the fittest means to drive her from her sorrowful
dumpes. Panthia desirous to let Signior Morando understand how greatly she did
account of his courtesy, came at the day appointed to his house, where both
she and her Daughters were not only well welcome to Morando, but to all the
rest of the company. Amongst whom was Signior Peratio, Messier Aretyno, and
Signior don Syluestro, with others, who sitting down to dinner and passing
away the time with pleasant parle, it chanced after dinner as they sat
talking that Signior Peratio spied hanging in the Parlera Table most curiously
painted: wherein both the Sea and Land was most perfectly pourtraied. The
Picture was of Europa, the Sea of the Phenicians and the Land of Sydon: On the
Shore was a beautiful Medowe, wherein stood a troop of dainty Damosells:
in the Sea a Bull, upon whose back sat a Dame of surpassing beauty sailing
toward Candie, but looking to the crew of her companions from whom by Sinister
means she was separated. The Painter by secret skill had perfectly with his
Pensell desciphered the feature of their faces, as their countenance did seem
to importe both fear and hope. For seeing their pereles Princess a pray to
such a prowling Pyrate, they rusht into the Seas (as willing to be partakers
of their Mistres misery) as far as fear of such fearful surges would
permit them, but pushed back with the dread of present danger, they stood
vewing how cunningly and caresully the Bull transported his charge: How Europa
araied in Purple Roabes sat securely and safely holding in her right hand his
horn and in her left his tail. About him the Dolphins seemed to leap, the
Sirens to sing, and Triton himself to triumph. Cupid also in the form of a
little boy was there most curiously painted, having his wings spread, a Quiver
by his side, in one hand a flame of fire, in the other a chain^ of gold, where
with he drew the Bull as by constraint, and turning his head toward Jupiter
seemed to smile at his folly and to despise his dietie, that by his means he
had made such a strange Metamorphosis.

Signior Peratio having long gazed on this gorgcous Picture, both praised his
perfect skill that had so cu^ningly made a counterfeit of Nature by Art, and
also mused at the force of Love that had by conquest caught so worthy a
Captive, that at length as one forced by affection he sighing said: O Gods
that a child should rule both the Heaven the Sea and the Land.

Don Siluestro seeing Peratio so suddenly passionate with the view of a simple
Picture, taking occasion herevppon to enter into further parle began to cross
him on this manner.

Why how now Peratio (quoth he) do you sigh to see Jupiter so fond as for
lust to abase his dietie, or Cupid so presumptuous as by Love to increase his
dignity: the one showing himself worse then a man for his folly, the other
more then a God for his power.

No sir (quoth Morando) you mistake his meaning, for it fares with him as with
Narcissus, that was never in Love but when he looked into the water, or like the
Fish Mugra which only leapeth at the sight of the North star: Hyparchion
never saw any Musical Instrument but he would sing, nor he any a^rous Picture
but he must sigh, the one showing thereby his affection to Music, the other
bewraying his passions in Love.

In deed sir (quoth Peratio) I remember Sylenus would always lead his Ass
in a string, that when he waxt weary he might ride, and Amphion played ever
best on his Harp when he heard poor Stheneus blow on his Oten pipe: So sir
you keep me for a plain song: whereupon to descant showing your fine wit
always to be most sharp when you find my dull head to be most gross. But
Calchas never prophesied Darth to the Grecians but when his own Lands were
barraine: Nor Tiresias had never given a verdite against Juno, but that he
himself had been once a woman. Thrasos age could not bereave him of his
parasiticall affections: neither was Battus a less vlabb being old then in
his youth: The whiter the Leekes head is the greener is the blade. The Angelica
bears seed always when it begins to wither: Dry sticks are sonest
consumed with fire, and doting age sonest caught with fancy, deuining that of
others whereof they themselves do most dream: but they follow the old
Proverb, Similes habent labra lactucas.

By my faith Signior Morando, quoth Madame Panthia, if you have pusht Peratio
with the pike has hit you with the Iaunce: but it semes he has been burnt in
the hand, that cannot abide to here of fire. Apollo would never willyngly avide
the noise of the Crow, because he had believed her to lightly. Sylenus was
ever most angry when any told him of good wine, because he would often be
drunk. Peratio likes not to be touched where he is gald, nor to be accused so
stricktlie, when his conscience feels the crime: and yet I go too far, for
it is no off^nce to love.

Yes Madame, quoth Aretyno, as Jupiter loved Europa crauyng only to cropp the
bud of her beauty, and to spoil the fruit of her honstie, seeking for the
gain of his fading pleasure, to procure her lastyng pain: Is not such
fancy a fault, when it springs up without honest affection?

Truth sir, quoth Panthia, but I coumpt likyng without Law, ^o love but lust.
Was Scipio thought a friend to Numantia, when he sought to spoil the Citie^ or
Chronis to Caeres, who robed her Temple of her treasure? The Turkey having lost
his culler is of no value. The fairest flower with out his smell is coumpted
but a weed: and the maid that by mischaunce loos^th her virginity, though
never so faier is most unfortunate, her chefest treasure is the^ but trash like
the Ore in the I Will Choos, which is puer in the mynge, but dross in the
furnace, for beauty without honesty is like deadly poison preserved in a box
of gould. Considering this Arctyno, do you coumpt him to love, that wishes
his Lady such loss.

Madame, quoth Morando, you misconsture of his mind, for Aretyno coumptes,
that what soever is fancy, that is love.

It Is good then (quoth she) to bring him from his heresy, for fancy is Vox
aequiuoca, which either may be taken for honest love, or fond affection, for
fancy oftimes comes of wealth or beauty, but perfect love ever springs
from virtue and honesty.

Marie, quoth Peratio, that is the cause that women love so much and men so
little, wherein by your own judgment they are altogether blamlesse, for women
find in us honesty without wealth, and we in the^ beauty without virtue.
Sir, quoth she, your censure is no sentence, neither can this broken coin
stand for sterlyng: for to excuse your self before you be accused, is to
find a foul crack in a false conscieuce. It Is hard to cover a great rent with
a small piece, or to hide Uulcans poult foot with pulling on a straight shoe.
Honesty is always painted like a woman, as signif^yng that it is most
predamynaunt in that sex. And sir to give you a venie with your own weapon,
as you said bef^e, like lips, like lettice, as the man is, so is his
manners, cat always goes after kind, and it is hard to find men without
small houestie, and great deceit.

Do you speak by experience, quoth Morando, was your husband in the number of
those that are cumbred with this consumption.

He was, quoth she, by nature, but that he did amend it by nourture, and yet,
quoth she, my husbands honesty cannot conclude generally, but that there must
be large exceptions.

I am glad Madame Panthia, that you are so pleasant, and all the rest of my
good guestes so merrily disposed, I hope you will not deny me of a request,
that generally I shall crave of you all.

If it be reasonable, quoth Panthia, I dare promise for the gentlewemen.

And I, quoth Syluestro for the men.

Why then I will have you tell me your opinions, whether this our country
proverb be true or no, which is commonly spoken Amor fa molto ma argento fa
tutto. Love does much but money does all.

In men quoth Panthia, and that we will prove.

In women, quoth Peratio, and that I will defend.

Two fit champions, quoth Morando, to try such a doubtful combat.

Nay sir, quoth Panthia, I my self refuse his proffer but my daughter Lacena
shall perform my challenge, for it is not a mourners part to discourse of
such pleasant points.

A fit match, quoth Peratio for so honest a man, and to put you out of doubt
I had rather sip with your daughter then sup with you: for an inche of a kidd
is worth an ell of of a cat, but to leave these cuttyng blows: how say you
Lacena, are you content to defend so false an heresy.

Sir, quoth she, where duty drives, there denial is a fault, and where nature
infereth, obedience there to resist is to war against the Gods: the youg Lamb
comes at the bleating of y^ old sheep: the Signett at y^ call of the Swan:
the Faune follows fast after y^ Do: creatures without reason, and brute
beasts by mere instinckt of Nature follow their dams, and should not I then
obey my parents: yes no doubt, or else I might be counted more brute then a
beast, or less natural then a reasonable creature. This considered, if I
aduentere rashely to discuss so hard a case being unfit by nature and art,
the duty I hope that I owe unto her, who has power to comma^nd me, shall be
sufficient to excuse my small skill and great interprise, and the common saying
so ^uerally used here in our country does somewhat incorage me. A ^ure truth,
quoth they, need no subtle gloze: nor a clear case a shifting Counselor.
Well (quoth Peratio) I doubt your fained simplisitie, will prove a non to be
sinewishe Sophestrie, and therefore thus to the purpose. The case (quoth he)
which we have to discuss, is a maxim houlden as true as a holy Oracle: but
the doubt is, whether it is to be auerred in men, or verefied in women: If the
perfection of the body, and the constitution of the mind, forces men to
love, more then the greedy desire to gain, then we have won the feilde, and
you lost the combat: and if women love more for beauty and virtue, then for
wealth and riches, we have taken the foil, and you won the conquest. But
it was hard for Achelous with his shifts to prevail against Hercules
because of his strength, and it will be as hard for you to resist my reasons
because they be true. Who so reads the Romish Records, and Grecian
Histories, and turns over the volumes filled with the report of passionate
lovers, shall find soundrie Sonnets, sawsed with sorrowful passions, diverse
Ditties declaryng their dumps, careful complaints, woeful wailinges, and a
thousand sundry hapless motions, wherein the poor perplexed lovers do
painte out, how the beauty of their mistres, has amazed their minds, how
their fancy is fettered with their exquisite perfection: how they are snared
with the form of her Feature: how the gifts of Nature so bountifully
bestowed upon her, has entangled their minds, and bewitched their senses,
that her excellent virtue, and singular bounty, has so charmed their
affections, and her rare qualities has so drowned them in desire, as they
esteem her courtesy more then Cesars Kingdoms, her love more then
Lordshippes, and her good will more then all worldly wealth. Tushe all Treasure
is but trash, in respect of her person. Yea, they prefer the inioying of her
perfection, before all the riches of fortunate Craesus. Thus the poor
passionate lovers whose life hangs on their Mistres love, crave only to
feed their fancies with her beauty, and to please their minds with her
virtue. But let the most injurious Dame, who has best skill to breath out
slaundrous speeches against men, say (if she can) that she has ever heard, or
red, of any lover that has desiphered in his ditties, the earnest desire he
had to entoye his Mistres, or painted out his passions, that he suffered to
gain his Ladies possessions: now it is a fault committed of most, and omitted
of few, that men in their love look before they leepe, and therefore oftimes
fall in the ditche, never gaping after the desire of greedy gain, nor
building their fancy upon the fading goods of Fortune: so that often they win
such a wife as he may put her Dowry in his eye for hurting his sight, and her
wealth may be cast without any great count: whereby it is evident, that if a
man once fix his fancy upon any Dame, no want of wealth, no lack of living
can impair his love, but he remains faithful in despite of Fortune,
wearing this Posie in his Shield, Non aurum sed amor.

In treth (quoth Siluestro) if I had a case in the law thou should be my
Counselor, for I doubt thou bast put in such a Plea, as it will be hard for
Lacena to a^swere.

Tushe sir (quoth she) though the Castle be sharply assaulted it is not
straight won, and the field is not lost at the first Alarm. Ajax valor was
no whit the less for Ulysses v^ine babbling, and though by his words he won
the prize, yet all men knew it was more by prating then by Prowess: so if you
foil me by your subtle fallations, every one shall perceive that it is not
because I defend the wrong, but because I cannot wrangle. Boethius in his
Books De consolatione, noting the sondrie affections which force the mind,
either to mislike greatly or to love fervently: says, that in making a choice
of their love women do most err, in that they suffer their minds sonest to be
subdued by the gifts of Nature: wherein although I confess they offend by
fixing their fancies on such a fickle subject: yet it is evident, that they
more respect the person then his purse, and rather like his perfection then his
lands and liuinges. For if women in their choice were more wedded unto wealth
then to wit, and respected more their Lovers Possessions then his person, no
doubt an infinite number of Damosells ^hculd lead their lives in more plenty
and less penury. But as the softest wax sonest receives impression: as the
tender twigge is most easy to bend, and the finest glass most brittle: so the
pure complexion of women is most subject unto Love, being quickly inflamed by
the force of affection but never quenched: like to the Abeston stone which once
set on fire can never be put out. For when as Cupid a^th to allure the mind of
a se^e maid to offer Incense at his Altar and so become his subject, he
seeks not to draw her with worldly trashe or treasure, nor to persuade her
with the gift of Jemmes or Jewelles, but covers his hook with y^ sugared
bait of beauty, wherewith she being once blinded he carries her away into
perpetual captivity. The affection of women is always f^ttered either with
outward beauty or inward bounty, either builded on the perfect complexion of
the body or pure constitution of the mind: they always way his worthiness
and not his wealth, his comeliness and not his coin: and rather seek to
settle their minds upon his virtue then on such fading pelf as is not
permament. For after that they have imprinted in their minds the form of
their Lovers feature, and that beauty has so bewitched their senses as they
are wholly at her beck, then they carefully poor souls conslder the condition
of their Lovers: and as they have vewed their outward substance, so they
divine of their inward qualities. If he be valiant they love to hear of his
Martial exploites: his Prowess pleases the^: his manly deeds drouneth them
in delight: yea, they are so besotted in this fond imagination, that they
think no man so able to attchiue any enterprise as he, vaunting of his
victories, as if she her self bad won the conquest: If he be wise his wit
sets them more on fire: If Eloquent, his sugared speech inchaunteth them: If
learned, his secret skill draws them into an endless Laberinth: so that
they wholly feed their fancies with his beauty, or delight their minds with
his qualities, neu^r resepecting his riches nor weighing his wealth: wher^by
oftimes when poverty pincheth them they cry Peccaui. But Signior Peratio, to
come more nerer to the purpose, tell me but what you would think of her that
would carefully couett that which she cannot at her own will enjoy, or seek
greedily to gain that thing which an other properly shall possess, were it
not to seem either fond or frantic: In the same case should women consist
if they liked more for living then for love. For after they be once married is
not her housbandes wealth his own to dispose? May he not either wisely keep
it or wilfully consume it, either spare or spend at his own pleasure? Yes no
doubt, her Dowry is then grown to be his due, and her Patrimony wholly his
proper possessions: so that it may consequently be concluded, that women are
not so wi^lesse as to wish for that which if they get yet their gain shall be
nothing, but they observe this rule as a principle, Omnia vincit amor, and nor
caedamus amori.

How now (quoth Panthia) has not my Daughter said pretely well to the
purpose? Did she not as well play the defendant as he the plaintiff?

In deed (quoth Peratio) she has done pretely but not pithelie. For to
conclude upon supposes is but slender Sophistry, and to calculate upon
conjectures is but bad Astrology. For though Boethius does find women faulty
for firing their fancies on the outward shape of beauty, yet he denies not
but that wealth may be the final cause which kindles their fond desire, as
he does blame them for gazing to much on the gifts of Nature: so he does
not excuse them from gaping to greedelie after the gifts of Fortune: so that to
use this reason in this case, is to pull on Hercules hose on a ch^ldes foot.
What the natural cause is of wemens unnatural covetousness I know not, since
I am not skillful in such secret Philosophy, but this I am sure that they
are so deeply addicted to this dross, and so greedelie given to the gain of
gold, that there is no love such which coin cannot change, no affection
such which fading pelf can not infringe: nay, almost no chastity so charie
which desire of wealth cannot wrack: which Uirgill wisely weighing said:
Auri sacra fames quid non Muliebria pectora cogis. And to prove these my
premises by a manifest instance. How was Danae the Daughter of Acrysius sought
and sued to by diverse and sondrie suitors, whose parentage and progeny, whose
beauty and bou^tie, whose singular feature and famous qualities deserved to be
mates to ye brauest Dames of the world: and yet because their comeliness was
without coin, their worship without wealth, and their singular perfection
without sumptuous possessions, although she had sufficient wealth of a poor
Pesaunt to make a mighty Prince, yet she was so greedy after the desire of
gain, that she esteemed more fading pelf then all the beauty and virtue in
the worlde^ yea, such was her covetous mind, that although Jupiter himself
sought to sack the Castle of her chastity, and to croppe the bud of her
beauty, yet she despised his dietie, until to optaine his desire he was feign
to fall into her lap in the shape of a shower of gold. Procris whose fervent
affection was such toward Cephalus, as her parents were constrained
unwillingly to marry her as they thought to an unfit match, because her
senses were so besotted with y^ beauty of this Cephalus, and his worth^e
qualities had so bewitched her mind that he was the only Saint whom in heart
she desired to serve. After that they long had led a happy life, Cephalus
intending to make a trial of his wives constancy, absenting himself for a
while, and coming in disguised apparel made suit unto her, that in her
husbands absence he might have the fruition of her person: but such was her
settled faith and affection, that neither sighs, sorrow, sobbes, complaints,
prayers, promises, nor protestations could prevail, until he gave the last
assault with the proffer of many precious Iewelles: whereat she was forced to
give over the Forte, and so Courtizanlike make a sail of her constancy. What
should I speak of that golden girl Eriphile, who being the Mistress of many
rich Possessions, was notwithstanding so adicted to the desire of pelf, that
she rejected poor passionate Infortunio, and chose that doting old Peasant
Amphiarus, whom after she betrayed to the Greeks for an ouch of gold. Beauty
nor virtue could not win the love of Tarpeia, but for a Bracelet she betrayed
the Capitol. Tushe, whom beauty cannot bend riches will break: whom virtue
cannot optaine wealth will win: For it is not the man that women respect but
money: not his person but his purse: not his Lineage but his living: That as the
Serpents Hydaspes, the more they drink the more they thirst, and so are never
satisfied: so women, the more coin they have the more they co^et without
satietie. So that I conclude, were I as mighty as Alexander, as beautiful as
Paris, as valiant as Hector, as wise as Ulisses, as trusty as Troylus, yet I
shall see the sentence of Ovid stand for an Oracle: Si nihil attuleris ibis
Homere for as.

Morando and the rest of the Gentlemen hearing how runnyngly Peratio did
prattle, laughed to see how stoutly he stuck to his tackling, saying that they
thought his reasons were so forcible, as they could not be infringed, and that
it were best for Lacena, to give over the fight in the plain feelde. Which
dry frumpe drive her into such a fuming choler, that she made Peratio this
sharp reply.

Sir (quoth she) it were hard for Vulcan to call any man Cripple, because he
himself had a poult foot, and Venus should be thought impudent to condempe any
of lightness, since she her self was so leude: and as vnsite for you to
condemn me of folli^, since your own reasons are so fond, for as you say it
is bad Astrology to calculate upon conjecture, so I say it is worse
Philosophy to prove a general Axiom by a particular instaunce, whereas you
auerre that women are naturally covetous, and know not the cause, your
affection seems to proceed rather of rancor then of reason, and of wilful
spite, more then of due proof, for wantyng a sure author to uphold your
heresy, you are feign your self to bring in the verdict, but in this Ipse
dixit shall stand for no pay, neither shall your censure be set down for a
sentence, we will not allow you to be a coynor of conclusions, unless your
premises had been of more puissaunce. But I remember very well that Horace
notyng the fond affections of men, and wisely describyng the greedy desire
they have to gain: did cunningly carpe at their covetousness, saying:
Quaeranda pecunia primu^ post nu^mos virtus meaning that in all their actions,
they first seek to pray upon pelf, counting such fadyng trashe, their only
treasure: preferyng wealth before wisdom, and riches before virtue, gaping
gredilie after gold, as the only guerdon they desire for their deserts, yea,
in their love they always aim more at the money, then at the maid, and
coumpt her dowry the best saint that deserves their depest devotion,
although they can connyngly counterfeit, that they are drowned in the desire of
her person, when in heart they mean her purse, playing like the Elophant that
rather chooses to lean against the strong Oak then against thsweete Briar, or
like the Tiger that chozeth his pray, not by the fairenes of the skin, but by
the fatness of the flesh, whereas poor gentlewemen either only respect the
out ward property or his inward perfection, either the comeliness of his
person, or the curtisie of his mind, detesting that filthy dr^sse, as a thing
not so gredilie to be desired. For was it the wealth of Eneas that Dido so
much doted on, or his worthienesse, who came to Carthage as a poor straggling
Stranger, being ready to take of all and being able to give to no^e? Was it
the pelf of Demophon or his person that Phillis so depely desired? was it the
riches of Paris that AEnone wished, or his beauty when she knew him for no
other but a poor Shepherd? Was it the wealth of Ulysses, or his wisdom that
Circes sought after, when she saw him to be but a wanoring Pirate? Did not
Campaspe prefer pore Appelles before mighty Alexander, and that lovely Lady
Euphinia choose Acharisto her Fathers bondsman. Tushe who sees not if he be not
either senseless, or sotted with selfwill, that women respect goodwill and not
gain, courtesy and not coin, yea, love only and not lands or ^ynges. And
sir whereas you bring in Danaae as an instaunce to prove wemens covetous desire,
if you wrest not the sense, it is small to the purpose, for Jupiter changed
not into gelde to obtain her chastity, but to corrupt her kepers that so he
might make a rape of her virginity, neither was Tarpeyae persuaded to love for
gold, but to betraie the Capital for gain. And though Eriphile did amiss
and Procris offend, will these two examples infer a general conclusion: No,
for as one Swallowe makes not summer, nor as one withered tree proves not
winter, so one woman's offense is not sufficient to prove all faulty. Your rash
reasons, therefore are like Tantalus Apples, which are fair to the eye, but
being touched, they turn to Ashes. Or like Apelles grapes, that seemed to be
such, till they were narrowly viewed. So your subtle arguments importe great
force till they be sifted, and then they are like Cornelius shadows which
seemed like men but were none. Retire therefore before you come at the trench,
since you have followed the sound of a wrong March, for it is proper to a man to
be deceived, but to percist in an error, is the sign of an impudent mind,
and upon this condition, although you have broadly blasphemed against women,
you shall escape unpunished, and fully pardoned.

Morando heryng how connyngly Lacena had resisted Peratios reasons, began to be
half blancke, because Panthia pulling him by the sleeue said.

Sir (quoth she) although my daughter has concluded in an imparfect Mood, yet
it is hard to reduce it but Per impossible: your Champion is chafed and
seeks revenge, but he plays like Phineus that sought to meet his foe in the
^elde, and yet he himself took the first foil, but as it is no shame for him
that gazeth against the Son to wink, so Peratio that strives against the
truth, may take the mate and yet have good skill at the Chesse.

Why (quoth Aretino) is he always the best man that gives the last stroke, or
she won the victoier, that speaks the last word, Peratio has but yet
plaide his quarters, he now means to lie at his ward, and I believe so
warelie, that Lacena shall have good luck if she escape without a loss.

Tush gentlemen (quoth Peratio) Madam Panthia thinckes that where Venus sitts
there Mars must lay down his Helmet, that no Birds can sing where the
Peacocke displaies her golden Feathers: but I am not so fond, as with Hercules
to become a slave to Omphale, nor with Mars to tie my self to Venus will.
Lacenas fair looks, nor her painted speech shall not so charm me, as I shall
so lightly give other the challenge, for I am not in love, and therefore may
speak at liberty. Truly (quoth Morando) since the controversy is such, as it
cannot without a long discourse be decided: I will at this time become a
mediator and yield my verdit because time calls us away. Upon this sentence,
this therefore is my sensure, that as Phillip of Macedon said there was no City
so surely defenced, whereinto an Ass laden with gold might not enter: so the
Temple of Vesta is never so well shut, but a key of gold will speedily unloose
the lock.

Sir (quoth Panthia) and I by your leave will conclude to your premises, with
the picture which Phidias the Painter drew of Mars and Uenus in this form:
representing Mars tied unto Uenus by the eye, his breast open, wherein appeared
a heart all of gold. But Venus having her sight valed, her heart persed through
with an arrow, and chained unto Mars with a silver thread, wherein was written
this posie Sans Aultre. Well (quoth Morando) it was hard to find Diana
without her bow, or Appollo without his harp, or a woman's crafty wit,
without a clarklie shift. But when Hercules had conquered Orithia he could not
vauut of the victory, because she was a woman: so therefore I will not strive
to confute Madame Panthia, since in gettyng the conquest I should rather reap
discredit, then purchase praise or honor: we will therefore now end our
discourse, and sit down to supper, where whatsoever your chere be, yet I
pray you think your selves hearty welcome. The Gentlemen and Gentlewemen
findyng their fare no worse then their welcome was, gave Morando great
thanks for his courtesy, and being all pleasantly disposed, they passed away
the supper with many pretty parlees, Don Siluestro only excepted, who was in
his dumps: for the beauty of Lacena had alredie so battered the bulwark of
his breast, and had so quatted his stomach with her excellent qualities, that
he only fed his eyes in notyng the exquisit perfection of her person, which
Aretino partly perceiuyng, he began to pluck him from his passions, in this
manner. I have often marueled and cannot yet cease to muse gentlemen (quoth he)
at the madness of those momentarie lovers, whose minds are like the state of
Mineruas Owl, that how heavy socuer her head was, would ever prune her self
at the sight of Pallas, or like Narcissus that had scarsely looked into the
water but was in love with his own shaddowe: but I think these violent
passions are nothing permanent, their sparckling heat never proves to perfect
coals, much like to Jasons Warriors that faded before they were fully
fourmed.

What moves you (quoth Morando to pop forth so suddenly this dark problem,
do you think there is any man here that is pinched with such passions, or
would you see by the measure of an other man's foot, where you own shoe
wringes you.

No sir (quoth he) the picture of Andromeda and Perseus, which hanges here
before mine eyes, brought this to my remembrance, for me think either
Andromeda was passing beautiful or Perseus very amorous, that soaring aloft
in the air he did firmly love before he did fultie look, his eyes were
scarsely fixed ere his heart was fet^red, and how think you Signior Siluestro
is not this strange.

Siluestro doubtyng that Aretino shot at an other mark then his talk did
pretend, thought to shadow his falt with a false culler, and with the Lapwing
to cry farthest of from her nest, he framed him therefore this answer.
Truly Aretino (quoth he) it were folly to question with Pigmalio^ about
Esculapius secrets, or to demand of Polydemon wha^ sollemnitie Hymeneus
observed in his Sacrafices, because the one was unskillful in Physic and the
other as ingnorant in Marriage, and meare fondness it is for the ^o ask my
oppinion of fancy, when I connot by experience yield a v^rdit of affection, it
is hard for him to give a censure of Paintyng that has but looked into
Appelles shop, and as difficult for me to set down my sentence of Love
which a^ but newly entered into Cupids School. For I confess I am not of
Tianeus opinion, to despise Beauty, nor so dogged as Diogenes, to condemn
women, since the one shows a crabbed nature, and the other as ill nourture. But
it may be you guess another man's bow by your own bent, and play like
Ewritius that accused Andremon of love, when he himself was before fettered
with lust.

What (quoth Aretino) shall Pigmalion be angry with him that said he was a
Caruer, seeing it was his profession by art, or shall a young gentleman take
offense for being named a lover, since it is proper to him by age. But I leave
with your melancholy humor Syluestro, since I see that it is hard to find a
suspicious man without ielowsie, and a lingering lover without Dumpes.

Gentlemen quoth Peratio, me thinks it is folly to talk about so fond a
trifle as love, which I can rightly compare to Perseus wings, which being given
him by Jupiter, carried him always into perrilous dangers, or to Mydas goulde,
which he counting his bliss, proved at last to be his b^le. Let not then
such a friuolons question cause friends to give such biting quippes.

Tush (quoth Aretino) these cuttes can not cause Syluestro and me toiarre,
every blow draws not blood, nor every word infers not wrath, that
friendship is of a brickle mould, that a little Table talk will crack. In
troth (quoth Syluestro) I take not such offense at Aretinos folly as I do
Peratio at thy extreme fondnes, that make so light acount of love. But
Proteus never remained long in one shape, neither was Iola seen to wear one
garment twice. The (...) Cassiopea remains in one sign but ten days, and
thou in one mind but ten hours, being now hot now could, first as courteous
as Traian, and then as currish as Tymon, one while a defender of lust, and an
other time a contemner of love. But as it is hard to catch the Polipe fish,
because she ^ourneth into the likeness of every object, so it is folly to
credit thee which framest thy talk after every new fantasy.

Stay then Syluestr^ (quoth Signior Morando) lest you prove your self more
fond in taking such small occasion of anger, then they in ministering the cause,
we met as friends, and loath I were we should part as foes. Therefore for this
night I commend you all as my guestes, to keep silence, and to morrow if you
please in close field to try the combat, Madame Panthia, and I will sit as
Judges to assign the conquest: the question shall be, whether it be good to love
or not, and in the mean time, since it is far in the night, I commit you to
God. Madame Panthia, and the rest giving their good host the Adieu, parted
quietly without any more quippes to their lodging.

The second days discourse.
THE night being passed, and y^ gl^string beams of Phoebus calling these
Courtiers from their drowsy beds, Signior-Siluestro who all this night had
slept with a flea in his ear, being pinched with the quippes of Aretino, but
more passionate with y^ exquisite qualities of Lacena, rose before all the
rest, and walking alone into the Garden, began there to muse on these painful
passions which so diversely perpiexed him, feeling the force of Love so
furiously to assail him, as either the mercy of his new Mistres must
mittigate his malady, or else his care must be ended by untimely death: the one
he doubted of as being in fear, the other he dreaded not as one in most
hapless distress, wavering thus between two waves as he sat in his dumpes,
Morando Madame Panthia and all the rest of the co^panic missing Siluestro, went
to seek him: whom they found as a solitary Saint sitting in a sorrowful
plight: which they espying began to laugh at his folly, that upon so small a
cause (as they surmised) had entered into such choler. But as their aim was
ill, so they mist the mark: For Siluestro was offering his sighs to an other
Saint then they could conjecture: yet whatsoever the cause of his care was,
Panthia thought to drive him out of his dumpes in this manner.

Signior Siluestro (quoth she) you accused yesternight Peratio of fickelnesse,
and I allow it the better, because I see by this chance you your self will be
no chaungeling: you went to bed in choler and rise full of melancholy,
resembling the bird Osyphaga, who if she perketh at night chatting, checketh
all the morning till the Sun be up: but I cannot blame you since Aretino and
his fellow came over your fallowes with such cutting blows.

I see Madame (quoth Peratio) you are no cunning Astrologer, that can by
calculation conjecture no better of Siluestros disease. Would you have Zetus
merry as long as he hears Amphion harp? Can poor Polipheme play on his
pipe as long as Galatea frowns? Or Apollo laugh when Driope lowers? No,
Appelles must be sad as long as Campaspe is coye: It is good reason that Lovers
should be solitary to be wraie their sorrow, and full of dumpes to signify
their dollor: Accuse not Siluestro then if he be not pleasant, being troubled
with such amorous pass^ons: for the poor Gentleman is in love I see by his
look.

Siluestro hearing with what bitter tauntes Peratio began to bob the fool, and
how he sought like a Sycophant to play with his nose, entering somewhat into
choler shakt him up with this sharp reply.

I remember Peratio (quoth he) that Cadmus for his cont^nnelious mind was
turned into a Serpent, and Arachne for her proud presumption was transformed
into a Spider: I marvel if the Gods to wreck their wrath would use their ^ide
Metamorphosis, whether they would turn thee into an Ass or an Ape: for by y^
one they might tipically figure forth thy blockishe reasons, and by the other
paint out thy apishe qualities. Did Apollo never lower but when he was in love?
Nor was Appelles never sad but when he was a suitor? No doubt then the God was
very gamesome before he knew Daphne, and the Painter passing pleasant before
he saw Campaspe. Surely your Astrologicall reasons be of small force in that
they have force: I mean not to prove me a Lover but thy self a fondling. Well,
if I love it is the sign of good nature: if I love not, of a Cinicall nurture:
but whether I love or no it cannot profit thee nor displeasure me, and yet not
to love is the sign of a discourteous Pesaunt.

M^rando hearing what bitter blows were given between these two Gentlemen,
parted them with this parle.

If (quoth he) Hercules and Achelous had not fallen out, the Nymphs had never
gotten their Cornucopia. Had not Circes and Ulysses iarred, his men had never
returned to their sh^pes. It Is an ill flaw that brings up no wrack, and a bad
wind that breeds no man's profit. Had not Syluestro and Peratio fallen out
about love, we had never brought it in question whether it be good to love or
no. But now we will have it tried out in the plain field to see the event of
the battle. For truly I am of Siluestros opinion, that to live without love
is not to live at all.

Sostrata who from her birth was vowed unto Vesta, and offered her Sacrifice at
the Shrine of Diana, hearing Morando take Siluestros pa^te, with blushing face
made this maidenly answer.

Sir (quoth she) although I may seem impudent in my mothers presence to
enterparle, and may be thought half inmodest without command to come to
counsel, yet I hope the equity of the cause and the necessity of the
defense, will excuse me to the one and clear me from the other. To have fond
love honored as a God were gross Idolatry: to consent to such Scisinaticall
opinions were palpable Heresy: therefore if it please my mother to give me
leave, I will prove that the worst course of life is to love.

Daughter (quoth Panthia) if you think your self strong enough to withstand so
stou^e an Heresy, my good will shall be quickly granted: but take heed least
in ventring in an unknown Foorde you slip over the shoes.

T^she (quoth Peratio) it was easy for Achilles to conquer Hector, when he
himself by the means of Thetis was inuulnerable, and as easily may Sostrata
withstand Siluestro (...) she is armed with the truth, which may well be
assalted, but never utterly sacked.

Your good word (quoth Siluestro) is never wanting, but if Sostrata would be
ruled by mine advise, she should not yield her verdict against Venus: but for my
part let her do as she please: for I am sure prattle she may, but prevail
she cannot.

Sostrata hearing the short censure of Siluestro, began to defend the walls
with this Rampire.

Ovid (quoth she) the Master of this Art, who busily bet his brain about
setting down of amorous principles, being demanded what Love was, answered
that it was such a vain and inconstant thing, such a fickle and fond
affectionate passion, that he knew not what it was, from whence it came, nor
to what end it tended: Only this he was assured of by experience, that to the
unhappy it was a hell, and to the most fortunate (at the least) the loss of
freedom. Anacreon said that it was the forgetting of a man's self: whereby his
senses are so besotted and his wits inueagled: he is so suared with vanity,
and so fettered with folly, as he greedelie seeks to gain that thing,
which at last turns to his extreme loss. For who so yields himself as a
flaue to love, binds himself in fetters of gold: and if his suit have good
success, yet he leads his life in glistring misery. For love according to
the definition of the Philosophers, is nothing else but the desire of Beauty:
so that the beginning, midst, and end of love, is to croppe the bitter
sweet bud of Beauty: which how pleasant so ever it be in the mouth, yet so
perilous in the maw, that he never or seldom digesteth it, without danger
both of his purse and person. Beauty the only ^ewell which Lovers desire to
enjoy (although you may object against me, that it is a foul bird defiles
their own neast) (yet conscience co^straines me to aver the tr^th) is like to
the Baaran flower, which is most pleasant to the eye, but who so touches it
feels present sinarte. None ever rid on Seianus horse but he came to ruin.
Who so possessed but one dram of the gold of Tholossa perished. He that with
unwashed hands touched the Altar of Ianus, fell down presently dead, and few
or none which only fix their fancy upon Beauty, escape without mishappe or
misery: so that I conclude, the Lover in liew of his toil gets such
gain, as he that reapeth the beautiful Apples of Tantalus, which are no sooner
touched but they turn to Ashes. If this trash the^ be the treasure which
Lovers desire so greedily to gain, no doubt their winninges shall be much
like to his, which supposing to embrace Juno, caught nothing but a vain
vanishyng Cloud. This considered, he has either his senses besotted, or else
is blinded with selfwill, which sees not the abuses in Love and folly of
Lovers: whose life is so pestered with continual passions and combred with
such hapless cares, as it is to be counted nothing but a very mass of
misery: They spend the day in dumpes and the night in dollor, seeking much
and finding little: gaping after that which they seldom gain: and which if
they get proves at length but loss.

It Is true in trothe (quoth Peratio) for of all follies, love is the greatest
fondness, and especially in those which are coumpted truest Lovers: who if
they want of their will, and miss of their wish, pine away in hellishe
pennurie, and though their mistres reward them with hate, yet they never make
an end of their love but by death. Such love in my opinion, no wise man either
will or can commend, for if to love were good, as is now in question, yet it is
a proved principle Omne nimium vertitur in vitium, therefore if ever I love I
will keep a mean, neither to hie least I suspecte with Cephalus, nor to low
least I mislike with Minos, and especially I would not exceed, for I think of
Lovers, as Diogenes did of Dauncers, who being asked how he liked them,
answered: the better the worse.

This pleasant conceit of Peratio made Morando and all the company to laugh,
seeing how bitterly he began to bob Siluestro on the thumbes, who thoroughly
chafed, burst forth into these terms.

Peratio (quod he) you come to counsel before you be calde, and set down
your sentence, before any manne craves your censure, your verdit is of less
valor. Your slender opinion is not to be taken for a principle, and therefore
learn thus much of me, that so apishly to carpe at every cause is a sign of
great immodestie, and small manners, but leauyng you to your folly, thus much
to the purpose. The Philosophers who have sought precisely to set out the
perfect Anotomie of pure love, who set down by pen that which before they
tried by experience, weighyng wisely the strange affectes and force of love,
and feeling in them selves the puissance of his power, justly cannonised that
sacred essence for a God, attributing unto it the ^itle of dietie, as a thing
worthy of such supernatural dygnitie. For it does infuse into the minds of
men such virtuous and valerous motions, kindlyng in men's hearts such gowing
coals of natural affection (which before the force of love had touched them,
lay buried in the dead cindres of hate) that it does knitt the minds of
friends together with such perfect and perpetual amity, as we may justly
say with Socrates, they be two bodies and one soul, yea, the common people
although their minds be sotted and almost senseless, yet they have had love
in such sacred estimation, that they carefully rewarded them with the title of
Honor and Dignity, which have excelled in that holy affection, estemyng
this only virtue (if so basly it may be termed) sufficient of a man to make
one a God. But to aim more near the mark, if we rightly consider the force
of love, we shall find that there is nothing which so pleasureth a man, and
proffitethe the Common wealth as love: Tullie being demanded why the Common
wealth of Rome did often fall into many calamnities at that time, especially when
S^illa and Marius Tyranously shed so much innocente blood, answered because
the temple of love was defaced, and being demanded what caused the
Commonwealth so to flourish in prosperous estate, answered love: Aledgyng to the
old Italian proverb Amor e la madre del bu^n citta. What causes virtue to
rain and vice to come to ruin but love? What delights in good and
despighteth ill but love? Yea, what causes a man to be honored for a GOD but
love. It makes the valient to venture amidest most perrilous dangers:
neither to be feared with the loss of life, nor to respect the dint of Death,
t^inkyng no adventure hard to be atchiued, nor encounter combersome, no
danger perrilous, so he be fully armed with the shield of love, to defend him
from the furious force of his enemies. So many Grecians had never been slain
of H^ctor had not Andromache looked over the walls. Troielus had never made
such a Massacre among his fo^s had not Cr^ssed buckled on his Helmet. Nay
Achilles had never slain them both, had not Briseida been the Mistres of his
thoughts. To conclude, in all ages Cheualrie had never so bravely flowrished
if Love had not been the guerdon for their deserts. Love makes a man which is
naturally adicted unto vice to be indewed with virtue, to apply himself unto
all lawdable exercises, that thereby he may obtain his Lovers favor: He
coueteth to be skillful in good letters, that by his learnyug he may allure
her to excel in Music, that by his melody he may entise her to frame his
speech in a perfect phrase, that his Eloquence may persuade her, yea, what
Nature wants he seeks to amend by nurture, and the only cause of this
verteous disposition is Love. And to prove this premises with a particular
instaunce, I remember that our countriman Boccaee in his Decameron brings in
one Chymon ^ Lacedemonian, who was more wealthy the^ witty, and of greater
possessions then good qualities, given from his birth to be a servile drudge by
nature, and could not by his friends be haled from his clownish state by
nurture: his delight was to toil at ye Plough, although a Nobleman borne, and
civil courtesy was the only thing he contemned. This Chimon who by no art
could be brought to have any wit, by chance as he passed through the
streets, cast his eye on the glittring beauty of a Ladyin Lacedemonia, whose
singular perfection so deeply imprinted into the heart of this witless Chimon,
as he felt the flame of fancy to fric within his entrales, yea, the force of
affection had so furiously assalted him, as perplexed with these unacquainted
passions. Love drive him so to his shifts, that he seckyng to obtain his
mistres favor, he began to apply himself to al bertuous exercises, that
within short time love being his loodestone, of a witless fool he became to
be a wise Philosopher, of of Clown to become a Courtiour, yea, love made
such a strange Metamorphoses of her new Nouice, that in prowess and courtesy
he exceded all the Courtiers of Lacedemonia. Tushe who rightly can deny that
Love is not the cause of glory honor profit and pleasure which happens to
man, and that without it he cannot conveniently live, but shall run into a
thousand enormities. Whereof I conclude, that not to love is not to live: or
else to lead a life repugnaunt to all virtuous qualities.

Well said Siluestro (quoth Morando) thy reason is good: for in truth he that
is an enemy to love, is a for to nature: there is nothing which is either so
requested of men, or desired of brute beasts more then mutual society,
which neither the one can gain nor the other attain without love: Is not he
then more senseless then a beast, or less natural then a reasonable creature
which would de^pise it? Yes no doubt, I would count him like to a Aparmantus,
that had no other reason to hate men but for that they were men: he himself
being like a man, but in nature a very Monster.

Sir (quoth Sostrata) if you weighed well what love were you would yield an
other verdict. Is there any thing which man esteems more then liberty: Nay,
does he not account it dearer then life: and is not Love the loss thereof, and
the means to lead him into an endless Laberinth? Does it not fetter him that
is free, and thrall the quiet mind in perpetual bondage? Is there any thing
to be found in Love but lowering, care, calamity, sorrow, sighs, woe,
waylinges, complaints and misery? What breeds frenzy and brings fury
but Love? What makes the wise foolish, and fools more fond but Love? What
besotteth the senses? What bruseth the brain? What weakeneth the wit? What
dusseth the memory? What fades the strength? Nay, what leads a man to ruth
and ruin but Love? And yet forsooth no less then a GOD Dido had ended her
golden days with joy in gallaunt Carthage. Phillis had never desperately
procured her own death. Ariadne had not miserably died in the solitary
Deserts. Medea had reigned royally as Queen of Colchos. Yea, innumerable
others had enjoyed more felicity or tasted less misery, if this cruel
monster Love had not wrought their mishappe. For as soon as it once inueagleth
the wit and bewitcheth the senses, it makes straight a Metamorphosis of the
poor Lovers mind: he then rages as though he were haunted with some hellishe
Hagge, or possessed with some frantic Fury, like one inchaunted with some
Magical charm, or charmed with some bewitchyng Sorcerie, yea, he is perplexed
with a thousand sundry passoons: first free, and then fettered: alatc
swimming in rest, and now sincking in care: erewhile in security, and then in
captivity: yea, turned from mirth to mournyng: from pleasure to pain: from
delight to despite: hatyng themselves and loving others, who is the chief
cause of this their calamitic. Fulfillyng the saying of Propertius, that to
love howsoever it be is to loose, and to fancy how charie soever the choice be
is to have an ill chance: For Love though never so faithful is but a Chaos of
care, and fancy though never so fortunate is but a M^sse of misery. Whereof I
conclude, that who so is entangled with the snares of Love, or besotted with
the beams of balefull Beauty, enjoys more care then commodity: more pain
then profit: more cost th^n comfort: more greef then good, yea, reapeth a
tun of dross for every dram of perfect gold.

Nay, stay (quoth Siluestro) conclude not so readily before the premises be
granted: for though you have ( Sostrata) sh^dowed the table, yet till the
colors be laid on with a perfect Pensell it is no certain picture. Zewexes
deceived birds with painted grapes, and yet they were no perfect fruit: and
though ye fill their ears with your fond reasons, yet after I have pulde back
the vale, every one shall see they are but mere shadows. You reason first of
the definition of love, saying: that it is no other thing but the desire of
Beauty: which if I grant, what then forsooth: by an odd induction you
conclude that Beauty is the breeder of mishappe, and therefore Love the
bringer of misery: but I neither affirm the one nor grant unto the other.
For Plato being demanded in what things we most resemble the Gods, answered
in Wisdom and Beauty: esteeming Wisdom the only Iemme which inricheth
the mind, and Beauty the only Jewel that adorneth the body. Yea, Severe
Socrates said, that the Gods in framing of Beauty skipt beyond their skill, in
that the maker was subject to the thing made: for the Gods themselves have been
so subject to y^ glittering hue of Beauty, as they have been forcst to forsake
their celestial Spheres, for to enjoy so precious a treasure, yea, to make a
Metamorphosis of their dietie into humane shape: as Jupiter did by turning into
a Bull to croppe the beauty of Europa: And think you then ( Sostrata) you
have not both committed an heinous offense in blaspheming so divine a thing,
and also been greatly deceived in thinking light of Love, which tends to no
other end but to the obtaining of so divine a treasure. Further, you count
every virtue in Love to be vanity: every straw to be a stumbling stock:
every little Molehill to be a great M^untaine: concluding because it is
fraught with care, therefore it is to be contemned: because it is subject to
trouble and mishapp, therefore to be utterly misliked: but your opinion is
vain, and therefore your reasons is of no value: they carry small sense in that
you are so subject to selfwill. For did not (...) compare virtue to the letter
(...) which is small at the foot but broad at the top: meaning that to
obtain virtue is very painful, but the possession thereof passing pleasant:
Yea, do not the wise Philosophers endeavor much travel to attain virtue? Do
not Martial minds who gape after glory sleep little and labor much: hasard
their li^mes and venture their lives to attain honor. Do not M^rchaunts yield
themselves to the mercy of the furious Seas, and try the rage of stormy
Tempests, suffer perilles by Sea and post by Land to possess riches? Shall
therefore the Philosophers life be contemned, because it is fraught with
trouble? Shall the Merchants stay, or the Martial state be despised,
because the one is subject to danger, and the other to death? No, if this may
be concluded it will breed a confusion in all estates. Shall then Love be
thought leaud, because poor passionate Lovers be ready to bear the burden
of all misfortune, to the end to attchiue so royal a reward as Beauty? No,
for he is to be thought a fearful dastard whom any worldly muck does deceive,
who^ any hard attempt does withdraw, or any humble prayer does withholde from
attaining the top of his desire. Cease then ( Sostrata) to blaspheme against
Beauty since it is divine. Leave of to inueigh against Love, since it is a
labor fit for the Gods: otherwise thou shall be thought to be more wilful
then wise, and to spitt out these bitter speeches more of cancred spite then
of any just cause.

Well (quoth Aretino) if that testie Tyanens were alive, who was the contemner
of Beauty, the despraiser of Love, despiser of fancy, and the detester of all
such amorous society, and heard Siluestro tell this tale, no doubt he would
not only turn his tippet, recant his heretical opinion, and persuade others
to honor beauty, but he himself would become a Lover.

Truly (quoth Panthia) for my part I confess that Siluestro has so
cunningly confuted my Daughters reasons, as I must needs say he is worthy to
have the verdict go on his side. For though Diana has reapt renown by her
chastity, yet Juno has gained more honor by her Marriage.

Why Madame Panthia (quoth Peratio) will you bring Siluestro into a Fools
paradise by allowyng his opinion, I can but smile to see how cunningly you can
claw him where he itcheth: but he knows you do but flatter, and thinks that
women's thoughts and their tongues runs not always together.

Truly quoth ( Aretino) that is the cause that Siluestro bears so much with
Lacenas folly: for he thinks she plays like the Consul Attilius, that was
wont to cover the picture of his Concubine with a courtaine: wherein was
imbrodered the story of Diana and Acteon.

What Lacena does (^ Sylnestro) I know not, but I am sure Peratio speaks more
of crabbednes then of conscience, resembling herein Apollo (I mean not in pure
complexion, but in peuish condition) who inueighing greatly against Venus and
Cupid, did himself the next night ravish poor Clymene.

Well (quoth Morando) Madame Panthia, since you have heard this doubtful
question so thoroughly discoursed, give your Censure and your verdict shall
stand for a sentence.

Sir (quoth she) if I should pass against Syluestro, then al might think I
either never loved my husband, or else that I spoke of affection, therefore that
I be not accused of the one, nor condemned of the other, this is my opinion,
that Syluestro speaking of those loyal lovers, which fix their fancy and
place their affection first upon the virtue of the mind, and then upon the
beauty of the body defends the right in saying that to love, is a virtue,
and that my daughter Lacena (in touching the excessive love, nay rather lust of
those fond and fantastical lovers, who only respect the complexion of the
body, and not the perfection of the mind, having their fancy so fickle, as
they are fiered with every new face, respecting pleasure more then profit, and
yet refusing no pains to satisfy their fleshly desires) says well that such
love is a vice.

Panthia having yielded her judgment was greatly praised of all the company for
giving so wise a verdict. In deed (quoth Aretino) it made me to marvel when
I heard Lacena so far out of square, since that by natural constitution women
are more subject unto love then men.

Not so (quoth Panthia) you speak by contraries, for women are hard to be
snared in love like the stone Ceraunon, which will hardly receive any stamp,
but being once printed never loses the form. Marie if I might be so bold,
I could aptly compare men to Spanielles, that will faune of every one that
carries bread in his fist.

Stay there (quoth Morando) it is now dinner time, and this question asks
along discourse, we will now dine, and the rest of the day to exercise our
selves we will spend in Hunting, but to morrow we will have this doubt
debated of Aretino and Fioretta. I will be the plaintiff (quoth Aretino.) And my
Daughter shall be the defendant (quoth Panthia.) Why then (quoth Morando) let
us plie our teeth as we have done our tungs: and with that they all sat down
to dinner.

The third days discourse.
PAnthia and the rest of the company having pleasauntly past away the day in
sport, and quietly spent the night in sleep, no sooner saw that Aurora had
forsaken the watrie bed of her Lover Tytan, but they remembering that Aretino
and Fioretta were to perform their challenge, hasted up to be hear^rs of this
doubtful discourse. But seeing Morando was not yet stirring, they walked into
the Garden to take the fresh and flagrant air, where Flora presented unto
them a Paradise of odoriferous flowers, greatly pleasing the eye and sweetly
delighting the sinell, intised with the verdue of these flowrishing Plants,
they all rested them in an Arbor made of Roses, whereby Peratio taking occasion
to be pleasant entered into this parlie.

I now (quoth he) see by experience Mantuans principle to be true, that weal
is never without woae, no bliss without bale, each sweet has his sower,
every commodity has his discommoditie annexed: For you see by proof the
sweetest Rose has his prickles.

And what of this (quoth Panthia) what infer ye of these principles?

Mary (quoth he) I can aptly compare a woman to a Rose: for as we cannot enjoy
the flagrant smell of the one without sharp prickles, so we cannot possess the
virtues of the other without shrewish conditions: and yet neither the one nor
the other can well be forborne, for they are necessary (...).

O sir (quoth Panthia) you are very pleasant, poor women must be content to
suffer the reproof though (...) the reproach: but if they were as little
virtuous as men are greatly vicious, no doubt then you would write volumes of
their vanity: but (quoth she) as bad as they be when you sue to obtain their
favor, then you accoumpt them as heavenly creatures, and cannonize them for
Saints, commending their chastity, and extolling their virtues: whereof I
conclude, that either they are faultlesse or you flatterers.

Tushe (quoth Peratio) what others think I know not, but I was never of that
mind: for truly this is my verdict, be she vert^ous, be she chaste, be she
courteous, be she constant, be she rich, be she renowned, be she honest, be
she honorable, yet if she be a woman, she has sufficicent vanities to
counteruaile her virtues.

Truly (quoth Siluestro) as the Inhabitaunts of Lemnos were turned into
Frogs for railing against Latona, so Peratio thou deseruest to be changed
into a Curre, for barking out such currishe blasphemous speeches against
women. Niobe inueighed against Uenus for her lightness, and yet she her self
more leaude: and thou railest against women for their vanity, thou thy self
being thrice more vicious: but as it was impossible to tell a tale to a Cretian
and not to talk to a liar, so it is impossible ( Peratio) to speak of thee
and not to name a slaunderer.

With that Morando being newly risen, and missing his guestes went into the
Garden, and hearing these bitter blawes thought quickly to part the fraie, he
severed them therefore with this salve.

Gentlemen and Gentlewomen (quoth he) in that I will not be tedious in one
word, I bid you all good day. The atchiuing of yesterdaies challenge between
Aretino and Fioretta, has made me rise thus early. Cease of therefore from
your supposes, for I inioyne you all to Silence, and let us hear what a plea
our plaintiff will put in to aver his doubtful Problem.

The company first requiting Morando with the like courtesy, and then
returning his salve with the like salutation, held their peace to hear Aretino
parle, who seeing they listened attentively to hear his talk, began his tale
in this manner.

It is a principle (quoth he) amongst the natural Philosophers, that men by
their constitution are indewed with a more perfect and stronger complexion then
women, being more apt to endewer labor and travail, and less subject to
effeminate pleasure and pastime: having their hearts more hardened to
withstand any kind of passion, and less mollified to receive any patheticall
impression. Whereof I infer that men having their hearts indurate by natural
constitution, are more able to withstand the force of Love then women, whose
effeminate minds are enclosed within a more tender and delicate complexion.
For as the perfect Gold which is of a pure substance, receives any form
sooner then the sturdi^ Steel which is of a gross and massy moulde, so
wemens effeminate minds are more subject to sudden affection, and are sooner
fettered with the snare of fancy then the hard hearts of men, which beein^
rubbed with the Adamant stone are apt to withstand any violent passions.
Tiresias who had by his hard hap the proof of both Natures: and Scython who
at his pleasure was either a man or a woman: the one being demanded by Jupiter
and the other by Bachus, whether men or women were most subject unto love,
framed this answer: that the Arms which Venus gave in her shield were
sufficient to discuss the doubt: meaning that as Doves who are Uenus
darlinges, are more prone unto lust then any other fowls: so women are more
subject unto Love then any other mortal creatures.

Truly sir (quoth Fioretta) you seem by your sentences to be a subtle and
secret Philosopher: for I think you bring in such dark problemes, as you
scarce understand your own reasons. Is this your skill in natural
Philosophy to bring in unnatural principles? Or think you by Sophistry to
shadow the truth? No, words are but wind, and a few dry blows shall not
carry away the conquest. Aristotle and Albertus both set down this infallible
Axiom, that the natural constitution of men is choler hot and dry, having
of all the four Elements fire most predominant in their complexions: So that
as Galen affirms in his Book De partibus corporis humani this fiery
constitution does make them full of passions, soon hot soon cold, easily
inflamed and quickly quenched. Whereas women be Phlegmatic cool and moist,
having water most predominant in their constitution, and therefore less
subject unto any fiery affections. Whereof I infer, that the minds of men
which are hot and dry, are sooner scorched with the heat of Venus and fiered
with the flame of fancy: yea, Love has more power to set on fire their
affections, being already of a hot constitution, then to scorch or scalde the
hearts of women, which naturally are of so moist and cold a complexion. The
dry Bauin is sooner set on fire then the watrie Beech: the withered Have sooner
burns then the moist Grass, and the fiery heart of Mars sooner scorched then
the cold mind of Diana.

Nay Mistress Fioretta (quoth he) seeing you urge me so strictly, I will prove
my premises with most approved instaunces. Was not Dido almost consumed in the
flame before Eneas touched the fire? Was not she fettered at the first sight,
whereas Venus could hardly induce her son to Love. Demophon was not so sone
drowned in desire as Phillis: for be no sooner set foot on l^nd but she was
over shoes in love, whereas God knows all her flattring allurementes could
hardly train him to the Court of Cupid. The Nymph Echo no sooner saw^
Narcissus but she was inflamed: whereas he neither by tears, prayers,
promises, nor protestations could be allured to yield himself a su^iect unto
Venus. Tu^he, what should I recount the passionate love of Salmacis, Circe,
Biblis, Hylonome, and of infinite other, whose lives are sufficient proofs and
presidents to confirm my former reasons. Cupid intending to revenge himself
upon Apollo, for discovering the adultrie between his mother and Mars, was
feign to spend many of his chiefest darts ere he could strike him in love with
Daphne: but as the blind boy pleasauntly sported with his mother, by chance
he raced her breast with the tippe of his arrowe, which no sooner touched her
but she was deeply in love with her darling Adonis. In fine, all ages and
estates have yielded sufficient proofs to confirm my premises, so that I
need not allege any more reasons, but conclude with the saying of Martial,
which affirms three things never to be parted Mulier, Amor, and
inconstantia.

Tush (quoth Fioretta) all this wind shakes no corn, your Antecedent infers no
necessary Consequent, for if I grant that diverse Dames have been suddenly
suprised with fancy, may you therefore conclude, that women are more subject
unto affection then men, this were Aretino to absurd an argument: But to
confirm my reasons with a plain proof which we both see and know by daily
experience. Are not men feign, being them selves once fiered with fancy to
seek and sue, to watch and ward, to prate, to parle to, pray, to protest, to
swear, to forswear, yea, to use a thousand sondrie shifts to alure a simple
maid unto love: Do they not seek to hale her unto their hook, with diverse
new devises. Some practice music to inueagle their minds, playng in the
night under their windows, with Lutes, Citrons, and Bandoras. Some Tornay and
Just: that by their manhood they may alure them to love. Some painte out
their passions in Songs and Sonets, to move them unto mercy: none saying they
are to pitiful, but all exclaimyng of their cruelty. The poor woman
notwithstanding, is so unwilling to yield unto love, that she is hardly induced
to fancy by all these flattryng alurementes, whereas the man is fiered with
every new face, fettered with every new fancy, in love at every look, yea,
they cannot Accedere ad ignem, but they do straight Galescere plus quam satis
so that it is hard to find a man, but he is either fraught with love or,
flattery.

Not so Fioretta (quoth Siluestro) conclude not so stricktly, for to love (I
grant) is proper to men, but to flatter belongs to women.

Why (quoth Peratio) dare you blaspheme so broadely against that noble sex,
take head, if your mistres hear of this fond sensure, she hang not the lip.

This is small to the purpose (quoth Morando) whether men feign or women
flatter, it is not the mark we shoot at. Since Madame Panthia, these two
champions have so manfully behaved themselves within the listes, that as yet
the combat hangs in suspense, to which of them shall we Judges of this
quarrel assign the conquest?

Truly sir (^ Panthia) to speak my mind freely without affection, in this
case this is my opinion. That love being no mortal passion, but a
supernatural influence alloted unto every man, by destiny charmeth and
inchaunteth the minds of mortal creatures, not according to their wills, but
as the decree of the fat^s shall determine, for some are in love at the first
look: As was P^rseus with Andromeda: Some ^euer to be reclaimed, as was
Narcissus: Others scortched at the first sight, as Uenus her self was of
Adonis: Some always proclaims open Wars to Cupid, as did Daphne. Thus I
conclude; that men or women are not more or less subject unto Love, respectyng
their natural constitution, but by the secret influence of a certain
supernatural constellation.

Morando and the rest of their company, greatly praised and allowed the wise
verdict of Panthia, commendyng the mother for her perfect modesty, and the
daughters for their passing chastity. The discourse thus ended and the
sentence set down, Morando and his guestes went to dinner, which being ended
as well with pithie devises as pleasant dainties, Panthia constrained by
certain urgent affairs, yielding Morando great thanks for his courteous
entertainment, went home to Bononia accompanied with the three Gentlemen: who
likewise leaving Morando in his dumpes for the loss of such good companions
departed, and for a time stayed with Panthia at Bononia: where what success
Siluestro had in his love I know not: but if I learn look for news

Finis.
Robert Greene^

Imprinted at London by I. Kingston for Edward White, dwelling at the little
North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun.


