A notable and marvelous Epistle of the famous Doctor, Matthewe Gribalde,
Professor of the Law, in the University of Padua: concerning the terrible
judgment of GOD, upon him that for fear of men* denies Christ and the
known verity: with a Preface of Doctor Calvin. Now newely imprinted, with a
godly and wholesome preservative against desperation, at all times necessary
for the soul: chiefly to be used when the devil does assault us most
fiercely, and death approaches nighest*

LVKE. 12. But I say unto you my friends, be not afraied of them that kill
the body, and after ward have no power to do any thing else. Imprinted at
London, by Henry Denham, for William Norton.

Ihon Calvin to the christian Reader.
HOW froward our mind is in iudgyng the works of God, and how crooked a
judgment we have, it does right well appear by this* that where as he
shows so many examples one after an other, in punishing the wickedness of
man, yet many do slightly pass over, or regard the same, yea, some plainly
scorn them, other suppose them to come by chance: and finally, all men
suddenly forget the^. This unthankfulness, as it is not of it self to be
borne, so brings it also this mischief with it* that we receive not the
fruit of the judgments of God* that we should do, which is briefly noted
of the Prophet Esai, that is to say, that all Esaias. 26.
the inhabiters of the earth, may learn righteousness thereby. By the
which saying, he does show us that being strike^ with fear, we ought to
learn to dread GOD, and live an holy life. And because the Prophets would
remedy this all, there is no poinct of doctrine, that they have more to
doe-withall, then to fasten in our remembrance, such plagues as God sends
upon the wicked, and ungodly persons. And yet is there ^ other other mischief
worse then this. And that is stubburnesse, that we be not wise, having go^
monition and warning: and therefore of so many aduertisementes, as the Prophets
in every pla^ beat into our heads: yea, threate and thunder ^ pon us, there
comes but small profit, and fe^ there been that are moved thereby. Because
God would shake from us this beastly sluggishnes, ^ shows ofte^tymes, such
monstrous examples ^ may co^strain us to feel, yea, though we be a sl^

Such like example not long ago, has he ^clared in Frances Spera: first in
Italy, that to say, in the highest and most notable Theater all Europe, and
Christendom: secondly, in the nation, which as it does otherwise excell^
finesse of wit, so is it in this point without ^ sense and felyng. For there
in every place do^ all wickedness so licenciously reign, that ^ most part
either thinks not, that God is ^ maker of the world, or else knows not,
that shall come to be our judge. And what maru^ i^ it if Antichrist, with his
blast infecte the ^ lians so nigh unto him, which has poured ^ his dedly
poison, even upon the uttermost c^ of the earth. And therefore we se other
nat^ bewitched with wicked superstitions, but ^ most furiously and
outragiously, contemp^ God himself. In deed there be in the cou^ some
excellent and wise servants of Christ. ^^ doubt not but god has many sheep
there (w^^ing now scattered abroad, at length shall be ga^ered together), But yet
in the common life of ^en (if a man would view every estate and de^ee) there
appears nothing but horrible blind ^sse. Then for as much as they despise God
so ^chelously, and with such arrogancy, let them ^ue such scholemasters as
they deserve. Surely ^rances Spera is worthy to be one of the chief. ^or
whereas the vain fellow puffed up with ^bicious bragging, would profanely
dispute ^d teach in the schole of Christ: at length com^yng abroad, could but
a while enjoy the place ^ them, of whose sort he was not. Hereby the ^alians
may learn, that use accustomably to ^lly with God, how earnest vengeance he
will ^ke upon those that scorn his majesty. Now, ^hereas the Romish
Antichrist would by his ^gate so notably triumph upon Christ and his ^ospell,
in the person of this wretched man, he ^th enjoyed such success, as is meet
for such ^ollicie and subtle enterprise. As long as Spe^ drew his breath in
this world, in the mids ^his most horrible pain and torments, he ne^
ceased to cry that he was euerlastyngly co^^pned, because he was brought
wickedly to ^ swear the son of God, his only health and ^uation: partly
through the whorishe intise^nte, and partly through the tyrannical threa^ges
of the Legate of Rome. The voices of the Martires, which they most cruelly
murder, do sound emongst them: yea, and are heard even in heaven: but the Pope
and his guard, think them not worthy their hearing. Let them delight
themselves therefore with the song of this martire of theirs so long, till they
be brought into the same pageaunt of desperation themself. I speak to the
Romish Pope, with his band of thieves, and to the Italians by name, not
because this example pertains to them only: but because this fight was set
so nigh before their eyes, by the marvelous providence of God: forasmuch as
they can not be wakened, but by such tragical motion.

In the mean season, all other nations may know that they are warned of the
lord. Let the Frenchemen bend and set their mind on this, that are, through
their folly and lightness auau^ced above the clouds, and are to much
accustomed irreverently to scorn religion. Let the Germans harken to this,
that have been heretofore to slack, and dulle in perceiuyng the iudgemen^es of
god, and now in their last euilles, some utterly to be void of al reason. Let
the English men also, and other learn, with what re^erence and carfulness
they ought to recei^e Christ, now shinyng upon them. This wretched Spera
(whether he was entised by ^tattrie, or constrained by fear, to forswear Gods
verity* which he had confessed) as a notable example, that the confession of
godly and wholesome doctrine (which we so ste^derly regard) is not a little
esteemed before the judgment seat of god. For as soon as he suffered himself to
be led away to this false simulation and saying (as the reprobate cease not
to commit one mischief upon an other) he fell into many trappes, and entangled
himself in many snares of desperation, till at length through his dotyng
fantasies, striuyng in vain (as beasts that are caught in snares) he
stra^gled himself. for as much then as this example of Gods judgment, ^s both
worthy to be known of this our age, and to be remembered of our posterity, I
thought good to set abroad (as faithfully as became me) ^his history of him,
compiled by a learned man and an eloquent: lest partly through negligence,
^artly through sluggishnesse, and partly through ^he wickedness of men, it
should be utterly lost.

For seeing that every man perceives how vn^iscretely such treatises were
compiled, as have ^een heretofore set forth, I can not se what they ^an
profit the reader. The lord Jesus establishe ^ur hearts in the right and pure
faith of his go^pell, and keep our tongues in the steadfast confes^on of him:
that now singing with his Angels, ^e may at length with them enjoy that joy
of ^he heavenly kingdom.

From Geneua, the fifte of December.
An Epigram of the terrible example of one Francis Spera an Italian, of whom
this book is compiled.
E xcesse of riches, promotion worldly
D ignities, honor, and yearthly pleasure,
W ife, children, kindred, name, affinity:
A ccompt not these things as perfect treasure
R iches that fail not, but ever endure.
D escende from heaven, and never turn to(...)
A s these which often both soul and body (...)
G race, truth, clear conscience, what treas(...) they been.
L et Spera be example to us all
I n these our days the like has not been s(...)
O f one that had from God, so great a fall,
N ot able once himself for grace to call.
B icause the wretch did set this worldly dros(...)
I n place about Christ's gospel, truth, and cross(...)
Sub his acrosticis latens, authoris nomen.
A great and marvelous example of the divine judgment, has appeared in
these our latter days. We do witness that, ^. Ihon. 2.
which we have heard with our ears, and seen with our Eyes.
FRAVNCIS SPERA* a Lawier and famous advocate, borne in the Castle of
Citadell: a man about fifty years He had a tedie mind to understand ye
scriptures.
of age, having a wife and.xi. children, worldly goods, offices, and
promotions aboundauntly: After he had received the gifts of the holy ghost,
through the unspeakable grace of GOD, and had fully known the Lord Jesus
Christ our ^a^iour, by the reuealyng of the whole scripture, and being
illuminate with the light of the holy ghost, did confess Christ only, and
preached that we had salvation* given us only through Christ the son of
God, and that by Christ only we were justified, and ought not to put
affiaunce in any works or merits of men^^ and yet not withstandyng, ought to
do good works, to the end we might obey God, and live justly and godly. And
finally, after he had attained aboundaunt knowledge of the truth, through
faith, by the manifest testimonies of the holy Scripture, tastyng in the mean
season in his har^, with much quietness, pleasure, and comfort, the gifts of
the holy Ghost, a^ faith* hope, charity, meekness, gentleness, and all
manner of quietness and tranquillity of the mind, as he that d(...) possess*
Christ, and had the fruition and pleasure of Christ: this wretched m^n (alas
too too wretched) being, through the pricking for ward of his enemies,
sommo^ned to appear at ^eny^ before the Legate of the chief Bishop, and there
being accused of her^^^e, grievously ^aunted and threatened: and (...)
constrained through f^^re, either of corporal death, or con^is(...)ti^^ of his
goods* utterly abiured and denied the doctrine which he tofore ha^ preached,
having commandment to return into his country, and ^^^^exan^ hi^ professed
doctrine, in the place of Cita(...) where he before had manifestly to (...)
^ort, declared and taught the same, and there to content the people and
Mini^^ers of the Church, with a minifest and ^^lempne recantation*

This wretched man being dismissed from the Legate, and prepared to his
^^urney to execute the commandment of late given him, concerning his abiuyng,
began diversely to reason with hym^elfe, whether he should return to Ci^adell,
to confirm his recantation: either ^houlde forsake all his goods, and go to
The holy ghost inspiryng.
^^me other place to repent. As he went in his journey, the spirit of God
continually ^ame into his mind, and the prick of Conscience is a thousand
witnesses.
^onscience provoking him to repentance, and councellyng him always not to go
^o abjure: but rather to forsake Wife Children, and the whole world: yea, and
^o suffer present death* rather than to ab(...)re and recante the truth which
he ^newe.

The spirit said, Frauncis, ^e ware least The ^utter in remembrance of our
inward thoughts.
(...)hou confirm the Recantation which (...)o^ heretofore haste made, take
h^ede (...)ast thou confirm and ^eale with the s^(...)et of thy heart, that
Epistle which thou (...)st signed with thy simple hand: thou* Christian
liberty.
^^t free yet Frauncis, and haste escaped* out of the hands of men, forsake
not the Do not become the servants of men.
truth* stand and fall no more, repent, and God will have mercy upon thee: the
frailenesse of the flesh has moved thee to this, beware least the wickedness
of the spirit come after. All these things and many The warnyng of the
spirit.
other (as Frauncis told us) did the Spirit, and his conscience continually
bea^e in his head, the which spirit being at length rejected, and his
heart being hardened, he decreed with himself, to prefer his wife, children,
offices, promotions and temporal goods, before the truth which he knew, and
to confirm his abiuration which he before had made, that he might enjoy his
temporal goods, in worldly quietness. And upon this purpose, entering into the
town of Citadell, offered himself to the Mayor (who was advertised of the
same, before by letters) to be ready to satisfy the people and congregation,
and to abjure the doctrine which he had preached before: and thi^ d^^n, he
departed home, the same night came to him a Priest bringyng him a certain
Copy of the recantation which be should make the next day before all the
people, and the same night, the wretch^^ man took no sleep: the next morning
followyng being Sunday when Mass was done: this Frauncis rising up did ab^ure
the doctrine which he before had maintained, before the whole multitude of
the people* which he reported to be about the number of two thousand persons,
in the presence of the Mayor, officers, and other his friends, and there did
recant al which he before had taught, confirmyng Merits, affianceof works,
freewill Purgatory, intercessions of Saints Pardons of Bishops,
satisfactio^s. etc*
the merits of men, affiaunce of works, free will, place of purgatory,
intercession of saints, pardons, satisfactions: and finally, all things which
he before had confuted by the testimonies of scripture, affirmyng with open
protestation, that he did err and was deceived, but now was returned to the
way of light and truth, and into the bosom of the holy Church of Rome.

This done, he was appointed to pay a (...)ne of thirty Crowns, of the
which he paid five to the Priest, that brought him the Copy of his
recantation, the other xxv. he gave out of hand for a receptacle or Tabernacle
of the Sacrament of the Auter. And so was dismissed of the magistrate, and was
restored to his wife, children, goods, and promotions. Ano^ Whosoever denies
me be fore men, I will also be ashamed of him.
this most wretched man and most unlucky of al other, perceived the terrible
sentence of the righteous GOD, to lighte^ and glister against him: and did most
evidently know that the wrath of the Almighty God was fallen upon his head*
By and by he lost all the gifts of the holy Do not make the holy ghost
sorrowful.
Ghost, and Christ was separated from him: All the benefits of Christ, all
comfort vanished away* his heart was filled with hatred, confusion, cursing,
and blasphemy. And immediately came in his mind a heap and remembrance of all
the iniquities and faults, from the dai^ of his nativity What should I say
more* By and by christ departed from him, and the most sweet peace of Christ.
And i^ their place came death, Satan, horro^^ fear, confusion and despair.

And thus this wretched person continuyng in this most miserable estate, by ^
He recanted the^ in May.
space of six Months, came at the length (in these latter days) with his
wife children and household unto Padua, when daily falling into worse estate and
wors^ and stricken continually with greater (...) fusion, feelyng also the
terrible indig(...) (...)n of God against him, fell at the length to utter
desperation. And so lay down his bed, without any fever, leesing all (...)e
use of his body, except his speech: nei^er desiryng, nor eating any thing,
nei^er digestyng that which was put into ^^m by force, nor voidyng any thing,
but (...)ely drinking, and troubled with an un(...)iable thirst, as though he
would have ^onke up Hister and Nilus But in coun(...)aunce Hister and Nilus be
great rivers.
and visage, well liking, in mind (...)d understanding, most constant, most
(...)ong of remembrance, never repea(...)ng one word twice, receiuyng all
that ^ne unto him, and vtteryng learned, ^aue, and sober communication, that he
^as condemned by the rightous iudge^ent of God, that he was already in hell,
continual torment, that he was void (...)d destitute of all hope and favor
of GOD, that he ought not* to look for the (...)ercie of God, for that he had
sinned a(...)inst the holy ghost, and that his fault (...)s unpardonable, that
the merits of He ^^^led the known truth for the peace of men.
(...)riste did avail him nothing, that he (...) no manner faith or hope left,
wishyng (...)e in the place of Judas or Caine, that looked for nothing else
daiely, but the horrible sentence of the just God, and t(...) the mercy of
God, did far surmount (...) the sins of the world: but yet could (...)
avail him any thing, for that he was (...) probate from the beginning:
neyt(...) He knew himself to be foreknowne.
written at any time, in the book of ly^^ that Christ neither suffered nor
pra(...) for him: but for the elect only, that t(...) judgment of God was
declared, and (...) justice fulfilled in him only.

Finally, that within short space, (...) horrible end should come: that he
mi(...) The principal end of this matter.
give an example to all the elect, of his (...) iuration. When he had uttered
all the things, and many mo, most euiden(...) and in perfect mind, in the
presence of that were assembled, about thirty p(...)sons in number, with the
reverend L(...) Bishop Vergerius: the same Verge(...) began to comfort him by
all means.

And when I amongst other, was a(...) to speak: the reverend Vergerius s(...)
unto him* Dear Master Frauncis, (...) ^s that Doctor Gribald that in this
(...)uersitie of Padua* professes the la(...) godly man and faithful, who
co(...) You be welcome: and I ill found.
to see you. Then he in his mother t(...) said. Sia lui^l ben venuto, et io il
mal^

^ato. Then did I direct my communication toward him, and said. Master
Frauncis, this is the illusion and mockyng of the Devil, that evidently does
trouble your mind. Wherefore with all your heart turn unto the blessed GOD,
who is ready to have mercy upon you. Do you not know that the earth is
full of the mercy of God? and that, if all the (...)nnes of the world were in
one man, yet (...)old they not be compared to the smallest spark of the
mercy of God, who said. As often as the sinner shall mourn, I will remember his
iniquities no more. Consi(...)er Peter that denied Christ thrice, and (...)hat
with an oath, with whom he had li(...)ed so long familiarlie, of whom he had
(...)eceiued so many benefits, so many to(...)ens of love: and yet
notwithstanding, (...)e most merciful God pardoned him. Consider the thief
that never had done (...)y good deed, but had bestowed his whole (...)e in
mischief, how he, through one m^(...)n of his heart, and power of faith,
(...)as received into favor. Know ye not (...)at the hand of the Lord is
not yet (...) (...) whose property is to pardon and have mercy* Call upon him
a little with your heart, and ask for his mercy* And I promise you assuredly,
that he is most ready to have mercy upon you, and to receive you into favor,
through Jesus Christ his blessed Son* Have a su(...) confidence Master
Frauncis, and rise^ and doubt ye not at all, God has already mercy upon you,
and has pardoned yo^ through Christ, all your offense. They said he, I do
not believe. And I answered again. Master Frauncis, I have known many by face
and acquaintance that have been both most grievous sinners, and possessed of
the Devil, and in far worse estate than you are, brougt into extreme
desperation, and yet the row the grace of God, by the exhortati^^ of their
faithful friends, have turned in to hope and favor, and died in peace a(...)
quietness, what should let you then, b(...) that ye may direct the smallest
spark (...) your heart to so oboundant mercy of God with an affection of your
heart to call upon him in hope and faith. When I h(...) said these, and many
other things: t(...) reverend Lord Vergerius took my (...) by the end, and
said. Ah sweet May(...) Frauncis, and my most dear Ma(...) Frauncis,
understand the words of this ^octor, who is both faithful and the Mes(...)nger
of God, whom God has sent unto (...)u, to ascertaine you of his mercy. Why
(...)e ye not believe this? Will ye not that (...)od should have mercy upon
you? He (...)ill out of doubt have mercy upon you, (...)d pardon all your
offense, how can he (...)nie you any thing, that has granted (...)u Christ
his blessed son? Be of good (...)eere, and lift up your heart a little in
(...)pe and trust. Will ye that we say the (...)rdes prayer together from the
heart? (...)ee answered to this: I believe all that (...) say: yea, the
Devils believe and are a(...)yde, but all this avails me nothing. (...)y sin
is to death. Certes I would (...)ndly attain the mercy and favor of (...)d:
but he will not. All the power of (...)th is taken from me. For the Lord had
(...)spect unto Peter: but he has no respect (...)to me. He was elect, and I
am repro(...)te, He does allege his reprobation or refusyng.
I will pray unto GOD with my (...)gue, and will quickly say whatsoever (...)
will have me to say. But my heart is (...) of hatred, cursing and blasphemy.
I (...)eve and feel that God is against me. (...)d as he spoke thus, a fly
came fliyng before his face: Lo (said he) now Belzabub calls me to a
feast, ye shall perceive mine end to approache, to the example of many, that
the judgment and justice of GOD, may openly be declared upon me. And when he
had thus said, he turned his face away from us, turnyng himself on the other
side, then said the reverend father Vergerius. Ah dear master Francis, turn
your face unto us. I would we prayed to God together, and say. Our father.
etc.

Then he turnyng him, began to say the lords prayer in his mother tongue, with
such gravity and devotion, that all we did wonder: and this uttered, he
added these words. I have said it with my mouth, but my heart is clean
from it. God has taken all his grace from me. My heart is utterly hardened:
Ye labor in vain. And when we had spo^ken with him all these words, and many
other, we had him farewell. And so departed all thence with the Lord Vergerius,
to pray unto God for him, entendyng to return on the morrow, if the blessed God
would vouchesafe to show him his mercy.

The next day we came to the wretched The second days work.
man, saluting him as the manner is, to whom the reverend lord Vergerius
said. Right well-beloved Master Francis, is it any better with you, by the
grace of GOD? have ye received no comfort in your heart? have you conceived any
good hope? to whom he answered nothing at all: but rather continually worse,
and worse. Then began we to demand of him many questions, and especially
what time he fell first into that confusion and desperation, and when that
unquenchable worm did first begin to burn his conscience, then recited he
unto us the whole order and process of his first and second abiuration: as we
have declared in the beginning. Which abiurations made, by and by he perceived
himself to be smitten with the mighty hand of God, not with any affliction or
infirmity of the body (which he right gladly would have acknowledged for the
chasticement and correction of sin, and would not utterly have cast away
hope and trust:) But the most wretched fellow from that hour, and that
suddenly, parceyued himself to be stricken in heart, spirit and conscience,
for God from that hour, sent into his heart a gnawyng worm, an unquenchable
fire, that suddenly he might be filled with error, confusion and desperation,
which worm and fire, never since forsook him: in so much that he confessed
himself to be in far worse estate, than if his soul were divided from his
body, and he with Caine and other dampened persons, desiring rather to be in the
place of any dead and damned soul, than so to live in his body, and that
death should be much more welcome to him.

Then weeping he began to declare unto us horrible visions, how that he
perceived since that time continually Devils to come to his chamber, yea, to
his bed, making a noise and business, putting him in fear and sheauering,
sticking pinnes in the pillow under his head, and said, that he conceived not
these things by a false or corrupt imagination, but even as truly as he saw
us all alive, and speaking with him.

Then said the reverend Lord Vergerius. Ah dear Master Frauncis, yo(...)
spirit utterly corrupt, represents (...) to you these erroneous illusions
and f(...) imaginations. But return a while unto the spirit of truth, and
direct your heart with hope and affiaunce unto the blessed God, merciful, and
full of goodness, and without doubt he will be good and merciful unto you, he
will cast from you all horror and confusion, have sure confidence sweet M.
Francis: we all have good hope of you, through the infinite mercy of God: and
(if it please you) let us say together from the heart the Lords prayer.

Then said he in Latin the whole prayer, with ple^tifull tears, so devoutly
and gravely, and with such inward affection, as we thought, that all we that
stood by, did weep with him, And when I beheld both the tears, the
repentance and contrition of the man: I said Master Frauncis, the blessed God
be praised. Now are not these the tokens of utter refusyng or castyng away.
You ^ourne, ye call for the favor of God with ^ar^est desire. Do not utterly
despair of his pardon, and say not with a desperate mind, that God is against
you, and that ye believe that ye were reprobate and refused from the beginning.
For no (...)a^ can know, as long as he is in this mortal life, whether he be
worthy the hatred or love of God, through the righteousness of works. And
when we earnestly exhorted him, that in no case he should fall from all hope
and trust, and that every man that is borne (although Eccle. ix.
he had committed all the sins of the whole world) ought yet to have some
hope of the favor and mercy of God, whose goodness and mercy is much more
plenteous, than man's understanding can perceive: and that if any of us were
fallen into such misery, yet should he not despair of the mercy of the
high and good God. To the which he answered: I know all this, and I believe
that the infinite mercy of God, does far surmount all the sins of the
world, and that every man that believes and has faith, eastlye obtayneth
pardon of all the sins of the world. But this hope, this faith, is the gift
of God. And this one Faith is the gift of God.
thing want I, that I can neither hope nor believe of the favor and mercy of
God toward me.

And I would God that he would grant me this one thing, that I could conceive
never so little hope and belief of forgiveness and pardon.

But this is even as possible as to take the whole water of the sea, in one
spoone, and to drink it up at a draughte. If Solomon had been in such case
as I am, and had some what known those things, which I prove now by
manifest experience, he would never have uttered that Sentence. But I do
believe (and this I know most assuredly) that there was never any man that had
more manifest experience in his life, of the hatred, wrath and indignation of
the righteous god against him, then I have.

I would I were in the place of any damned person. You that are in blessed
estate suppose this an easy thing to be done, that a sinner reknowledging his
fault, may lift up himself to hope and faith toward God* and therefore ye
exhort me, for as much as ye see me repentaunt and sorrowful, that I would
conceive some hope and trust to rise again* The helthfull has no need of a
Phis^tion: and he that is whole, can soon give council to the sick. But
herein am I tormented: this is my hell, this is my confusion and desperation,
that I know all grace to be taken from me, that I feel my heart hardened,
that I can not believe nor hope any thing at all of the atonement and mercy of
God. Few Few chosen
there be whom just Jupiter has loved. We comforted the miserable estate of
this desperate man, by such means as we could: and promising that we would
pray to God for him, bad him farewell, and departed thence with the reverend
Lord Vergerius.

And thus does the wretched man live The state of the desperate manne.
in his body. A certain strong man there is, that when he intended to give him
meat, does bind his arms and shoulders with hands, because he should not
resist with his hands. And so opening his mouth by force, puts thin broth
into his mouth with a spoone or other instrument. And yet does he let it as
much as he can, stopping it with his tongue. But it can not choose, but that
some of the broth must needs fall down by his gaping into the jaws and
palace of his mouth, and so thence into his stomach. And thus with much a do,
he is (...)shed twice a day, but avoiding nothing. But ever he desires to
die, and to go to hell with all speed: lookyng every hour for the terrible
sentence of God: as he most euidentlye and openly does declare by his
communication.

The third day came we unto him, The iij. days work.
with the reverend Father Vergerius, and did salute him as the manner is: and
began again to comfort him: Notwithstanding, he said nothing, but shuttyng
his eyes like one a sleep, with pain gave answer. Then came there a certain
aged man, from the place of Citadell, askyng him whether he knew him his
friend: whom the wretched man beholding with his eyes, did scarce acknowledge.

Then said he: Master Frauncis, I am Anthony Fontanina Priest, who was with
you, the same day that ye came to Venis: about seven or eight months past.
Then said Frauncis with pitiful groan, and sighings. Alas that cursed day.
Alas that cursed day. I would I had never gone thither, or else had dyed at
that present.

Then began we to demand him many questions, specially of his old faith, and
whether he had at any time, any steadfast or perfect belief: and how he fell
so miserably from that faith* for as much as it was impossible that he that
had once perfitely and firmly believed should fall from the whole. For it is
written: that Roma. xj.
the gifts of the holy ghost, are without repentance. Then answered he.
Certes, I did believe that Christ was the sacrifice that appeased Gods wrath
toward Christ only justifies.
us, and that it was he only, by whom we did attain salvation and
righteousness, neither doubted I at any time in this. But I did not
reknowledge the benifites He had not true charity.
of Christ, and (to say the truth) I never loved him again with perfect
heart. But rather took the faith of the Gospel, to the liberty of the flesh,
and so did abuse that faith, to unlawful license to sin: Often error.
and did neglecte the whole study, desire, and mean of Godliness and
religion.

By and by, turning him unto certain young men that stood by, he said. My
Sons hearken to my words. I say not this for that I would pluck any thing
from the holy Gospel (which I know to be most true: (but that ye should
not set is much by your faith: but that also ^^ should do good works,
believe me, that have proved it. And then oftentimes with tears and sighynges,
he did commend above all the scripture, the worthy Epistle of Peter, chief
in deed of all the Apostles: ij. Peter.
which exhorts all faithful christians to Godliness, chastity, holiness,
and clean life: and to prepare an unspotted Temple to God.

But I (said he) where as I both did presume that I had attained perfect
faith and also boldly preached to other: and had in a readiness all the
places of Scripture, yet lived wickedly and ungodly.

And behold the manifest judgment of God, who has suddenly taken me in his
anger and fury, not for any amendment, but to perfect damnation,

Then rose there up one that was there present, a man excellently learned, and
long exercised in holy Scripture, and said Master Frauncis, we do not
altogether allow this your exhortation, whereas ye council us not so much to
yield to the faith of ye Gospel: but that we should also embrace and commend
the affiaunce of works. For we know that there are two kinds of
righteousness, outward and inward. Outward righteousness, which is of
works, and which the world does commend, the same justifies not before God,
neither avails to salvation. For Socrates, Cato, and Arestides, right well
performed that righteousness: whereby they gate much praise and glory in
this world. But the inward righteousness The righteousness which is in
Christ, justifies.
is of God, which does regenerate us by grace into hope, faith and charity:
and by this faith freely granted unto us, do we live and are justified, and
God imputes not our sins unto us, without the which, nevertheless, we can
not be, as the scripture says: if we say we have no sin, we beguile our
selves. But blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and whose
sins are covered.

Wherefore, there is no cause that ye should send us to outward works, as to
the Anchor and refuge of salvation and righteousness. Than said I: Sir,
Master Francis words are not to be taken so precisely or exactly, as though he
would compare the outward righteousness of works, to the faith of the
Gospel, and inward righteousness: But he exhorted the young men after this
sort: because the most part do wickedly turn the liberty of the Gospel into
the unlawful liberty of the flesh, and without aduisement ^buse the gift of
faith, and whereas they ^^all themselves faithful, yet deny faith (...)
their deeds. Therefore Peter in his Epistle (which this man so much
com(...)ended, as ye have heard) and James also teach almost nothing else,
than that we should declare our faith in our outward works, as Saint
Peter says. Wherefore brethren, do as much as ye (...)n to make your
election certain by your ^ood works. And James also says. Show (...)e thy
faith, and I will show thee mine ^y my works. Therefore this man bla(...)eth
himself greatly for this cause, that (...)hereas he professed that he had the
in^ard righteousness, always neglected ^^e outward.

Then began we earnestly to dispute The beginning of a disputation.
of the matter, and of the estate of this ^retched man, and diligently to
search, ^heter his trespass were mortal, or no. for the which, according to
the saying (...) Saint Ihon, we ought not to pray. and that well learned man
began to (...)spute learnedly and excellently of the (...)nue against the
holy Ghost, and of resistyng after the truth* is known, and made a plain
distinction (as we thought) of all the kinds of sin, against the holy
ghost. And the wretched man harkened to all these things with attentive ear:
to whom the Lord Vergerius said. Well* beloved Master Francis, when ye hear
these things disputed so godly and devoutly, and the places of Scripture, in
which ye have excelled) to be brought forth, take you in the mean season n^
comfort and recreation with us? And specially, seeing that you for your
capacity* declare the Scriptures so eloquently, w(...) are not without all
hope of your salvation and suppose that the spirit of God is no(...) clean
taken from you, to whom he answered. What comfort can happen to cursed and
damned man? yea, whatsoever I speak, hear, see, taste, or feel: all (...)
turned unto my confusion and curse, to whom the Lord Vergerius said. Ah dea^
Master Francis, why should ye not hop^ of the goodness and mercy of God?
Do(...) not the Lord lead down into Hell, and bring back again? Consider
David the Prophet, who being brought down (...) Hell, and to death: yet prayed
unto G(...) with gronyng and tears, to grant him the renuyng of heart and
spirit. And he made answer: David was always elect and in Gods favor, and
although he fell grievously, yet the spirit of God never departed from him:
Yea, he prayed unto God, that he would not cast him from his face: and that
he would not take the holy ghost from him. But I am in far unlike estate,
neither elected, nor in Gods favor, but have been always reprobate and
cursed: neither can I pray unto him, not to take away the holy Spirit from
me, for he is quite taken away already, and never shall be resto^ed. I know
that god does raise up again, those that are bodily dead, and restores to
(...)fe, those that are brought unto hell: that (...), to their Sepulture: as
Christ raised up ^azarus, and brought him again from (...)ll. But I that am
condemned to eter(...)ll death, have no hope left of bringyng (...)gain: but
so that I could conceive never (...) little hope or trust of the mercy of god:
would most gladly those to live ten(...) (...)ousand years and more, in all
the pai(...)s and torments of hell, so that at length might hope for some end.
But I do* most firmly believe, that I shall thus long remain in life, and
in all cursing and desperation: that the judgment of God may be fulfilled in
me: that I may be an example to all the world, of Gods vengeance and just
indignation against a reprobate man: would God I were dead* and in the place
of any dampened person. Then said I, Master Frauncis, here me a little, I
cannot utterly despair of your salvation. For I dare take it in good part*
that the blessed GOD has so grievously tormented you in this present life, and
has not reserved your punishment to another world: so that I have some hope*
that God will have mercy upon you. And he made answer: Nay, I know most
assuredly my refusing and reprobation* and that he has not corrected my sin
with corporoll punishment: but rebuking me in his anger and fury, has
condemned my soul, heart and spirit, with perpetual hardness and confusion.
Wou(...) God he had suddenly vexed my body, and had left my spirit free.

What shall I say more? We talk(...) with him, till it was night of many
(...)ces of Scripture, and of the marueyl(...) judgments of God. Amongst other
things, I demanded of him what he thought of The place of souls.
the sleeping of souls. And he answered. Although a certain Doctor of
Germany supposes that this is not manifestly enough declared by the
scriptures: yet I believe that the soul of the elect does (...)raight way
ascend into the place of e^erlasting bliss, and does not sleep with the
buried body. Then the reverend Lord ^ergerius, taking his tale by the end, ^f
this (said he) ought we in no wise to ^oubt. There be for this many places of
(...)ripture: as, this day thou shall be with (...)e in Paradise: and it is
also manifestly proved by the story of Lazarus, and the (...)h man, and Paul
desired to be dead, (...)at he might be in heaven with Christ. (...)t the
length, beholding the incurable (...)ague (as me thought) of this desperate
(...)low, I was so bold to ask him this (...)estion. Master Frauncis, I
pray you answer me: for as much as through (...)er desperation, ye say, that
in this (...)e ye are worse, than if ye were with (...) dampened folk in hell:
and for as much I see you continually to wish for death, (...)t ye might go to
hell, as though now* both your body and soul were in more painful torment,
as ye do openly witness. I demand of you, if ye had a sword in your hand:
would ye kill your self (as all desperate persons for the most part do)
that have sticked themselves with weapon, or strangeled themselves by hanging.
Then said he, give me a sword, and ye shall see what I will do. Nay (said
I) I do but desire you to show us your will: I can not tell (said he)
neither can I say what my will t(...) should be. And when he had thus said*
the reverend Lord Vergerius obtained of him again with much a do; (...)
say the Lords prayer. But he said (...) no more with such affection of heart,
as he was wont to do. Moreover* he did protest that his heart was quite from
God and that he called him not father with his heart, but rather curssed and
blasphemed him: and therefore he said* there was no cause why we should labor
any more in vain, to comfort and bring him home again. For it was even as
possible to bring him to any hope or trust (...) the mercy of God, toward
him, as (...) was possible to fill the whole world with one grain of Mill.
Then all we honoring Mill, is a small seed.
the wonderful judgment of God, hade him farewell and departed. And for as
much as his kinsfolk had provided a Chariot, and were purposed the next day
to convey him from Padua, to the place of Citadell: we gave them warning in no
wise to forsake him, but continuallye should get him the company of godly
men: that the blessed God (if it were possible) by the continual prayer and
comfortyng of good men, might vouchsafe to grant him his mercy.

The next day after, when the wretched The.iiij. days work.
man was ready to take his journey, and having his apparel on, was brought
from his bed, he beheld all the chamber with a fierce and cruel countenance,
and horrible eyes, and by chance espied a Woodknife liyng upon the table,
which by and by, he snatched to stick himself. But his two sons that were
always by him, took him suddenly by the hand, and plucked the knife from
him: whereby we may plainly know what we may undoubtedly think of that
demand which we asked him the day before, of kylling him: to the which he
would make none answer, ^yding his intent. And this did the reverend Lord
Vergerius signify unto me, as an enterprise worthy to be noted, being
advertised of the same by his forenamed kinsfolks.

Thus was this miserable man conveyed to his house at Citadell. But how he
does, and what end he has, I shall by all means go about to understand:
That may ye see in the Preface.
and being advertised of the truth, I shall by Gods favor, declare you the
whole*

Fare ye well. From Padua, the xxvij. of November. 1548.

These things have we seen, and sensibly known, and have thought good to
write them unto you, to the praise and glory of the high God, whose kingdom
we earnestly desire to be openly known to the whole world.

Here follows a godly Prayer against desperation.
A godly prayer against desperation.
OLyuing God, and most merciful father, which alone of thy almighty power
providence and wisdom did create heaven and earth with all things
therein, in most comely form* and de^^^^ order, and that of very love that
thou dearest, chiefly toward mankind* whom thou did not only much safe
to make after thine ^wne similitude and likeness: but also did ^^ke m^^
Lord and governor over (...) thy other good creatures: placing him in the
Paradise of all felicity* forbidding him nothing* but only the eating of one
^^uite among many, that this one commandment should be a mean for him* to
know his superior: and to practice his obedience toward his Creator. But
our father Adam, nothing regarding thy fatherly love, nor inestimable
benefits* not waiyng the Royal state and felicity that he was in, did most
unthankfully nothing staiyng himself by thy fore admonition) tra^sgresse and
wilfully break(...) thy commandment, thereby deiectin^ himself clean out of
thy godly fauou(...) utterly losing all his former beatitude (...) felicity,
making himself of the free son(...) of God, bondslaue to the devil: of
immo^tall, and ever to have lived in all feliciti(...) mortal and subject to
death and all (...)serie. And alas, not only casting away^ himself by his
unfaithful disobedienc^ but (for that he having the sentence (...) death and
dampnation laid upon hy^ begatte us, as the whole parent of man kind) he, in
his offense, most justly c(...)demned me, and all his posterity: Here(...) so
haynously displeased thy Majesty, (...) so justly procured thy wrath and
i(...)gnation: that all our deeds all our me(...)tes, no not all the
intercessions and (...) rites of all the creatures that ever liu(...) in this
world, could not once move t(...) righteous justice, to pardon him, nor (...)
offense committed in him: But as t(...) godly providence did from evermore
for(...) see that miserable fall of man, so did t(...) mercy from everlasting,
determine (...) redeem man again: for thou so love(...) the world, that (at
the time appointe^ thou did send down thy only begot^en son incarnate,
to suffer death for ma^kinde, and by his death once for ever, ^o make the free
sacrifice and omnisuffi^ient satisfaction to thy justice, for the (...)nnes of
the whole world freely to make ^ust in thy sight, all that unfeignedly be^eeue
therein. Therefore, for as much as (...)t has pleased thee, oh father, so to
open (...)y mind, and dark senses, that I do ^ertainely know, and
undoubtedly be^eeue, all these things, by that infallible ^estimonie of thy
sacred and holy Scri^ture, not only that thou of thy mercy (...)oost freelye
forgive me the offense of mine original sin, for Christ's sake: ^ut also my
manifold and daily sins, ^o^mitted actually* against thy majesty: (...)
most humblye beseech thee here, being (...)rostrate, and lowlye submitting me
before the throne of thy mercy, always to grant me thy peace (which passes
al ^nderstanding that when, or how soever ^he world do rage against me. The
so^icitie or care of living, loss of goods, or ^riendes, or any thing
visible, or inuist(...)le, do molest and trouble me, that I may (...)uer have
thy peace, rest and quietness, in my conscience, and to put my wh(...) trust
and affiaunce in thee: and so to pr^serue me from the subtle perswasio(...)
and cruel assaults of Satan that whatsoever my calamities, my losses, or min^
adversities be, or how great, heinous (...) manifold soever my sins be:
that (...) never fall into any kind of desperation, other of body or soul:
But that I may always remember and know thy bottomless mercy to surmount
and pass the number and gravity of all mine offenses. That I may always
trust in thy mercy, that thou will other preserve me from sin, or of thy
mere mercy freely forgive me all my sins for thy son Jesus Christ's sake.
And that tho^ wilt never take from me thy spirit, but ever grant me grace,
that in all my necessities and troubles, other of body or soul, I may truly
repent my sins, call upon thee for help and aid, and that I may steadfastly
believe, that thou (like a merciful father, for thy sons sake) wilt
favorably hear me, mercifully forgive me, and mightily defend me against all
my enemies, and in all my troubles, that I never commit nor consent to the
destruction of my body or ^oule: but ever to live here in thy fear and
dread, until it shall please thee (of thy mercy) to call me to reign with
thee in glory everlasting.

Amen.
Here follows the Godly and wholesome preservative against desperation, etc.
I. PETER V. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil as a roaring
Lion: walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the
faith. The Preface.
THis preservative (g(...)tle reader) is prepar(...) for thy profit: Th(...)
thou readyng it at l(...) sure, may chose o^ such comfortable se^tences, as
may bot^ stay thine own conscience in the ty(...) of temptation: and also
quiet others, w(...) the Devil shall be busy with them: (...) ij. Cor. ij.
we be not ignorant of the thoughts Satan, how he continually furnishes
hy^ self, to bend his ordinance against m(...) And now with the
consideration of t^^ greatness, and multitude of sin. No^ Ephe. vj.
with the terror of death and dampna(...) on, d^oe labor to beat the buckler
(...) j. These. v.
Faith out of our hands, to strike the he met of hope from our head, and to
wr(...) from us the swearde of the spirit, whi^^ Ephe. vj.
is Gods word.

But here, christian reader, is thy swo(...) and buckler delivered unto thee,
her^ thy helmet put upon thy head, here th(...) shalt find such armoure and
weap^^ whereby thou shall be able to withsta^^ the force of our common enemy
the D(...) (...): and also (by the counsel) to rescue (...)ers that they
perish not. Yea, here thou (...)lte find choice of most comfortable
^^ntences, whereby man's conscience (...)e be stayed from dampnable despe^ion*

Watch therefore, stand steadfast in j. Cor. xvj.
the, play the manne, and be of good (...)mforte. Resist the Devil, and he
will Jacob. iiij.
(...) from thee. Not for fear of thine own (...)were, strength, or holiness:
but for fear Christ: in whom by faith thou art in^ffed. For it is Christ,
through whom j. Cor. xv.
^od has given us victory against sin, ^ath, hell, and the devil. Neither
is there Acts. iiij.
any other name under heaven given unto manne, wherein we may be saved, but
the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, be all honor and glory.

Amen*
A preservative against desperation.
FOr as much as the diseas^ of the body and corpor(...) death, does so
trouble man mind, that we common(...) tremble and quake at the o(...) mention
of them: How much ought (...) to fear the sickness of the soul and dea^ of
the same, then which there can no gr^ter nor more fearful calamity chau(...)
unto man.

And seeing that every man does a(...) (so much as in him lies) the pain,
(...)ries, diseases, and death of the body: h(...) much more ought we to
decline and (...) chewe the causes of these evils, which (...) sins and
offenses, and fear the ire (...) God, which we so (by our enormities) (...)
provoke. If we be never so little sicke^ our body, by and by we send for the
P(...)sition, we spare no cost, we seek for me^cines and remedy, though they
be ne(...) so chargeable, and all to patche and cl(...) up this earthen vessel
of our body, whi(...) do we never so much, can not last l(...) And why use we
not like diligence in (...)siryng and seeking remedies against diseases of the
soul, which like as they be (...)re grievous, even so they bring with (...)m
(without comparison) infinitely (...)re danger. For what can it profit a
(...)nne though he have all the riches in (...) world, though he live a
thousand year (...) that in such health and pleasure, that ^s not once touched
with sickness or (...)e: his soul in the mean time being (...)oued with
sin, being captine to than, having god displeased with him, (...) damnation
ready for him after this (...) For truly this life must once have (...)nde,
neither know we when, where, (...) what manner or how soon.

Therefore says Christ watch, for ye Matthew. 25*
(...)er know the day nor hour when ^onne of man will come. And least we
^short time of our abode (omittynge (...)ges most weighty and profitable)
(...)d follow trifles and things of small (...): he has vouchsafe to
prescribe us (...)der, and as it were a brief, certain (...)re wa^e: to come
unto true felicity, (...)g.

(...)eke first for the kindome of God and Matthew. 6.
^^ghteousnesse thereof: and all things (...)e added unto you* Care for living,
care for riches, care for worldly dignity, worldly favor, worldly estimation,
and such like tra^sitorie things, which in deed^ does little profit, but many
times because both of filthy vices and also of grievous calamities (does
busy, does vex, does trouble, does even defatigat us both day and night) but
in seeking for and procuring of Godly and heavenly things* we be most
negligent, most slack, most dull, most forgetful. And I pray yo^ what can
be a greater blindness, or ^ more dangerous madness? whilst w^ be lusty,
whilst we be in health, while^ we be in prosperity, we scarcelye think^ upon
any life to come, we remember not once that we shall die. But when we be in
peril and danger by sickness, ^ death begins to knock at our door, Eue^
at that same hour when we should play the men and fight against our enemy,
being sufficiently armed and weaponed before, then begin we first to think upon
our armor, to think upon our weapon, to think upon mending of our life. These
things declare us to be smally exercised Soldiers, to be men of
preposterous judgment, and very weakelings in faith. God be merciful unto
us. Amen.

But yet though a man be never so old, though the day be never so far past,
so he amend whiles he is here, ere it be night, his repentance comes not out
of ceaso^. Nevertheless it were to be wished, that no man should defer his
repentance to his last and most dangerous conflicte. For even they shall have
much a do to stand and to defend them selves from the assaults, the guiles,
and invasions of the enemy, which in the time of their health prepared and
armed them selves, what tha^ shall come of the^ which not fearyng God, neither
mindyng once repentance, had led a dissolute, filthy and naughty life,
how shall they fight? how shall they be able to withstand the force of Satan?

Seeing therefore the multitude of people is great, and the ministers of the
Gospel very few, neither able to be every where to do their office to
every man: I having a will to help all men: have gathered together and written
out of Scripture, a certain brief form, how to admonish, instruct, and
comfort such a^ ^e sick, that they either reading these things, or hearing
them red by others: may conceive certain hope and perfect consolation, least in
this most dangerous conflict they faint, give over like toward, and so be
ouercomed and perish: For this is certain, whenever a man is taken with
extreme sickness and is in danger of death, he is assaulted with diverse
many, and grievous temptations* First, it is a grievous and behement
te^taption, when he sees the most terrible Image of death before his eyes,
when he sees he must leave this light, leave this life, leave friends, leave
lands, goods* kinsfolks, father, mother, wife, children, all things wherein
he had here either pleasure or comfort. Then such sins as he against the
will and pleasure of God has committed shall show and present themselves, and
shall appear more in number, and more grievous tha^ ever they seemed before,
and so shall wonderously vex and tormente the conscience. Then death,
judgment, ^ell, dampnation as it were in a plumpe, shall assault and laid
siege with diverse dangerous ingines against the old man of ours*

In these Agonies, except a man be armed with a sure and constaunt faith: it is
to be feared, least he be wearied, tired, and at last ouercommed. For these
temptations which chance unto men liyng in extremes: appear most huge,
fearful, and dangerous, and that for because out faith is very slender, and
wavering, neither yet able to see, perceive, or apprehende, the
incomprehensible and inestimable riches of the children of God, which be
remission of sins, through Christ; resurrection of the flesh, communion of
saints, everlasting life, and all these given unto us in Christ, and for
Christ.

In these articles of our faith we must daily exercise our selves. These we
must diligently reuolue, and earnestly expe^de in our minds. For though all
the articles of our faith are diligently to be remembered, and without all
wavering believed: yet in the Agony and point of death, these four (that is)
the communion of saints, remission of sin, by the blood of Christ, the
resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life: are chiefly to be minded,
expended, and inculcated.

For like as death is the pain and ^^pende Romans 6.
of sin: even so for sin God does commonly punish us with diuer^ diseases
and plagues, as it is to be seen in diverse places of Scripture. John. 5* Psalm.
88. Deuteronomy. 28. 2. Reg. 24.

Nevertheless afflictions be many times laid upon us, that our faith may be
tried: For than is it easy to be perceived how much we love God, what faith
w^ have in him, how we trust him, when we be pressed and grieved with
adversity. In this case therefore we must ^^ wayle and acknowledge our sins,
for the which, we have justly incurred Gods displeasure, and deserved most
grievous pain, we must turn to God wit^ true repentance in all our heart
a^ mind, without all fayning and counterfeyting, we must have recourse (...)
the Gospel, where we shall find (...) bountiful consolation. First,
absolutio^ or remission of our sins, which Christ has instituted in the
Church. John. ^ Receive (says Christ) the holy Gho^ whose sins ye forgive,
they are for^^uen. This inestimable treasure is day^ opened and offered unto
us. When ^^mission of sins is thus desired and ^^tayned: undoubtedly then the
pain ^ ^ynne which is the disease or affliction shall soon cease and leave
us, or else ac^ording to the most beneficial will of our ^eauenly father:
shall turn to the pro^te and soul health of him that is disea^ed or afflicted.
For this may we be sure ^f, that the pain and affliction in the body ^ this
world (seem it never so grie^ous a burden or heavy yoke to the ^eshe) as
commonly nothing else but a ^therly rod, wherewyth God does ^aw us his
children from sin, and call Psalm. 88.
^s home to him. Truly our heavenly ^ther does love us most fervently, he
^eareth us good mind, and does all things Heb. 12.
^r our amendment and profit, for ^home God loves, him he chastises, and
^rrecteth us temporally here: that we 1. Cor. 11.
^oulde not be punished in hell euerla^ngly. Though he seems angrye: he ^eth
singulerly. Neither is his ire the ^e of a Tyrant or tormentor desiring ^r
perdition, but of a father seeking our ^endemente and safety. First there^e we
must cry God mercy, desire par^n and forgiveness of our sins (but ^
Christ, but with a heart truly peni^t) that we may be at one with God, and have
him merciful unto us. This done we may then desire God to deliver us from the
imminent and present affliction and disease. For so teaches Ecclesiast. Son
in thy infirmity neglect not Eccle. 3.
thy self, but pray to the Lord: and he shall deliver thee. Also in the
Psalm, remember not O Lord God our old Psalm. 70.
iniquities, but let thy mercy speedily prevent us: for we be very miserable,
help us God our Savior. Lord God of power turn us? show thy face and we
shall be saved. Here we be taught first to desire remission of sin, that we
may be at one with God: and after that to have his wrath, and the tokens of the
same taken away. But whenever we desire to be delivered or to be eased of the
cross that presses us, we must always annexe this addition. Thy will (O
heavenly Matthew. 5.
Father) be fulfilled.

Neither know we so well what is profitable unto us. Neither can we so well
provide for our selves as our most loving heavenly father. Which is both of
infinite power, and also of incomprehensible wisdom, which never turns his
eyes from us, which cares continually for us, which knowethe the number of
our years, which does quicken, nourishe, feed, keep, defend, provide for
all his creatures much better than they can wish or desire. But to draw to
the more particular temptations, and to show what things do most fiercely
and daungerously at the time of death assault us. And how we shall withstand
them.

There be three things* which at the hour of death, does wonderously vere,
trouble, and fear our minds (that is to say, sin, death, hell, or
damnation.

Sin.
WHerein we have ungodly mispente our life, whereby we have grievously
offended GOD, and our neighbor: this coming to our remembrance, when we lie
upon our death bed, does drive us to a wondrous fear, pensiveness, and
anxietie, As S. Romans 2.
Paul says: Wrath, indignation too trouble, and anguishe against every
soul of man that does evil.

A medicine against sin, vexyng and troublyng our conscience
LET us call earnestly to remembrance, that the son of GOD came done from
heaven, became man, took upon his back the sins of the world, died for
them upon the Cross, there making satisfaction for us, and paiyng our
debtes. This most precious blood of Christ was shed also for us, and of his
death we be also partakers, so we rightly believe in Christ. Neither need we
to doubt, but Christ died as Romans 6.
well for us, as for Peter and Paul: For we be baptized also (as Saint
Paul says) in the death of Christ. This ought to comfort us: This ought to
erecte, and ^^a^e our minds. For seeing we be baptized in the death of
Christ, Christ's death brings also unto us health and salvation. By
Christ's death we be also dead to sin, by Christ's death we have also
certain and sure remission of our sins, by Christ's death we be raised also
to a new and everlasting life. For baptism is a couenaunte betwixt God and
us. And a sign of his grace and (...) toward us, wherein we be reconciled,
and made at one with God again, so that we may now have a joyful, and quiet
conscience, for so much as our sins be forgiven us, through the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, yea Christ also in the institution of the most
blessed Sacrament of his last supper, speaking also to us saying that his blood
is shed for the remission of sin. Now although we have not lived alwaie
innocently, neither lead such a life as we ought to have dooen: yet we may
not despair, but without delaie resort unto God, by true repentance, call
Beleuyng the Gospel. Romans 10.
faithfully upon his name, and we shall be ^aued. Yea, let every one of us
with a meek heart burst out into these, or like words and say: O most
merciful God Father of all mercy, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
merciful unto me a wretched sinner, make speed to deliver me, for the most
bitter (but most precious) death, and passion of Jesus Christ, thy only
begotten soonne, our redemer, and only Savior: Amen. Enter not (O lord)
into judgment with thy servant, handle me not, according to my deser^yng,
neither do unto me after my iniquities: but according to thy infinite (...)
botomelesse goodness and mercy, t^ me unto thee. I a miserable and wre^ched
creature, am in thy hand, I am thy debte and danger, thou may d(...) with
me what it please thee. O m(...) merciful father forsake me not, nor (...) me
of. I am thine all that I am, there (...) no man comfort, no man help, no
(...) deliver me, but thou alone. Thou art (...) true comfort, the most
present help, t(...) surest Bulwark in all necessity. The God art my refuge,
my strength, my (...) in all trouble. Thou art my Lord, in t(...) hands
rests all my chance and aff(...)res. Show thy loving, and merci(...) face
upon thy servant, save me in t(...) mercy, O Lord: but in any ways in
(...) extreme sickness and affliction, let (...) beware we look not to
earnestly, (...)there too long upon our sins. But (...)there let us have the
Image of Chri(...) most healthful, and precious death (...)fore our eyes. Let
us fix in our mind and be full persuaded, that Christ now burdened with our
sins, that (...) has now taken them upon his o(...) shoulders, and so
has satisfied for t(...) (...)d washed them away, that he will ne(...)r
charge us with them, but freely for(...)e us them, as we profess in our
Creed, (...)e^ we say, Credimus remissionem pec(...)orum, we believe the
remission of (...)nes.

And that thou may be assured thereof g(...)(...)ell reader, with a full
persuasion of faith, I have noted out of Gods holy word, some places,
showing.i. How Christ our true Messiah was promised from the beginning of the
world, and so from time too time.ij. The assurance that he is come. (...)j.
To what end Christ's coming is.

GOD said unto Abam, the Genesis 2. Christ our Messiah promised. Genesis 12.
Seed of the woman shall tread down the Serpents head.

God said unto Abraham thy seed all the nations of the earth all be
blessed, because thou have heard ^y voice.

Moises said unto the children of Is(...)ell, Deuter. 18. Acts 3.
a Prophet shall the lord your God (...)ise up unto you, even of your own
bre(...)en, like unto me, him shall you hear (...) all things, whatsoever he
shall sa^^ (...)t^ you.

God said unto David, I will set up ^. Kings. ^*
^y ^e^de after thee, which shall proceed out quities: but according to thy
infinite ^ botomelesse goodness and mercy, ta^ me unto thee. I a miserable
and wreched creature, am in thy hand, I am thy debte and danger, thou may
do^ with me what it please thee. O mos^ merciful father forsake me not, nor ^
me of. I am thine all that I am, there t^ no man comfort, no man help, no man
deliver me, but thou alone. Thou art the true comfort, the most present help,
the surest Bulwark in all necessity. The God art my refuge, my strength, my
hel^ in all trouble. Thou art my Lord, in the hands rests all my chance
and aff^res. Show thy loving, and mercif^^ face upon thy servant, save me in
the mercy, O Lord: but in any ways in o^ extreme sickness and affliction,
let ^ beware we look not to earnestly, n^^ther too long upon our sins. But
rather let us have the Image of Christ^ most healthful, and precious death
before our eyes. Let us fix in our mynd^ and be full persuaded, that Christ
now burdened with our sins, that ^ ^ath now taken them upon his ow^
shoulders, and so has satisfied for the^^ (...)d washed them away, that he
will ne^r charge us with them, but freely for^e us them, as we profess in our
Creed, ^he^ we say, Credimus remissionem pec^torum, we believe the remission
of ^nes.

And that thou may be assured thereof ge^^ell reader, with a full persuasion
of faith, I have noted out of Gods holy word, some places, showing.i. How
Christ our true Messiah was promised from the beginning of the world, and so
from time too time.ij. The assurance that he is come. iij. To what end
Christ's coming is.

GOD said unto Abam, the Genesis 2. Christ our Messiah promised. Genesis 12.
Seed of the woman shall tread down the Serpents head.

God said unto Abraham thy seed all the nations of the earth all be
blessed, because thou have heard ^y voice.

Moises said unto the children of Is^^ell, D^uter. 18. Acts 3.
a Prophet shall the lord your God ^ise up unto you, even of your own bre^ren,
like unto me, him shall you hear ^ all things, whatsoever he shall sat^ unto
you.

God said unto David, I will set up ^ Kings* ^*
^y seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy body, and I will
stablishe the seat of his kingdom for ever, and ^ will be his father, and he
shall be m^ son, and my mercy will I never tak^ from him.

David says in the spirit of God, the Psalm. 2.
art my soonne this day begat I thee.

Again thy seat O God, indureth fo^euer. Psalm. 2.


Behold, a virgin shall conceive an^ Esaias. 7.
bear a soonne, and thou his mother, she call his name Emanuell, that is to
sa^ God with us.

Unto us a child is borne, unto us Esaias. 9.
soonne is given, upon his shoulder she the kingdom lie, he shall be called ^
his own name, wonderful, the giver ^ counsel, the mighty GOD, the
everlasting father, the prince of peace.

There shall a Rod spryng out of the Esaias. 11.
kindred of Iesse, and a blossom shall spryn^ out of his Root, and the Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him.

Behold my servant upon whom^ Esaias. 42.
lean, my elect, in whom my soul ^ pacified.

Behold says the Lord, the sy^ Jeremy. 23.
shall come, that I will raise up a righ^ ^s branch unto the house of thy
ser^unte David, which king shall bear ^le, and he shall prospere in wisdom.

The Angel of the Lord said unto Matthew. 1. Five witnesses among many that
the true Messiah is come. Luke. 1.
^^seph, fear not to take unto thee Man thy wife, for that which is conceived
her, comes of the holy Ghost, she ^ll bring forth a son, and thou shall
^l his name Jesus, for he shall save his ^^ople from their sins.

The Prophet Zachary says, bles^ be the Lord God of Israel* for he ^th
visited and redeemed his people, and ^th raised a mighty salvation for us* in
^e house of his servant David, as he ^^ke by the mouth of his holy
Pr^^etes, which has been since the world ^^^ne, that we should be saved
from (...) enemies, and from the hands of all ^t ^ate us.

Lord, now let thou thy servant ^art in peace, according to thy word, ^
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, ^iche thou have prepared before the face ^ll
thy people, to be a light to lighten (...) Gentiles, and to be the glory of
thy ^ple Israel.

Saint Ihon Baptist says. Behold Ihon. 1*
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

5 Our heavenly father says, This is Matthew. 9. 17.
my dear soonne in whom I do delight, hear him.

Who says, the whole need not the To what end Christ's coming is.
Physician but they that are sick, for I come not to call the righteous, but
the sinners to repentance.

The son of man came not to be Matthew. 20.
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his li^e for many.

He that believes and is baptized shall Mark. 16.
be saved, but he that believes not, shall be da(...)ed.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten soonne, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes on him shall not be Mark. 3.
condemned, but he that believes not, i^ condemned already, because he
believed not in the name of the only begotten soonne of God.

He that hears my words, and b^leueth Ihon. 5.
on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into (...)
nation, but is escaped from death to life.

Christ says, this is the work of Ihon. 6.
GOD, that he believe on him whom he has sent.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that Ihon. 6.
^eleueth in me has everlasting life.

I am the resurrection and life, he that Ihon. 11.
^eleueth on me, ye though he were dead, ^et shall he live, and whosoever
lives and believes in me shall never die.

I am come a light into the world, who^oeuer Ihon. 12.
believes in me, shall not bide in ^arkenesse*

I am the wai^, the truth, and the life, Ihon. 14.
(...) man comes to the father, but by me.

This is the life eternal, that they Ihon. 17.
^ight know thee the only very God* and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Saint Peter says, Christ is the stone Acts. 4*
^hiche was cast away of you builders, ^hiche is become chief of the corner,
neither is there Salvation in any other, for among men under heaven, there is
given one other name, wherein we must be (...)ued.

To Christ bare all the Prophets wit^esse, Acts 1^.
that through his name, whosoever ^^leeueth in him, shall receive remission ^f
sins*

Saint Paul says, through Christ (...) Acts. xiij.
preached unto us the forgiveness of sy^nes, and that by him all that believe,
a(...) justified from all things, from which we could not be justified by
the Law^ of Moises.

Saint Paul to the Romans says Romans 1.
the just shall live by faith.

The righteousness of God, comm(...) by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto al
(...) upon all that believe.

There is no difference, for all have (...)ned, Romans 3.
and are destitute of the glory of g(...) but are justified freely by his
grace, th^rowe the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set for
the as seat of mercy, through faith in his bl(...) that he might be coumpted
just, and the iustifier of him which believes in Jesus

To him that woorketh not, but bel^ueth on him that justifies the vngodl(...)
his faith is coumpted for righteousnes^^

By faith is the inheritance giu^^ that it might come of favor, and the
pr^mise might be sure to all the seed.

Christ was delivered to death for (...) Rom 4.
sins, and rose again for our iustif(...)tion.

Because we are justified by faith, we Roma. v.
are at peace with god the father, through our lord Jesus Christ, by who^ we
have away in through Faith, to that grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in
hope of the glory of God.

God sets out his love that he has to us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us, much more now, seeing we are justified in his
blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him: for if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to GOD by the death of his soonne, much more
seeing we are reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life.

Not only so, but we also joy in God Roma. v.
by the means of our lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement.

Eternal life is the gift of God, through Roma. vj.
Jesus Christ our Lord.

There is no damnation to them which Roma. viij.
are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

We know that all things work for the best, unto them that love God, and
them which be appointed before them, he also calls, and which he calls
them he justifies, and which he justifies, them also he glorifieth.

What shall we say the^ to these things, if God be on our side, who can be
against us, which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, how
shall he not with him give us all things also.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, it is God that
justifies, who then shall condemn, it is Christ which is dead, ye rather
which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us.

If thou shall knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and shall
believe in thy heart, that God raised him up from death, thou shall be safe,
for the belief of the heart justifies, and to knowledge with thy mouth makes
a man safe.

Christ is the end of the law, to justify Roma. x.
all that believe.

None of us live unto himself, if we live we live unto the Lord: and if we
die, we dye unto the Lord, whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords,
for Christ therefore died and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of quick, and dead.

Saint Paul says: Christ Jesus of Corrin. i.
God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

We are washed, we are sanctified, we Corin. vj.
are justified, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of
our God.

Christ died for our sins, agreeing to Corin. xv.
the Scriptures, he was buried and rose again the third day, according to
the scriptures.

As by Adam al die, even so by Christ Corin. xv.
shall all be made alive.

Death is swallowed up in victory, death where is thy sting, hell where is thy
victory, the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law:
hut thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Therefore my dear brethren be steadfast Corin. xv.
and immovable, always rich in the works of the Lord, for as much as ye
know, as your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

By faith ye stand. Corin. j. Corin. iiij.


According as it is written in the 116. Psalm. I believe and therefore have I
spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak, for we know that he which
raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by the means of Jesus, and
shall set us with you.

God has made Christ to be sin for Corin. v.
us, which knew no sin, that we by his means should be that
righteousness, which before God is allowed.

A man is not justified by the deeds of Gala. j.
the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, and therefore have we believed on
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by
the deeds of the law, because that by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall
be justified.

For the life which I now live in Gala. ij.
the flesh* I live by the faith of the son of God, which loved me, and gave
himself for me, I despise not the grace of GOD, for if righteousness come by
the law, then dyed Christ in vain.

Abraham believed to God, and it was Gala. iij.
counted to him for righteousness.

The scripture saw before hand, that Gala. iij.
God would justify the Heathen through faith, and therefore showed before
hand^ glad tidings unto Abraham, in thee shall all nations be blessed, so then
they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. Understand therefore
that the^ which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

Christ has delivered us from the curse af the law, and was made accurssed for
us.

That we might receive the promise of the spirit by faith.

The scripture concludes all things under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe.

We are all the sons of God by the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

We be all one in Christ, Jew, Gentle, bond, and free man and woman.

If ye be Christ's, than are ye Abraham's Gala. v.
seed, and heirs by promise.

Ye are gone quite from Christ, as many Gala. v.
as are justified by the Law, and are fallen from grace, we look for and hope
in the spirit, to be justified through faith.

God forbid that I should rejoice in Gala. vj.
anything, but in the cross, death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ^.

For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision Cala. vi.
avails any thing at all, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature in Christ,
and of the household of God.

By Christ we have redemption through Ephesi. j.
his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins, according to the riches of
his grace.

By grace are ye made safe through Ephe. ij.
faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God, and comes
not of works, least any man should boaste himself.

We are made nie unto God by the Ephesi. ij.
blood of Christ, for he is our peace, and has broken down the wall that was
a stop between us, and by him we have an open way in one spirit unto the
father: now therefore we are no more strangers, but citezens with the saints.

By Christ we have boldness and entrance, with the confidence which we have
by faith in him.

Christ is gone up on high* and has Ephesi. iiij.
led captivity captive, and ^ath given gifts unto men.

Christ is to me life, and death is to Philip. j.
me advantage.

In Christ we have redemption through Colos. j.
his blood, that is to say, the forgiveness of sins.

In Christ dwells all fullness, and Colos. j.
through the blood of his Cross, are all things reconciled to God the
father, and set at peace both in heaven and earth.

We which were dead in sin, has Colos, ij.
Christ forgiven us all our trespasses: and has put out the hand writing that
was against us, contained in the law written: and that has he taken out of
the way, and has fastened it to his cross, and has spoiled rule and power,
and has made a show of the^ openly, and has triumphed over them openly in
his own person. Timo. j.


This is a true saying, by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners.

There is one God, and one Mediator Timo. ij.
between God and man, which is, the man Jesus Christ, which gave himself a
ransom for all men.

The power of God has saved us, and Timo. ij.
calls us with and holy calling, not according to our deeds, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which grace was given through Christ Jesus
before the world was, which has put away death, and has brought life and
immortality unto light, through the Gospel.

God has not saved us for the deeds Titus. iij.
of righteousness, which we wrought, but of his mercy has he saved us.

Christ in his own person has purged Hebre. j.
our sins.

Christ has put down through death, Hebre. ij.
him that had Lordiship over death, that is to say, the Devil, and that he
might deliver them, which for fear of death were all their life time in
danger and boundage.

Christ is an everlasting Priesthood: Hebre. vij.
wherefore he is able also ever to save them that come unto God by him, for as
much as he ever lives to make intercession for us.

We are sanctified by the offering of Hebre. x.
the body of Christ once for all.

With one offering has God made Hebre. x.
perfect for ever them that shall be sanctified.

We are not redeemed with corruptible i. Peter. j.
silver and gould, but with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb
vn^efiled and without spote.

Christ his own self bare our sins Peter. j.
in his body on the Tree, by whose stripes ye were healed.

Christ has once suffered for sins, Peter. iij.
^he just for the unjust to bring us unto God.

If we say we have no sin, we de^eyue Ihon. j.
our selves, and the truth is not in ^s, if we acknowledge our sins, he is
^aithfull and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
vnrigh^eousnesse.

If any man sin we have an aduo^ate Ihon. ij.
with the* Father Jesus Christ the ^ighteous, and he it is that obtayneth
^race for our sins.

Christ appeared to take away our Ihon. iij.
^^nnes.

For this purpose appeared the son Ihon. iij.
^ God, to lose the works of the Devil. Ihon. iij.


This is Gods commandment that ^e believe in the name of his son Ie^^
Christ, and love one another.

In this appears the love of God to Ihon. iij.
^ ward, because that God sent his one* begotten soonne into this world* that
we might live through him.

God has loved us, and sent his sonn^ Ihon. iiij.
to make agreement for us.

Hereby perceive we his love that (...) Ihon. iiij.
gave his life for us.

Here is the love perfect in us, that w^ Ihon. iiij.
should have trust in the day of iudgeme^^ there is no fear in love, but
perfect lo^ casts out fear.

He that believes not God, has man him a liar, because he believes not (...)
record that God gave of his soonne, a^^ this is the record, how that GOD h^^
given us eternal life, and this life is his soonne, he that has the soonne
ha^ life, and he that has not the soonn^ God, has not life,

These things do I write unto y^^ Ihon. v*
that believe on the name of the soonne (...) GOD, that ye may know, how that
have eternal life, and that ye may b^leue in the name of the soonne of God.

Jesus Christ is very GOD, and et^^nall ^hon. v.
life.

Christ has loved us, and washed Apoca. j.
from our sins in his own blood, (...) made us Kings and Priests unto
(...) his father.

Christ is Lord of Lords, and king Apoca: xvi^*
^ Kings, and they that are on his side, ^e called, and faithful chosen.

He that overcomes, shall in all thin^s, Apoca. xxj.
and I will be his God, and he shall ^e my soonne.

He that testifies these things, says* Apoca. xxij The end.
it, I come quickly, even so come lord ^esu.

1 The Paschall Lamb of the Jews, Exodus xij. Ihon. j. Ephe. v. Peter. ij.
the figure of the true Paschall Lamb ^^sus Christ, which is the pure and
vn^filed Lamb of GOD, which offered ^^mself a sweet smellyng Sacrifice to
^OD for us, which never committed (...)ne, and in his mouth no guile was
(...)unde.

2 Christ was figured by Manna, which Exodus xvj.
^od gave from heaven unto the Israeli(...), to eat in the deserte.

3 The rock gushyng out, the comfor^^ble Exodus xvij.
waters signifies Christ.

The brazen Serpent in the old law, Deuteronomy. xxj.
^as a figure also of Christ.

4 Whosoever shall drink of the wa(...) Ihon. ii^^.
that I shall give him, shall never ^irste*

1 Christ is that well-beloved soonne of Math. iij. x^^^.
God, for whose sake the heavenly father was well pleased.

2 Christ is that king, which forga(...) Math. xviii.
the servant the ten thousand T^lentes, which he ought.

3 Christ is that most loving Sam^ritane, Luke. ^.
which healed the wounded m(...) that was half dead.

4 Christ is that tender Shephe(...) Luke xv.
which fetched home unto the shee^ fold, even upon his shoulders the l(...)
sheep.

5 Christ is that most gentle fath^^ which with so great joy, and with (...)
bracing arms received home again (...) lost son.

Come unto me all ye that labor (...) Math. xi. An exhortation.
are laden, and I shall refresh you. Lo, (...) calls al, he refuses, he
excludes n(...) we must include also our selves with his words.

All we must resort to him, and he (...) receive and refresh us.

God sets forth his love towa(...) Roma. v.
For Christ died for us, when we (...) yet sinners: much more now the(...) we
being justified by his blood, sh(...) safe from wrath by him.

Christ Jesus is become unto us wi^dome, i. Cor. j.
righteousness, holiness, and re^^mption. Here let us comfort our selves,
(...)at though we have been never so ^eat sinners, yet let us confess and
^^owledge our sin, let us call for mer(...) and pardon, let us unfeignedly
believe ^^riste to be our only health, justice, (...) redemption, and
straight way he is (...)he will by and by ^^uer and put away (...) ^ynnes, in
s^^he sort that we shall ^^e fear no peril nor danger.

Him that knew no fynne, has God ij. Cor. ^*
(...)de sin. j. a payement of sin for (...) that we should become the
righ(...)snesse of God by him.

Christ gave himself for our sins, Gala. j*
(...) he might deliver us from this pre(...) wicked world, according to the
(...) of God our father.

^hriste Jesus is come into this world j. Titus. j*
(...)e sinners.

^hriste Jesus has given himself a j. Titus. ij*
(...)ption for all men. This let us con(...)ly believe, undoubted we be of the
(...)er of those that shall be saved. For (...) he is come a redemption for all
(...) things that he has suffered, pertains no less to thee and me, and
every one of us (so we believe) than to P^ter or Paul, Christ has borne our
sins in his body upon the Cross.

By these places and such like, we i. Peter. ij.
may see how God the father (which will not the death of a sinner, but
th(...) we should turn and live) for that m(...) seruent burning love that
he bear(...) toward us, has eased us of the burth(...) of our sin, and has
laid it upon (...) Esaias. liij.
back of his most dear beloved soon(...) which his son has so taken,
bor(...) and suffered for them, that they can ^uer condemn us. For God takes
(...) reputeth the death of his son for a (...) satisfaction and payement for
all our (...)nes* so that we truly believe in h(...) For seeing that our sins
thus laid (...) Christ, could not overcome him, (...)taine him in death, nor
damn him ((...) why he rose again) undoubtedly a (...) satisfaction is
already made for them* (...) justice of God is fully answered, (...) they be
utterly hid and forgiven. (...) believe this and we shall not
peri(...)uerlastingly. For Christ is now (...) ours, with all that he has
wit(...) (...)ath, with his resurrection, with his as(...)tion into heaven,
with his life, his (...)rites, his glory. As saint Paul wit(...)sseth Qui
proprio filio suo non sepercit.
Romans 8. Wherefore Satan, has (...)w no title to us, he ca^ not meddle with
(...), he has no power to hurt us* Forso(...)e as we be justified by Christ,
pur(...) from our sins, and made the chil(...)n of God by Christ, who has
recon(...)d us and wrought our peace, we must (...)refore be of good comfort.
For seeing (...) be in the hands of God, that is om(...)otent, who is now our
best, most (...)ng, and trusty Father, we be in a (...) port, we be without
danger, there (...)o inco^moditie, nor adversity hurt (...)or we be
environed with the custody (...)od, and the guard of Angels, out of
(...)hands of this heavenly father, can (...)reature by force pluck us. When
we Ihon. viij.
(...)t an end by death of this cross and (...)orall affliction, then have we
ended (...)ourney, then have we finished our (...)re. Christ has borne the
same (...)e* Christ has passed the same (...)e, he has suffered like death,
he is head, we must be like to him, we suffer with him, if we intend to
reign with him, we must leave this ^^^porall life, ere that we can enjoy
(...) everlasting. Let not our sins tro^^ us: let them not torment our
cons^^^ces, as thought they could not before ^uen. They are already forgiven,
if (...) repent and believe: Christ is all (...) as much as he is. He by his
innoce^^ has covered and taken away our ^^nes. As Christ can not be
dampne^ ^uen so we can not be dampened, if w^^ right faith, we cleave unto him.
As si^^ death, and hell, had no power again Christ, so have they no power ag^
us, so we be in Christ, and Christ i^^ If the matter had been left and
^mitted to us, to have borne our o^^ sins, and to have satisfied for the
they would have been to heavy (...) we had not been able to stand t^ them,
they would have pressed (...) sunk us down to Hell. But Ch^^^^ both God and
man, has (of his (...) free will) offered himself for us, he (...) taken our
turn, he has playde (...) part, and paid for us all that we o^^ As it is
in the Psalm spoken in the ^^sone of Christ, I paid that I ough^ (...)e had
trespassed we were the detters, so far behind hand, that all that was in
(...)s, was not able to pay the least sum (...)hat we ought. Christ became
our suer(...)y, paid for us, acquitted us, and set us at ^ibertie, yea, made us
coheires with him ^f everlasting glory.

If it were possible for one man to com^it the sins of the whole world, so he
^ruely repent, and cleave by true faith to Christ, he cannot be dapmned, his
sins (...)e sufficiently, and abou^dantly by Christ (...)iffied for. For
Christ (as touching his (...)dhed, one in substance with the heaven(...)
father. As touching his manhood, our (...)rye flesh and blood) has purchased
and (...)uely bought grace and pardon for us. For christ became man for us, was
borne for (...), died upon the Cross for us, rose from (...)ath for us,
ascended into heaven for us, (...) has accomplished, and performed al
(...)ynges mete for our salvation for us. If (...)refore we believe in Christ,
we are be(...)e partakers of Gods favor, we are (...)ed of the pack and
burden of sin, (...)e are made the heirs of God, and co(...)es with Christ
for ever, and that by (...)iste, and for Christ. For without Christ there is
no consolation, no health no hope, no help. In Christ alone is (...) comfort,
all health, all hope, all succou(...) all refuge, all grace, and mercy, more
^boundant, more plentious, more exc(...)lent, then any man is able either*
(...) comprehend or to wish. God grant (...) therefore a true, and a
constaunte faith In this form, or in like sort, we mu(...) comfort our
selves in our sickness, calamity, and our brother being visit But in any
wise, and with all diligenc(...) is to be foreseen, that we withdraw (...)
mynne from the fearful and terri(...) contemplation of sin, death, and
da(...)nation. And that we fix these of (...) mind, and whole thought upon
Chr(...) only, that we clean unto him, that call upon him, that we commit our
sell(...) wholly to him. For in Christ we s(...) epsy nothing but innocence,
justice, (...) salvation, which all be derived fr(...) Christ into us, so
that we will ackn^^ledge him, and receive him, for the (...)thor of our
salvation, and only redee(...) if we have Christ crucified before (...) eyes:
if we imprint him in our heart(...) we fly to him with our faith, if ^holye
clean to him. Then shall hell (...)tes nothing prevail against us, then
(...)all we be able to withstand all the (...)rcible assaults of Satan,
though they (...) never so sore, never so fierce, never so (...)rrible*

Let us call to remembrance with (...)hat lenity, what gentleness, what
hu^anitie, what clemency Christ (as it is the evangelical history) has
called to him and received all such sinners has repented them, and desired
his (...)pe. We shall find Marie Magdalen, (...) sinner that hong upon the
right hand Christ crucified, the publicane, Zache, (...)h other mo, whom
Christ m^oste (...)yngly receiuyng, pronounced clear (...) sin (though they
had sinned grea(...)) and the children of salvation: Christ (...)erie grace,
mercy, help comfort, life, (...)e, and saluatio to al those which look these
things at his hands, and put (...)r trust in him. And all these things (...)
God (who is truth it self, and can (...)lie, nor will not deceive (promised
un(...) for Christ's sake.

^inally, when Death approaches, we must do as Christ did upon the cross, w^
Math. vj.
must pray for our enemies, and forgi(...) them with our heart. If we have
offend(...) any man, we must be heartily sorry for (...) we must desire
forgiveness, if we ha(...) injured any man, we must make him mendes, or take
such order that amend(...) may be made unto him, if it passes o(...) power
to make restitution, and amend(...) shall be enough that we desire
forgiuene(...) And with our hearts forgive others wh(...) has hurt us, either
in name, body, s(...)staunce, or estimation. For if we truly (...) give, God
has promised we shall be fo(...)uen, as it is in the 6. of Mat. but above have
an immovable faith in the for(...) promises of God made in Christ Ie(...) our
lord. It is very necessary also and (...)^^ble, for the confirmation and
stren(...)ning of our faith, to receive the i(...) blessed sacrament, of the
body and (...) of our savior Christ, which we are (...)maunded to receive in
remembra(...) of his benefits, that hereby, we (...) be truly certified in
our conscienc^ his body to be given for us, and his blood to be shed for
remission of our sins.

Death.
OF our fleashe and frail nature, is so feared and abhorred, that when he
approaches, man's heart ^e filled and laden with such sorrows, panges, (...)d
anxieties, as tongue is not able too (...)press.

A medicine against the fear of Death.
WE must call to our remembrance, Death to be ouercommed and abholished by
Christ. So that now the souls of so many as trust Christ, can not dye nor
perish: but de(...)tyng from the body, goes straight to (...)rist. For thus
was it said to the these (...)is hour of death. This day shall thou with me
in paradise. The body though (...)est and pause for a while, yet we be
certain hope, that at the last day, it (...) be raised again to immortal
and (...)rlastyng life. And therefore scripture (...)eth the death of the body
but a sleep, that this same frail, weak, vile, mortal, and corruptible
body, which we carry about, which lies sick and sore diseased, which
shortly shall be put into the earth, burn to ashes, devour(...) with beasts
or fowls, drowned in water, that self same body (I say) shall be raised
again incorruptible, glorious beautiful, strong, pure, immortal, (...)
possess a new and everlasting life where there shall neither be hunger ^.
Cor. xv.
thirste* heat, cold, sin, death, nor a(...) kind of calamity: but
justice, innocent life, joy, bless, world without end* F(...) as the body
of Christ laid in the gra(...) rose again the third day, never more (...)
die, even so shall the bodies of all that believe in Christ, at the latter day
be (...) suscitate to a life, after which shall follow no death. God who is
of infinite (...)were, and infallible truth, has promise these things, they
must therefore (...) des be so. And here it shall be (...)ble, to ^all to
remembrance such pla^ of scripture, as treats of the resurr(...)on of the
flesh, which be the woor(...) not of man, but of GOD, who is (...) and
will certainly fulfill whatsoever (...) has spoken. No man can change
(...) (...)ill, no man can alter his purpose. No (...)eature can frustrate,
let or tarry his (...)tence. He is omnipotent, he is true, he (...)
faithful, his goodness and mercy is (...)explicable. Let no man
therefore (...)ubte of the truth of his words, let (...) manne doubt of
the performaunce of (...)s promise.

(...) Here after follows certain places of scripture, witnessing the
resurrection of the ded, (...) according to the articles of our faith, wherein
we say, we believe that this flesh shall rise again.
THis is the will of my father Ihon. vj.
which sent me, that whosoever sees the soonne, and believes in him, shall
have life everlasting, and I will (...)se him up at the last day.

The hour comes wherein all they Ihon. v.
(...)t be in the graves, shall hear the (...)e of the soonne of God, and
shall go (...)the, they that have doe^ good, unto the (...)rrection of life.
For if so* be that the (...)ite of him, which raised up Jesus from Roma* viij.
(...) dedde, dwells in you: even he that (...)ed up Jesus Christ from the
dedde, (...)ll also quicken your mortal bodies, because of his Spirit that
dwells (...) you.

GOD has both raised up our Lo(...) j. Cor. vj.
Jesus Christ, and shall also raise us (...) by his power.

Christ says, Lazarus was but a s^e(...) Ihon. xj.
where in very deed, he was dedde (...) buried. But Christ is the
resurrection and life* (as it is in the same place) so th(...) he that believes
on him, though he w(...) dedde, he shall live. In verefiyng when(...) of, he
raised straight way Lazarus (...)yng four days dedde and stinkyng. A(...)
because we be naturally in the ago(...) of death very fearful, weak and
fai(...) hearted to the end that we might be (...) easelier persuaded in the
Article of (...) surrection: Scripture makes menti(...) of many, which in the
time of the P(...)phetes, Christ and the Apostles, we called from death to
life.

Christ raised the widows soonne. Luke. vij.


He raised the ruler of the Sinag(...) Luke. j.
his d^ughter.

He raised Lazarus. Ihon. xj.


Peter restored to life Tabitha. Acts. ix.


Paul raised again Eu^i^hus. Acts. xx.


Eliz^us the Prophet, called again (...) iiij. Reg. iiij.
(...)e his hosts soonne.

Helias raised the Babe of the woman iiij. Reg. xvij.
(...)f Sareptanie.

GOD took also unto him out of this G^^e v.
(...)aile and transitory life, these two er(...)llent iiij. Reg. ii.
and holy men, Enoch and He(...)as, quick both body and soul, to give
(...) (as it were) a taste and representation of the true life to come, least
after the o(...)i^ion of the Ethnicks and Epicures, we should think there were
no world, nor (...)eeyng after this wretched and miserable life. Let us not
forget what Christ jesus, Lord of life and death, says, in the eight of
Luke: Weep not, the maid (...) not dedde, but a sleep. Reason not
comprehendyng the mysteries of GOD, neither perceiuyng his power, does laugh
his saying to scorn, but Christ proves his saying true, he raised by and by
the (...)edde maid to life. The fiftene Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, is (...)eplenished with most godly, pleasant (...)d pithie
consolations. Truly it is more precious then any gold. For in that Cha^ter
Saint Paul does so annexe and (...)uple our resurrection* to the
resurrection of Christ, as though they could in no wise be separate, or
divided after th(...) form. Christ is risen from death which thing is
certain) ergo, we also shall v(...) doubtedly rise. For Christ is our
hedd(...) and we his members: this head is neith(...) without, neither will
forsake his members.

Then it follows that where* Chr(...) is, there shall we be. For why, we
(...) the members of his body, and even of(...) flesh and bone: what tongue,
what p(...) what wit, is able to set forth (as i(...) Ephe. v.
worthy) this ineffable, and inestima(...) glory of the mercy and grace of
GO(...) that God has vouchsafe so low to h(...)ble himself, as to become
mortal m(...) that this ^eble and frail nature of m(...) united and knitte to
the divine not(...) by the power and efficacy of the god(...) might be
inhaunced and promoted to(...) mortality. For truly the nature o^ faithful
men, which either were fore Christ, has been since, or now(...) shall be
to the worlds end: undoubtedly, in Christ very GOD and ma(...) has obtained
immortality. The (...)lation therefore that rises of Chr(...) resurrection is
of great efficacy. A(...) (...)ncte Paul says to the Corinthians: ^^riste
is risen again from dedde, and is j. Corin. xv.
(...)e first fruictes of them that sleep, for by (...)e manne truly came
death, and by one (...)nne comes the resurrection of the (...)de. And as al
die in Adam, even so shall (...) be made alive in Christ, but every (...)e in
his order. The first is Christ* ^hen they which are Christ's, which (...)h
believed in his coming. And saint (...)ule does add a similitude taken of
(...)urall things, whereby he does set (...) the, and declare the
resurrection of bo(...)s. The similitude is taken of seed, (...)iche is cast
into the earth by the hus(...)dman, dies as it were and rotteth*
^uerthelesse, it is not utterly lost, but (...)ength springs, and comes
forth (...)he earth, goodly, beautiful, and (...)saunt. So our bodies
shall rise again; (...) feeble, vile, corruptible, and mortal: (...) strong,
glorious, incorruptible, immor(...), never to dye again, but ever to live. ^
The way into true and everlasting (...) to our long home, as they call it,
and (...)ntrie, is by corporal death. Fleashe (...)blood being corruptible and
mortal, (...) not inherit the kingdom of GOD, where nothing is but life.
Therefore this corruptible body must put on int(...)ruption, and this mortal
must putte^ immortality. Then shall the saying t(...) is written be
fulfilled: Death is swa(...)wed up in victory. They that believe Christ, has
now ouercommed sy(...) death, and hell. Therefore not fear(...) Oze. xiiii.
death, but strong, bold, and well ha(...) Esaias. xxv.
in Christ: They may say, Death wh(...) is thy sting: Death where is thy
vict(...) The stynge of Death is sin: and (...) power of sin is the Law.
But t(...)kes he unto GOD, which has g(...) us the victory, through our
Lord I(...) Christ.

Let us hear also more sentences, (...) of godly and mighty consolation. ii.
Cor. iiii.


He that has raised up Jesus, (...) raise us up also with Jesus.

Our conversation is in heaven, (...) Philip. iiii.
whence we do look for the savior, (...) lord Jesus Christ, which shall
cha(...) our (...)i will body, that it may be like (...)ned unto his glorious
body, a(...) to the woorkyng of his power, by (...) which also he is able to
subdue all (...)ges unto himself.

Ye are dedde, and your life is hid with Colos. iii.
^^riste in God, but when Christ your (...) shall appear, then shall ye also
ap(...)rs in glory with him.

We would not brethren, that ye i. These. iiii.
(...)uld be ignoraunte concerning them (...)t sleep, that ye sorrow not
also as o(...)r do, which have no hope. For if we (...)eve that Jesus Christ
died, and rose (...)iue: Even them also which are a (...)pe through Jesus,
shall GOD bring (...)h him.

^aicte Paul also does comfort Tithe ii. Tymot. ii.
with the article of resurrection* (...)ng: Remember the Lord Jesus Christ
(...)yng the seed of David, rose again (...) the dedde, according to my
Gospel. (...) if we be dedde with him, we shall (...) live with him. If we
suffer pacient(...)e shall also reign with him.

It was written also to the Hebrews, Hebr. ii*
(...) Christ tasted death for all men, (...) that he was partaker of
fleashe and (...)d: first became very manne, that he (...)ht destroy him,
which had the rule (...)ath (that is) the Devil, and that he (...)ht deliver
them, which were in bo^(...) all their life time, by the reason of the hearing
of Christ's Gospel: is so v(...) the fear of death.

God has delivered us, and called (...) ij. Tim. iiij.
with an holy calling, not according to (...) works, but according to his
purpose(...) grace, which is given us in Christ (...) before the time of the
world, but is n(...) made manifest by the appearyng of (...) savior Jesus
Christ, which truly (...) dest^^ied death, and has brought life^
immortality to light, by the Gospel.

We know that we are trans(...) j. Ihon. iij.
from life to death, because we love(...) brethren.

In this has the love of God appe(...) Ihon. iiij
in us, because God sent his only be(...)ten son into the world, that we
(...) live through him.

I know that my redeemer does (...) Ihon. xix.
and in the last day I shall rise ag(...) and again be wrapped in my own
s(...) And in my own flesh shall see (...) whom I my self shall see, and
these eyes shall behold and none other.

These places of holy Scripture, (...) such like, if we diligently reme(...)
and faithfully embrace: we shall pe(...) great consolation and comfort. And
(...) (...) saint Paul rejoice, that we know Philip. iij.
(...)ste, and the power of his resurre(...), whereby death is ouercommed.
(...)there is there now (to these that be(...) in Christ) any thing in death
ter(...), or to be feared, saving only the (...)ge and outward form, hurt
it can (...) Like as a dead serpent, keeps (...)is old fearful shape, and
form, (...) sting, or to do harm, it has no (...)r at all. And like as by
the brazen (...)ent which Moses by Gods com(...)dement set up in the desert,
when (...)s looked upon, through the power of (...) word, men were delivered
from (...)er of the lively and venymous Ser(...)s: so our death is made
harmless, we delivered from the fear and (...)er of it, so often as with the
eyes of (...)ithe, we do behold the health(...)nd medicinable death of
Christ. In (...)ion, death is now become an I(...)* and shadow of death, yea*
the en(...)ce and gate of life. For Christ Ihon. viij*
(...)s truth it self, says. If any man my word, he shall never see death:
(...) trusting to the mercy of God, (...)h faith which he conceiueth by
hearing and knit to Christ his Lord and (...) ster, that he cannot be
plucked, nor s(...) rate from him.

The body in deed for a time is (...) rate from the soul, but in certain
(...) of rising again to everlasting life. (...) so he that believes in
Christ does (...) see nor feel the everlasting death(...) body and soul,
which is euerla(...) damnation. For the death of good m(...) nothing else, but
a departure from (...) transitory and mortal life: to im(...) talitie to
Christ, to his Aungelles (...) Saints.

Hell and damnation.
Does offer it self at the were of death, so that (...) times manne does
g(...)ly fear, least he be ab(...) from the favor of (...) and appoincted to
everlasting pain. (...) Devil (which seeks by all m(...) how to devour
us) stirryng up i(...) minds many dangerous and troub(...) thoughts,
concerning our election* predestination.

A medicine against the fear of Hell and damnation.
WHen the devil goes about, to cause us to despair, or to doubt of our
election: whether we be of the number of them that are appoincted (...)
everlasting life or no. In any wise let (...) not be to bold in copyng with
him, (...)t us not enter disputation against him (...)or he is to subtle and
expert for us) but (...)ie shortly unto him. A way Satan (...)ith sorrow, it
is written, thou shalt (...)t tempt the Lord thy God. For seeing (...)t God as
a most loving father, has (...)t only given us life, fed, and preser(...)
us, to this hour: but also has en(...)ed, and even laden us from time to
(...)e with his singular benefits, what (...)dnesse were it contrary to our
former (...)erience, now to doubt of his mercy? (...) has received us into
his flock by (...)ptisme. He has sent us the Gospel (...)is grace, wherein
he has promised (...)ecome our father. We have been sed (...)h the flesh and
blood of his Soonne (...) Savior Christ, in remembrance (...) our debtes be
paid, and we acquired, why should we now then doubt the good will of God
toward us? Le^ not therefore admit the doubtful, dangerous imaginations of
our pr^stination, which the Devil like a (...)tie, and malicious marchaunte
do(...)bour to iustle. But let us think (...) such sentences, as God
would have minds occupied withal, which C(...) himself has prescribed, as
Ihon where he says. GOD has so love(...) world, that he has given his
onel^ gotten soonne, that whosoever bele(...) in him shall not perish, but
have l(...)uerlastyng. Lo, here we see th(...) which believes in Christ,
which (...) fully acknowledges Christ to b(...) sanctification, justice,
redemption, a(...)tisfaction, can not be dampened, but (...)sured of
everlasting life. So many (...) ceiue faith by hearing of Gods w(...) and so
trust steadfastly upon the me(...) Christ. Undoubtedly they be of the (...)ber
of those, which be chosen to e(...)styng bliss, known before in C(...)
predestinate, and written long s(...) the book of life. These things be
(...) certain, and most true, God can n(...) (...)ceyue, nor be deceived:
Such is his (...)od will, so has he purposed and de(...)ed before the world
began, what (...)nges so ever therefore our enemy (...) Devil (spyting
our salvation, and (...)king our destruction) shall put in (...)e mind
contrary to this doctrine* (...)t them not move us, let them not (...)ke us
afraid, but let us trust truly Christ: and so shall he become ours, (...)
we become his, who being our good (...)de, we can not perish, nor be
dam(...). For he will lose none of those that Ihon. x.
(...) father has given him, we must (...) our eyes upon Christ, we must
(...) to him, we must cleave to him. He (...)ure only and true Savior, who
(...)te be apprehended, and embraced by (...)h, if we look to be saved. For
they (...) believe rightly in Christ, they are (...)estinate to everlasting
life.

^ere we wuste diligently remember (...) earnestly expende the godly
exhor(...)n of Saint Paul, which he wri(...) in the xij. to the Hebrews,
whose Hebr. xij.
(...)es be these. Let us run by pa(...)e unto the battle that is set before
(...)ooking unto Jesus the aucthor and finisher of faith, which when the io^
was set before him, suffered the Cross and despised the shame, and fitteth at
(...) right hand of the seat of God.

Furthermore, all the grievous temptations, and afflictions that Christ
s^fered, he suffered them for our sakes. (...) saint Paul says, also in
the fourth (...) Hebre. iiij.
the Hebrews, we have not a high Prie^ that is not able to have compassion
(...) our weakness: but such one was pr^ued in all points without sin:
let (...) therefore with boldness go unto t^ seat of his grace, that we may
obtay^ mercy, and find grace to help in ti^^ of need.

Let us in any wise consider and deeply imprint in our hearts, Christ to
(...) given unto us, not only to the end the we might be redeemed,
reconcyled, a^ made partakers of everlasting salu^tion: but also that in him we
might ha^ an example, both how to live, and al^ how to end our life. Neither
can a^ man live, suffer, or die well: unless (...) look upon and follow the
life, suff^ring, and death of Christ: if therefo^^ we desire to end this
life well and go^^ (...)t us consider and remember, how Christ (...)haued
himself in the bitter and smarte (...)onie, when hanging upon the Cross, (...)
was assaulted with diverse, fierce, and (...)ost grievous temptations, and pray
(...)at we may have grace to follow his (...)ample.

FIrst he was tempted with sin, when being hanged betwixt two thieves as a
notable and heinous sinner: it was said unto him, Math. xxvij.
thou be the son of God, come down (...)m the cross. By this contumelious
(...)ice, what do they signify else, but (...)at they judged him a naughty
and un(...)dlye person, such one as by craft, sub(...)tie, falsehood, socerie,
and other vn^^wfull means had deceived the peo^^e, had blinded the world, and
to be (...)thing less than the son of God.

Even in like manner at the hour of (...)ath, does the Devil tempt man, what
(...)ever man has committed against God, (...)l the sins that ever he did,
he she(...)th unto him, he does exaggerate them (...) the uttermost: to the
end, that the multitude, and heinousness of them (...)sidered, and perceived,
man shoud do(...) of the mercy and favor of God, and, (...) fall into
desperation. Here we had ne(...) to stand sure, and every one of us h(...)
need to answer our enemy, thus te^pting us after this manner: I knowled(...)
my self to have sins above all number, and measure but Christ: who ne(...)
sinned, in whose mouth was found (...) guile, who is that very innocent
lam(...) has suffered death for my sins, he ha(...) washed them away, he has
satisfied (...) Esaias. liij.
boundantly for them, how many, a(...) how great so ever they were, Christ
death pertayneth also to me, he w(...) wounded also for my iniquities, he
w(...) bruised for my ungraciousness, by (...) stripes I am also healed. All my
sin has Christ taken to himself, so th(...) now, I have none (thanks be
to Christ^ who has satisfied for them in his own body.

CHrist was tempted also with dea(...) Math. ij.
when it was said unto him, (...) has saved other, but he can (...) save
himself. (As though if should (...) said) he is now at a point, he must dye,
(...)ere is no reamedie, he can not escape. (...)hus does our old and
erreconcible (...)imie, labor to fear us with death, but (...) us hold out
the buckeler of faith in christ against him, let us remember (...)t Christ our
Lord, King of glory, (...) Prince of life, could not be over(...)nmed, nor
holden of death, but though (...)once tasted of death: he now lives (...)
reigns for ever. This Lord of ours (...)ll not leave us, nor suffer death to
ere(...)e any tyranie against us, that after (...) has suffered us to be
tempted a while, (...) will also that we dye corporally: all (...)t is wholly
for our wealth.

Neither could we eotherwyse come everlasting life, but by te^porall death*
(...)e must therefore leave this present (...)e, ere we can inherit the
eternal (...)e. Also this corporal death, brings (...)s commodity, that by
tasting the bit(...)nesse and sowernesse of it, we have (...)erience and know
the exceeding love (...)t Christ bare toward us, and the (...)stimable
benefit, that he did for us (...)ensing our sins, in abolishing of (...)th,
in breaking up of Hell gates, and all by his death.

Otherwise, we could never h(...) known the power of Christ, in abo(...)yng
of death, we could never have i(...) esteemed the excellency of this been(...)
we could never have seen how i(...) cause we have to give thanks to C(...)
our Lord and redeemer. Christ ly(...) truly, we shall also live. And this
co(...)rall death to us shall be nothing else (...) a sweet and wholesome sleep,
an entr(...) and gate into the true and blessed (...) For after this
transitory life, the^ ginne we first truly to live.

Thirdly, Christ was te(...) with hell, or everlasting (...) nation, when it
was said (...) him, he has trusted in G(...) let him now deliver him, if he
will (...) though they should say. Now it app(...) that he has hoped in God
in vain. (...) God will none of him, he has for(...) him, he likes him not,
he does (...) him, he will east him down to h(...) perpetually condemned
him. W(...) fore the temptour shall lashe at (...) like temptations, we may
not (...) may not be afraied, we may not be (...)ouraged, but commend our
self who(...)o Christ, hang upon him who is who(...)urs, who has given himself
wholly ^s, so that sin, death, nor hell, has thing to do with us. Christ
with an (...)stimable price, his own blood has de(...)ered us from the
tyranny of the De(...), and everlasting damnation, he is been our innocence,
our life, and our iu(...)e. Let us take heed in any wise, that (...) turn
not our hearts from Christ, (...)cified. If we clean to him, we are set
(...)on a sure, and inexpugnable rock, a(...)nst the which, all the power of
hell is (...)e to do nothing. So that we may (...)ly exclaim, and every
one say with (...)riste: I provided the Lord before my Psalm. xvj.
(...)s alwaie, for he is at my right elbowe (...)t I should not be moved,
therefore my (...)te has been glad, and my tongue has (...)yced: more^uer, my
flesh shall rest (...)open. By faith in Christ we become ^so^nnes of God,
the brethren and co(...)es of Christ, and partakers of euerla(...) life, by
this faith departing hence, (...) shall go to the kingdom prepared the
elect, before the beginning of the world. And if in the feruentnesse of the
temptations, our faith begin to waue^ we do not bear patiently the will of ^
heavenly father, if our love toward ^^ ware faint, and cold, if our hope begin
to^ feeble and weak: and therefore we be^ to fear, least God and we be not
all ^^ full point, but yt he is yet displeased w^ us, which re^ptation surely
is very gr^^uous, painful, dangerous and hard to ou^ come: we must call to
remembrance Chr^ to have suffered for us so intolerable, a^ invincible
temptations, that there ap^red no help, no comfort, no refuge, wh^ in God and
the whole world, seemed ^ have forsaken him, and to be against hy^ in so much
that he exclaimed, O my g^ O my God, why haste thou forsaken ^^ Oh here was a
grievous temptation. ^ sharp and bitter death that Christ su^fered for us,
and all to make the waie^ the cross and death easy unto us. The^^fore, seeing
that Christ of his own fr^^ will, cast himself into the feelyng of^
tolerable pain, calamity, and anxiet^ (GOD our most loving father, bee^^
therewith content) undoubtedly he kn^weth, and co^sidereth our infirmities* ^^
^btedly he will not deal with us, ac^yng to the rigor of the Law, but ^l
bear much with us, and pardon any things to our infirmity. Does ^ Christ
speak to all men? Does he ^ call men, when he says: Come unto ^ all you
that do labor, and are laden, ^ I shall refreshe yo^u? How can there ^ any
greater consolation? How could ^riste speak more merciful too us? here be
many things that pinche, vex, ^ trouble manne grievously, but what (...)ng is
it, that can trouble the conscience ^ sinner more, then when he doubts ^he
mercy of God, then when he fea^h least God will cast him of, then when can not
persuade himself, to conceive ^ trust of Gods mercy, but imagine ^t as a
withered member he shall cut and cast away.

Here we had need of Christ's present ^, here we had need of spedie comfort,
^st this violent tempest ouerwhelme, and ^une us. But let us not fear, Christ
is ^issembler, he will stand by his word will perform his promise, he will
help, ^refreshe. Therefore when we begin ^remble, and fear in our consciente,
when we begin to doubt of Gods mer^ when we perceive our faith to be f^^^ Let
us forthwith call upon God, and t^ fervently, and that instantly, even fr^^ the
bottom of our heart, that he tou^ not his face from us.

Let us pour before him all that do^ trouble us. Let us disclose to him all ^
misery, our imbecilitie, our increduli^ Let us cry with the Disciples: Lord
^ crease our faiche. And with the Father the lunaticke, Lord we believe, help^
Luke. xvij.
incredulity. And with the Prophet, lo^ Mark. ix.
make haste to help us. For thy merci^ above all thy works. O most louy^ O
most merciful father, Lord God our health, our only help and refu^ Enter
not into judgment with thy ^nauntes. Plal. lxix.
Christ is our justice, our redemption, and innocence, he for us has s^fered
most better and cruel death.

Let these things move thee, O fat^ of mercy: for this thy soonne our saui^
Christ's sake, have mercy upon us: ^firme and strength our heart in faith^
fort us with the consolations of thy ^^ spirit, that we may finally obtain
^^ everlasting, through Christ our lord.

AFter this sort, if we (laboring wrestyng, and striuyng with our imhecilitie,
accusing before God, and lamentyng our puci^itie* and Incredulity) do catch
hold Christ, and cleave fast to him, earnest* and fervently destryng his
help, that will vouchsafe to take our place, and to ^lie that is lackyng in us.
These thin^ if we do surely, all things shall be ^ll, we shall avoid and
escape easily, ^aunger and peril, we shall be saufe ^ugh. For these two, to
believe in ^ifte, and with heart to desire faith, ^th not much differ the one
from the ^r. For though we feel yet great ^kenesse, and imperfection in our
self, ^ this ought to comfort us, that God ^eth, and commands that he
should ^alled upon, that he has promised to ^e, and help these, that call
rightly v^ him. Now, as nothing is more iust^ necessarily destred then true
faith, ^so God hears no prayer sooner, nor ^^ gladly, then when man findyng
no ^lesse in hym^elf, does acknowledge ^wne infirmity, his own misery, ^wne
beggerlinesse, does accuse, and lamente his own incredulity, and ^^ deep
^ighes, and hearty desires calle^ faith. These sighs, these desires, t^
prayers, this little spark of faith, is ^ very seed of God, wrought in us by
^ which says of Christ by the Pro^ Esaye, that he shall not quench the ^^
king flax, nor break the bruised Re^ Therefore let us steadfastly believe, ^
the least earnestly and heartily pray, ^ we may believe, bewailyng before ^
our lack of faith, which things i^ do, we need not doubt, but we
be^^ep^ed of God, we be taken for his ^dren. For it is not for naught, nor in
^ that he has laid our imbecillitie ^ sins, upon his only begotten soo^
back* In Matthewe it is said: bless^ Matthew. v.
those that mourn, for they shall be ^forted: blessed be those that hunger^
righteousness* for they shall be sati^ These words are spoken also to vs^
may justly be applied to us, we mo^^ and are sorry in our hearts, that we ^
mispended our life paste. We wish^ desire, yea, we even hunger and thi^ ^ter
righteousness. Let us be o^ cheer, we shall obtain our desire* ^ll be
comforted, we shall be compted ^e before God, for Christ our Savior ^ sake.
Finally, let us after this exam^ of Christ, and saint Steven, com^de our
souls into the hands of God ^ heavenly father, saying every one af^ this
manner.

O Most merciful Father, I commend into thy holy hands my spirit, yea,
thy spirit, for thou have created it, thou have committed it for a ^e, to the
body, thou have given it thy ^e Image and similitude. Thou haste ^e for the
redemption of it, thy own ^e dearly beloved soonne to shed his ^d. This the
spirit. I resign into thy ^es, O God of all mercy, I am thine ^at I am, I
beseech thee refuse not ^y own, but receive, keep, and place me in
everlasting glory, for the sake of Jesus Christ, thy only begotten son.

Amen.

