THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE GRISONS, IN THE YEAR 1618.

WHEREIN ARE TRVELY and clearly laid open the lawful and urgent causes of
calling an Assembly of the Commons: and of their due proceeding and Honorable
prosecution of Justice, which they were enforced to use against some false and
perfidious Patriots, in a full Congregation, and with absolute power met
together at TOSANA.

IMPRINTED AND PVBLISHED BY Commandment of the Lords the Heads, the
Counsailours and Commons of the Three Confederations of the Renowned Free
States of the Grisons: in maintenance of the Truth, and remoouing all manner of
calummation.



ANNO. 1619.

TO THE READER.
He that will take an exact Survey of the known World, beginning at home, and
going as far as Travel and History can lead him, shall find few people
which are Aboriginalls, and first Inhabitants of the Cities or Countries they
now possess: But by settling of Collonies, or In-roads and Inundations of
War, have been transplanted. The Saxons hither: the Cimbrians into France:
the Gauls into Italy: the Vandalls into Spain: the Greeks into the Kingdom
of Naples: the Scythians into Turkey: the Turks into Greece; And these Grisons
into this part of the Alps, anciently called Rhetia, then Canninia; after, the
upper Slesia; and now lastly, in their own Language Growpijndter or
Co^federations.

This Country had the name of Rhetus, who sled out of Tuscany from the fury of
the Gauls, in the year 187. before the coming of Christ, and led with him
many of the Inhabitants about Florence, Pisa, and Lucca, seating them in these
high and in-accessible Mountains: And as a few weather-beaten Trojans laid the
foundation of Great Rome, and some few fugitive Citizens of Vincenza, Padoa,
and other Towns in Lombardy (fleeing the rage of the barbarous Goths,)
planted themselves in the Adriatic Marshes, where they first began the
renowned Venice: So this handful of Tuscans here planting and settling
themselves, are now grown to a warlike, strong, and populous Nation. Such a
fruitful mother of children is Necessity, begotten by old Time their Father;
that (as the mother of Cyrus dreamed) there springs a Vine in her womb, by
which in time whole Countries are ouer-shadowed.

This Country lies between the Degrees 46. and 44. in Latitude: part in
Germany, and part in Italy; divided by the Ridge of the Mountain Splugen: On
this side they speak Dutch, on the other, Bergamasque Italian. They have free
exercise of both Religions, Reformed and Roman. Here the Rivers of the Rhein
and Tesin have their heads; that, dividing it self into several Branches, and
disemboking into the German Ocean; this other falling into the Po, is carried
by him into the Venetian Gulf. It confineth East upon Tiroll, West upon the
Swisse-Cantons, North upon Constance, Friburg, and some parts of the House of
Austria, and South upon the Country of Bergamo and State of Millan. The hither
part is Mountainous, and therefore not so well able to sustain the
Inhabitants; yet are there many fruitful Valleys, which, (besides their
frugall and parsimonious manner of living) supply that want. Among these is
Valtelina on the Italian side; for this is so plentiful of Corn, Cattle,
Wines, and other fruits, as any part of Europe. The chief Towns of this
fruitful Valley, are, Bormio, Sondrio, Tirano, Posclauio, Morbegno, Traona,
and Telo, whereof the Valley takes the name, wherein are above 100000. souls.
The part on this side has many Castles and Towns, whereof Coira is the
chief. It stands upon the River Lasgar; it embraced the Christian faith the
year 448. and in 744. had many privileges granted by Charlemain, and the
Bishop thereof made Rector of Rhetia: Among other Liberties it has the coining
of Money, which passes current through the whole Country.

The nature and manners of this people may be read by the Character of the
Swisses: For, lying in the same Latitude, and inhabiting the like Mountains,
herein also they are like unto them. A people given to Tillage and Planting
their grounds; feeding upon Butter, Cheese, Fish, Bread, Roots, Wine, and but
small store of Flesh; using little Merchandise, but much manifacture, borne to
Arms, and brought up to labor; much addicted to exercise, especially the
Harquebuse, having in diverse Towns and Villages Prizes for them which do
best. They are also much delighted with hunting in the Mountains, of wild
Goats, Bucks, Bears, Wolves, and wild Boares: holding it a great honor to
take of these Beasts, and for a Trophey to nail their heads on their gates;
for which also sometime the State rewards them. They are (only on this side
the Country) subject to the Swisse and Dutch fault of excessive drinking.

Their Country is divided into three Cantons or Confederations. The first is
called, The Confederation of Cade, or Ca-di-Dio: (that is, Gods House:) the
second is, Lega Grisa: and the third, Lega delle Dritture, or Jurisdictions.
Cadi Dio contains the City and Territory of Coira, the Valley of upper and
lower Agnadina, with Bregaglia: Lega Grisa contains the Valley of Mesolce, and
Calanca, with the Lands of Rogoret and Musocco, with other Valleys besides, on
this side the Ridge of the Mountains: the Dritture contain the rest of the
Country. The first comprehends 21. Comminalties or Corporations: the second
19. the third 10.

These three Cantons make the Confederation General: for though each of them
have their peculiar Magistrates, Laws, Customs, and Justice civil and
criminal, yet the highest power and last Appeal is to the Senate or Assembly
of the Three Cantons together: called by them the Pibach. Whereunto the first
Confederation sends 23. Deputies or Commissioners: the second 28. and the third
14. Where, they propound, consult, and determine only that, for which they
have direction and command from their several Cantons. To this Senate likewise
belongs to treat and conclude Peace or War, to make or revoke Alliances and
Leagues, to establish or abrogate Statutes and Laws, to determine any
difference between either of the Cantons, or resolve any business concerning
the general good of the whole Country. The places of Assembly are these;
Coira in the first Confederation: Illiantum in the second: and Dauosium in the
last. But if the Three Confederations are to treat a Business, which they
would have kept secret, there are only admitted into Council, the Consul of
Coira, the Provincial Judge of the Lega Grisa, and the Amano or chief Justice
of the Dritture: yet the voice to confirm all, is that of the People; if there
be any Appeal. For controversies among themselves thus: If a difference arise
between the Three Confederations, three or four persons out of each are
deputed (with discharge of their Oath to their own Confederation) to arbitrate
and compound the business. If two be at difference, the third determines it.
If between any of the Comminalties, the Senate of all Three Confederations
jointly depute Judges of the business. If between a private man and the
Confederations, two or three Judges are appointed out of every several
Confederation. If two Confederations have a difference with the third, six of
the two Confederations, and six of the third are chosen for Judges: and in
case these agree not, one only Judge is chosen by the voice of all the Commons.

The first League was made between the Bishop of Coira, and the Provinces
about him, in the year 1441. The next between the Abbot of Zizatis, the Count
of Mauan, and the Baron of Bezuns, with them of Coira; this was called Lega
Grisa, as that former Lega Cade: after this, the Comminalties of Segouia made
League with the two former, and was called Lega delle Dritture. And lastly, in
the year 1470. they all Colleag^gether. But in the year 1471. having
difference with their neighbors of Tiroll, they all entered League with seven
Cantons of the Swisse. And lastly, the whole thirteen Cantons of the Swisse,
with these of the Grison Confederation, and the seven Wards or Sokes of the
Valesians, joined all in League with St. Gallo: which City was first founded
and inhabited by one Sengall a Scottish-man, with other of his Country, and
after grew to have large Territories and Privileges. Thus all these Cantons
Grison and Swisse, with the Valesians and them of St. Gallo, being a great,
Warlike, and powerful Body, stand in the gates of Italy, as firm as the
Mountains wherein they live, against any foreign force whatsoever.

A larger Relation might be made of this People and Country: But because a
great head holds no Symmetry with a small Body; this little shall suffice to
give light to the ensuing Declaration.

THE PROCEEDING OF THE GRISONS. 1618.
AMONG the manifold benefits, and gracious favors granted us by God, the
liberty of our Church and Commo^-wealth whereby we order and govern our own
affairs, is not the least: Because by the lawful use and sweet fruition
thereof, our Souls and Honors, Bodies and Goods, are freely enjoyed and
safely preserved from all vexation and trouble. Hence is it, that Liberty like
a most precious Jewel has been over much endeared and desired of all men.

We therefore the Inhabitants of the ancient and high Rhetia, now called by the
name of the three Grison Confederations general, having long enjoyed the sweet
fruits and benefits of the blessings of God, and of his Almighty power,
manifestly showed in the real fortitude and valor of our religious Ancestors,
who for many ages have possessed and preserved both those liberties. It has
seemed most meet and requisite to us, the Heads, Counselors, and Commons of
both the free Religions of these our Countries, publicly and privately to hold
the same liberty much indeared, and highly prized, and as much as in us lies,
to continue it among us, and to our posterity.

We could well have wished that these our times had been such, as we might
like our valiant forefathers, have continued in the ancient possession of our
own, without any trouble or molestatio^: But as al things of this world are
subject to declination and decay; so also this free State of ours is with time
not a little weakened, and the danger thereof so much increased in these our
days, as it had run into manifest precipitation and ruin, had not God in
his mercy stirred up the zeal of our faithful and good Compatriots to tame
and chastise the corrupters of our Government, and withal to conserve and
settle it in the former freedom.

We are therefore willing, for satisfaction of those that desire to know what
has passed, and are rather lovers of the truth then calumnies, to give them
this full, substantial, and true advertisement and account of what has
passed, not only in the weakening of our State, and impayring of our
reputation, but also in the lawful proceeding and just punishing of those
perfidious ones, for the reestablishment of our Government, and reparation of
those Breaches they had made upon the liberty of our Country.

The form of our Commonwealth is Popular, and the choosing and displacing of
the supreme Magistrate, Officers, Judges, and Commissioners in our free
Countries and of our Subjects, stands merely in the power of our People, who
have absolute authority by plurality of voices, to establish and abrogate
Laws, Leagues, and Affiances with Princes and foreign States, to make War
or Peace, and to order and govern all other businesses belonging to the higher
and lower Magistrate.

All these Liberties and Privileges of ours, some private Persons through
their great wealth and authority, with Pensions, Corruptions, Friendships, and
Adherences, have sought to appropriate unto themselves, and assume into their
own hands, not once, but diverse times, and in several places, and
Comminalties, according as they have had occasion: wherein their practices have
prevailed so far, as not only our free Patriots and Subjects, but even
Princes and foreign States, whatsoever they desired in our Commonwealth, they
were forced to seek it at their only hands: toward whom these men used all
manner of treacheries, unfaithfulness, fals-hood, deceit, tyranny, lewd
practices, and violences; and among many other their abuses, they have brought
our Country into dis-reputation and scandal with all Princes and foreign
States, by vnderraking high matters, and making great promises for large sums
of money, and after through their perfidious tergiuersation, have falsely
broken their faith, and wrought the multitude sometimes one way, sometimes
another, of whose simplicity they made their use, and deceitfully ruled and
led them to all their purposes.

And albeit this woeful estate of our affairs lay covered and hid as under a
cloud, yet both the wiser fort of men among us, and the Commons also, made such
daily discovery of the badde effects thereof, as they all did much lament their
miserable estate, and would most willingly have remedied so great a mischief,
by a present reformation and lawful proceeding: but they found no possible
means to effect that fruitfully, which they desired so earnestly, by reason of
the great and many adherents of these wicked men, and the diffidence and
jealousy that the common people had of all men. Hereupon all the true-hearted
and honest men of our Country, well seeing that our State could not long stand
in these disorders, and yet not knowing how to repair or amend them, they have
sent up their sighs and prayers to God, the true protector of the afflicted:
who has now at last heard their woeful complaint, and showed them the way to
recover their delivery.

And besides those many grave and prudent persons of the body Politic,
discovering the miserable estate of our Affairs; our Churchmen also have both
earnestly and incessantly, privately and publicly, called upon the State for
a Reformation, and without any respect or fear of the danger they might
incur, they jointly preferred a Bill of Complaint, in the public Assembly
held at Tauas in the month of August, 1617. laying open their grieuances before
the Three Confederations general, and the ordinary Magistrate, for these so
great and so unsupportable inconveniences: and after a long commemoration of
the present disorders and dangers, they modestly and earnestly pressed for a
speedy and necessary Reformation.

Whereupon, the Magistrates calling into consideration the importance of the
business, and other weighty reasons, resolved to propound these gneuances to
the Councellers and Comminalties of the People, as to the supreme Magistrate,
whom they ought and must obey: And accordingly in a Synod holden in April,
1618. by the Protestant Divines, they drew a Bill (the same in substance with
that former) to be offered to the Councellers and Comminalties over all their
Churches, earnestly requiring and humbly beseeching, that a speedy course might
be taken by the States General, for remedy of so great an inconvenience, by
all the fair ways and ordinary means possible, without tumult or disturbance
of the State, for the recovery of their liberty Spiritual and Civil, and for
their freeing from the treacherous Complots, and perfidious Treaties, which
some of our men have entertained with diverse Princes, and foreign States: yet
so, as not to provoke these men to indignation, despite, or wicked
deliberations, but rather to carry the business with such temper and
moderation, that as the faithfulness and integrity of our forefathers is
honored and magnified by us, so ours to our posterity might be recommended.
And though this our endeavors to a mild and quiet proceeding has been
published and made known to the world; yet the chief heads of that corruption
have labored with all their might, to cross our deseignes, to turn all to
smoke, and to continue in their former practices and violent insolences:
Hereupon they of the Clergy have with more vehemence urged and pressed in
their Sermons for a general reformation of the State; and that the people
would make choice of some honorable Persons of the Country, such as were
unpassionate, and free from any interest or engagement with other Princes or
States; to whom they might lay open the notorious perfidie of some men
tyrannising amongst them, as an insolency no longer to be endured, and the
principal cause of hindering the intended Reformation.

Into this number, the Adherents and Clyents of these treacherous and malicious
men, presently intruded, forcing themselves by all possible means, to hinder
and make frustrate all the good effects by good men desired. Whereupon the
people despairing to bring the business to any wished issue by so small a
number of persons deputed, and finding that these tyrannisers over the State
could no ways be ouer-topped, but by a greater number, they proceed (not by
way of resistance and force) but by plurality of voices, and by exclusion of
all sorts of corruptions and false insinuations.

To which purpose the five Comminalties of the lower Agnadina lying under the
Waltasna, with those of Munstertal, met together in the end of June last,
earnestly by their letters soliciting all the other Co^minalties and Deputies
of the Three Confederations to do the like, and jointly to assist them as a
people oppressed and afflicted, their ancient power and authority being wrested
from them, and engrossed and usurped by certain private persons; their voices
falsified, their Laws changed, and their goods daily and unduly taken from
them, under pretext of Magistracy and Justice; to the end the new Laws might
be abrogated, their ancient Country restored to the former liberty, the
Treasures of Princes and States foreign might not be seized upon by private
persons, without the knowledge and consent of the People; as also that Princes
might be no more abused and entertained with their false promises, and
perfidious treachery, but that a lawful and impartial Court of Justice might
be established by the whole Country, for the punishment of these their
transgressions formerly committed, and for the defense of all true-hearted and
honest Compatriots.

Upon these instant entreaties and admonitions, there joined presently with
them certain Comminalties of the Jurisdictions, and of the Cade, with Ensigns
display de, and a great number of men, namely, they of the higher Agnadina,
Pregello, Posclauia, Firstenau, and Berguno, resolving to assist their
neighbors in the reformation of the public State, and establishing a lawful
and unpassionate Court of Justice, against these traitorous Delinquents to
their common country; so that this proceeding might stand with the good liking
and approbation of the other Comminalties. While this is in Treaty, Rodulphus
Planta chief head of the tyrannizing faction dwelling at Zernes, in the lower
Agnadina upon Waltasna, (notwithstanding the safe conduct which the people
granted to him and his Ensigns) by advice and counsel of his adherents,
fortifies himself with men and munition in his house, and Tower anciently
called Wildenberg, placing there in Garrison and in the streets of Zernes 600.
of his men, all good soldiers, taking an oath of them to defend him, to keep
the passages, throw down the Bridges, and to make open and hostile war
against the Confederats and his near neighbors. He has also demanded
military succors from others, thereby to draw a civil War upon his own
Country: but they of Cade coming to assail his house, and he doubting lest
his men might be forced to render up the Place and him in it, as not being able
to make head against so great a power of the Confederates, perceiving also that
his taking of arms in such hostile manner had greatly incensed them against
him, one morning very early with some few of his trustiest followers he escaped
and fled.

Shortly after, the house was assaulted, and that which in the first fury was
not spoiled and consumed, was taken by Inuentory, and carefully preserved.
Mean while the other Comminalties of the Three Confederations deputed their
chief officers in Agnadina, who in their Assembly resolved to send them an
Embassage of certain grave persons both Spiritual and Temporal, with offer
to join with them, to reform the Right and Justice in the whole State, so
that they would lay down arms and dismiss those troops. But receiving
answer, that the power and Adherents of the offenders was so great, as that
without more assistance it was impossible to effect what they had propounded,
they gave them good acceptance, and all the Comminalties of the Country laid
down their Ensigns, and united themselves unto them. First in Coira, and then
in Tosana, a village in the Grison Confederation; where, in the Common Council
for the reestablishing of our State and government, they have revived certain
ancient and laudable Provincial Laws, and made other new, upon occasions of
these late transgressions (but with all good temper and moderation) whereunto
they also that staide at home, have given their free consent: the substance
whereof is as follows.

That both the Religions, Reformed and Catholic, in all our Countries and
Jurisdictions shall have their free exercise, and every Country be jointly
defended by all the rest in the Religion it professes.

That in all our Countries every Confederation, Comminaltie, Jurisdiction,
Persons private, Nobles, and common People, shall be maintained in their
Privileges, Liberties, Customs, Honors, and goods, and shall be content in
every controversy and suite of Law with one indifferent and unpassionate
Judgment.

That our subjects shall be governed with Equity and Justice, and not fall
into the laws of ravening Wolves, as heretofore diverse times has happened.

That the Exchequer of every several Comminaltie be from henceforth more
faithfully looked unto then formerly, and that it be not permitted to private
men, to embezell and exhaust the Public Treasure.

That no private person presume henceforward, to treat with Princes and
foreign States in matters of public affair, without especial commandment,
under pain of Death: but yet, that all Leagues and Intelligences formerly made
by order of our Law, shall be faithfully and really observed.

And that faithful and good neighborhood be kept with the borderers and
consiners upon all our States, etc. with other particularities more at large.

Hereupon was established a Court of Justice, consisting of most godly,
religious, and upright men, not Partialists nor engaged by oath or particular
gifts to any Prince or States whatsoever. In which Court every Confederation
has appointed two and twenty Judges, nine Inquisitors, two Informers, one
Secretary, and two Clerks. And because it has hitherto always appeared,
that our people have been kept in better awe and order by the authority of
Spiritual men, it was thought sit that nine of the Clergy should be always
Assistants in the Court, except it be when Sentence is to be given. All which
Judges are bound by solemn oath, to discover such, as contrary to our Law
would treat with them, and especially to regard no corruptions, bribes,
friendships, enmities, factions, adherences, and the like, which might turn
them from doing right: but only to set before their eyes the glory of God, the
safety of our Country, and the due administration of Justice.

The People being therefore met together, diverse suspected persons were
committed to prison, and many other conscious of their own guiltiness and
perfidie, stole away and fled the Country.

Among the Prisoners, the chief was John Battista de Prouosti, commonly called
Zambra, dwelling in the upper Vespranela Bregaglia, who both by the confession
of some already executed, by the testimony of diverse others, and by his own
handwriting, was co^uicted to have counseled and helped with other his
adhere^ts, that Fort Fuentes should be built upon the confines of the Grisons,
and that the foundation being laid, and the Three Confederations resolving by
arms to hinder the work, as a thing contrary to the accord made with Millan
1531. and to their liberties, and privileges, he stayed the people being now
ready in arms, with his false and perfidious pretenses; and mean while wrote
to the State of Millan to go on with the work, the enemy forces being
diuerted that would have hindered the proceeding.

That before and after this, he had many privileges for transportation from
the State of Millan, and many notable sums of money, not only for the causes
aforesaid, but also for persuading the people to a Capitulation with Millan, as
a thing profitable and necessary, which notwithstanding had turned to our
great prejudice and danger, not considering that he had received from an
Ambassador of another Prince two hundred crowns by way of Denotiue, and
seventy four of annual pension, with promise to dissuade our people from the
said Capitulation, and to hinder it (albeit at other times) the said Zambra and
other perfidious persons have received great sums of money of diverse Princes,
upon promise to work their ends, by our Countries prejudice, and after has
most shamefully deceived them, and perfidiously broken both his word and faith
given them.

But when as Zambra had obstinately and impudently denied both his own
handwriting, the confession of others, and the testimony of diverse honorable
Persons, he was by the Court condemned to take the Strappata, and being only
pulled up without weight, at his letting down, freely confessed all the
circumstances aforesaid, and that Rodulphus Planta, with others now dead, had
been authors of the counsel for the said Fort Fuentes, during the time of
the assembly of the Confederates in Tauas 1603. to constrain our people by
this means (as he said) to hasten the League with Millan, even as themselves
pleased, which league the said Planta has labored to be concluded and
confirmed. And moreover, besides his many Liberties and Licenses for
transporting Commodities, he received from Millan at one time four hundred
Hungars, with promise of a gold chain if the practice went forwards, besides
many goodly Donatiues for all his house: as also, that he wrote to the Marquis
of Como, aduertising him, that the powerful resistance of the Enemy (meaning
those of our Confederates) was now diuerted, and therefore he should not fail
to finish the Fabrike of the said Fort. And lastly, that he resolved to
conclude the League between Millan and five Comminalties only, who were
deceived and abused by him (with false corruptions and many fair promises)
although none of the rest entertained or accepted it, not considering that our
common Country is bound by continual and interchangeable obligation, not to
accept any into their League, without the knowledge and consent of the Mayor
part of the Three Confederations; All this with other things he has
confessed, which is needless to remember.

Whereupon Sentence was pronounced against him by the Court, upon the 22. of
August last past, that according to the Laws he should be beheaded and
quartered by the common hangman, as a notorious Traitor to his Country: And
that all his goods should be confiscate to the common Exchequer of the Three
Confederations; save only those allotted for payment of his debts, and his
wives portion. It was further adjudged, that his house should be demolished and
razed down to the ground, and in the place thereof two Pillars set up, for a
perpetual memory and detestation of his fact. But after Sentence given, great
suite was made for him both by the Clergy and Laity, that in respect of his
years being seventy four, and of his nine Children, and many Kinsfolk, he
might only be beheaded, leaving it free to the Companies of Soldiers and
common people, whether to pull down his house or no.

Answerable to this, and much more guilty were found the two Brothers,
Rodulphus, and Pompeius Planta, who to drayne the wealth from our Country, and
draw it into their own hands, as also the chief Magistracy and government
thereof, they have by a copartcinory infeoffed themselves in the Lands, and
intruded themselves into the Tutelage of all our great Widows and Orphans. The
Marriages of great persons were wholly at their disposing, by means whereof
they procured great power and adherencie, ruling and commanding not only the
Subjects of Valtelina, but even the Prouincials themselves, at their own
pleasure; nay, they tyrannously oppressed their own Confederates and free
neighbors, violently entering upon their Estates, under color and pretext of
Justice, not sparing the lives of Laytie or Clergy, and receiving large gifts
of Princes and neighbor States, promising much, and performing little or
nothing.

Upon the 18. of August a Process was framed against Pompeius Planta of
Zernes, dwelling at Paschale in Donlesch, who long before the Sentence was fled
his Country: for that it clearly appeared by his own handwritings, and by
Letters of his Brother Rodulphus, and diverse witnesses, that the said Pompeius
had usurped upon the liberty of his Country, and like a false Traitor had had
secret practice with foreign Princes, by which the Commonwealth was brought
into eminent loss, and imminent precipitation. Moreover, that he had usurped
the supreme Magistracy in his own Lieutenancy of Forstenau, which he
procured of the Bishop of Coira for term of thirty years, contrary to the
Law and custom of the Country, taking bonds of other Officers preferred by
him to like places of Magistracy, not to undertake or conclude any business
of importance without his knowledge, or of his Brother. He has with the
money of foreign Princes, placed all such in the supreme governments of their
common Country, as stood affected and addicted to them, and of whom they
might serve themselves in all occurrences, at their own will and pleasure, as
appears (among others) in Lucio da Monte, to whom he gave at one time two
thousand Florens of foreign Princes money, and helped him to distribute them,
that by this means he might the more easily obtain the office of supreme
Judge Provincial of the Grison Confederation, without disbursing one penny of
his own, as by his Letter to the said Pompeius appears: whereby he was forced
to execute his office at the beck and command of Pompeius, that every business
might wholy depend upon him, might pass after his humor, and be done out
of his head, and not according to the ancient Liberty of our Country.

He has boldly coozened and abused such Princes and foreign States as gave
him any trust: For once he was Broker for Monsieur Pasquale the French
Ambassador, to receive and distribute six thousand Crowns, to be employed,
that the League we had contracted with Venice, might be renounced by us,
before the full date were expired.

In consideration whereof he received a great present to his own proper use
and behoof, besides three hundred Crowns in Donatiue, and two hundred Frankes
of annual pension, which he thought too little, as appears by a Letter of
one of his Adherents, bearing date 12 July 1612. Yet contrarily, he writes to
his Brother Rodulphus, and gives him Counsel to promise the State of Venice,
that if they would grant him a Colonels place with 500. Crowns of yearly
pension, both in time of War and Peace, with some honorable presents
besides, that then he would secretly further their demands: and toward
France, Millan, and Austria, he would seele up one of his eyes, (such are the
very express words of his Letter) wherein he further signifies, that in case
his brother were not satisfied with the command of a French company, and that
their falsehood and double dealing were discovered, that then he would fall
from France, under color of more urgent reasons, the better to palliate his
falsehood, and excuse himself to neighbor Princes. In which Letter also we
find these very words; Monsieur Gueffier the French Ambassador here resident,
would willingly there were a division and sedition among us, and that we
should earnestly labor Maximilian Mora the Millanese Secretary, that they
would refuse us intercourse and commerce with them of that State: but I think
he does it to spare his Crowns, that we might be wholly at his devotion, and
bound to no body else: as though that passage were only in the power of the
French.

In another of his to his Brother, bearing date the 15. of April 1616. he
writes thus: That concerning the Leauy of Soldiers here by the Venetians, he
meant to give his consent and assistance; but with condition, that Signor
Padauino should perform what he had promised, (that is, large Donatiues) and
though his Brother held still his French Company, yet he would do his
uttermost for the Venetians without any danger; writing also in these words:
They cannot so easily fall upon us, we have (God be praised) more Soldiers
strangers then they: as for the French, I esteem them less and also worse,
for they cannot so easily piece their business with the Venetians, and these
men ever grow upon us. Lord God! who knows what will become of the business?
We must put it to the venture: and yet for conclusion, I am fully resolved in
spite of the French, to act somewhat for mine own best advantage. Moreover, in
the said Letter we find these words: I have been ill at ease these two days,
else had I advised the Frenchman, upon whom I will have an eye that he shall
not betray us; we shall not need many words, but do that which is requisite.
And yet the better to hide his secret practices, he has written to the
neighbor Princes, suggesting unto them the means (as appears by his Letter)
how they might hinder the League the Venetians demanded of us in time of their
Wars, that it might take no effect: and albeit he has ever made fair show
to the Venetian Commonwealth, yet he has wrought our people with money and
other means, to stop their passage through our Country, to join in League
with the Millanese, and to make him absolute Master of all our passages,
according to the intolerable Articles of the League propounded to us by Millan.

He bound himself by strict Oath to the Archdukes Highness of Inspruch,
upon receiving a great Lordship to be held in Fee of him, as appears by that
Princes Letters of the 29. of November 1613. the 26. of January 1615. and the
15. of October 1615. to be always faithful to his Highness as his Councellor
and Vassal, and to supply him with Soldiers at his demand, against all his
enemies, wheresoever, howsoever, and whenever he should have occasion. And
yet on the other side he greatly mis-prized and vilified the authority of
that Prince in a Letter of his to his Brother Rodulphus, bearing date the 15.
of April 1616. and counseled him against Justice and the Prerogative of that
Prince in Agnadina, but withal, that the business might be cautelously and
cunningly carried.

Afterward he solemnly protested by Oath in the public Asse^bly at Tauas
1617. that he was not (effectiuely) bound to any foreign Prince or State: and
yet without regard of his Oath, whereby as a person now placed in Authority he
stood bound, nor having respect to his own Honor, or reputation of our common
Country, he discovered to his Highness whatsoever was concluded in our
Council, suggesting to that Prince, that he should terrify us with threats,
in case we undertook the Treaty of a League with Venice; and protesting,
that if we received any hurt thereby, the blame should lie upon none but
ourselves, as appears by the Contents of his Letter dated the 10. of May 1615.
and of his answer from Inspruch the 25. of the same month.

He persuaded also his Highness, that he would earnestly solicit the Three
Confederations General, both by Letter and other means, that the Inhabitants
of Tauas who have many privileges, might become his Subjects; as appears by
his Letter of they. of August 1614. He braggeth in another of his to his
Brother, that he had intercepted some Letters of foreign Princes addressed to
the Confederations General: and because his practices succeeded oft-times to
his wish, his Brother and he vainly thought themselves so powerful, as they
might do what they list in their Country: the reason was, for that in all
occasions of conuenting the Three Confederations General together, they still
ouerswayed the Councels and Judgments with their plurality of voices, great
Clientele, and Adherence, etc. But as the children of darkness are wise in
their generation, so these Brothers had prouidently complotted, that in case
their perfidious treacheries were discovered, they would then retire themselves
into Valtelina, where their chiefest friends and dependants were, or else some
other-where to fortify and arm themselves, and so make a Civil war upon
their native Country, as Pompeius had formerly threatened: who being
advertised that the Clergy would oppose his desseignes, (and especially the
Spanish League he intended) he audaciously answered amongst other his insolent
speeches, Let them look to themselves, lest they run the like fortune that
Zuinglius did in the war of Zurich.

He therefore having committed these and many other heinous crimes, and having
brought his Country into great troubles in it self, and great dis-reputation
and disgrace with other Princes, through his temerarious perfidie; after many
Citations by form of Justice and Law, he was upon his contumacie banished for
life from the Three Confederations General, with a Fine and Donatiue of a
thousand Crowns to him that should bring him alive into the hands of Justice;
and five hundred Crowns out of the public Treasury to him that should bring
in his head. And in case he were taken in any of our Countries or
Jurisdictions, that without further Process he should be executed by the
common Hangman, and his quarters to be set up upon the high vvayes; his house
to be razed, and two Pillars of infamy set up in the place; his goods
confiscate to the Exchequer of the Three Confederations General, and no man
upon pain of death ever to speak or treat for his Pardon: whosoever should
lodge him, to forfeit a thousand Crowns, and to be banished (as he is) for
life: and if any of our Comminalties should harbor him, to be excluded (as
perfidious) out of the Letters Patents of the Confederation.

Upon the 26. of August, another Process was framed against Rod^lphus Planta
of Zernes, Captain of the Province of Val^eli^, and criminal Judge in Zernes
aforesaid and the neighbor Comminalties; Captain likewise of a Band of the
Confederates for the French Kings service. Against this man it was proved by
several Processes, Confessions, Testimonies, Writings, and memorials of his
own and his Brothers, as also by Letters of other his Adherents, that he had
by many and strange practices brought the whole power of the Supreme Magistrate
of the Three Confederations into his own hands, using it with much tyranny
against both public and private persons, and falsely practicing as well
against our own Countrymen, as against Princes and foreign States: He has
treacherously betrayed his Country through his perfidious avarice, as also all
others that trusted him; bringing us all into discredit and displeasure with
other States, and thereby has been the cause of many Deliberations most
prejudicial and pernicious unto us.

He has intruded into the Magistrates place and power after this manner: His
Highness of Inspruch has some privilege in choosing the criminal Judge of the
lower Agnadina every St. Georges day, with the will and consent of the common
people. By this means and that Princes favor, Pl^ has been chosen Judge
diverse years together: which time being expired, he has sought no renewing
or confirmation by the whole Bench of Justice, but has boldly usurped the
power, as if it had been his own by inheritance or purchase. Moreover, of his
own mee^e Authority he has arrogated the decision of civil or criminal
causes, by choosing those for Judges that were for his purpose, and he that
would not be pliable to his will, and submit himself to ^ Tyranny, was
instantly cassed, and another more obedient to his pleasure chosen: whereby he
has brought the Supreme power of the Magistrate to be at his devotion and
disposition without any contradiction, in all places as far as their whole
Jurisdiction extends.

He has also preferred others to places of government, especially such as
could advance any Creature and Adherent of his to the Supreme Magistracy, b^
yet with condition, that neither he nor they should conclude any thing of
importance, without his advice and counsel; but should carry the business by
his direction only, against the liberty of our common Country. According to
which complot he has taken into his protection in his Castle of Coira, John
Bishop of that place, before he had obtained his Liberty or Pardon: a man who
for his treachery to his Country and other offenses, had been banished from
the Three Confederations General, by a lawful and unpassionate judgment of
both the Religions: which the said Planta has done, to have the Bishop ever
ready at his will and command for the appointing of any Officers (chiefly
within the precincts of Cade:) In consideration whereof, the said Bishop
granted to Pompeius Planta the Lieutenancy of Forstenau for thirty years:
where, as chief in the Bishops name, he has power to appoint three
Burgomasters; and so has he dealt with the young Lord of Rasiuz, and many other.

He has also obtained of diverse great Families, that when they shall have any
suites in Law depending in their Comminalties, he only may have the decision
of their controversies, gaining power by that means to establish in the Office
that man whom he shall prefer: and these few years last past, some Gentlemen
of good quality in the upper Agnadina, desirous to enjoy their Liberties and
custom of free Election, he with his false and wicked practices so handled
the matter, as none but his own Dependents were chosen to any Offices: and
seeking in the disposition of other Charges also, to infringe the strength of
plurality of voices, he has been the cause of six men's death, besides the
endangering of many Judges lives by force of Arms.

And knowing that Monsieur Pasquale was at that time in great credit and power
with us, he secretly contracted with him, as appears by a Letter of his
Brother, and another of one of his Adherents, bearing date the 22. of February
1611. and the 11. of January 1612. and by a Letter of Monsiour Pasquales own
hand: which Letter stood Planta in good stead, and served fitly his purpose;
for having got strict Intelligence with the Ambassador, every one that
desired a Pension, was forced to receive it through Planta's hands; by which
means he got of the Ambassador large sums of money, new pensions, and
augmentation of the old, as shall more amply be related in the summing up of
his practices.

Moreover, he has much increased his Authority by means of Marriages; for
being in great reputation and power with his kindred and Adherents, they ran
all to him in business of greatest importance: and if they bound themselves to
stand wholly to his direction, they got what they desired, else not.

He has always kept Spies and Informers both at home and abroad, to
understand the deliberations of those he suspected: and finding them upon
information contrary to his deseignes, he would first seek to win them;
if not, he would prosecute and pursue them to their uttermost ruin. And to
make himself yet more powerful, he would falsify and corrupt the Statutes and
Laws of the Country within his Jurisdiction, enlarging or restraining them to
his best advantage.

With these and the like sleights these thirty five years together, he is
grown so great, as for a long time he has engrossed into his hands all the
important business of our Subjects, whom he has bound to him by diverse
presents and bribes, to elect his creatures and Dependents into the Offices of
several Comminalties: by whom he might after serve his own turn to infringe
the Laws, to stir up tumults against honest men, and to govern all at his
own pleasure; using this his power with much tyranny against all sorts of
people both Spiritual and Temporal.

He has most insolently usurped upon the Jurisdictions of the Comminalties,
depriving them of their Liberties, and forcing them to depend wholly at his
devotion in the choice of their Magistrates, not daring to speak or advise any
thing against him, for fear of losing his favor; but they all ran as he
would have them.

He has too rigorously condemned poor men of the Country for very small
faults, and then compounded with them for no small gifts and bribes, without
the knowledge or consent of the Court: whereunto the poor men were enforced to
avoid his tyrannous persecution, and were bound by Oath not to complain or
once speak of the wrong he had done them: whereof we have here set down some
few particulars among many hundreds; and these they be:

A man being fled upon a certain crime committed, and dead in the
Mountains; Planta forces the poor heirs of the dead man to pay two hundred
and sixty Florens for his escape: contrary to the Laws of the Country, which
condemn a man only in ten Florens for his flight: which Fine is also to be
paid to the whole Court, not to the criminal Judge alone.

If at any time an offender endited and convicted, had accused another of some
small crime, he would not discover the evidence, nor call the party in
question, till after the execution of the Accuser: And though the party
accused knew not whether he were indeed charged by that other, or that it was
a thing of Planta's own forging, and much complained that he was not called
to his answer while the Accuser lived: yet was he forced to compound with
him for round sums of Money, to avoid his indignation, and unjust persecution.

Two men confessed upon the Torture, that they had stolen a certain quantity
of Wheat from a neighbor of theirs: the man hearing of their confession, said
he knew of none he had lost: for which word alone, Planta fined him secretly
at forty Crowns, threatening, that if he paid not the money, he would cast him
in prison, and put him to Torture, to confess whether he lost any wheat or no.

Upon a time he sending his Warrant for one accused, to appear before him at
Zernes, he demanded a horse of a woman for that service, to send him back to
prison, whose Husband was gone to the wood with him: Planta seems offended
that the horse could not be had: the poor Wife sends presently to her
Husband, to make what haste he could with his Horse from the wood: the
good man, though he came home presently after the Judge and the prisoner were
departed, and made haste after them to offer them his Horse, he had answer,
that now they had got another to serve their turn: all this notwithstanding,
Planta fined the poor man in five and twenty Crowns, because he had not
offered his Horse before he went to the wood.

Two men being in suite for a matter not above half a Crown, one gave in
evidence: Planta presently laid to his charge that he had given false
witness; threatening him the Torture, and that he would pluck out his tongue
by the roots. Hereat the poor man was so much affrighted, as he promised
Planta a secret Donatiue of two hundred Crowns to be leauied upon his Lands,
and was afterward forced to disengage them of that morgage with a hundred and
twenty Hungars, besides threescore Crowns Fine for the accusation, and fifty
more for charges of the Court.

Four free men of the Confederation, bringing from Chiauenna into Finscouia
some loades of Rice upon their own horses, and passing through the lower
Agnadina, bartring their Rice for Wheat, they returned with their said loading
and Merchandise through Zernes: Planta presently charged them by his cruel
practice to make their market, and vent their commodity in the upper Agnadina,
or else they should be fined for using their own horses, and not those of his
neighbors: who refusing to satisfy him herein, they were fined at a hundred
Florens.

One said to a neighbor of his, that if he had paid Planta the money he
ought him, he would not owe him the putting off of his cap: he was for these
words only, fined in an hundred Crowns.

He plotted that strange stratageme in the upper Agnadina, where he incensed
two germane brothers one against the other: and that side which he abbetted
having the worse, he sent to his aid two hundred and fifty men, to obtain
that by unlawful ways and open violence, which he could not compass by
corruptions, promises, and menaces: By which tumult he was the occasion of six
honorable men's death, besides many other sore wounded.

He has also been an Assassinate and bloud-sucker of the Clergy: for a
Priest of Monstertall seeing his perfidious practices, and speaking somewhat
freely of them, he so persecuted the man with his calumniations, as at length
he caused him to dye by the hand of Justice.

Likewise, they of the reformed Clergy opposing the Capitulations of the
League propounded between our Confederations and the house of Millan, in the
year 1617. and publicly reproving diverse other disorders, some of them he
persecuted with his criminal Authority; others he labored to remove from
their Ministry; some he violently set upon in his own person; some he
imprisoned and threatened to do worse unto them; upon others his servants bent
their Pistols, and Harquebusies charged, menacing to kill them: He has fined
diverse men for speaking well of their Doctors and Ministers. Finally, the
perfidie and falsehood of his notorious practices is unspeakable: for many
times he takes bribes to the sum of a thousand Florens and more between
both parties in difference, and in the end shamefully deceiues the one and the
other.

To defend a Traitor and save him harmless from danger of the Law, he took
a bribe of a thousand and five hundred Crowns. In another case of difference,
he took seven hundred and eighty Crowns of one party, and a thousand of the
other, and then failed them both. In a difference of suite depending between
two Comminalties, he took four hundred Crowns apiece, and effected nothing
for either.

His treacherous practices against his Country cannot sufficiently be related,
as appears by what has been said, and by his endeavors at all times to
make himself Lord of the Government: as likewise appears by the Process of
Zambra, and other actions of his own, which tended to favor and further the
treacherous capitulation with the house of Millan, to deprive us of our
Privileges and Jurisdictions, and to enthrall us under the power of foreign
Princes. Among other means he has used, he has also served his turn of
these which follow:

The year 1603. he complotted with John Battista Zambra, to further or rather
enforce a League above and against all other intelligences and Leagues we had
formerly contracted, laboring that the Fort Fuentes might be built, and
withholding our people from hindering the proceeding of the said work. And the
Three Confederations General in the year 1606. being truly informed that all
their secrets of State were discovered to foreign Princes, they established a
Privy Council of fifteen men, to the intent that all their Deliberations
might be entrusted to secret Confidence: whereupon Planta and his Accomplices
being so debarred from the knowledge of any thing, raised that dangerous tumult
in the year 1607.

Iohn-Peter Mora da Piur, has also confessed Planta's Treason touching the
Fort, and that he was moved by him and won by his subtle sleights,
corruptions, and Donatiues, to the calling back of his forces, as by Planta's
Letter to his Brother Pompeius appears, and by Letters of other his Adherents
dated the 3. of October 1604.

In the year 1610. to our great loss and grief, the French King Henry the
fourth was murdered, after whose death, Monsieur Pasquale the French
Ambassador resident with us, sent a secret dispatch to Millan in the year
1611. to treat with Signor Alphonso Casale, Ambassador in Switzerland for the
King of Spain, that he would cause a League or new intelligence to be made
between the State of Millan, and the Three Confederations General: and to the
intent the said Treaty might not be hindered, the said French Ambassador and
Captain Planta being both agreed upon the business (though the French Kings
were always against it) he gave Planta six thousand Crowns of gold, and two
thousand and five hundred Frankes of yearly pension, to be distributed as he
thought good, without being bound to make any account, that he and his
Adherents would help to break the League with Venice, which was contrary to
the Treaty between Millan and us: as appears by the Letters of Pompeius and
his Adherents in the year 1612. and by a Memorial written with Captain
Planta's own hand.

The renunciation of the League between the State of Venice and us being
procured and bought by money, Planta presently draws out some Articles of the
League of Zuz: Wherein some Comminalties dwelling upon the Passages, are bound
not to grant passage to any whatsoever through our Countries, that all
friendship and aid of ours toward the Venetians might be broken. And the said
Casale having in the year 1617. required a League with us, and free passage,
in name of the house of Millan, they which were authors of the League of Zuz,
and of the denial of passage to the Soldiers of foreign States, were the
first that granted the King of Spain free passage for his Forces, through all
our Countries and upon all occasions, contrary to what they had formerly
concluded: So that the falsehood of Planta and his Adherents doubly appeared.

Against these Treaties of Planta and other his Accomplices, diverse good Patriots
both of the Clergy and Laity so earnestly labored, as they were by no means
accepted: hereupon Planta much enraged, thought upon a speedy and lively
revenge, beginning to prosecute those of most honesty and reputation, far
more then formerly he had done, and stirring them of the upper Agnadina to
tumult, he made them rise in Arms with Ensigns displayed, to thrust
violently Signor Padauino out of our Country, who had retired himself before
their coming: he has also conuented the people together, brought thither by
his Adherents and Servants, framing diverse barbarous Articles, and constraining
all men to observe them.

The second of which Articles was this: That no Churchman of any Comminaltie
should dare to speak or give his voice in any business concerning the
Country: though this be lawful to every free man of our State, be he never so
poor and base: and this he did, because in all his machinations and plots, he
never found stiffer resistance then from the Clergy. Moreover, they have had
diverse and sundry consultations with Maximilian Mora to put them to silence,
and stop their mouths altogether: and lastly, they have found it fit to forbid
them by a general Law, not to meddle with matters of State, or the good of
their common Country, or to be informers of the present corruptions. So much
the Devil has blinded their eyes, that they neither can, nor will see or
suffer the wholesome admonition of faithful Subjects.

They have also settled a Court of Justice, the decrees whereof (by confession
of some of the Judges themselves) were wholly managed and dispatched by the
advice and information of the two Brothers only. Judges also were chosen, such
as stood partially affected to foreign Princes, of whose liberality they had
bountifully tasted: who also were bound by Oath to defend the Bishop of Coira,
against our Provincial laws, to which they were sworn: which they did by
many indirect ways, and by the procurement of the inwardest friends to the
Planta's, who by their bad proceedings have deceived many honest men, and
diverse honorable Comminalties, with their large sums of money.

More especially, they have persecuted the said Clergy, calling them to
appear before them, and charging them not to meddle, or once speak in the
Spanish business, fining some of them in gross sums for having spoken too
much: and among the rest, they brought one Preacher by force from his house in
Coira, without any cause but mere malice; threatening imprisonment, and death,
or banishment to others.

On the other side, they have offered to maintain the Bishop of Coira with
strong hand: who (as is aforesaid) had been banished by Proclamation out of
the Three Confederations General, and has lately been charged by form of
Law with many notorious crimes: and not regarding his manifold transgressions,
they have consented to his escape out of the Country, and granted free passage
for his goods after him.

These tumults Planta has not only caused, as is manifest by many vvitnesses
Viua voce, but he has also granted transportation of Commodities, without
knowledge of the State, in a time when the passages were shut, and commerce
forbidden between us and Millan: though at the same time his Brother Pompeius
wrote to him, that Monsieur Gueffier the French Ambassador had importuned
Maximilian Mora, to desire the stopping of the passage and intercourse,
alleging, that he desired a commotion and sedition among us.

And now this present year 1618. some of our Comminalties rising in Arms to
remedy this mischief, he presently bound by Oath the men of his Circuit to
demand aid of others, thereby to move a Civil war, that the common people
butchering one another, he might subdue the stronger part remaining, and so
make himself universal and absolute Lord of all the Country. But foreseeing
that this plot would fail him, and doubting that he should be cited to
answer the Law for his notorious mis-demeanours, he presently fled: upon his
flight, he was according to custom diverse times summoned, and never appeared.
Seeing therefore he has usurped the chief Authority of our Country, as to
give and abolish Laws, to make and renounce Leagues, to create and depose
Magistrates, to dispose of War and Peace, and has used this his power with
all manner of perfidie, deceit, violence, tyranny, and Treason; he has been
by the Law and Justice of our Country, condemned to perpetual banishment from
all the Three Confederations General, and left free to the Birds of the air:
with a reward and Fee of a thousand Crowns to him shall bring him alive into
our Country, and to him shall bring in his head five hundred Crowns; besides
his freeing from the Proclamation, if he stand banished for any other offense,
but Treason against the State, or wilful murder: which money shall be paid
out of the Common Treasury: And in case he be apprehended in our Country, or
yield himself into the hands of the Three Confederations General, that then
the Magistrate shall call a Court of Justice of the Three Confederations, and
without any farther Process shall order, that he be forthwith executed and
quartered by the common Hangman, and his quarters to be set up in the common
high ways: all his goods to be confiscate to the Chamber of the common
Treasury, saving the dowry of his wife, and the payment of his clear debts;
his house to be razed, and two pillars set up in the place, to his perpetual
infamy: and that Comminaltie which shall refuse to execute this Sentence, and
shall succor him with meat, drink or lodging, shall forfeit their Right in
the Confederation, and besides, for every such offense shall be fined in a
thousand Crowns: and if he be a private person, he shall be deprived of his
honors, and forfeit a thousand Crowns: but he that is not worth so much in
goods or lands, shall forfeit his life: and lastly, if any speak of his
Pardon, write to him, or talk with him, or shall receive or read his Letters,
shall likewise lose his life.

In this Interim, upon the 22. of August, Nicolo Rusca da Lugano, Archpriest
of Sondrio in Valtelina, was accused, who formerly had been imprisoned by the
People, for having conspired with Iohn-Paolo Quadrio of Ponte, and Vince^zo
Gatto of Coira, to kill Signor Scipione Calandrino late Preacher in Sondrio, in
case they could find him upon the State of Millan, or else to carry him out of
our State, to Millan or to Rome, as diverse times heretofore it had happened to
others; as Michael Ciappino has publicly confessed, both upon the Torture
and after: who being resolved to act this his bloody purpose, Calandrino had
notice by some of his friends, that the Archpriest lay in wait for his life,
and had his Spies upon him: as appeared by a Brief of his sent to Ciappino by
a young Lad; wherein he gives him advertisement, when, and in what place he might
come with his accomplices, and in what manner he might perform that felonious
act: where upon Ciappino was imprisoned in the year School. in the month of
September, under the charge of Captain John Corn of Castelmur: where, upon
proof of the Evidence, he suffered death, as appears by his Process and the
confessions under the hand and seal of the said Signor Capitan^. Ciappino had
to this purpose made choice of certain Ferry-men, Andrea Serem da Como, John
Pifer the Traona, and Battista Domini da Menus, who in the year 1594. July,
were all executed, because being at the Ferry-place of the River Add, where
Calandrino was retired, they would violently have haled him into their Barque;
but they were apprehended by Signor Capitano Artman de Artmani, and the whole
business being proved against them, they were for the said murtherous
conspiracy and treasonable plot condemned to die.

Moreover, this Rusca had showed himself a Rebel and disobedient to the
supreme Magistrate of the Three Confederations General, because he embezeled
and defaced the Decrees and Records of that Office: and afterward holding his
Congregation in the Cloisters at Sondrio, there were heard many seditious and
rebellious words by diverse honest men in the streets, which they have fully
testified and proved, and as since has been confirmed by Nicolo Carbonera,
both upon and after Torture: affirming moreover, that he had given counsel
to cancel some Decrees of his own State, by the procurement of the French
Ambassadors, in whom Signor Iulio della Torre had great interest to prevail,
as a faithful and trusty friend of theirs: That he had also hindered the free
course of preaching the Gospel.

He had so far made himself Master of the peoples will, that the Officers of
Valtelina fearing some sudden tumult and insurrection, durst not lay open his
horrible crimes and transgressions. In the time while Fort Fuentes was
building, he retired to Morbegno, where, (as is proved by diverse Testimonies
and his own confession) he persuaded the people, not to make war with so
Catholic a Prince as the King of Spain, but to keep their consciences free,
and to ask him pardon for their fault: resisting by that means the Proueditor
of the Confederations General, who was forced patiently to dissemble this
rebellious affront: and albeit he was resolved to charge him herewithall before
the Counselors and Comminalties, yet he deferred it till the fourth of August
1608. at what time he was summoned before the Comminalties, and in November
after, before the Justice Court of the Three Confederations General of both
the Religions; but being conscious of his own guiltiness, he never appeared.

He has also by assistance of his Accomplices labored to corrupt and draw many
men to his party, as appears by Letters of his written to a friend the 22,
23, and 24. of December the same year, as also by the testimony of diverse
honest men; whereupon even they that were corrupted by him, have received
condign punishment, but yet with clemency.

He has held particular correspondencie and secret conference with the
Commissioners of foreign Princes, and especially he has had strict
intelligence and practice with the disloyal Rebels of our Country, favoring
many of their pernicious desseignes, as appears by writings of his own and
others: nay, during the time of our refusing passage and commerce with the
State of Millan, he made a journey twice to that City, not without our great
suspicion and jealousy. Which said accusations coming before the Court of
Justice, and the Judges calling into serious consideration our ancient Laws
and proceedings, and carefully perusing and examining the foresaid Letters, as
also those written by Paolo da Sulmona Priest, the 6. of November 1608. by
Signor Philippo Bishop of Como the 15. of March 1610. and by Friar Francis
Provincial of his order in Millan, bearing date the 12. of January 1611. and
by many other Letters addressed to him, and by the testimony of honest men
heard and approved, they all appear to the Court to be true and justifiable.

This man notwithstanding gainesayed all, denied the confessions of those had
been tortured and executed, made a ridiculous scoff of the Letters and
attestations, laboring to excuse himself and put off the matter with a jest:
but withal he besought the Court they would proceed no farther against him,
but either send him to perpetual banishment, or condemn him to the Galleys.
Hereupon they adjudged him to be tortured: the first day he was hoised thrice
without any weight; nor would he confess any thing: the second day being
twice drawn up by the Pulley, he seemed very feeble; upon this they let him
down to the ground, and loosned his cords, when instantly he dyed, not without
strong suspicion that he had poisoned himself, as appeared by the tokens in
his body. So by the Sentence of Justice he was carried by the Hangman to the
public place of execution, and there buried.

A rumor was spread abroad by some false Calumniators, that this Rusca was
tortured to death in prison, by the malice of those of the Religion: but worthy
men of both the Religions that were then and there present, can witness the
contrary: because, during the two days wherein he was tortured, he was not in
all above one hour on the Torture: besides, his torture was most easy, but
his death came by some other means, as has been declared.

The first day of September, Iohn-Antonio Giouer da Calanca was called in
question, whose own Letter, and others, with their Process and witnesses do
testify, that he had plotted to bring a war upon his Country, and to this
end had sought to raise Forces in foreign States.

Iohn-Battista Zambra, of whom we have formerly made mention, has confessed,
that Giouer had not only conveyed his Letters and directions to Millan, but
also that having written to him to be ready at the service of the house of
Millan, and to hinder the Leauy of the Three Confederations against the
building of Fort Fuentes, the said Giouer had returned him this answer; That
he would advance the business as much as he could.

He has by his Letters and Spies discovered the secret Counsels of the Three
Confederations General to foreign Princes, making offer to procure a good
issue to their affairs, rather then to those of his own Country. By his
counsel the passage of Millan was shut up, so was it by us to them of that
State: yet he by his Office suffered many horses and other things to pass from
this State thither, and has craftily wrought that the Salt and Grain of that
State might be kept from hence: having also secretly distributed money here, to
corrupt others against the Privileges of our higher Powers.

He has, contrary to the Liberty of our Religion and public Peace, stirred
up certain Comminalties of the Three Confederations General, one against
another by lies and false reports: and namely, he counseled and helped to
burn the Seats of the Protestants in the Church of Maso^h, their Bells to bury
under ground, and drive out the Ministers; wherein himself was a principal
Actor, and for which worthy service he was Knighted by the Pope, to whom he
took his Oath, contrary to the Allegiance he owes to his own Country.

He published a counterfeit Proclamation at Morbegno, in the name of the Three
Confederations General, That those who go to Venice, should not only be
denied entertainment and lodging, but also he that should kill any of them,
should be free from all danger of punishment or Fine. Many other notorious
outrages he has committed, not needful here to be related. Being therefore
two several times summoned to the Court of Justice, and not appearing, he was
banished, and had like Sentence of condemnation with that of Captain Rodulphus
Planta.

The same day Process was framed by due course of Justice against Lucio di
Monte, chief Judge of the Grison Confederation, for that it was evidently
proved by his own Letters, and others, and by diverse witnesses, that he made
his way to that Office by the money of foreign Princes, assisting them and
their affairs in matter of State, with all his power; receiving at one time
two hundred Doubles of Spain from a Secretary to a foreign Prince, and from
another Prince three hundred gold Crowns for the like service. He has
likewise received much money from a certain Ambassador of a foreign Prince,
and disbursed seven hundred Crowns for obtaining the Office of Lantama, or
chief Justice of Lugniz with corruption and presents: and yet (to the terror
of all men) took his corporal Oath, that he entertained no secret practice
with any foreign State.

While he was in his office of supreme Judge and Lantama, he countenanced and
furthered the seditious tumult of 1617. whereby many good men were persecuted,
the Confederation of Cade brought into great expenses, and the Three
Confederations General into extreme danger. He has further threatened when
State matters were in handling, that unless they succeeded as he would have
them, he would cause to be made such a hauock and spoil among them, as it
should reach to their destruction and loss of life. He showed his readiness
to receive 50000. Crowns, for soliciting the unjust Articles of the League
with Millan, and working us to a consent thereunto: wherein notwithstanding,
the rest of his Accomplices would not give their consent, for fear, if the
League should go forward, he would keep all the money to himself. Moreover,
he has held strict practices with forrenners, to the great prejudice of our
State, and has dared to brag that he had seventeen of our Comminalties
within the League of Cade, at his command, and in the rest of our
Confederations he was grown so powerful and strong, as he nothing esteemed
the contrary party: whereby he became so insolent, as he would force them to
his ends by open violence, or else threaten to kill them like Calves. Lastly,
he has demanded Arms, with succors of foreign States against his own
Country.

Hereof being conscious, and of many other villainies, he is fled the Country
and Liberties thereof: and being summoned by the Court of Justice, and not
making appearance, he was banished, and received like Sentence of condemnation
with Pompeius Planta.

Some few days after, John Bishop of Coira was accused, who eleven years
since had been banished by order of Law, and impartial judgment of both the
Religions of the Three Confederations General, for many foul crimes, and
other transgressions against his Country: namely, for aduising and assisting
that the Three Confederations General might not keep their Oath and covenant
(which they ought) with other Princes and foreign States their Colleagues: and
for receiving and disbursing diverse sums of money, that we might oppose the
Lords of Switzerland our faithful Neighbors and Confederates. Likewise, he
put his Bishopric under the Protection of those that were our professed and
sworn enemies, and knowing himself guilty of this perfidie, he labored (in
case his villainies should come to light) to hold the Office of a Legate in the
Countries of Germany.

Not long after, contrary to the Proclamation of the Three Confederations for
his banishment, he being confederate with the disloyal and traitorous men of
our Country, who had then the power of the Supreme Magistrate in their own
hands, and returning to his Bishopric at Coira, whither he was brought by
Rodulphus Planta, chief head of the Treason against his Country, he has here
continued in his former practices, and persisted in his pernicious complottings
against the State. He has robbed our House near Fustemburgh in his Diocese,
and has placed therein a perfidious person, and one banished our State.

He has contrary to Law taken away the Hereditarie Lands belonging to his
Bishopric, from those that possessed them by descent, but were not of his
Episcopal faction, and given them to others of his own party. He has
aliened and conveyed away diverse Lands from his Church, without the consent or
knowledge of the League of Cade, which is Visiter and Protector of that
Bishopric; and has employed wicked, perfidious, and temerarious persons, in
his service, and against the State. He has preached in Villages of matters of
State, contrary to his Oath, and the dignity of his calling. He has taken
bribes in differences and suites in Law between party and party, concerning
the Limits and boundaries of our Country, ever assisting that side which
opposed us. He styles his confederates that are of the reformed Religion, by
the name of Heretics, when he mentions them to foreign Princes, contrary
to the peace of our Religion and Country. He has denied them burial in that
part of his Jurisdiction which is out of our Country, so as they are forced to
bring the corpse hither to have Christian burial: besides many other
Partialities. And having had notice that his actions were made known to the
Comminalties and Counselors, he retired himself last year out of our
Jurisdiction: and being lawfully summoned to the Court, he failed to appear.
Hereupon the honorable Court of Justice proceeded against him the 15. of
September this present year, and upon sufficient examination of his own
handwriting, and others, diverse witnesses being produced and heard, and all
the premises clearly proved, besides many other; the Court has decreed to
add new vigor to the former Proclamation of his banishment for life;
confiscating all his own proper goods, and reserving those of the Bishopric:
and has further commanded the League of Cade, and the Deane and Chapter of
that Cathedral Church, to proceed as speedily as conveniently they may, to the
election of a new Bishop: straightly charging and forbidding all men to harbor
him in the Country, and being taken there, to have his head cut off.

Process was likewise framed against many others, whose several crimes and
offenses for breuities sake we omit. But besides the former, we find other
wicked men so much corrupted and bribed with Presents and Donatiues from the
Ministers of the French King, as they have not only promised to observe the
League, (in which case no bribes were needful, every man being resolved to
keep his Oath and bear himself as became his honor and reputation) but also
to apply themselves in all things to the good will and pleasure of those
public Ministers: and accordingly, some servants of his said Majesty have
thrust themselves into businesses not comprised in the Articles, promising not
to give passage through our Countries, (as if they were their own) and not to
give their consent that we should enter League with any other.

These very men, upon acknowledgement of great Donatiues and expectation of
greater sums promised, have likewise made themselves Vassals and humble
Servants to the Catholic Kings Ambassador in Switzerland, he hoping by this
means to obtain his demand in our Country; namely, that the King his Master
may be absolute Lord of all our passages. And yet these selfsame men have
taken money of the Venetians, to further their demand of some Troops of ours,
or else to have free passage for those they should leauy from other places; or
at least if any should favor their affair, to be silent, and hear and see
nothing. By which means, drawing to themselves the treasures of other Princes,
and impudently coozening both the one side and other, they have brought our
common Country into discredit and dis-reputation: hence it is, that many of
them who had but a small patrimony left them by their Ancestors, come now to
live splendidly, and grow infinitely rich.

Some of these men have been banished their Country, and had they been
taken, they had been sentenced to be hanged and beheaded: some have forfeited
their estates, honors, and Arms; others put out of our Councels; others have
lost their money and goods; and many have been accused that have cleared
themselves; who not being convicted of any crime, either by their own writing,
confession, or testimony of honest and Legal men, they have been discharged
without paying one penny of mulct, or Fees of the Court whatsoever.

So that in conclusion, whosoever will take knowledge of our manner of
proceeding, shall evidently see, that we have been forced thereunto by urgent
necessity. First, that God the Lord of Hosts might be glorified, who has
planted us in this Ecclesiastical and Civil Liberty; and secondly, that our
common Country might be preserved by Justice, to the extermination and
banishment of all Treasons, the punishment of all notorious offenses, the
advancement of true virtue and loyal honesty, the reformation of evil abuses,
and restoration of our ancient Liberty, for the sincere and real propagation
thereof to our Posterity.

And these are the true causes and reasons why we are falsely slandered and
calumniated by our perfidious Countrymen and other malicious persons, blaming
us to other Princes and foreign States, as if this our Assembly and Judicial
proceeding had been only appointed for private factions, wicked emulations,
hatred against the Roman Catholic Religion, and despite of our Confederates
and ancient friends, to change them for new, and colleague our selves with
them. But we are in good hope, that they who shall hear such persons talk,
against whom we have sent out our Process and Proclamation, will likewise
remember, that they are the same men who have so falsely and so often deceived
foreign Princes and States our neighbors, receiving great sums of money
from them, and in word promising much in diverse places, but in effect
performing nothing. And as they have vainly sought to excuse their falsehood
against their accusers, so no doubt they will not be ashamed with false
machinations and pretenses to palliate and cloak their malice.

If these so powerful men have been faithful Ministers in the government of
our Country, and have carried themselves with such integrity and sincerity
toward all men, why do other Princes and States complain of our ill
government, and of our daily changing our Councels, whereof these men have
been the only occasion? Why do they contest with Barons and Earls in all
manner of riches and magnificence, and yet leave the Country empty of all
provision? Can a Prince or foreign State complain of any man's perfidie, and
not of these, with whom he has had so strict intelligence, who promised them
much, yet neither did nor could do any thing? Who can charge us to have
persecuted any one Family or Comminaltie through faction or emulation, since it
plainly appears, that the persons executed were of diverse Families and
Comminalties? who will imagine they were falsely slandered of diverse things,
when the Articles whereof they stood accused, appeared to be plainly proved
by their own handwritings, and those of their Accomplices? Who will believe that
their faults are aggrauated, and they condemned not being guilty, when their
own writings, actions, and confessions do plainly give evidence, that the
bloody Fort Fuentes was built by their counsel, assistance, and contribution?
who also pronounced them enemies that hindered the work, and bewrayed the
secret deliberations of our Country, which were so honest, sincere, and to no
man prejudicial: prescribing us the way how to carry our selves in that
business, that through fear we might become base and pusillanimous; to which
service they were drawn by money, like vile and mercenary persons.

But they say we have a particular Faction by which they are persecuted. This
which they call Faction, is that which desires to advance, preserve, and
defend the Honor and Word of God, consisting of all the real and true
Subjects of our Country of both Religions. This is the Faction, that desires
to keep the Liberties of our Country, according to our ancient laws and
ordinances. This is the Faction, that desires to maintain their Faith,
Honor, and Oath, with all their Confederates. This is the Faction, that now
for many years has promised to receive no Pension of foreign Princes for
matters of State, and that never made promise of any thing that it has not
faithfully performed; and for long time has with much patience and more grief
endured such wicked persons. These are the children and posterity of those
that have freed themselves from Tyrants, and will no longer acknowledge their
Successors as Superiors, but as neighbors; and these are they that sustain
and support themselves by their integrity; they hate all Arrogance and
Ambition; they desire not to thrust their fingers into Princes Treasures, but
serve them faithfully and honestly for their Pay in all their occasions, when
they are required, and who venture their lives and goods with all readiness
and obedience for the defense of Justice, and suppression of violence. In
conclusion, this is the Faction that never could, can, or will endure so many
gross abuses and seditious practices against our Country.

These perfidious persons must needs have a feeling (if not in themselves, yet
by others) that all men have the glory of God, and the truth of their own
Religion in tender recommendation, and that every one thinks in his own
conscience, it is a deadly sin not to defend it, and resist the Persecuters
thereof: and yet these men shame not to give out, and publish to the world,
that our end is nothing else but to persecute the Catholic Roman Religion,
and to drive it out of our Country.

Had the Roman Catholics alone made this complaint, perchance some might
have believed them; but why then do they of the reformed Religion complain,
who (as they say) are not molested? Why then do both the Religions with hand
and heart unite themselves in these proceedings for defense of their Country,
and maintenance of their ancient liberties? Why do both Religions sit together
in Court of Justice at this present, with equity and indifferency to punish
offenders both Reformed and Roman? But these bad men kept long secret in their
bosoms this their calumniation and slander, till now the water of the
Fountains runs so clear, as they can no longer by troubling it, disturb
the peace of our Country: and therefore now upon discovery of their perfidious
and false hearts, they use this false pretext of Religion, to withdraw our
Subjects from their Countries service, and to draw our neighbor Princes and
others, not to further with such zeal as they ought, the good success of
these our proceedings. Let them give leave to the honest and good men of our
Country who are still among us, to complain in this particular of Religion,
of whom we firmly believe that no one man of either Profession will ever open
his lips, because we have never suffered in all our proceedings, that the least
violence should be used to the one, or the other.

They say we have put to death the Archpriest of Sondrio: To this we answer,
It is true, and he had but justice; yet have we not taken away the Benefice,
but have given order for another to be chosen in his place, to discharge that
Office: Nor did we proceed against him, for that he was a Priest, but for his
bloody deeds, his wicked counsels, and Treasons. In like manner the Bishop of
Coira stands outlawed and banished, but his Bishopric is not abolished; and
another in his stead is to have the possession. Besides, there have been mo of
the reformed Religion punished, then of Catholics.

It seems in these our days, that Religion is used as a cloak and pretext for
wicked and nefarious actions, and it is the ordinary custom of those men to
serve their turns with such excuses, who in their life and conversation never
showed any acknowledgement of Religion at all: nor have any pretense of truth,
to approve the innocence and integrity of their actions.

We are likewise charged to have despised and set at naught the Majesty's of
other Monarchs in a barbarous manner, by renouncing our Faith given them, and
quitting our friendship and Alliance with them. But we knowing well, that to
despise and calumniate the said Majesty's is utterly against the Christian
Faith; we do therefore hold them in all reverent esteem and observation, and
think our selves much honored, if we enjoy their good favor and friendship:
yet neither may nor can we by any means approve the indiscreet and
inconvenient actions of some of their Servants: we hold them for our
Confederates, but we are not tied to them in any special duties, or services
not comprised in their Commission, nor specified in the Articles of League with
us.

Who can truly say, or charge any Deliberation or Council of ours, to have
renounced or broken any League or intelligence we had with others?

We both in general and in particular are ready, to maintain toward all men
our Faith, Credit, Honor, Oath, and good correspondencie, and neighborhood.
And albeit some Ambassadors by their indiscreet carriages have provoked us to
just displeasure, yet have we no purpose to diminish any one point in our
interchangeable Leagues with others, or to molest and trouble them any way,
only we could wish, that those Ministers of State were prescribed a better
course how to carry themselves, or else that their Masters would call them
home, and send others in their place.

If our People were so temerarious and headstrong as these calumniators would
make the world believe; we, adhering to them as Authors of all lewdness,
should every year have made Leagues and broken them, like these our slanders,
who have wrought their uttermost among us to renounce and quit all our true and
real Confederations, which, by the constancy and faithfulness of our People,
and some of our Heads and Councillors, we still maintain in their force and
inviolable: and if any fault has been made, or failing in duties whereto we
were obliged by Article, the blame is to be laid upon those perfidious
Patriots, who like Merchants suffered themselves to be won with money, by
their false shadows and pretenses of danger, to turn our Common People from
the right way, who hold among us the supreme Authority.

By all which things aforesaid, we hope that every man (especially such as
know what true liberty is, and wherein it consists) shall have occasion for
the time to come, to judge more modestly of our actions, without giving ear to
false pretenses, or favoring the said perfidious Countrymen of ours, by us
justly banished; but shall banish them likewise out of their limits, as persons
most wicked, and deserving any kind of punishment.

GOD, who changes Kingdoms, sets up and pulls down Kings, enlarges
Dominions, and raises the Humble, keep in his gracious favor and protection
all States and Commonwealths, defend them from War and Treason, from
suspicions and iealousies; confounding all perfidious practices by his mighty
Power, and preserving all good Governments by his infinite Mercy.

Amen.
AND to the intent that the world may know, how much these mercenary men of
ours took upon them, by propounding and procuring to sell our Liberty, and
Treasury to Princes and foreign States: we have set down word by word, the
Articles of the League between his Majesty of Spain, and our Countries, to
which League they persuaded our Commons in the year 1617.
Articles drawn and to be agreed upon the 9. of March 1617. by the most
Illustrious Don Alfonso Casale, Councellor and Ambassador for the Catholic
Majesty in Switzerland; in the name and behalf of the most Illustrious Prince
Don Pietro di Toledo, Governor of the State of Millan, on the one party: and
the Lords the Heads and Deputies of the Three high Confederations General of
Grisons on th other party: with the good liking and approbation of his
Majesty, and of the said Three Confederations General.

WHereas there has ever been a good, sincere, and faithful amity,
neighborhood, and correspondencie between the Duke of Millan, and the Three
Consederations General; the which, ever since the High and Mighty Kings of
Spain hau^ been Lords of that State, has been continued by their Majesty's:
therefore both the parties, upon dye consideration of the happiness, profit
and security, which arises from the good affection, sincerity, and loving
intelligence between them; and to the intent that all cause of jealousy and
diffidence might be removed, which has or might heretofore happen between
the Majesty of Philip the third, and the said Three Confederations General;
and that a perpetual good intelligence, faithful neighborhood, and a real
and mutual union might be established between them: they have to the honor
and glory of GOD, and to the public good and safety, jointly resolved to
conclude this present Capitulation, Treaty, and Union, to stand in the full
force and virtue of a continual and hereditary League.

And therefore the most Illustrious Prince and Lord, Don Pietro di Toledo
General of Millan, in the name and behalf of his Majesty, and his successors
Dukes of Millan on the one party, and the High and Noble Lords the Presidents,
Counselors, and Comminalties of the Three Confederations General on the other
party, do promise, that between his Majesty as Duke of Millan, together
with the Subjects of the said Duchy, and the Three Confederations General,
with all their Subjects in Valtelina, Bombio, and the County of Chiauenna,
shall be a true, sincere, and perpetual amity, correspondencie,
neighborhood, and union; so at neither party shall suffer themselves to be
employed upon any service or occasion, to the prejudice and hurt of the other;
nor shall suffer that through their Countries or their Subjects, any passage,
counsel, or aid shall be given directly or indirectly, which may secretly
or openly damnifie either party, but that they shall oppose and resist them
with all possible diligence and power. And when either of the parties shall
know or understand any secret practice or attempt, whereby may be engaged the
prejudice and hurt of the other; that then they shall without delay give notice
thereof, and procure with all diligence and faithfulness to divert the same.

And because his Excellency understands, that the Three Confederations
General would willingly that the Fort built in the year 1603. upon the
Confines of Valtelina were demolished, as a pawn and pledge that they were
again restored into the good favor and assured confidence of his Majesty;
he promises, in testimony of his Majesty's good affection to the Three
Confederations General, That, so soon as this said Capitulation shall be
concluded, sworn, and signed by both the parties, forthwith the Fort and
Sconce belonging to it, shall effectually and really be demolished: and that
the said Fort shall never be rebuilt, so long as the Contents of this
Capitulation be faithfully and inuiolably kept, and no second cause be given
his Majesty of diffidence and doubt of them, as was in the year 1603. And
forasmuch as the said Lords Presidents, Counselors, and Comminalties of the
Three Confederations General, do know that the reason of that diffidence and
doubt, which caused the building of the Fort was, in regard of the League and
passage granted to the State of Venice the year before; they therefore promise
for themselves and their Successors, never to renew the said League or passage,
nor to give their consent thereunto, so long as this Capitulation shall
continue.

That commerce, negotiation, and passage shall be free through both their
Countries, and for all their Subjects without exception of persons, of what
quality and condition so ever: but with this prouiso, that in their Letters of
credence there be no scandal, nor bring in with them prohibited books, and
that in time of Pestilence or Plague, the ancient customs be observed. And
concerning the Toll of Cattle or other commodities, which shall be brought into
the State of Millan, they shall enjoy the like liberties with those already
granted to such Swisse Cantons as are confederate with his Majesty.

And in case it so happen that his Majesty shall have need of the Soldiers
of this Country to defend his Duchy of Millan, he shall have a Leauy granted
him by the Three Confederations General, of four thousand men at the most,
and two thousand at the least, (but all to be voluntaries;) reserving
notwithstanding a power in the Three Confederations General, to grant a
greater number at their pleasure: The choice of the Collonell and Captains to
be made by his Majesty's Ambassador: who having made the said Leauie, he
shall agree with the Collonell and Captains chosen, for their Arms and Pay.

And in case his Majesty would cause to pass into his Duchy of Millan,
through the Country of the Three Confederations General, or of their
Subjects, any number of foreign Soldiers, for the preservation and defense
of his Duchy or other his States, free passage shall be granted to his
Captains and Officers, so as their Troops consist of no more then two hundred
men, and that they be always distant one days journey the one from the
other. Every Troop also shall have his Captain or Leader, and also one
Commissary appointed by the Three Confederations General, at the charge of his
Majesty, to see that good order and discipline be kept, for the avoiding of
all inconveniences; which Soldiers shall pay for their victuals, and other
customs, and shall bear themselves quietly and peaceably throughout the
Country.

They shall bear no other Arms but Sword and Dagger, if they be on foot;
and they on horseback, nothing but their Pistols: and in case it shall appear
by proof, that these Soldiers have damnisied the Countries of the Three
Confederations General, that then his Majesty shall be bound to make
restitution.

On the other side, if it should so happen that the Three Confederations
General were set upon in hostile manner by any Prince, Potentate, or free
State, that then his Majesty shall be bound upon every their demand, to send
to their succors two thousand foot, and two hundred horse, upon his own
expense till the war be ended: and in case the Three Confederations General
should stand in need of greater succors, his Majesty shall be bound to send
them forthwith: But if the Three Confederations General shall find it more
for their advantage, or like it better to have money then Soldiers; that then
his Majesty shall truly pay them ten thousand Crowns a month so long as
their war lasts, and shall lend them six Pieces of Artillery and Munition
thereunto belonging, as far as the uttermost bounds of the County of
Chiauenna, with condition that the war being done, the Artillery be
restored. It shall be lawful for the Three Confederations General and their
Subjects, to buy at the Fair of Como and Palanza in the Duchy of Millan, all
sorts of Grain for every man's use and necessity, with like freedom as those
Swisse-Cantons do, which are in League with his Majesty.

His Majesty as Duke of Millan, according to his wonted Princely Liberality,
and to testify his gracious favor to the Three Confederations General,
promises to pay into the Exchequer of each Confederation General yearly,
upon St. John Baptists day, three thousand Florens, worth three shillings nine
pence Sterling a-piece: This payment to begin the first Saint John Baptists
day after the Sealing and Swearing of this Union.

And when any difference or dispute shall ^se between his Majesty and the
Three Confederations General, two Arbiters shall be chosen of either party,
who shall meet at Chiauenna or Lorico, as the one or other part shall be
Plaintiff or Defendant; and these differences between them in two months to
be clearly determined and decided. And in case any difference arise between
private persons of both the States, that then the Plaintiff shall call the
Defendant before his Magistrate and Judge: but in case they cannot here be
agreed, and their difference compounded, that then each of the Parties shall
have choice of one able man well experienced in causes of Justice, out of the
Adversaries Country: and then to cast Lots which of these two shall determine
the difference.

That this present Capitulation shall be no way prejudicial to the League and
Letter-*Riuersall, made and given by the Three Confederations General with the
Crown of France: but that, that League and Letter shall still remain in their
force, and their own proper words.

That this present Capitulation shall be perpetual and hereditarie; his
Majesty reserving on his part the holy Sea of Rome, the Sacred Roman Empire,
the High and Mighty House of Austria, his League with the Catholique-Cantons of
Switzerland, and all other his ancient Leagues and Treaties. And on the other
part, the Three Confederations General reserving the Sacred Roman Empire,
their League and Letter-*Riuersall with the Crown of France, their perpetual
Union with the High and Mighty House of Austria, their Confederation with the
Cantons of Switzerland, and all other their ancient Leagues which have been
formerly inuiolably and effectually kept and observed.

FINIS.

