The Dial of Princes, Compiled by the reverend father in God, Don Antony of
Gueuara, Bishop of Guadix, Preacher, and Chronicler to Charles the fifte, late
of that name EMPEROVR.

Englished out of the French by T. North, son of Sir Edward North Knight,
L. North of Kyrtheling. And now newly reuised and corrected by him, reformed
of faults escaped in the first edition: with an amplification also of a fourth
book annexed to the same, Entitled The favored Courtier, never heretofore
imprinted in our vulgar tongue.

Right necessary and pleasant to all noble and virtuous persons.

Now newly imprinted by Richard Tottill, and Thomas Marshe. Anno. Domini.
1568.

To the most high and virtuous Princess, Mary, by the grace of God, Queen
of England, Spain, France, both Sicilles, Jerusalem, Naples, and Irelande.
Defendour of the faith, Archiduchesse of Austria, Duchess of Burgundy,
Mylaine, and Brabante, Countess of Haspourge, Flaunders, and Tyroll. Long
health and perpetual felicity.
THE Divine philosopher Plato, most gracious sovereign Lady, travailing all
his life time to abolish the barbarous manners of the Grecians, and to induce a
civil form of living among the people: ordained a law to the great comfort
of those that followed virtue, and no less to the terror of others that
haunted vices. The which commanded, that not only those, which brought in, or
invented any new thing that might either corrupt the good manners, violate the
aunciente customs, hinder through evil example good living, impoison with
erroneous doctrine the consciences, effeminate with voluptuous pleasures the
hearts, impouerish with unprofitable marchaundise the people, or diffame
through malicious words the renowmes: should be (as unprofitable members) from
the common wealth expelled and banished: but also ordained, that those which
studied to publish any institution, apperteyning either to the honor of the
Gods, to the reformation of the frayltie of men, or by any other mean to the
profit of the weal public, should be condingly of the common wealth
enterteined, preferred, and honored. Then if this law were just, most
gracious sovereign Lady (as it is most just in deed) who deserved more
honorable enterteynement among the living, or who meriteth a worthier fame
among the dead, then Don Antony of Gueuara the Author hereof? For by his stayed
life God has been glorified, by his wholesome doctrine the people of Spain
heretofore edified, and by his sweet and sauorie writings, we (and sundry
other nations) at this present may be much profited. The which though they are
al pit^y and full of high doctrine: yet this entitled Los relox de principes,
above the rest (in my opinion) is most profonde and pleasant. For if the zeal
that I bear to his works deceive not my judgment, there is no Author (the
sacred letters set aparte) that more effectuously sets out the omnipotency
of God, the frailty of men, the inconstancy of fortune, the vanity of this
world, the misery of this life, and finally that more plainly teaceth ye good
which mortal men ought to pursue, and the evil that all men ought to fly:
then this present work does. The which is so full of high doctrine, so
adourned with ancient histories, so authorized with grave sentences, and so
beautified with apt similitudes: that I know not whose eyes in reading it can
be weried, nor whose ears in hearing it not satisfied. Considering therefore
(most gracious sovereign Lady) that this work may serve to high estates for
council, to curious serchers of antiquities for knowledge, and to al other
virtuous gentlemen for an honest pleasant and profitable recreation, and
finally that it may profit all and can hurt none: I (according to my small
knowledge and tender years) have reduced it into our vulgar tongue, and under
your graces name hame published it for the commodity of many. Most humbly
beseching your highness to accept in good part (according to your graces
accustomable goodness) this my good will and travail: which here I offer as a
pledge of my bounden duty toward your highness, and also as a perpetual memory
of the fervent zeal I bear to my country. And in so doing your grace shall
not only encourage me being young in these my first fruits: but also others
(peradventure) of more ripe years to attempt the like enterprise, by the
which the divine majesty may be immortally glorified, your puisaunt name
worthily magnified, your royal person duly obeyed, and all your graces
natural and loving subjects greatly profited.

At Lincolnes Inn the.20. of December. Your highness most humble and loyal
subject Thomas North.

The general Prologue upon the Book entytuled, the Dial of Princes, with
the famous book of MARCUS AURELIUS. Compyled by the reverend Father in God,
the Lord Antony of Gueuara, Bishop of Guadix, Confessor and Chronicler of
Charles the fifte Emperor of Rome, to whom and to al other Princes and noble
men this work was directed.
APOLONIVS THIANEVS disputing with the Scholars of Hiarcas said: that among
all the affections of nature, nothing is more natural, than the desire that
all have to preserve life. Omitting ye dispute of these great philosophers
herin, we our selfs hereof have daily proof: that to live men do travail: to
live birds do fly: to live fisshes do swime: and to live beasts do hide
themselfes for fear of death. Finally I say there is no living creature so
brutish, that has not a natural desire to live. If many of the ancient
Paynems so little wene life, that of their own free wills they offered the^
selves to death, they did it not for that they despised life, but because they
thought that for their little regarding life, we would more highly esteem
their fame. For we see men of hawte courages seek rather to win a long
during fame, than to save a short lasting life. How loathe men are to dye, is
easily seen by the great pains they take to live. For it is a natural thing
to all mortal men, to leave their lives with sorrow, and take their deaths with
fear. Admit that all do taste this corporal death, and that generally both
good and evil do dye: yet is there great difference between the death of one,
and the death of another. If the good desire to live, it is for the greater
desire they have to do good: but if the evil desire to live, it is for that
they would abuse the world longer. For the children of vanity call no time
good, but that wherein they live according to their own desires. I let ye
understand that are at this present, and ye also that shall come hereafter:
that I direct my writing unto those which embrace virtue, and not unto such as
are borne away with vice. God does not way us as we are, but as we desire to
be. And let no man say I would, and can not be good: for as we have the
audacitie to commit a fault, so (if we list) we may enforce our selves to
work amends. Al our undoing proceeds of this, that we outwardly make a show
of virtue, but inwardlye in the deed we employe our thorough power to vice:
which is an abuse, where with all the world is rorrupted and deceived. For
heaven is not furnished but with good deeds, and hell is not replenished but
with evil desires. I grant that neither man nor beast desires to dye, but
all travail to the end they may live: But I ask now this question. What does
it avail a man to desire his life to be prolonged, if the same be wicked,
ungodly, and defamed? The man that is high minded, proud, inconstant, cruel,
disdeinfull, envious, full of hatred, angry, malicious, full of wrath, covetous,
a lier, a glutton, a blasphemer, and in all his doings disordred: why will we
suffer him in the world? The life of a poor man that for need steleth a gown
or any other small trifle, is forth with taken away: why than is he that
disturbeth a whole common wealth left alive? O would to God, there were no
greater thieves in the world than those, which rob the temporal goods of
the rich, and that we did not wink continually at them, which take away the
good renoume as well of the rich as of the poor. But we chastise the one, and
dissemble with the other which is evidently seen, how the thief that steleth my
neighbors gown is hanged forthwith, but he that robs me of my good name,
walks still before my door. The divine Plato in the first book of laws
said. We ordain, and command, that he that uses not him self honestly,
and has not his house well reformed, his riches well governed, his family well
instructed, and lives not in peace with his neighbors, that unto him be
assigned tutours which shall govern him as a fool, and as a vacabonde shall be
expulsed from the people, to the intent the common wealth be not through him
infected. For there never rises contention or strife in a common wealth, but
by such men as are always out of order. Truly the divine Plato had great
reason in his sayings, for the man that is vicious of his person, and does not
travail in things touching his house, nor keeps his family in good order, nor
lives quietly in the common wealth, deserves to be banished, and driven out
of the country. Truly we see in diverse places mad men tied and bound
fast, which if they were at liberty would not do such harm, as those that
daily walk the streates at their own wills and sensuality. There is not at
this day so great or noble a Lord, nor Lady so delicate, but had rather
suffer a blow on the head with a stone, than a blot in their good name with an
evil tongue. For the wound of the head in a month or two may well be
healed: but the blemmishe of their good name duringe life will never be
removed. Laertius says in his book of the life of Philosophers, that
Diogenes, being asked of one of his neighbors, what they were that ordained
the laws? answered in this wise. Thou shall understand, my friend, that the
earnest whole desire of our forefathers, and all the intention of the
Philosophers was to instruct them in their common wealth, how they ought to
speak, how to be occupied, how to eat, how to sleep, how to treat, how to
apparaile, how to travail, and how to rest: and in this consists all the
wealth of worldly wisdom. In deed this Philosopher in his answer touched
an excellent point, for the law was made to no other end, but to bridell him
that lives without reason or law. To men that will live in rest and without
trouble in this life, it is requisite and necessary that they chose to them
selves some kind and manner of living, whereby they may mainteyne their house
in good order, and conform their lives unto the same. That estate ought not to
be as the folly of their parson does desire, nor as may be most pleasant to
the delights of the body: but as reason teaches them, and God commands
them, for the surer salvation of their souls. For the children of vanity
embrace that only which the sensual appetite desires, and reiecte that which
reason commands. Since the time that trees were created, they always
(remaining in the first nature) until this present day, do bear the same
leaf, and fruit which things are plain seen in this, that the palm bears
dates, the fig tree figs, the nut tree nuttes, the pear tree pears, the
apple tree apples, the chesnutte tree chesnuttes, the Oak acornes: and to
conclude I say all things have kept their first nature, save only the
sinful man which has fallen by malice. The planettes, the stars, the
heavens, the water, the earth, the air, and the fire: the brute beasts, and
the fishes, al continewe in the same estate wherein they were first created,
not complayninge nor envying one the other. Man complayneth continually, he is
never satisfied, and always desires to change his estate. For the shepherd
would be a husbandman, the husbandman a squier, the squier a Knight, the
knight a King, the king an Emperor. Therefore I say, that few is the number of
them that seek amendment of life: but infinite are they that travail to better
their estate, and to increase their goods. The decay of the common wealth (at
this present) through all the world is, that the dry and withered oaks which
have been nourished upon the sharp mountains, would now seem to be daynetie
date trees cherished in the pleasant gardens. I mean, that those which
yesterday could have been pleased with dry acornes in a poor cottage at home: at
this day will not eat but of delicate disshes in other men's houses abroad. What
estate men ought to take upon them to keep their conscience pure, and to
have more rest in their life, a man cannot easily describe. For there is no
state in the Church of God, but men may therein (if they will) serve God, and
profit them selves. Nor there is no kind of life in the world, but the wicked
(if they persevere and continue therein) may sclaunder their persons, and also
lease their souls. Pliny in an epistle that he wrote to Fabatus his friend,
says. There is nothing among mortal men more common and dangerous, than to
give place to vain imaginacions, whereby a man believes the estate of one to
be much better than the estate of an other. And hereof it proceeds, that the
world does blind men so, that they will rather seek that which is an other
man's by travail and danger: than enjoy their own with quiet and rest. I say
the state of Princes is good, if they abuse it not. I say the state of the
people is good, if they behave them selves obediently. I say the estate of the
rich is good, if they will Godly use it. I say the estate of the religious is
good, if they be able to profit others. I say the estate of the communaltie is
good, if they will content them selves. I say the state of the poor is good,
if they have patience. For it is no merit to suffer many troubles, if we have
not patience therein. During the time of this our miserable life we cannot
denay, but in every estate there is both trouble and danger. For then only
our estate shall be perfect, when we shall come gloriously in soul and body
without the fear of death: and also when we shall rejoice without dangers in
life. Retourninge again to our purpose (mighty Prince) although we all be of
value little, we all have little, we all can attain little, we all know
little, we al are able to do little, we all do live but little: Yet in all
this little, the state of Princes seems some great and high thing. For that
worldely men say there is no such felicity in this life, as to have authority
to command many, and to be bound to obey none. But if either subjects knew
how dear Princes by their power to command, or if Princes knew how sweet a
thing it is to live in quiet: doutelesse the subjects would pity their
rulers, and the rulers would not envy their subjects. For full few are the
pleasures which Princes enjoy, in respect of the troubles that they endure.
Sith then the estate of Princes is greater than al, that he may do more than
all, is more of value than all, vpholdeth more than all, and finally that from
thence proceeds the government of all, it is more needful that the house,
the person, and the life of a Prince be better governed, and ordered, than all
the rest. For even as by the yard the marchante measures al his ware: so by
the life of the Prince is measured the whole common weal. Many sorrows
endures the woman in nourishing a waywerde child, great travail takes a
scholemaister in teaching an untoward scholar, much pain takes an officer
in governing a multitude ouergreate: how great than is the pain and peril,
whereunto I offer my self, in taking upon me to order the life of such a one,
upon whose life hangs all the good state of a common weal. For Princes and
great Lords, ought of us to be served, and not offended: we ought to exhort
them, not to vex them: we ought to entreat them, not to rebuke them: we ought
to advise them, and not to defame them: finally I say, that right simple reckon
I that surgio^, which with the same plasters he laid to a hard heel, seeks
to cure the tender eyes. I mean by this comparison, that my purpose is not to
tell princes, and noble men in this book what they be, but to warn them what
they ought to be: not to tell them what they do, but to advise them what they
ought to do. For that noble man which will not amend his life for remorse of
his own conscience, I do think that he will amend it for the writing of my
pen. Paulus diaconus the historiographer in the second book of his
commentaries, shows an antiquity right worthy to remember, and also
pleasant to read: Although in deed to the hinderaunce of my self I shall
rehearse it. It is, as of the hen, who by long scraping on the donghill,
discovers the knife that shall cut her own throat. Thus was the case.
Hannibal the most renowned Prince and captain of Carthage (after he was
vainquished by thaduenturous Scipio) fled into Asia to king Antiochus, a
Prince then living of great virtue, who received him into his realm, took
him into his protection, and right honorably enterteyned him in his house. And
certes king Antiochus did herein, as a pitefull Prince: for what can more
beautify the honor of a Prince than to succor nobility in their needful
estate. These two Princes used diverse exercises to spend the time honorably,
and thus they divided time. Sometime to hunt in the mountains, otherwhile to
disporte them in the fields, often to vewe their armies: But mostly, they went
to the schools to hear the Philosophers. And truly they did like wise and
skillful men. For there is no hour in a day otherwise so well employed, as in
hearing a wise pleasant tonged man. There was at a time in Ephesus a famous
philosopher called Phormio, which openly red and taught the people of that
realm. And one day as these two Princes came into the school, the
philosopher Phormio changed the matter whereupon be red, and of a sudden
began to talk of the means and ways that Princes ought to use in war, and
of thorder to be kept in giving battle. Such, so strange, and high phrased
was the matter which he talked of, that not only they merueiled which never
before saw him: but even those also that of long time had daily heard him.
For herein curious and flourisshing wits show their excellency, in that they
never want fresh matter to entreat upon. Greatly gloried the king Antiochus,
that this philosopher (in presence of this strange prince) had so excellentlye
spoken, so that strangers might understand he had his realm stored with wise
me^. For courageous and noble princes esteem nothing so precious, as to have
men valiant to defend their frontiers: and also wise to govern their commonweals. The lecturered, king Antiochus demanded of the prince Hannibal, how
he liked the talk of the philosopher Phormio? to whom Hannibal stoutely
answered, and in his answer showed him self to be of that stoutnes he was
the same day, wha^ he wanne the great battle at Cannas. For although noble
hearted and courageous princes lose all their estates and realms: yet they will
never confess their hearts to be overthrown nor vaynquisshed. And these were
the words that at that time Hannibal said. Thou shall understand king
Antiochus, that I have seen diverse dotinge old men, yet I never saw a more
dootarde fool than Phormio, whom thou causest such a great philosopher. For
the greatest kind of folly is, when a man that has but a little vain science,
presumes to teach not those which have only science, but also such as have
most certain experience. Tell me (king Antiochus) what heart can brook with
patience, or what tongue can suffer with silence, to see a sely man (as this
philosopher is) nourished all his life time in a corner of Greece, studieng
philosophy, to presume (as he has done) to talk before the prince Hannibal
of the affairs of war, as though he had been either lord of Affrike, or
captain of Rome? Certes he either full little knows him self, or else but
little estemeth us. For it appears by his vain words, he would seem to know
more in matters of war, by that he has red in books: than does Hannibal by
the sundry and great battayles which he has fought in the fields. O king
Antiochus, how far and how great is the difference, between the state of
philosophers, and the state of captains: between the skill to read in schole,
and the knowledge to rule an army, between the science that these wise men
have in books, and thexperience that thothers have in war: between their
skill to write with the pen, and ours to fight with the sword, between one
that for his pastime is set round with deskes of books, and an other in peril
of life compassed with troops of enemies. For many there are which with great
eloquence, in blasing deeds done in wars, can use their tongs: but few are
those that at the brunt have hearts to adventure their lives. This sely
philosopher never saw man of war in the field, never saw one army of men
discomfeited by an other, never heard the terrible trumpet sound to the
horrible and cruel slaughter of men, never saw the treasons of some, nor
understood the cowardnes of other, never saw how few they be that fight, nor
how many there are that run away. Finally I say, as it is semely for a
philosopher and a learned man to praise the profits of peace: eue^ so it is in
his mouth a thing uncomely to prate of the perils of war. If this philosopher
has seen no one thing with his eyes that he has spoken, but only red them in
sundry books: let him recounte them to such as have neither seen nor red them.
For warlike feats are better learned in the bloody fields of Afrike, than in
the beautiful schools of Greece. Thou know right well (king Antiochus) yt for
the space of. 36. years I had continual and dangerous wars, as well in Italy
as in Spain, in which fortune did not favor me (as is always her manner to use
those, which by great stoutnes and manhodde enterprise things high and of much
difficulty) a witness whereof thou see me hear, who before my berde began to
grow, was served: and now when it is hoar, I my self begin to serve. I swear
unto the by the God Mars, (king Antiochus) that if any man did ask me how he
should use and behave him self in war, I would not answer him one word. For
they are things that are learned by experience of deeds, and not by prating in
words. Although princes begin wars by justice, and follow them with wisdom,
yet the end stands upon fickle fortune and not of force, nor policy. Diverse
other things Hannibal said unto Antiochus, who so will see the^, let him read
the Apothemes of Plutarche. This example (noble prince) te^deth rather to this
end, to condemn my boldness, and not to commend my enterprise, saying that
thaffaires of the common wealth be as unknown to me, as the dangers of the
wars were to Phormio. Your majesty may justly say unto me, that I being a
poor simple man (brought up a great while in a rude country) do greatly
presume to describe, how so puissant a prince as your highness ought to govern
him self and his realm. For of truth the more ignorant a man is of the
troubles and alteracions of the world, the better he shall be counted in the
sight of God. The estate of princes is to have great trains about them, and
the estate of religious men, is to be solitarye: for the servant of God ought
to be always void from vain thoughts, and to be ever accompanied with holy
meditations. The estate of princes is always unquiet: but the state of the
religious is to be enclosed. For otherwise, he above all others may be called
an Apostata, that has his body in the sell, and his heart in the market place.
To princes it is necessary to speak and common with all men: but for the
religious it is not decente to be conuersaunt with the world. For solitary men
(if they do as they ought) should occupy their hands in travail, their body in
fasting, their tongue in prayer, and their heart in contemplacion. The estate of
princes for the most part is employed to war: but the state of the religious
is to desire and procure peace. For if the prince would study to pass his
bounds, and by battle to shed the blood of his enemies: the religious ought
to shede tears, and pray to God for his sins. O that it pleased almighty
God, as I know what my bounden duty is in my heart, so that he would give me
grace to accomplish the same in my deeds. Alas, when I ponder with my self the
waightines of my matter, my pen through slothe and negligence is ready to
fall out of my hand, and I half minded to leave of mine enterprise. My intent
is to speak against my self in this case. For albeit men may know thaffaires
of princes by experience: yet they shall not know how to speak nor write the^
but by science. Those which ought to counsel princes, those which ought to
refourme the life of princes and that ought to instruct them, ought to have a
clear judgment, an upright mind, their words advisedly considered, their
doctrine holesom, and their life without suspicio^. For who so will speak of
high things, having no expere^ce of them: is like unto a blind man that would
lead and teach him the way, which sees better tha^ he him self. This is the
sentence of Xenophon the great which says. There is nothing harder in this
life than to know a wise man. And the reason which he gave was this. That a
wise man cannot be known but by an other wise man, we may gather by this
which Xenophon says: that as one wise man cannot be known but by an other
wise man: so likewise it is requisite that he should be, or have been a prince,
which should write of the life of a prince. For he that has been a mariner, and
sailled but one year on the sea: shall be able to give better counsel and
advise, than he that has dwelled.x. yers in the haven. Xenopho^ wrote a book
touching the institucion of princes, and brings in Cambises the king, how he
taught, and spoke unto king Cirus his son. And he wrote an other book
likewise of the art of cheualrye, and brought in king Phillip, how he ought
to teach his son Alexander to fight. For the philosophers thought that
writting of no authority, that was not entitled and set forth under the name
of those princes, which had experience of yt they wrate. O if an aged prince
would with his pen (if not with word of mouth) declare, what misfortunes
have happened sins the first time he began to reign, how disobedient his
subjects have been unto him, what grief his servants have wrought against
him, what unkindness his friends have showed him, what subtle wiles his enemies
have used toward him, what danger his person has escaped, what tarres have been in his palace, what faults they have said against him, how many times they
have deceived strangers, finally what grefes he has had by day, and what
sorrowful sighs he has fetched in the night: truly I think (and in my
thought I am nothing deceived) that if a prince would declare unto us his hole
lif, and that he would particularly show us every thing, we would both wonder at
that body which had so much suffered: and also we would be offended with that
heart that had so greatly dissembled. It is a troublesome thing a dangerous
thing, and an insolent and proud entreprise, for a man to take upon him with a
pen to govern ye common wealth, and with a prince to reason of his life. For
in deed men are not persuaded to live well by fair words, but by virtuous deeds
And therefore not with out cause I say yt he is not wise, but very arroga^t, yt
dare presume unasked to give a prince counsel. For princes in many things
have their minds occupied, and haughtely bent, and some of them also are
affectioned, and where as we (peradventure) think to have them merciful, we
find the^ more angry and heavy against us. For counsel does more harm than
profit, if the giver thereof be not very wise, and he also which receives it
very pacient. I have not ben a prince to know the travails of princes, nor am
not as president to counsel princes: yet I was so bold to co^pile this book,
it was not upon presumption to counsel a prince, so much as by an humble
sort to give mine advise.

For to give counsel, I confess I have no credit: but to give them advise,
it suffiseth me to be a subject. What the order is that I have taken in this
book, how profitable it is to all men, and how unpleasant to no man, how
wholesome and profound doctrine in it is contained, and how the histories be
herin applied; I will not that my pen do write, but they the^ selves shall judge
which shall read this work. We se it often com to pass that diverse books do
lose their estimation, not for that they are not very good and excellent: but
because the auctour has been to presumptuous and vainglorious. For in my
opinion, for a man to praise his own writings much, is nothing else but to
give men occasion to speak evil both of him and of his work. Let no man
think that I have written this which is written, without great aduisement and
examination. I do confess before the redemer of the whole world, that I have
consumed so many yers to seek what I should write, that this.ii. yers one day
has scarsely escaped me, wherein my pen has not don his duty to write or
correct in this work. I confess that I took great pain in writing it, for of
truth it has been written twice with mine own hand, and thrice with another
man's hand. I confess I have red and searched in diverse and sondrie parts,
many and good strange books, to thend I might find good and pleasant doctrine,
and besides that I travailed much to set and apply the histories to the
purpose. For it is an unseemly thing to apply an history without a purpose. I
had great respect in that I was not so brief in my writings, that a man
might note me to be obscure: nor yet in any thing so long, that a man should
sclaunder me with to much talk. For all the excellency of writing consists,
where many and goodly sentences are declared in few and apt words: For often
times the long style is lothsom and tedious both to the hearers and readers.
Nero yt emperor was in love with a lady in Rome named Pompeia, yt which in
beauty (to his fa^tasie) exceded all other. In the end partly with entreaty,
partly with money and prese^tes, he obtained of her ye he desired. For in this
case of love, where prayers and importunities be pacie^tly hard, and resistance
does lack: The inordinate love yt Nero bare to Pompeia, proceeded of the yelow
here is she had, which were of ye color of amber, and in praise of them he
co^piled diverse and sundry songs in heroical meter, and with an instrument
sang the^ himself in her presence. Nero was a sage prince, wise, and
excelle^tly well learned in the latin tongue, and also a good musicia^: yet
Plutarche in his book of the gests of noble women (to declare ye vaniti and
lightness of Nero) recites this history: and describi^g Po^peia said, ye her
body was small, her fingers long, her mouth proper, her eye lyds thin her nose
so^what sharp, her teeth small, her lips red, her neck white, her forhead brod,
and finally, her eyes great and rowlin, her breast large and well propocioned,
what think you would Nero have don if he had so affectionatly set his fa^tasy
upon al other her beautiful properties, sins yt for the love alonly of her
yelow locks, he was deprived both of his wisdom, and also senses. For vain and
light me^ love co^me^ly not yt which reason commands: but yt which their
appetite desires. The love of ye emperor increased with folly so much, yt not
only he counted severally al yt heeres yt his lover Po^peia had on her head,
but also gave to every here a proper name, and in praise of every one of the^
made a song, in so much yt this effeminat prince spent more time in ba^ketting
and plaieng with his lover Po^peia: tha^ he did to reform and amend ye faults
of ye common wealth. Yea his folly so much surmou^ted al reason, yt he commanded
a co^be of gold to be made, and therwt he himself co^med her yelow locks. And
if it chau^sed yt any one here in kemi^g fell of, he by and by caused it to be
set in gold, offered it up in ye temple to ye gods Juno. For it was an ancient
custom among ye Romans, yt the things which they entierly loved (whether it
were good or evil) should be offered up to their gods. And when it was once
known yt Nero was so in love with these heeres of Pompeia, which were of ye
color of amber, all the ladies endeavored the^ selves, not only to make
artificially their here of that color: but also to were their garments, and
other attyres of the same color, in somuche that both men and women did use
collers of amber, brooches and ringes set with amber, and al their other Jewels
were of amber. For always it has been seen, and ever shallbe, that those
things whereunto the prince is most addicted, the people follow, and above al
other covet the same. Before this Emperor Nero played this light part in Rome,
the amber stone was had in little estimacion, and after that he set so much by
it, there was no precious stone in Rome so much esteemed. Yea and furthermore
the merchant gained nothing so much (whether it were in gold or silk) as he
did in the amber stones, nor brought any kind of marchaundise to Rome more
precious, or more vendible than that was. I do meruelle at this vanity,
forasmuch as the children of the world do love, desire, and labor more to follow
the strange folly of an other: than to furnish and supply their own proper
necessity. Therefore retourning again to my purpose (most excellent prince)
by this example you may conjecture, what I would say, that is, that if this
writing were accepted unto princes, I am assured it would be refused of no
man: And if any man would slanderously talk of it, he durst not, remembering
that your majesty has received it. For those things which princes take to
their custody, we are bound to defend, and it is not lawful for us to diminish
their credit. Suppose that this my work were not so profound as it might be
of this matter, nor with such eloquence set out as many other books are: yet I
dare be bold to say, that the prince shall take more profit by reading of this
work, than Nero did by his love Pompeia. For in the end, by reading and
studieng good books, men turn, and become sage and wise: and by keeping il
company, they are counted fools and vicious. My meaning is not, nor I am not
so importunat and unreasonable, to persuade princes that they should so favor
my doctrine, ye it should be in like estimacion now in these parts, as the
amber was there in Rome. But that which only I require and demand is, yt the
time which Nero spent in singing and telling ye heeres of his love Pompeia,
should now be employed to redress the wrongs and faults of the common wealth.
For the noble and worthy prince ought to employ the least part of the day in
the recreation of his person. After he has given audience to his counsaylours,
to the ambassadors, to the great Lords and prelates, to the rich and poor,
to his own country men and strangers, and after that he be come into his
privy chamber, then my desire is that he would read this treatise, or some
other better than this: for in princes chambers oftentimes those of the privy
chamber and other their familiares loase great time, in reciting vain and
trifling matters and of small profit, the which might better be spent in reading
some good book. In all worldly affairs that we do, and in all our books which
we compile, it is a great matter to be fortunate. For to a man that fortune
does not favor, diligence (without doubt) can little avail. Admit that
fortune were against me, in that this my work should be acceptable unto your
majesty, without comparison it should be a great grief and dishonor unto me,
to tell you what should be good to read for your pastime, if on the other part
you would not profit by mine advise. For my mind was not only to make this
book, to the end princes should read it for a pastime, but to that end (in
recreating the^ selves) sometimes they might thereby also take profit. Aulus
Gellius, in the. 12. chapter of his third book entitled De nocte attica,
said that amongs all the scholars which the divine Plato had, one was named
Demosthenes, a man amongst the Greeks most highly esteemed and of the
Romans greatly desired. Because he was in his living severe, and in his tongue
and doctrine a very sa^ire. If Demosthenes had come in the time of Phalaris the
tiraunt, when Grecia was peopled with tirau tes, and that he had not been in
Platoes time, when it was replenished with Philosophers, truly Demosthenes
had been as clear a lantern in Asia, as Cicero the great was in Europe.
Great good hap has a notable man to be borne in one age, more then in any
other. I mean, that if a valiant Knight come in the time of a courageous and
stout prince, such one truly shall be esteemed and set in great authority. But if
he come in the time of an other effeminate and covetous prince, he shall not be
regarded at al. For he will rather esteem one that will augment his treasour at
home: than him that can vanquishe his enemies in battle abroad. So likewise
it chaunseth to wise and virtuous men, which if they come in the time of
virtuous and learned princes, are esteemed and honored: But if they come in
time of vain and vicious princes, they make small accounte of them. For it is
an ancient custom among vanities children, not to honor him which to the
common wealth is most profitable: but him which to the prince is most
acceptable. The end why this is spoken (Most pusant Prince) is because the
two renoumed philosophers were in Greece both at one time: and because the
divine philosopher Plato was so much esteemed and made of, they did not greatly
esteem the philosopher Demosthenes. For the emine^t and high renoume of one
alone, diminishes the fame and estimacion (among the people) of many. Although
Demosthenes was such a one in deed as we have said, that is to wit, eloquent
of tongue, ready of memory, sharp and quick of wit, in living severe, sure
and profitable in giving of counsel, in renoume excellent, in years very
ancient, and in philosophy a man right well learned: Yet he refused not to go
to the schools of Plato to hear moral philosophy. He that shall read this
thing or hear it, ought not to merueile, but to follow it, and to profit
likewise in the same: that is to understand, that one philosopher learned of
an other, and one wise man suffered him self to be taught of an other. For
knowledge is of such a quality, that the more a man knows, daily there
increases in him a desire to know more. All things of this life (after they
have been tasted and possessed) cloyeth a man, wearieth and troubles him, true
science only excepted, which never does cloy, weary, nor troble them. And if
it happen we weary any, it is but the eyes which are weried with lokinge and
reading: and not the spirit with feeling and tastinge. Many Lords and my
familiar friends do ask me how it is possible I should live with so much
study? And I also demand of them, how it is possible they should live in such
continual idelnes? For considering the prouocacion and assaults of the flesh,
the dangers of the world, the temptacions of the devil, the treasons of
enemies, and importunities of friends: what heart can suffer so great and
continual travail, but only in reading and comforting him self in books?
Truly a man ought to have more compassion of a simple ignoraunte man, than of
a poor man. For there is no greater poverty unto a man, than to lack wisdom
whereby he should know how to govern him self. Therefore folowinge our matter
the case was such, one day Demosthenes (going to the schole of Plato) saw in
the market place of Athens a great assembly of people, which were hearing a
philosopher newely come unto that place: and he spoke not this without a cause,
that there was a great company of people assembled. For that naturallye the
common people are desirous to hear new and strange things. Demosthenes asked
what philosopher he was after whom so many people went? and when it was
answered him that it was Calistratus the philosopher, a man which in eloquence
was very sweet and pleasant: he determined to stay and hear him, to the end
he would know whither it were true or vain that the people told him. For
oftentimes it happens, that among the people some get them selves great
fame, more by favor, than by good learning. The difference betwixt the
divine Philosopher Plato, and Calistratus was, in that Plato was exceadinglye
well learned, and the other very eloquente: and thus it came to pass, that in
living they followed Plato: and in eloquence of speech they did imitate
Callistratus. For there are diverse men sufficiently well learned, which have
profounde doctrine, but they have no way nor means to teach it others.
Demosthenes hearing Calistratus but ones, was so far in love with his doctrine,
that he never after heard Plato, nor entered into his scole, for to harken to
any of his lectures. At which news diverse of the sages of Grecia marueiled
much, seeing that the tongue of a man was of such power, yt it had put all their
doctrine to scilence. Although I apply not this example, I doubt not but your
majesty understands to what end I have declared it. And moreover I say, that
although Princes have in their chambers books so well corrected, and men in
their courts so well learned, that they may worthily keep thestimacion which
Plato had in his schole: yet in this case it should not displease me, that the
difference that was between Plato and Calistratus, should be between Princes and
this book. God forbid, that by this saying men should think I mean to
dissuade Princes from the company of the sage men, or from reading of any other
book but this: for in so doing, Plato should be rejected which was divine:
and Calistratus embraced which was more wordly. But my desire is, that sometime
they would use to read this book a little, for it may chance they shall find
some wholesome counsel therein, which at one time or other may profit them in
their affairs. For the good and careful Princes ought to graffe in their
memory ye wise sayings which they read, and forget the canekred injuries and
wrongs which are done the^. I do not speak it without a cause, that he that
reads this my writing shall find in it some profitable counsel. For all
that which has been written in it, has been in every word and sentence with
great diligence so well weyed, and corrected, as if therein only consisted, the
effect of the whole work. The greatest grief that learned men feel in
their writing is, to think, that if there be many that view their doings, to
take profit thereby: they shall perceive that there are as many more, which
occupy their tongues in the sclaunder and disprayse thereof. In publishinge this
my work, I have observed the manner of them that plant a new gardein, wherein
they set Roses which give a pleasant savor to the nose, they make fair grene
plattes to delight the eyes, they graft fruitful trees to be gathered with the
hands, but in the end as I am a man, so have I written it for men, and
consequently as a man I may have erred: for there is not at this day so
persite a painter, but another will presume to amend his work. Those which
diligently will endeavor themselves to read this book, shall find in it very
profitable counsels, very lively laws, good reasons, notable sayings,
sentences very profound, worthy examples, and histories very ancient. For to
say the truth, I had a respect in that the doctrine was ancient, and the
style new. And albeit your majesty be the greatest Prince of all Princes, and I
the least of all your subjects, you ought not for my base condition to
disdain to cast your eyes upon this book, nor to think scorn to put that
thing in proof which seems good. For a good letter ought to be nothing the
less esteemed, although it be written with an evil pen. I have said, and
will say, that Princes and great Lords, the stouter, the richer, and the
greater of renoume they be, the greater need they have of all men of good
knowledge about them, to cou^seil them in their affairs, and of good books
which they may read: and this they ought to do as well in prosperity as in
adversity, to the end that their affairs in time conueniente, may be debated
and redressed. For otherwise, they should have time to repent, but no leisure
to amend. Pliny, Marcus Varro, Strabo, and Macrobius, (which were
historiographers no less grave than true) were at great controversy, in
prouinge what things were most autentike in a common weal, and at what time
they were of all men accepted. Seneca in a pistle he wrote to Lucillus,
praised without cessing the common wealth of the Rhodiens, in the which (with
much a do) they bent them selves altogether to keep one self thing, and
after they had thereupon agreed, they kept and mainteyned it inuiolately. The
divine Plato in the sixte book entitled De legibus, ordained and commanded
that if any citizen did inuente any new thing, which never before was read,
nor hard of, the inuentour thereof should first practice the same for the
space of.10. years in his own house, before it was brought into the common
wealth, and before it should be published unto the people, to the end if the
inuencion were good, it should be profitable unto him: and if it were naught,
that than the danger and hurt thereof should light only on him. Plutarche in
his Apothemes says, that Licurgus upon greauous penalties did prohibit, that
none should be so hardye in his common wealth to go wanderinge into strange
countries, nor that he should be so hardy to admit any strangers to come into
his house: and the cause why this law was made, was to the end strangers
should not bring into their houses things strange, and not accustomed in
their common wealth, and that they travailing through strange contreis,
should not learn new customs. The presumption of men now a days is so
great, and the consideracion of the people so small, that what so ever a man
can speak he speaks, what so ever he can inuente he does inuente, what he
would he does write, and it is no marueill, for there is no man that will
speak against them. Nor the common people in this case are so light, that
among them you may daily see new devises, and whether it hurt or profit the
common wealth they force not. If there came at this day a vain man among the
people which was never seen nor heard of before, if he be any thing subtle, I
ask you but this question: shall it not be easy for him to speak and inuente
what he lists, to set forth what he pleases, to persuade that which to him
seems good, and al his saienges to be believed? Truly it is a wonderful
thing, and no less sclaunderous, that one should be sufficient to peruerte
the senses and judgments of all, and all not able to repress the lightness
and vanity of one. Things that are new and not accustomed, neither princes
ought to allow, nor yet the people to use. For a new thing ought no less
to be examined and considered, before it be brought into the common wealth:
than the great doutes which arise in men's minds. Rufinus in the prologue
of his second book of his apology reproves greatly the Egyptians because
they were to full of devises, and blamed much the Grecians because they were to
curious in speaking fine words: and above all other he greatly prayseth the
Romans, for that they were very hard of belife, and that they scarcely
alweyes credited the sayings of the Greeks, and because they were discrete in
admitting the inuencions of the Egyptians. The author has reason to praise
the one, and disprayse the other. For it proceeds of a light judgment, to credit
all the things that a man hears, and to do al things that he sees.
Returninge therefore now to our matter. Marcus Varro said there were.5.
things in the world very hard to bring in, whereof none (after they were
commonly accepted) were ever lost or forgotten, for even as things vainly
bego^, are easily left of: so things with great fear accepted, with much
diligence are observed.

The first thing that chiefly thoroughout all the world was accepted, was al men
to live togethers: that is to say, they should make places, towns, villages,
cities and common wealths. For according to the saying of Plato, the first and
best inuentours of the common wealth, were ye antes, which (according to
thexperie^ce we see) do live togethers, travail togethers, do go togethers,
and also for ye winter they make provision togethers, and furthermore none of
these antes do give the^ selves to any private thing, but al theirs is brought
into their commonwealth. It is a marvelous thing to behold the commonwealth of
the antes, how netely they trim their hills, to behold how they swepe away
the grain when it is wet, and how they dry it when they feel any moisture, to
behold how they come from their work, and how the one does not hurt the
other: And to behold also how they do rejoice the one in the others travail,
and that which is to our greatest confusion is, that if it come so to pass,
50000. antes will live in a little hillocke togethers: and two men only cannot
live in peace and concord in a common wealth. Would to God the wisdom of
men were so great to keep them selves, as the prudence of the antes is to live.
When the world came to a certain age, and men's wits waxed more fine, than
tirantes sprange up which oppressed the poor, thieves that robbed the rich,
rebels that robbed the quiet, murderers that slew the pacient, the ydell that
eat the sweet of other men's brows: all the which things considered by the^
which were virtuous, they agreed to assemble and live together, that thereby
they might preserve the good, and withstand the wicked. Macrobius affirms
this in the second book of Scipions dream saying, that covetousness and
avarice was the greatest cause why men invented the common wealth. Pliny in
the seventh book.56. chap. says, the first that made small assembles, were
the Atheniens: and the first that builte great cities, were the Egyptians.

The second thing that was accepted throughout all the world, were the
letters which we read, whereby we take profit in writing. According
whereunto Marcus Varro says, the Egyptians praise them selves and say, that
they did inuente them: and the Assyrians affirm the contrary, and swear that
they were showed first of all amongst them. Pliny in the seventh book says,
that in the first age, there was in the alphabet no more than 16. letters, and
that great Palamedes at the siege of Troy, added other.4. and Aristotle
says, that immediately after the beginning there were found.18. letters. And
that afterward Palamedes did add but.2. and so there were 20. and that the
Philosopher Epicarmus did add other two, which were.22. it is no great matter,
whether the Egyptians or the Assyrians first found the letters. But I say and
affirm, that it was a thing necessary for a common wealth, and also for
thencrease of man knowledge. For if we had wanted letters, and writings, we
could have had no knowledge of the time past, nor yet our posterity could
have been advertised what was done in our days. Plutarche in the second book
entitled De viris illustribus, and Pliny in the seventh book and.56.
chapter, do greatly praise Pirotas, because he first found the fire in a
flinte stone. They greatly commended Protheus, because he invented harneis, and
they highly extolled Panthasuca, because she invented the hatchet. They praised
Citheus, because he invented the bow, and the arrows. they greatelye praised
Pheniseus, because he invented the cross bow and the slinge. They highly
praised the Lacedaemonians, because they invented the helmet, the spear, and the
sword. They commend those of Thessalia, because they invented the combat on
horseback, and they commend those of Affrike, because they invented the fight
by sea. But I do praise, and continually will magnify, not those which found
the art of fightinge, and invented weapons to procure war, for to kill his
neighbor: but those which found letters, for to learn science, and to make
peace between two princes. What difference there is to wet the pen with ink,
and to paynte the spear with blood: to be enuironned with books, or to be
laden with weapons. To study how every man ought to live, or else to go privily
and rob in the wars, and to lie in weight to kill his neighbor: There is
none of so vain a judgment, but will praise more the speculation of the
sciences, than the practice of the war. Because that in the end, he that
learneth sciences, learneth naught else but how he and others ought to live. And
he that learneth warlike feats, learneth none other thing than how to sley
his neighbor, and to destroy others.

The third thing, that equally of all was accepted, were laws. For admit
that al men now lived togethesr in common, if they would not be subject one to
another, there would contention arise amongst them, for that according to
the saying of Plato, there is no greater token of the destruction of a common
weal, than when many rulers are chosen therein. Pliny in his seventh
book.56. chapter says, that a Queen called Ceres, was the first that taught
them to sow in the fields, to grind in milles, to paste and bake in ouens,
and also she was the first that taught the people to live according to the
law. And by the means of all these things our forefathers called her a
goddess. Since that time we never have seen heard nor red of any realm, or
other nation (as well strange as barbarous) what so ever they were, but have
had laws whereby the good were favored, and also institutions of grievous
pains wherewith the wicked were punished. Although truly I had rather, and it
were better, that the good should love reason: than fear the law. I speak
of those which leave to do evil works, for fear only of fallinge into the
punishementes appointed for evil doers. For although men approve that which
they do, yet God condemns that which they desire. Seneca in an epistle he
wrote to his friend Lucille, said these words. Thou writest unto me Lucille,
that those of the isle of Scicili, have carried a great quantity of corn into
Spain, and into Affrike, the which thing was forbidden by a Romayne law, and
therefore they have deserved grievous puni^^ement. Now because thou art
virtuous, thou may teach me to do well, and I that am old will teach the to
say, well: and this is because that amongst wise and virtuous men it is enoughe
to say, that the law commands, appoints, and suffers this thing, but
in as much as it is agreing with reason. For the crown of the good, is reason,
and the scourge of the wicked, is the law.

The fourth thing that commonly through the world amongst all men was
accepted, was the barbars. And let no man take this thing in mockery. For if
they do read Pliny in the.59. chapter the seventh book, they shall find
for a truth, yt the Romans were in Rome.454. years without pouling or shauing
ye hayres of the beard of any man. Marcus Varro said, that Publius Ticinius,
was the first that brought the barbers from Scicili to Rome. But admit it
were so or otherwise: yet notwithstanding there was a great contention among
the Romans. For they said, they thought it a rash thing for a man to
commit his life to the courtesy of another. Dionisius the Siracusan never
trusted his beard with any barbor, but wha^ his daughters were very little,
they clipped his beard with sisers: but after they became great, he would not
put his trust in them to trim his bearde, but he him self did burn it with
the shales of nuttes. This Dionisius Siracusan, was demanded why he would not
trust any barbours with his beard. He answered, because I know that there be some
which will give more to the barbor to take away my life, than I will give to
trim my beard. Pliny in the seventh book says, that the great Scipio
called African, and ye Emperor Augustus, were ye first that caused them in Rome
to shave their beards. And I think thend why Pliny spoke these things, was to
exalte these two princes which had as great courage to suffer the raysours
touch their throtes: as the one for to fight against Hannibal in Afrike, and
the other against Sextus Pompeius in Scicili.

The fifte thing which commonly through the world was accepted, were the
dialles and clockes, which the Romans wanted a long time. For as Pliny and
Marcus Varro say, the Romans were without clockes in Rome, for the space
of.595. years. The curious hystoriographers declare three manner of dialles that
were in old time that is to say, dialles of the hours, dialles of the son,
and dialls of the water. The dialle of the son Aneximenides Millesius invented,
who was great Animandras scholar The dialle of the water. Scipio Nasica
invented, and the Dial of hours, one of the scholars of Thales the
Philosopher invented Of all these antiquities which were brought into Rome,
none of them were so acceptable to the Romans, as the dialles were, whereby
they measured the day by the hour. For before they could not say, we will
rise at.vii. of the clock, we will dine at.x. we will see one the other at.xii.
at.i. we will do that we ought to do. But before they said, after the son
is up we will do such a thing, and before it go down we will do that we
ought to do. Thoccasion of declaryng unto you these.v. antiquities in this
preamble, was to no other intent, but to call my book the Dial of Princes.
The name of the book veing new (as it is) may make the learning that is
therein greatly to be esteemed.

God forbid that I should be so bold to say, they have been so long time in
Spain without dialles of learning, as they were in Rome without the dial of
the son, the water, and of the hours. For that in Spain have been always
men well learned in sciences, and very expert in the wars. By great reason
and of greater occasion, the Princes ought to be commended, the knights, the
people, their wits, and the fertilitye of their country: but yet to all
these goodness, I have seen many unlearned books in spain, which as broken
dialles deserve to be cast into the fire to be forged anew. I do not speak it
without a cause, that many books deserve to be broken and burnte. For there
are so many that without shame and honesty do set forth books of love of
the world, at this day as boldly, as if they taught them to despise and
speak evil of the world. It is pitye to see how many days and nights be
consumed, in readyng vain books (that is to say) as Orson and Valentine, the
Court of Venus, and the.iiii. sons of Amon, and diverse other vain books,
by whose doctrine I dare boldlye say, they pass not the time but in perdicion:
for they learn not how they ought to fly vice, but rather what way they may
with more pleasour embrace it. This dial of princes is not of sand, nor of the
son, nor of the hours, nor of the water, but it is the dial of life. For
that other dialles serve to know, what hour it is in the night, and what
hour it is of the day: but this shows and teaches us, how we ought to
occupye our minds, and how to order our life. The propertye of other dyalles
is, to order things publyke: but the nature of this dyal of princes is, to
teach us how to occupye our selves every hour, and how to amend our life
every momente. It little avails to keape the dyalles well, and to see thy
subjects dissolutely without any order, to range in routes, and daily raise
debate and contention among them selves.

Jn this Prologue, the Aucthour speaks particularlye of the book, called
Marcus Aurelius, which he translated and dedicated to the Emperor Charles the
fyfte.
THe greatest vanitye that I find in the world is, that vain men are not only
content to be vain in their life: but also procure to leave a memory of their
vanity after their death. For it is so thought good unto vain and light men,
which serve the world in vain works: that at the hour of death, when they
perceive they can do no more, and that they can no longer prevail, they offer
them selves unto death, which now they see approach upon them Many of the
world are so fleshed in the world, that although it forsakes them in deeds:
yet they will not forsake it in their desires. And I durst swear, that if the
world could grant them perpetual life they would promise it always to
remain in their customable follye. O what a number of vain men are alive,
which have neither remembrance of god to serve him, nor of his glory to obey
him, nor of their conscience to make it clean: but like brute beasts follow and
run after their voluptuous pleasours The brute beast is angrye if a man keep
him to much in awe: if he be weary he takes his rest, he slepeth when he
lysteth, he eats and drinks when he comes unto it, and unless he be
compelled he does nothing, he takes no care for the commonwealth, for he
neither knows how to follow reason, nor yet how to resist sensuality.
Therefore if a man at al times should eat when he desires, revenge himself
when he is moved, commit adultrie when he is tempted, drink when he is
thristie, and sleep when he is drousey, we might more properly call such a one a
beast nourished in the mountains: than a man brought up in the common wealth.
For him properly we may call a man, yt governs him self like a man, that is
to say, conformable unto such things as reason wills, and not where sensuality
leads. Let us leave these vain men which are alive, and talk of them that
be dead, against whom we dare say, that whiles they were in the world they
followed the world, and lived according to the same. It is not to be marueiled
at that sins they were living in the world, they were noted of some worldly
point. But seeing their unhappy and wicked life is ended: why will they then smell
of the vanities of the world in their graves? It is a great shame and dishonor
for men of noble and stout hearts, to se in one minut thend of our life, and
never to see the end of our folly. We neither read, hear, nor se any thing
more common, then such men as be most unprofitable in the common wealth, and of
life most reprobate, to take upon them most honor whiles they live, and to
leave behind them the greatest memory at their death. What vanity can be
greater in the world, then to esteem the world which estemeth no man, and to
make no count of god who so greatly regards al men? what a greater folly can
there be in man, then by much travail to increase his goods, and with vain
pleasours to lose his soul? It is an old plague in man's nature, that many
(or the most part of men) leave the amendment of their life far behind: to
set their honor the more before. Suetonius Tranquillus in the first book of
the Emperors says, that Julius Caesar (no further then in Spain, in the
City of Cales now called Calis) saw in the temple the triumphs of Alexander
the great painted, the which when he had well vewed, he sighed marvelous
soore, and being asked why he did so, he answered: What a woeful case am I
in, that am now of thage of.30. years, and Alexander at the same years had
subdued the whole world, and rested him in Babylon. And I (being as I am) a
Roman, never did yet thing worthy of praise in my life, nor shall leave any
renoume of me after my death. Dion the Grecian in the second book de Audacia
says, that the noble Drusius, the Almayne, used to visit the graves and
tombs of the famous and renowned which were buried in Italy, and did this
always, especially at his going to warfare, and it was asked him why he did
so, he answered. I vysite the sepulchers of Scipio, and of diverse others which
are dead, before whom al ye earth trembled when they were alive: For in
beholding their prosperous success, I did recover both strength, and stoutnes.
He says furthermore, that it encourages a man to fight against his enemies,
remembering he shall leave of him a memory in time to come. Cicero says in his
Rhethorike, and also Plynie makes mention of the same in an epistle: that
there came from Thebes (in Egypt) a knight to Rome, for no other purpose, but
only to see whether it were true or no, that was reported of the notable
things of Rome. Whom Mecenas demanded, what he perceived of the Romans, and
what he thought of Rome. He answered: the memory of the absente does more
content me, then the glory of the present does satisfye me. And the reason of
this is. The desire which men have to extol the living, and to be equal unto
the dead: makes things so strange in their life, that they deserve immortal
fame after their death. The Romans reioysed not a little, to hear such words
of a strangers mouth, whereby he praised them which were departed, and exalted
them that yet lived. O what a thing it is to consider the ancient heathens,
which neither feared hell not hoped for heaven, and yet by remembrance of
weakness, they took unto them strength* by cowardnes, they were boldened:
through fear, they became hardy: of dangers they took encouragement: of
enemies they made friends: of pouertye they took patience: of malice they
learned experience: finally I say, they denied their own wills, and followed
thopinions of others, only to leave behind them a memory with the dead, and to
have a little honor with the living O how many are they that trust the
vnconstauntnes of fortune, only to leave some notable memory behind them. Let
us call to mind some worthy examples, whereby they may se that to be true, which
I have spoken. What made king Ninus to invent such wars? Queen Semiramis to
make such buildings? Ulysses the Grecian to sulke so many seas? king Alexander
to conquer so many lands? Hercules the Thebane to set up his pillars where he
did? Caius Caesar the Romayne to give.52. battles at his pleasure? Cirus king
of Persia to overcome both the Asiaes? Hannibal the Carthagian, to make so
cruel wars against the Romans? Pirrhus king of Epirotes to come down into
Italy? Atila king of the Huns to defye al Europe? truly they would not have
taken upon them such dangerous enterprises, only upon the words of them
which were in those days present: but because we should so esteem them that
should come after. Seeing then that we be men, and the children of men, it is
not a little to be marueiled at, to see the diversity between the one and the
other, and what cowardnes there is in the hearts of some, and contrariwise what
courage in the stomakes of others. For we se commonly now a days, that if
there be, 10. of stout courages, which are desirous with honor to dye: there
are 10. thousand cowards, which through shameful pleasurs seek to prolong
their life. The man that is ambitious, thinks him most happy, who with much
estimacion can keep his renown, and with little care regard his life. And on
the other side, he that will set by his life, shall have but in small estimacion
his renown. The Sirians, the Assirians, the Thebanes, the Caldes, the Greeks,
the Macedonians, the Rodians, the Romans, the Huns, the Germans, and the
Frenchmen, if such noble men (as among these were most famous) had not
adventured their lives by such dangerous enterprises, they had never got such
immortal fame as they had don to leave to their prosperity. Sextus Cheronensis
in his third book of the valiant deeds of the Romans says, that the famous
captain Marcus Marcellus (which was the first of al men that saw the back of
Hannibal in the field) was demanded of one how he durst enter into battle,
with such a renoumed captain as Hannibal was? to whom he answered: friend, I
am a Roman borne, and a captain of Rome, and I must daily put my life in
hazard for my countries sake, for so I shall make perpetual my renoume. He was
demanded again why he stroke his enemies with such fiersenes, and why he did
so pitefully lament those which were overcome, after the vyctory gotten in
battle? he answered: the captain which is a Roman, and is not judged to
be a tiraunt, ought with his own hand to shed the blood of his enemies, and
also to shed the tears of his eyes. A captain Roman ought more to advance
him of his clemency, then of his bluddie victory. And Marcus Marcellus says
further, when a Roman captain shall be in the field, he has an eye to his
enemies with hope to vanquishe them, but afterl they be vanquisshed, he ought
to remember they are men, and that he might have been overcome. For fortune
shewith herself in nothing so common, as in the successes of war. Certes
these were words well beseming such a man, and surely we may boldlye say, that
al those which shall hear or read such things, will commend the words which
that Roman spoke: but few are they that in deed would have done the feats
that he did. For there be many that are ready to praise in their words that
which is good: but there are few that in their works desire to follow the same.
Such hearts are unquiet, and much altered by sight and envy that they bare
toward their ancients which through manfulnes atayned unto great tryumphes,
and glory) let them remember, what dangers and travails they passed through,
before they came thereto. For there was never Captain that ever triumphed in
Rome, unless he had first adventured his life a thousand times in ye feld I
think I am not deceived, in this that I will say. That is to wete, al are
desirous to taste of the marye of fame present: but none will break the bone
for fear of peril ensuing If honor cold be bought with desire only, I dare
boldly say, it would be more esteemed in these days of the poor page: then it
was in times past of the valiant Roman Scipio. For there is not at this day
so poor a man, but would desire honor above al things. What a doleful case
is this to se, many gentlemen and young knights, become evil disposed vacabondes,
and loyterers: the which hearing tell of any famous battle fought, and that
many of their estate and profession have done valiant feats in the same:
immediately therewith be stirred and set on fire through enuies heat, so that
in the same furye, they change their robes into armor: and with al speed
prepare them selves to war, to exercise the feats of arms. And finally
(like young men without experience) make importunate suit, and obtain license,
and money of their friends to go unto the wars. But after they are ons out of
their country, and see them selves in a strange place, their days evil, and
their nights worse, at one time they are commanded to skirmish, and at an
other time to watch, when they have vittailes, they want lodging, and when the
pay day comes, that pay and the next also is eaten and spent. With these and
other like troubles and discommodityes, the poor young men are so astonyed:
especially when they call to mind the goodly wide haules, so well hanged and
trymmed wherein they greatly delighted to pass the time in summer season. When
they remember their great chimneis at home, whereby they comforted their old
limbs, and how they used to sit quietly upon the sonny banks in winter. For
the remembrauncr of the pleasour past, greatly augmenteth the pains present.
Notwithstanding their parents and friends, had admonished them hereof before:
And now being beaten with their own folly, and feling these discommodities
which they thought not of before: they determyne to forsake the wars, and
each one to return home to his own again. But where as they asked license
but ons to go forth, now they were enforced to ask it.10. times before they
could come home. And the worst is, they went forth laden with money, and
return home laden with vices. But the end why these things are spoken is,
that sage and virtuous men should mark, by what trade the evil disposed seek to
gain: which is not gotten by gasing at the windows, but by keeping the
frountiers against their enemies: not with playeng at tables in the tauernes,
but with fighting in the fields: not trimmed with cloth of gold or silks, but
laden with armoure and weapons: not praunsing their palfreis, but discovering
the ambushmentes: not sleaping until none, but watching al night: not by
auauncing him of his apparaile and handsomnes, but for his stout couragiousnes:
not banketing his friends, but assaulting his enemies: though a knight do these
things, yet he ought to consider that it is vanitye and folishnes. But seeing
the world has placed honor in such a vain thing, and that they can attain
unto it by none other way, the young aduenturous gentlmen ought to employe
thereunto their strength, with stout courage, to atchieue to some great acts
worthy of renown For in the end when the war is justly begone, and that in
defense of their country: they ought to rejoice more of him that dies in the
hands of his enemies: the^ of him which lives accompanied with vices. It is a
great shame and dishonor to men of arms, and young gentlemen being at home, to
hear the praise of them which be in the wars, for the young gentlemen ought
not to think it honor for him to hear or declare the news of others? but yt
others should declare the virtuous deeds of him. O how many are they in ye world
this day puffed up with pride, and not very wise) which still prate of great
renown, and yet pass their life with small honesty. For our predecessors
fought in the field with their lances, but young men now a days fight at the
table with their tongues. Admit that al vain men desire, and procure to leave
a memory of their vanity: yet they ought to enterprise such things in their
life, whereby they might win a famous renown (and not a perpetual shame)
after their death. For there are many departed, which have left such memory of
their works as moves us rather to pity their folly, than to envy their
virtue. I ask those that read or hear this thing, if they will be in love
with Nembroth ye first tiraunt: with Semiramis, which sinned with her own son:
with Antenor, that betrayed Troy his country: with Medea, that slew her
children: with Tarquine that enforced Lucretia: with Brutus, that slew Caesar:
with Silla, that shed so much blood: with Catilina, that played the tiraunt in
his country: with Iugurtha, that strangled his brethren: with Caligula that
committed incest with his sisters: with Nero that killed his mother: with
Heliogabalus that robbed ye temples: with Domitian, that in nothing delighted
so much, as by strange hands to put men to death, and to drive away flies with
his own hands Small is the number of those that I have spoken, in respect of
those which I could recite: of whom I dare say and affirm, that if I had been
as they, I cannot tell what I would have done, or what I should have desired:
but this I know, it would have been more pains to me, to have won ye infamy
that they have won, then to have lost the life that they have lost, It
profyteth him little, to have his ponds full of fish, and his parkes full of
dear, which knows neither how to hunte, nor how to fysh. I mean to show by
this, that it profits a man little to be in great authority, if he be not
esteemed, nor honored in the same. For to attain to honor, wisdom is
requisite: and to keep it, patience is necessary. With great consyderacions
wise men ought to enterprise dangerous things. For I assure them they shall
never win honor, but where they use to recover slander. Returnyng therefore
to our matter (Puisaunt prince) I swear and durst undertake, that you rather
desire perpetual renown through death: then any idell rest in this life. And
hereof I do not merueile, for there are some that shall always declare the
prowesses of good princes, and others which will not spare to open the vices of
evil tiraunts. For although your imperial estate is much, and your catholic
person deserves more, yet I believe with my heart, and se with these eyes, that
your thoughts are so highly bent unto aduenturous deeds, and your heart so
courageous to set upon them, that your majesty little estemeth the inheritance
of your predecessors, in respect of that you hope to gain, to leave to your
successors. A captain asked Julius Caesar (as he declares in his
commentaries) why he travailed in the winter in so hard frost, and in the
summer in such extreme heat, He answered: I will do what lies in me to do,
and afterward let the fatal destinies do what they can. For the valiant knight
that gives in battle thonset, ought more to be esteemed: then fickle fortune,
whereby the victory is obtained, sins fortune gives the one, and adventure
gydeth the other. These words are spoken like a stout and valiant captain of
Rome. Of how many princes do we read, whom truly I much lament to see, what
flatteries they have herd with their ears being alive: and to read what
slanders they have sustained after their death. Princes and great lords should
have more regard to that, which is spoken in their absence: then unto that
which is done in their presence. Not to that which they hear, but to that
which they would not hear: not to that which they tell them but to yt which
they would not be told of: not to that is written unto them being alive, but to
that which is written of them after their death: not to those that tell them
lies, but to those which (if they durst) would tell them troth. For men many
times refrain not their tongues, for that subjects be not credited: but
because ye prince in his auctority is suspected. The noble and virtuous prince,
should not flit from the troth whereof he is certified: neither with flateryes
and lies should he suffer himself to be deceived: but to examine himself, and
se whether they serve him with troth, or deceive him with lies. For there is no
better witness and judge, of truth, and lies: then is a man's own conscience. I
have spoken all this, to the intent your majesty might know, that I will not serve
you, with that you should not be served. That is, to show my self in my
writing a flaterer. For it were neither mete nor honest, yt flateries into the
ears of such a noble prince should enter: neither yt out of my mouth (which
teach the divine truth) such vain tales should issue. I say, I had rather be
dispraysed for true speaking, then to be honored for flatery and lieng. For of
truth, in your highness it should be much lightness to hear them, and in my
baseness great wickedness to invent them. Now again following our purpose I say,
the historyes greatly commend Licurgus, that gave laws to the Lacedaemonians.
Numa Pompilius, that honored and adourned the churches. Marcus Marcellus, that
had pitye on those which were overcome. Julius Caesar, that forgave his enemies.
Octauius, that was so well-beloved of the people. Alexander, that gave rewards
and gifts to al men. Hector the Troyane, because he was so valiant in wars.
Hercules the Thebane, because he employed his strength so well. Ulysses ye
Grecian, because he adventured himself in so many dangers. Pirrhus king of
Epirotes, because he invented so many engines Catullus Regulus, because he
suffered so many torments. Titus the Emperor, because he was father to the
Orphans. Traianus, because he edified sumptuous and goodly buildings. The good
Marcus Aurelius, because he knew more the^ al they. I do not say that it is
requisyte for one prince in these days, to have in him all those qualyties:
but I dare be bold to affirm this, that even as it is impossible for one
prince to follow al: so likewise it is a great slander for him to follow none.
We do not require princes to do all that they can, but to apply themselves to do
some thing that they ought And I speak not without a cause, that which I have
said before, For if princes did occupy themselves, as they ought to do: they
should have no time to be vycious, Plynie says in an epistle, that the great
Cato, called Censor, did were a ring upon his finger, wherein was written these
words, Esto amicus vnius, and inimicus nullius, which is, be friend to one, and
enemy to none. He that would depely consider these few words, shall find therein
many grave sentences. And to apply this to my purpose, I say, the prince that
would well govern his common weal: show to al equal justice: desire to possess
a quiet life: to get among al a good fame: and that coueteth to leave of
himself a perpetual memory: ought to embrace the virtues of one, and to reject
the vices of al. I allow it very well that princes should be equal, yea and
surmount many: but yet I advise them, not to employ their force, but to follow
one. For oftentimes it chaunseth, that many, which suppose themselves in their
life to excel al, when they are dead are scarcely found equal to any. Though
man has done much, and blased what he can: yet in the end he is but one, one
mind, one power, one birth, one life, and one death. Then sithen he is but one,
let no man presume to know more then one. Of al these good princes which I have
named in the roll of justice, the last was Marcus Aurelius, to the intent that
he should weaue his web. For suppose we read of many princes that have
compyled notable things, the which are to be read and known: but all that
Marcus Aurelius said, or did is worthy to be known, and necessary to be
followed. I do not mean this prince in his heathen law, but in his virtuous
deeds. Let us not stay at his belyef: but let us embrace the good that he did
For compare many chrystians with some of the heathen, and look how far we
leave them behynd in faith: so far they excel us in virtuous works. Al ye old
princes in times past, had some philosophers to their familiars, as Alexander,
Aristotle. King Darius, Herodotus. Augustus, Pisto. Pompeius, Plauto. Titus,
Pliny. Adrian, Secundus. Traian, Plutarchus. Anthonius, Apolonius. Theodotius,
Claudius. Seuerus, Fabatus. Finally I say, yt philosophers then had such
authority in princes palaces: that children acknowledged them for fathers and
fathers reverenced them as masters. These sage me^ were alive in the company of
princes: but the good Marcus Aurelius (whose doctrine is before your majesty)
is not alive, but dead. Yet therefore that is no cause why his doctrine should
not be admitted. For it may be (paraduenture) that this shall profit us more,
which he wrate with his hands, then that which others spoke with their tongues.
Plutarche says, in the time of Alexander the great, Aristotle was alive, and
Homere was dead. But let us see how he loved the one, and reverenced the other:
for of truth he slept always with Homers book in his hands, and waking he red
the same with his eyes, and always kept the doctrine thereof in his memory, and
laid (when he rested) the book under his head. The which privilege Aristotle
had not, who at al times cold not be heard, and much less at al seasons be
believed: so that Alexander had Homere for his friend, and Aristotle for a
master. Other of these philosophers were but simple men: but our Marcus
Aurelius, was both a wise philosopher, and a valiant prince: and therefore
reason would he should be credited before others. For as a prince he will
declare the troubles, and as a philosopher he will redress them. Take you
therefore (Puisaunt Prince) this wise philosopher and noble emperor, for a
teacher in your youth, for a father in your government, for a captain general
in your wars, for a guide in your iourneys, for a friend in your affairs, for
an example in your virtues, for a master in your sciences for a pure white in
your desires, and for equal match in your deeds.

I will declare unto you the life of an other being a heathen, and not the life
of an other being a chrystian. For how much glory this heathen prince had in
this world, being good and virtuous: so much pains your majesty shall have in
the other, if you shall be wicked and vycious. Behold, behold noble prince, the
life of this Emperor, and you shall se how clear he was in his judgment, how
upright in his justice, how circumspect in his life, how loving to his friends,
how pacient in his troubles, how he dissembled with his enemies, how severe
against Tyraunts, how quiet among ye quiet, how great a friend to the sage, and
lover of the simple, how aduenturous in his wars, and amyable in peace, and
above al things, how high in words, and profound in sentences. Many times I
have been in doubt with my self whether the Eternal majesty (which gives unto
you princes the temporal majesty, to rule above al other in power and
authorytie) did exempt you that are princes, more from human frayltye: then
he did us that be but subjects: and at the last I knew he did not. For I see
even as you are children of the world, so you do live according to the world. I
see even as you travail in the world: so you can know nothing but things of
the world. I se because you live in the flesh, that you are subject to the
myseryes of the flesh. I see though for a time you prolong your life: yet at
the last you are brought to your grave. I see your travail is great, and that
within your gates there dwells no rest. I se you are cold in the winter, and
hot in the summer. I se that hunger feels you, and thirst troubles you, I
se your friends forsake you, and your enemies assault you. I se that you are
sad, and lack joy. I se you are sick, and be not well served. I see you have
much and yet that which you lack is more. What will ye se more, seeing that
prince^ die? O noble princes and great Lords, syns you must die, and become
worms meat, why do you not in your life time search for good counsel? If the
princes and noble men commit an ^rroure no man dare chastise them, wherefore
they stand in greater need of advise and counsel. For the trauailer who is
out of his way, the more he goes foreward, the more he errethe. If the people
do amiss, they ought to be punyshed: but if the prince err, he should be
admonished, And as the Prince will the people should at his hands have
punishment: so it is reason that he at their hands should receive counsel.

For as the wealth of the one depends on the wealth of the other: so
truly if the prince be vycious, the people can not be virtuous. If your
majesty will punyshe your people with words, command them to prynt this
present work in their hearts. And if your people would serve your hyghnes with
their advise: let them likewise beseech you to read over this book. For
therein the subjects shall find how they may amend, and you Lords shall se all that you ought to do, wdether this present work be profitable, or no, I will
not that my pen shall declare: but they which reed it shall judge.

For we aucthours take pains to make and translate, and others for us use to
give judgment and sentence, From my tender years until this present, I have
lived in the world, occupieng my self, in reading and studieng human and
deuyne books, and although I confess my debilitie to be such, that I have not
read so much as I might, nor studied so much as I ought: yet not withstandinge
all that I have red, has not caused me to muse so much, as the doctrine of
Marcus Aurelius has, since that in the mouth of an heathen, god has put such a
great treasor. The greatest part of al his works were in Greek: yet he wrote
also many in latin. I have drawn this out of greek through the help of my
friends, and afterward out of latin into our vulgar tongue by the travail of
my hands. Let al men judge what I have suffered in drawing it out of Greek into
latin, out of the latin into the vulgar, and out of a plain vulgar, into a
sweet and pleasant style. For that banquet is not counted sumptuous, unless
there be both pleasant meats, and sauory sauces. To call sentences to mind, to
place the words, to examine languages, to correct sillables: what swette I
have suffered in the hot summer, what bitter cold in the sharp winter, what
abstinence from meats when I desired to eat, what watching in the night when
I would have slept, what cares I have suffered in steed of rest that I might
have enjoyed: let other prove, if me they will not credit. The intencion of my
painful travails, I offer to the divine majesty upon my knees, and to your
highness (noble prince) I present this my work, and humbly beseech god, that
the doctrine of this book may be as profitable unto you, and the common wealth
in your life: as it has been to me tedious, and hinderaunce to my health. I
have thought it good to offer to your majesty the effect of my labors,
though you peradventure will little regard my pains: for the requyting of my
travail, and reward of my good will, I require naught else of your highness, but
that the rudeness of my understanding, the baseness of my style, the smalnes of
my eloquence, the evil order of my sentences, the vanity of my words, be no
occasion, why so excellent and goodly a work should be little regarded. For it
is not reason, that a good horse should be the less esteemed, for that the
ryder knows not how to make him run his carrier. I have done what I could
do, do you now that you ought to do, in gyuynge to this present work
grauytye, and to me the interpretor thereof aucthority. I say no more, but
humbly beseech god to maintain your estimacion and power in earth: and that you
may afterward enjoy the fruicion of his deuyne presence in heaven.

The Argument of the book called the Dial of Princes. Wherein the aucthour
declares, his intencion and manner of proceadinge.
ARchimenedes, the great and famous philosopher, (to whom Marcus Marcellus for
his knowledge sake granted life, and after using Nygromancie deserved death)
being demanded what time was, said: that time was the inuentor of al
noueltyes, and a Regestre certain of antiquities, which sees of it self the
beginning, the midst, and the ending of al things. And finally, time is he
that ends al. No man can deny but the diffinition of this Philosopher is
true: for if time could speak, he would certifye us of sundry things wherein we
doubt, and declare them as a witness of sight. Admyt al things perish, and have
an end: yet one thing is exempted, and never has end, which is truth, that
amongst al things is priuileged in such wise, that she triumphs of time, and
not time of her. For according to the dyuine saying it shall be more easy to se
heaven, and earth to fall: then once truth to perish. There is nothing so
entyer, but may be diminished: nothing so healthful, but may be diseased:
nothing so strong, but may be broken: neither any thing so well kept, but may be
corrupted. And finally I say, there is nothing but by time is ruled and
governed, save only truth, which is subject to none The fruits of the spring
time have no force to give sustenaunce, nor perfait swetenes to give any
savor, but after that the summer is past, and harvest comes, they ripe, and
then all that we eat nourishes more and gives a better taste, I mean by
this, when the world began to have wise men, the more Philosophers were
esteemed for their good manners, the more they deserved to be reproved for their
evil understanding. Plato in his second book of the common wealth said, that
the ancient Philosophers) as well Greeks, as Egiptians, and Caldees) which
first began to behold the stars of heaven, and ascended to the top of
the mount Olimpus, to view the influences, and mocions of the planets on the
earth, deserved rather pardon of their ignorance, then praise for their
knowledge. Plato said further, that the Philosophers which were before us,
were the first that gave themselves to search out the truth of the Elements in
the heaven, and the first which sowed errors in things natural of the earth.
Homere in his Iliade agreyng with Plato, says. I condemn all that the ancient
Philosophers knew, but I greatly commend them for that they desired to know.
Certes Homere said well, and Plato said not amysse: for if amongst the first
Philosophers this ignorance had not raygned, there had not been such contrary
sects in every school. He that has read, not the books which are lost, but
the opinions which the ancient philosophers had, will grant me: though the
knowledge were one, yet their sects were diverse: that is to say. Cinici,
Stoici, Academici, Platonici, and Epicurei, which were as variable the one from
the other in their opinions, as they were repugnaunt in their conditions. I
will not, neither reason requires, that my pen should be so much dysmesured,
as to reprove those which are dead, for to give the glory al only to them
that are alive: for the one of them knew not al, neither were the other
ignorant of all. If he deserves thanks that shows me the way, whereby I
ought to go: no less then meriteth he, which warns me of the place wherein
we may err, The ignorance of our forefathers, was but a gyde to keep us from
^rryng: for the error of them showed us the truth, to their much praise, and
to our great shame. Therefore I dare boldly say, if we yt are now, had been
then, we had known less then they knew, And if those were now, which were
then, they would have known more then we know. And that this is true it
appears well, for that the ancient philosophers, through the great desire
they had to know the troth, of small and bypathes have made broad and large
ways, the which we now will not see, nor yet walk therein. Wherefore we have not
so much cause to bewail their ignorance, as they had reason to complain of
our negligence, For truth, which is (as Aulus Gelius says) the daughter of
time, has reveled unto us the errors which we ought to eschew: and the true
doctrine which we ought to follow. What is there to se, but has been seen? what
to dyscouer, but has been discovered? what is there to read, but has been
red? what to write, but has been written? what is there to know, but has been
known? now a days human malice is so expert, men so we ^able, and our
wits so subtyl, that we want nothing to understand, neither good, nor evil,
And we undo our selves by sekyng that vain knowledge, which is not necessary
for our life. No man under the pretense of ignorance can excuse his fault,
since al men know, al men read, and al men learn, the which is evident in
this case, as it shall appear. Suppose the ploughe man, and the learned man do
go to the law, and you shall perceive the labourer (under that simple garment)
to forge to his counselor half a dosen of malicious tricks, to delude his
adversary as fynely: as the other that is leerned shall be able to expound. 2. or
3. chapters of this book. If men would employ their knowledge to honesty,
wisdom, patience, and mercy, it were well: but I am sorry they know so much,
only for that they subtly disceiue, and by usury abuse their neighbors, and
keep that they have unjustly gotten, and daily getting more inuenting new
trades Finally I say if they have any knowledge, it is not to amend their life:
but rather to increase their goods. If the diuil could sleep, as men do, he
might safely sleep: for whereas he waketh to deceive us, we wake to undo our
selves, well, suppose that al these heretofore I have said is true: Let us now
leave aside craft, and take in hand knowledge, The knowledge which we attain to
is small, and that which we should attain to so great: that al yt we know, is ye
least part of yt we are ignorant Even as in things natural, the elamentes have
their operacions, according to the variety of time: so moral doctrines (as the
aged have succeeded) and sciences were discovered. Truly al fruits come not
together, but when one fails, another comes in season. I mean, that
neither all the Doctors among the Christians, nor all the philosophers among the
gentyles were concurrant at one time, but after the death of one good, there
came another better. The chief wisdom, which measures al things by justice:
and disparseth them according to his bounty, will not that at one time they
should be al wise men, and at an other time al simple. For it had not ben
reason the one should have had the fruit, and the other the leaves, The old
world that ran in Saturnes days (otherwise called the golden world) was of a
truth much esteemed of them that saw it, and greatly commended of them that
wrote of it. That is to say, it was not gilded by the Sages, which did gilde
it: but because there was no evil men, which did vngild it. For as thexperience
of the mean estate and nobility teaches us, of one only parson depends
as well the fame and renoume, as the infamy of a hole house, and parentage. That
age was called golden, that is to say of gold: and this our age is called
yronne, that is to say of iron. This dyfference was not, for that gold then was
found, and now iron: nor for that in this our age there is want of them that be
sage: but because the number of them surmounteth, that be at this day
malicious. I confess one thing, and suppose many will favor me in ye same.
Phauorin the philosopher (which was master to Aulus Gellius, and his especial
friend) said ofttimes, that the philosophers in old time were holden in
reputacion, because there were few teachers, and many learners. We now a days
se the contrary, for infinite are they which presume to be masters: but few
are they which humble them selves to be scholars. A man may know how little
wise men are esteemed at this hour, by the great veneracion that the
philosophers had in the old time. What a matter is it to se Homere amongst the
Grecians Solomon amongst the Hebrews, Lycurgus amongst the Lacedomoniens:
Phoromeus also amongst the Greeks, Ptolomeus amongeste the Egiptians. Liui
amongeste the Romans, and Cicero likewise amongeste the Latins? Appolonius
among the Indians, and Secundus amongst the Assirians.

How happy were those philosophers (to be as they were in those days) when the
world was so full of simple persons, and so destitute of sage men: that there
flocked great nombers out of diverse contries, and straung nations, not only to
here their doctrine: but also to se their persons. The glorious saint Hierome
in the prologue to the bible says. When Rome was in her prosperity, then
wrote Titus Liuius his decades: yet notwithstanding, men came to Rome more to
speak with Titus Liuius, then to se Rome or the high capitol thereof Marcus
Aurelius writing to his friend Pulio, said these words. Thou shall understand my
friend, I was not chosen Emperor for the noble blood of my predecessors, nor
for the favor I had amongst them now present: for there were in Rome of
greater blood and riches then I, but the Emperor Adrian my master set his
eyes upon me, and the emperor Anthony my father in law chose me for his son
in law, for no other cause, but for that they saw me a friend of the sages, and
an enemy of the ignorant. Happy was Rome to chose so wise an emperor, and
no less happy was he to attain to so great an empire. Not for that he was
heir to his predecessoure, but for that he gave his mind to study. Truly, if
that age then were happy to enjoy his person: no less happy shall ours be
now at this present, to enjoy his doctrine. Salust says, they deserved great
glory, which did worthy feats: and no lesser renown merited they, which wrote
them in high style. What had Alexander the great ben, if Quintus Curtius had
not written of him? what of Ulysses, if Homere had not been borne? what had
Alcibiades been, if Zenophon had not exalted him? what of Cirus, if the
philosopher Chilo had not put his acts in memory? what had been of Pirrus,
king of the Epirotes, if Hermicles cronicles were not? what had been of Scipio
the great Affricane, if it had not been for the decades of T^tus Liuius? what
had been of Traiane, if the renowned Plutarche had not been his friend? what of
Nerua and Anthonius the meke, if Phocion the Greek had not made mention of
them? how should we have known the stout courage of Caesar, and the great
prowess of Pompeius, if Lucanus had not written them? what of the twelve
Cesars, if Suetonius tranquillus had not compiled a book of their lives? and
how should we have known the antiquityes of the Hebrews, if the upright
Iosephe had not ben? who could have known the coming of the Lombardes into
Italy, if Paulus Diaconus had not writ it? how could we have known the coming
in, ye going out, and end of the Goths in Spain, if the curious Rodericus had
not showed it unto us? By these things that we have spoken of before, the
readers may perceive what is dew unto the Historiographers: who in my opinion,
have left as great memory of them for that they wrote with their pens: as
the princes have done for that they did with their swords. I confess I
deserve not to be named amongst the sages, neither for that I have written and
translated, nor yet for that I have composed. Therefore (the sacred and deuyne
letters set a side) there is nothing in the world so curiouslye written, but
neadeth correction, and as I say of the one, so will I say of the other, and
that is: as I with my will do renounce the glory, which the good for my
learning would give me: so in like manner evil men shall not want, that against
my will will seek to defame it, We other writers, smally esteem the labor and
pains we have to write, although in deed we are not ignorant of a thousand
enuyous tongues, that will backbite it, Many now a days are so evil taught, or
to say better, so enuyous, that when the aucthour laboreth in his study, they
play in the streates: when he waketh, they sleep. When he fasteth, they eat:
when he sits turninge the leaves of the book they go huntyng after vices
abroad: yet for all that, they will presume to judge, deprave, and condeme an
other man's doctrine, as if they had the aucthoritye that Plato had in greece, or
the eloquence that Cicero had in Rome. When I find a man in the latin tongue
well seen, his vulgar tongue well polished, in histories well grounded, in Greek
letters very expert, and desirous to spend his time with good books: this so
heroical and noble a parsonage, I would desire him to put my doctrine under his
fete For it is no shame, for a virtuous and wise man, to be corrected of an
other wise man. Yet I would gladly know what patience can suffer, or heart
dissemble, when two or three be assembled togithers at meat, and after (at the
table, or otherwise) one of them takes a book at adventure in his hands,
against the which another will say it is to long, and another will say it
speaks not to the purpose: another it is obscure, and another the words are
not well couched: another will say, all that that is spoken is fained, one will
say he speaks nothing of profit, another he is to curious, and the other he
is to malicious. So that in speaking thus, the doctrine remains suspicious,
and the author scapeth not scotte fre. Suppose them to be therefore such that
speak it (as I have spoken of) and that at the table do find such faults,
suer they deserve pardon: for they speak not according to the books which
they have read, but accord^nge to the cups of wine which they have drunk.
For he that takes not that in geste, which is spoken at the table, knows
not what gesting means. It is an old custom to murmr at virtuous deeds,
and into this rule enters not only those that make them, but also those
which wryt them afterward: Which thing seems to be true, for that Socrates
was reproved of Plato* Plato of Aristotle. Aristotle of Auerois, Sicilius of
Vulpitius. Lelius of Varro, Marinus of Ptolomens, Ennius of Horace, Seneca of
Aulus Gellius, Crastonestes of Strabo, Thessale of Gallian, Hermagoras of
Cicero. Cicero of Salust, Origines of saint Hierome, Hierome of Rufinus,
Rufinus of Donatus, Donatus of Prosper, and Prosper of Lupus. Then sith that
in these men, and in their works has been such neade of correction, which
were men of great knowledge, and Lanternes of the world: it is no maruayle at
all that I have such fortune, since I know so little as I do He may worthily
be counted vain and light, which at the first sight, as for only once
reading, will rashely judge that, which a wise man with much diligence, and
study has written. The authors, and writers are ofttimes reproved, not of
them which can translate, and compile works: but of those which can not
read, and yet less understand them. to the intent simple folks should count
them wise, and take their parts in condemning this work and esteem him for a
great wise man. I take God to witness, who can judge, whether my intention were
good or ill to compile this work, and also I say this my doctrine at the feet
of wise and virtuous men, to the end they may be protectours, and defendours
of the same. For I trust in God, though some would come to blame (as diverse
do) the simple words which I spoke: yet others would not fail to relate the
good intention that I meant. And to declare further I say, that diverse have
written of the time of the said Marcus Aurelius, as Herodian wrote little,
Eutropius less, Lampridius not so much, and Julius capitolinus somewhat more.
Likewise ye ought to know, that the masters which taught Marcus Aurelius
sciences, were Iunius Rusticus, Cinna Catullus, Sextus Cheronensis, which was
nephewe to the great Plutarque. These three were those, that principally as
witnesses of sight, wrate the most part of his life and doctrine. Many may
marvel to hear tell of the doctrine of Marcus Aurelius, saying, it has been
kept hid and secret a great while, and that of mine own head I have invented
it. And that there never was any Marcus Aurelius in the world. I know not what
to say now unto them, for it is evident to all those which have red any
thing, that Marcus Aurelius was husband to Faustine, father to Comodus,
brother to Annius Verus, and son in law to Antonius Pius, the seventh (of
Rome) Emperor. Those which say I only have made this doctrine, truly I thank
them for so saying, but not for their so meaning For truly, the Romans would
have set my Image in Rome for perpetual renown, if so grave sentences should
have proceaded from my head. We see that in our time, which was never seen
before, and hear that we never heard before. We practice not in a new world,
and yet we marueyle that there is at this present a new book. Not for that I
was curious to discover Marcus Aurelius, or studious to translate him. For
truly it is worthy he be noted of wise persons, and not accused of equious
tongues. For it chances oftentimes in hunting that the most simplest man
kills the dear. The last thing which the Romans conquered in Spain, was
Cantabria, which was a city in Nauarra, over against Lagrogne, and situated
in a high country, where there is now a vain of vynes. And the Emperor
Augustus which destroyed it, made ten books De bello Cantabrico, where are
things worthy of notinge, and no less pleasant in reading, which happened
unto him in the same conquest. As Marcus Aurelius was brought me from Florence,
so was this other book of the wars of Cantabrie brought me from Colleine. If
perhaps I took pains to translate this book, as few have done which have
seen it, they would speak the like of it, that they did of Marcus Aurelius.
Because men are so long in speaking, and so brief in studienge, that without
any let or shame, they will a vow no book to be in the world this day, but
that they have read, or seen it. I have as much profited in this writynge,
which is human: as other doctors have done in matters, which are divine.
It is not translated word for word, but sentence for sentence. For we other
interpreters are not bound, to give words by measure: but it suffiseth us, to
give sentencis by wayghte. I began to study this work in the year, a
thousand, five hundred, and eyghtene, and until the year, a thousand, five
hundred, twenty and four, I could neither understand, nor know, wherein I
was occupied. and albeit I kept it secreat.vi. years yet it was known abroad
whereupon the Emperor his majesty being with the fever diseased, sent to me
for it to pass the time away And I (according to his commandment) showed him
Marcus Aurelius that then was uncorrected, and humbly beseaching him said:
that for recompense of all my travail, I desired no other reward, but that no
man in his chamber might copye the book. And I in the mean time proceeded to
accomplish the work, Because I did not mean in such manner to publyshe it:
for otherwise, I said his majesty should be evil served, and I also of my
purpose prevented: but my sins caused, that the book was copyed, and
conveyed from one to another. And by the hands of Pages sondrie times written*
so that there increased daily in it errors, and faults. And since there was
but one original copye, they brought it unto me to correct, which if it
could have spoken, would have complained it self, more of them that did
write it: then of those which did steal it. And thus when I had finyshed
the work, and thought to have publysshed it, I perceived that Marcus Aurelius
was now imprinted at Civil. And in this case, I take the readers to be judges,
between me and the Imprinters, because they may see, whether it may stand
with law, and justice, that a book which was to his imperial majesty
dedicated, the auctour thereof being but an infant, and the book so vnparfecte
and vncorrect, without my consent or knowledge should be published.

Notwithstanding they ceased not, but printed it again in Portugal, and also
in the kingdom of Navarre, And if the first impression was faultye, truly the
second and the third were no less. So that which was written for the wealth
of all men generallye, each man did apply to the profit of him self
particularlye. There chanced another thing of this book called the golden
book of Marcus Aurelius, which I am ashamed to speak, but greater shame they
should have, that so dishonestly have done. That is, some made them selves to
be auctours of the whole work, others say that part of it was made, and
compyled of their own heads: the which appears in a book in print,
wherein the auctour did like a man void of all honestye, and in another book,
one used likewise the words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to Faustine, when she
asked him the key of his study. After these thieves came to my knowledge, judge
you whether it were inoughe to prove my patience. For I had rather they had
robbed me of my goods, then taken away my renown. By this all men shall see,
that Marcus Aurelius was not then corrected, nor in any place parfecte, whereby
they might perceive, that it was not my mind to translate Marcus Aurelius, but
to make a dial^ for Princes, whereby all christien people may be governed and
ruled. And as the doctrine is showed for the use of many: so I would profit
my self, with that which the wise men had spoken and written. And in this
sort proceadeth the work, wherein I put one, or two Chapiters of mine, and
after I put some epistles of Marcus Aurelius, and other doctrine of some
ancient men. Let not the reader be disceaued, to think that the one, and the
other is of the auctor. For although the phrase of the languag be mine, yet I
confess the greatest part that I knew, was of another man, although the
historiographers and doctors (with whom I was helped) were many: yet the
doctrine which I wrote, was but one. I will not deny, but I have left out
some things which were superfluous: in whose stead I have placed, things
more sweet, and profitable. So that it neadeth good wits, to make that which
seems in one language gross, in another to give it the apparaunce of gold. I
have divided into three books this present dial of Princes. The first
treats, that the Prince ought to be a good christian. The secound, how he
ought to govern his wife, and children. The third teaches, how he should
govern his person, and his commen wealth. I had begone another book, wherein
was contained, how a Prince should behave him self in his court, and
palace, but the importunity of my friends, caused me to withdraw my pen, to
the end I might bring this work to light.

The Table of the Dial of Princes
THe Prologue general of the Auctour The Prologue upon the book entitled
Marcus Aurelius, The Argument of the whole book. The first Chapter entreats
of the birth and lynage of Marcus Aurelius, where the Auctour recites at the
beginning of the book.iii Chapters in the which he declares the discourse of
his lief: for by his Epistles and doctrine this whole work is proved. Chap. i.
Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius, wrote to his friend Pulio: wherein he
recounteth the order of his lyef. and among other things declares the words
which a poor man of Nola spoke unto the Roman censor. Chap. ii. Macus
Aurelius concludes his letter, and mencioneth the scienses which he learned,
and all the masters he had, and in the end he recites five notable things in
the obseruaunce of the which the Romans were very curious. Chap. iii. Of the
excellencye of the Christian religion (whereby the true God is known) and of
the vanities of the auncientes in times past. Chap iiii. How among the
Auncientes the Philosopher Bruxellus was esteemed, and of the words he spoke
unto them at the hour of his death. Chap. v. Of the words which Bruxellus
the Philosopher spoke to the senate of Rome. Chap. vi. How the Gentiles
thought that one God was not of power sufficient to defend them from their
enemies. Chap. vii. Of a letter which the senate sent unto all those which were
subject to the empire. Chap. viii. Of the true and living God, and of the
maruailes he wroughte in the old law to manifest his divine power, and of the
superstition of the false gods Chap. ix. That there is but one true God, and
how that realm is hapie which has a King that is a good christian. Chap.
x. Of Sundry gods which the Ancients worshipped, of the office of those gods,
and how they were revenged of them that displeased them. Chap. xi. Of other
more natural and peculiar gods which the Ancient people had. Chap xii. How
Tyberius the knight was chosen governor of the empire, and afterward created
Emperor, only for being a good Christian: and how God deprived Iustinia^ the
younger both of his senses and empire for being an heretic. Chap. xiii. Of the
words the empress Sophia spoke to Tiberius Constantinus, which tended to his
reproffe for that he consumed the treasures which she had gathered. Chap.
xiiii. The answer of Tiberius unto the empress Sophia, wherein he declares
that Princes need not to hourde up great treasures. Chap. xv. How the
chieftaine Narsetes overcame many battles, only for that his wholle
confydence was in God. And what happened to him by the empress Sophia Augusta:
wherein may be noted the vnthanckfulnes of Princes toward their servants.
Chap. xvi. Of a letter the emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to the king of
Scicille, in the which he records the travails they endured to gether in
their youth, and reproves him of his small reverence toward the temples.
Chap. xvii. The Emperor proceeds in his letter to admonish Princes to be
fearful of their gods, and of the sentence which the senate gave upon this
king, for pullinge down the church. Chap. xviii. How the Gentiles honored
those which were devout in the service of the gods. Chap. xix. For five
causes Princes ought to be better Christians then their subjects. Chap. xx. Of
the Philosopher Bias, and of the.x. Laws which he gave, worthy to be had in
mind. Chap xxi. How God from the beginning punysshed evil men by his Justice,
and specially those Princes that despise his church and mansion house. Chap.
xxii. The auctour proves by.xii. examples that Princes are sharply punyshed
when they usurp boldlye upon the churches and violate the temples. Chap.
xxiii. How Valentine the Emperor because he was an evil christian, lost in
one day both the Empire and his lief, and was burned alive in a shepecoote.
Chap. xxiiii. Of the Emperor Valentinian and Gratian his son, which because
they were good Christians were always fortunate: and that God gives victories
unto Princes more through tears of them that pray, then through the weapons
of those that fight. Chap. xxv. Of the godly Oration which the Emperor
Gratian made to his soldiers before he gave the battle. Chap. xxvi. That
the captain Theodosius (which was father of the great Emperor Theodosius)
died a good Christian: of the king Hysmarus and the bishop Siluanus and the
holy laws which they made and established. Chap. xxvii. What a goodly thing
it is to have but one prince to rule in the public weal, for their is no
greater enemy to the common weal then he which procures many to command
therein. Chap. xxviii. That in a public weal there is no greater destruction,
then where Princes daily consent to new orders, and change old customs. Chap.
xxix When Tyrauntes begame to reign, and upon what occasion commanding and
obeing first began: and how the authority the Prince has is by the
ordinance of God. Chap. xxx. Of the golden age in times past, and worldly
myserie at this present. Chap. xxxi. What the Garamantes said unto king
Alexander the great when he went to co^quer India, and how that the purity of
lief has more power, then any force of war. Chap. xxxii. Of an Oration which
one of the sages of Garamantia made unto king Alexander, a goodlye lesson for
ambitious men. Chap. xxxiii. The sage Garamante continues his Oration, and
among other notable matters he makes mencyon of seven laws which they
observed. Chap. xxxiiii That Princes ought to consider for what cause they were
made Princes, and what Thales the Philosopher was, and of the questions
demanded him. Chap. xxxv. What Plutarke the philosopher was, the wise words he
spoke to Tra^an the emperor, and how the good Prince is the head of the
publyke weal. Chap. xxxvi. The Prince ought to hear the complayntes of all
his subjects, and to know them all to recompense their service. Chap. xxxvii.
Of a solemn feast the Romans celebrated to the God Ianus, and of the
bounty of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius the same day. Chap. xxxviii. Of the
Emperors answer to Fuluius the senator, wherein he peynteth envious men. Chap.
xxxix. Of a letter the emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend Pulio,
wherein he declares the opinions of certain Philosophers concerning the
felicity of man. Chap. xl. That Princes and great Lords ought not to esteem
them selves for being fayer and well proportioned of body. Chap. xli. Of a
letter which Marcus Aurelius wrote to his neuew Epesipus, worthy to be noted
of all young Gentlemen. Chap. xlii. How Princes and noble men in old time
were lovers of sages. Chap. xliii. How the Emperor Theodosius provided wise
men at the hour of his death for the education of his sons. Chap. xliiii.
Cresus king of Lidya was a great lover of sages of a letter, the same Cresus
wrote to the Philosopher, Anacarses, and of the Philosophers answer again to
the king. Chap. xlv. Of the wisdom and sentence of Phalaris the Tyraunte, and
how he put an Artisan to death for Inuenting new torments. Chap. xlvi. That
sondrye mighty and puyssant Princes were lovers and friends of the sages.
Chap. xlvii. The end of the Table of the first Book.

The table of the second Book.
OF what excellencye marriage is, and where as common people mary of free will,
princes and noble men ought to marye of necessity. Chap. i. How by means of
marriage many mortal enemies have been made parfitte friends. Chap. ii. Of
the sundry laws the ancients had in contracting matrimony, and of the manner
of celebrating marriage Chap. iii. How princesses and great ladies ought to love
their husbands: and that must be without any manner of witchcraft or sorcerye
but only procured by wisdom and obedience. Chap. iiii. The revenge of a
Greciane Lady on him that had slain her husband in hope to have her to wife.
Chap. v. That pryncesses and great Ladies should be obedient to their
husbands, and that it is a great shame to the husband to suffer to be
commanded by his wife. Chap vi. That women (especially princesses and great
ladies) should be very circumspect in goinge abroad out of their houses, and
that through the resort of them that come to their houses they be not ill
spoken of. Chap. vii. Of the commodities and discomodities which follow
princesses and great Ladies that go abroad to visit, or abide in the house.
cap viii. That women great with child (namely princesses and great Ladies)
ought to be very circumspect for the danger of the creatures they bear:
wherein is laid before you, many known and sorrowful mysfortunes happened to
women in that case. Cap ix. A further rehearsal of other inconveniences and
unlucky chances happened to women great with child. Chap. x. That women great
with child (chieflye princesses and great ladies) ought to be gently entreated
of their husbands. Chap. xi. What the Philosopher Pisto was, and of the rules
he gave concerning women with child. Chap. xii. Of three counsels which Lucius
Seneca gave unto a secretary his friend who served the emperor Nero. And how
Marcus Aurelius dsposed all the hours of the day. Cap. xiii. Of the Importunate
suit of ye empress Faustine to ye Emperor Marcus Aurelius her husband
concerning the key of his closet. Chap. xiiii. The Emperors answer to
Faustine touching the demand of the key of his closet. Chap. xv. The
Emperor follows his matter, admonishinge men of the plagues and great
dangers that follow those, which haunt to much the company of women. And
recites also certain rules for married men, which if they be matched with
shrowes and do observe them, may cause them live in quiet with their wives.
Chap. xvi. The Emperor answers more particularly concerning the key of his
closet. Chap. xvii. That princesses and noble women ought not to be ashamed
to give their children suck with their own breasts Chap. xviii. The auctour
still persuades women to give their own children suck. Chap. xix. That
princesses and great ladies ought to be very circumspecte in chosinge their
nurces, of seven properties which a good nource, should have. Chap. xx. The
auctor adds.3. other conditions to a good nource that gives suck. Chap.
xxi. Of the disputacion before Alexander the great concerning the sucking of
babes. Chap. xxii. Of wytchcraftes and sorceries which the nources used in old
time in geuinge their children suck. Chap xxiii. Marcus Aurelius writes to
his friend Dedalus, inueighenge against witches which cure children by
sorceries and charms. Chap. xxiiii. How excellent a thing it is for a
gentleman to have an eloquent tongue. cap. xxv. Of a letter which the Athenians
sent to the Lacedaemonians. Chap. xxvi. That nources which give suck to the
children of princes ought to be discret and sage women. Chap. xxvii. That women
may be no less wise then men, and though they be not it is not through default
of nature, but for want of good bringyng up. Chap. xxviii. Of a letter which
Pithagoras sent to his sister Theoclea she readinge at that time philosophy in
Samothracia. Chap. xxix. The auctor follows his purpose, persuading
princesses and great ladies to endeavor them selves to be wise as the women were
in old time. Chap xxx. Of the worthynes of the lady Cornelia, and of a notable
epistle she wrote to her.ii. sons Tyberius, and Caius: which served in the
wars. Chap. xxxi. Of the educacion and doctrine of children whiles they are
young. Chap. xxxii. Princes ought to take heed that their children be not
brought up in vain pleasures and delights. chap. xxxiii. That princes and
great lords ought to be careful in seeking men to bring up their children. Of
x. conditions that good school masters ought to have. Chap. xxxiiii. Of the
ii. sons of Marcus Aurelius of the which the eldest and best beloved dyed.
And of the masters he reproved for the other named Comodus. Chap. xxxv. How
Marcus Aurelius rebuked five of the xiiii. masters he had chosen for the
educacion of his son Comodus. And how he bannished the rest from his palace
for their light behauior at the feast of the god Genius. Chap. xxxvi. That
princes and other noble men ought to ouersee the tutours of their children lest
they conceal the secret faults of their scholars. Chap. xxxvii. Of the
Emperors determinacio^ when he committed his son to the tutoures, which he
had provided for his educacion. Chap. xxxviii. That tutours of princes and
noble men's sons ought to be very circumspect, that their scholars do not
accustom them selves in vices whiles they are young, and specially to keep
them from four vices. Chap xxxix. Of.ii. other vices perilous in youth which
the masters ought to keep them from. Chap. xl. The end of the Table of the
second Book.

The table of the third Book.
HOw Princes and great Lords ought to travail to administer to all equal
Justice. Chap. i. The way that Princes ought to use in choosing their Judges
and Officers in their contreyes. Chap. ii. Of an oration which a vilian of
Danuby made before the senators of Rome, concerning the tyranny and
oppressions which their officers use in his country. Chap. iii. The villayne
argues against the Romans, which without cause or reason concquered their
contreye and proved manifestely that they through offendyng of their gods were
vancquished of the Romans. Chap. iiii. The villayne concludes his oration
against the Judges which minister not Justice, and declares how prejudicial
such wicked men are to the common weal. Chap. v. That Princes and noble men
should be very circumspect in choosyng Judges and Officers for therein
consists the profyt of the publyke weal. Chap. vi. Of a letter which Marcus
Aurelius wrote to Antigonus his friend, wherein he speaks against the
crueltye of Judges and Officiers. Chap. vii. The Emperor Marcus continues his
letter against cruel Judges, and recites ii. examples: the one of a pitiefull
king of Cipres, and the other of a cruel Judge of Rome, and in this Chapter is
mentioned the erbe Ilabia (growing in Cipres, on the mount Arcladye) which
being cut droppeth blood. etc. Chap. viii. Of the words, which Nero spoke
concerning justice, and of the instruction, which the Emperor Augustus gave
to a judge which he sent into Dacia. Cap. ix. The Emperor follows his purpose
against cruel judges, and declares a notable imbassage which came from Judea
to the Senate of Rome, to complain of the judges that governed that Realm.
Chap. x. The Emperor concludes his letter against the cruel judges, and
declares what the grand father of king Boco spoke in the Senate. Chap. xi. An
exhortacion of the auctor to princes and noble men, to embrace peace, and to
eschew the occasions of war. Chapter xii. The commodities, which come of
peace. Chap. xiii. A letter of Marcus Aurelius to him fre^d Cornelius, wherein
he describes the discommodities of war, and the vanity of the triumph,
Chap. xiiii. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius declares the order that the Romans
used in setting forth men of war, and of the ou^tragious vilanies, which
captains and soldiers use in the wars. Chap. 15. Marcus Aurelius lamenteth
with tears the follye of the Romans, for that they made war with Asia. And
declarethe what great damage comes unto the people where the prince does begin
wars in a straung country. Chap. xvi. That princes and great lords (the more
they grow in years) should be the more discrete and virtuous to refrain from
vices. Chap. xvij. That princes when they are aged, should be temperate in
eating, sober in drynking, modest in apparel, and above al, true in their
communication. Chap. xviii.. Of a letter of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to
Claudius, and Claudinus, wherein he reproves those that have many years, and
little discrecion. Chap. xix The emperor follows his letter, and persuades
those that are old, to give no more credit to the world, nor to any of his
flatteries. Chap. xx. The emperor procedith in his letter, and proves by good
reasons, that since the aged persons will be served and honored of the young:
they ought to be more virtuous and honest then the young. Chap. xxi. The
emperor concludes his letter, and shows what perilles those old men live
in, which dissolutly like young children pass their days, and gives unto them
holsom counsel for the remedy thereof. Chap. xxii. Princes ought to take heed
that they be not noted of Avarice, for that the covetous man is both of god and
man hated. Cap xxiii. The auctor follows his matter, and with great reasons
disco^mendeth the vices of covetous men, Chap. xxiiii, Of a letter which the
emperor M. Aurelius wrote to his fre^d Cincinatus wherein he touches those
gentlemen, which will take upon them the trade of marchaundise against their
vocations divided into 4. chapters, Chap, xxv. The Emperor proceeds his
letter, and declares what virtues men ought to use, and the vices which they
ought to eschew. Cap. xxvi. The Emperor concludes his letter, and parswadeth
his friend Cincinatus to despise the vanities of the world, and shows though a
man be never so wise yet he shall have need of a another man's counsel. chap.
xxvii. The auctor persuades princes and great lords to fly covetousness and
avarice, and to become liberal, which is a virtue semely for a Royal parson.
Cap. xxviii. The auctor parswadeth gentlemen, and those ye profess arms, not
to abase them selves by taking upon them any vile offices for gain sake. Cap.
xxix. Of a letter themperoure wrote to his neighbor Marcurius, wherein men may
learn the dangers of those which traffic by sea, and see the covetousness
of them that travail by land. Cap xxx. The Emperor follows his matter, and
concludes his leter, rebuking his friend Marcurius, for that he took thought
for the loss of his goods. He shows the nature of fortune, and the
conditions of the covetous man. Cap. xxxi. That princes and noble men ought to
consider the misery of man's nature, and that brute beasts are in some points
(reason set a part) to be preferred unto man. cap. xxxii The auctor compares
the misery of me^, with the liberty of beasts. Cap. xxxiii. The Emperor
writes his letter to Domicius to comfort him being banyshed for a quarrel
betwixt him and another about the running of a horse, very comfortable to al
them, that have been in prosperitye, and are now brought into adversity. Cap.
xxxiiii. That princes and noble men ought to be aduocattes for widows, fathers
of orphans, and helpers of al those which are comfortles. xxxv. That the
troubles, greefes, and sorrows of women are much greater then those of men,
wherefore princes and noble men ought to have more compassion upon women: then
on men. Cap. xxxvi. Of a letter which the Emperor wrote to a Roman lady named
Lauinia comforting her for the death of her husband, which is a great
consolation for all those, that are sorrowful, for the dissease of their
friends. Chap. xxxvii. The Emperor persuaded wid^es to put their wylles unto
the will of god, and exorteth them to live honestly. Chap. xxxviii. That
princes, and noble men ought to despise the world, for that there is nothing in
ye world but plain disceyte. Chap. xxxix. The emperor speaks vehemently
against th disceytes of the world. Chap. xl. Of a letter, which the Emperor
Mar. Aure. wrote to Torquatus to comfort him in his banishement, which is
notable for all men to learn the vanities of this world. Chap. xli. The
Emperor persuades al men by strong and high reasons, not to trust ye world
nor any thing therein. Chap. xlii. Princes and noble men ought not to bear
with Iuglers, iesters, parasites, minstrelles loyterers, nor with any such kind
of raskals And of the laws which the Romans made in this behalf. Chap.
xliii, How some loyterers were punished by the auncientes, and of these
raskalles of our time. Chap. xliiii. Of a letter which the Emperor wrote to a
friend of his, certifieng him, that he had banished from Rome, the iesters
iuglers, conterfet fools, parasytes, ruffia^s, minstrels, vacabondes, and al
other loyterers a notable letter for such as keep cou^terfait foles in their
houses. Chap. xlv. How the Emperor found the sepulchers of many learned
Philosophers in Helespont, whereunto he sent all these loyteres. Chap. xlvi.
The emperor declares the cause why these iesters and iuglers were admytted
into Rome. Chap. xlvii. That Princes and noble men ought to remember, that they
are mortal and must die, where are sundry notable consolations against the
fear of death. Chap xlviii. Of the death of ye Emperor. Mar. Aur. and how
they are few friends which dare say the truth unto sickmen. Chap. xlix. Of the
confortable words, which the secretarye Pannutius spoke to the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, at the hour of his death. Chap. l. Pannutius the secretary
exorteth al men wyllingly to accept death and utterly to for sake the world and
his vanity. Chap. li. The answer of the Emperor. Marcus to Panutius his
secretary wherein he declared that he took no thought to forsake ye world: but
all his sorrow was to leave behind him an unhappy child to enherite the
Empire. Chap. lii. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius concludes his matter and
shows that sondrye young Princes for being vicious, have undone the^ selves,
and impouerished their Realms. Chap. liii. Of the words which the emperor M.
Arelius spoke unto his son Commodus necessary for all noble young gentlemen
to understand. Chap. liiii, The emperor. Mar. aur. among other wholesome
counsels exorteth his son to keep wise and sage me^ about him, for to give him
counsel in all his affairs. Chap. lv. The emperor follows his matter and
exorteth his son unto certain particular things worthy to be engraued in the
hearts of men. Char. lvi. The good Marcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome ends his
purpose, and life. And of the last words which he spoke to his son Co^modus
and of the table of counsels which he gave him. Chap. lvii. The end of the
Table of the third book.

The table of the fourth book.
The Epistle to the Reader. The Prologue. The Argument. That it is more
necessary for the courtier (abidyng in court) to be of lively spirit and
audacitie, the^ it is for the soldier, that goes to serve in the wars.
Chap. i. Of courtiers brawles and quarrels with the harbingers for ill lodging.
Chap. ii. How the courtier should entreat his host or master of the house
wheare he lies. Chap. iii. What the Courtier must do to win the Princes
favor. Chap. iiii. What manners and gestures become the courtier when he
speaks to the Prince. Chap. v. How the courtier should behave himself to
know, and to visit the noble men and gentle men, that be great with the
Prince and contynuing still in court. Chap. vi. Of the good countenance and
modesty the courtier should have in behauing himself at the prince or noble
man's table in yt time of his meal. Cap. vii. What company the courtier
should keep and how he should apparel himself. Chap. viii. Of the wise manner
the courtier should have to serve and honor the Ladies and gentlewomen, and
also to satisfye and please the ushers and porters of the kings house. Chap.
ix. Of the great pains and troubles the courtier has that is toild in suits
of law, and how he must suffer and behave himself with the Judges. Chap. x.
The auctor speaks of the beloved of the court, admonishing them to be pacient
in their troubles, and that they be not partial in thaffayres of the common
weal. Chap. xi. That thofficers and beloved of the court should be very
diligent, and careful in the dispatche of the affairs of the prince and common
weal, and in correctynge and reformyng their servant, they should also be
very circumspct and advised. Chap. xij. That the deerlings of the court beware
they be not proud, and high minded, for lightlye they never fall but through
this wicked vice. Chap. xiii, That it is not fit for courtiers to be to
covetous, if they mean to keape themselves, out of many troubles and dangers.
Chap. xiiii. That the favored of the court should not trust to much to
their favor and credit they have, nor to the great prosperity of their life, a
worthy chapter and full of good doctrine Chap. xv. The auctor admonysheth those
that are in favor, and great with the prince, that they take heed of the
deceipts of the world, and learn to live and dye honorably, and that they
leave the court before age overtake them. Chapter xvi. Of the continency of
favored courtiers and how they ought to shonne the company and conversation of
dishonest women, and to be careful quickly to dispatch al such as sue unto
them. Chap. xvii. That the nobles and beloved of princes excede not in
superfluous fare, and that they be not to sumptuous in their meats. A notable
chapter for those that use to much delicacye and superfluity. Chap. xviii. That
the favored of princes ought not to be dishonest of their tongues nor envious
of their words. Chap. xix. A comendacion of troth, which professed courtiers
ought to embrace, and in no respect to be found defective in the contrary,
telling one thing for another. Chap xx. The end of the table of the fourth
Book.

Hear begins the table of the letters, translated out of Spanishe, which
were not in the French Copye.
OF a huge monster which was seen in Scicilli in the time of Marcus Aurelius.
Chap. i. Of that which chanced, unto a neighbor of his in Rome, in the time
of his Empire. Chap. ii. How Marcus Aurelius the Emperor sought the wealth
of his people, and how his people loved him. Chap. iii. How at the intercession
of many, which the Empress had sent, the Emperor granted his daughter
Lucilla license to sport her self at the feasts. Chap. iiii. Of the sharp
words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to his wife, and too his daughter. Chap.
v. The Emperor exhorts his wife to take away all occasions of evil from her
daughter, where in is declared the frailetye of the tender flesh. Chap. vi. Of
the wysedom of Marcus Aurelius in procuryng husbands for his daughters. Chap.
vii Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to his especial friend,
to comfort him in his troubles. Chap. viii. A letter sent by the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius to Censorius, that was so sorrowful for the death of his son,
worthy to be red and noted. Chap. ix A letter sent by Marcus Aurelius Emperor
to Censorius of the news, which at that time were at Rome. Chap. x. Of a
sharp letter full of reprehensions sent by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to the
amourous ladies of Rome, because in his absence they devised a play of him.
Cap. xi. Of a letter which he sent to his lover Bohemia, for that she desired
so earnestlye to go with him to the wars, wherein is to be noted the great
folly of young men, and the little shame of evil women. Cap. xii. The answer of
Bohemia to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wherein is expressed the great malice,
and little patience of an evil woman. Chap. xiii. Of a letter which the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius sent to the lady Macrine, the Romayne, of whom (beholding her
at the window) he became enamoured, which declares what force the beauty of a
fair woman has in a weak man Chap. xiiii. Of an other letter, which the
Emperor sent to the lady Macrine, wherein he expresses the fiery flames which
consume sonest the gentle hearts. Chap. xv. Of a letter which the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius sent to the beautiful lady of Lybia, wherein he reproves that
love is natural, and that the most part of the philosophers and men have been
by love overcome. Chap. xvi. The end of the table.

The first book of the Dial of princes, with the famous Book of Marcus
Aurelius, wherein be entreats what excellency is in the prince, that is a
good Christian: and contrariwyse, what evils do follow him, that is a cruel
tyrante.
Where the Author speaks of the birth and lynage of the wise Philosopher and
Emperor, Marcus Aurelius And he puts also at the beginning of this Book
three Chapters, wherein he entreats of the discourse of his life: for by his
Epistles and doctrine, the whole of this present work is proved. Cap. i.
AFter the death of the Emperor Antonius Pius, in the 695. years from the
foundation of Rome, and in the 173. Olimpiade: Fuluius Cato, and Gneus
Patroclus then being consulles: the fourth day of October, in the high
Capitol of Rome, at suit of the whole Roman people and with thassent of the
sacred Senate Marcus Aurelius Antonius was proclaimed Emperor universal of
the whole Roman monarche. This noble prince was naturally of Rome borne in
the mount Celio, on the sixth day before the Kalendes of May, which after the
Latins accounte is the.xxvi. day of April. His Graundefather was called Annius
Verus, and was chosene senatoure in the time of the Emperors Titus, and
Vespasian, his great graunde fathere was named Annius Verus, which was borne
in Spain in the free town of Gububa, whenne the wars were most cruel
between Caesar and Pompeius: at what time many Spanyardes fled to Rome, and
many Romans ran into Spain. By this means this Emperor had a great
graundfather a Romayne, and a great graundmother a Spanyard. His father was
named Annius Verus after his grandfather and great grandfather, by reason
whereof the ancient historiographers call him Marcus Antonius Verus. And true
it is that the Emperor Adrian called him Marcus Verissimus, for that he never
forged lie nor swarued at any time from the truth. These Annij Very were a
kindred in Rome (as Julius Capitolinus reports) which vaunted themselves to
come of Numa Pompilius and Quintus Curtius the famous Roman: which (to work
the Roman people safety, and his own person everlasting memory) willingly
threw him self into the lake, which afterward was called Curtius. That as
then was seen in Rome. This Emperors mother was called Domitia Camilla, as
recounteth Cinna in the books that he wrote of Romain pedigrees. That stock
of Camilli, was in those days highly honored in Rome: for that they
conueighed their dissent from that Camillus, which was the renowned and
valiant Romain captain, who delivered Rome when the Gavvles had taken it and
besieged the Capitol. The men that sprange of this lineage bare the name of
Camilli, for remembrance of this Camillus. And the woman that came of the same
stock kept the name of Camille, in memory of a daughter of the said
Camillus. This Camilla refused marriage, and chose to live among the vessall
virgins: and there long space remained enduring a sharp and hard life. And
she was so virtuous a Romayne and precise in her life, that in the time of
Seuerus Emperor of Rome, her tomb was honored as a relic, whereon was
engraued this Epitaphe.

Camilla lo, does here engraued rest.
That only was, Camillus daughter dear
Twyse twenty years, and fix, she has possessed
A covert life, un touchte of any feere.
The king of Trinacry, could not her move
To taste the sweet delight of wedlockes band
Nor train by suit, her sacred mind to love,
^nclosde in breest, so deep did chastnes stand.
But oh, great wrong, the crawling worms her do
To gnawe, on that unspotted senceles corse
That rage of youth spent undefiled so
With sober life, in spite of Cupides force.
And this was written in heroycal verse in the Greek tongue with a maruelouse
haughty style. But to our matter, ye shall understand that the Romans kept a
certain Law in the 12. tables, the words whereof were these. We ordeyne and
command, that all the Romans shall for ever have special privilege in every
such place, where their auncestoures have done to the Romayne people any
notable service. For it is reason, that where the citizen aduentureth his life,
there the city should do him some honor after his death. By virtue of this
law, all the family of Camilli ever enjoyed the keeping of the high Capitol,
for that by his force and pollicye he chased the french men from the siege.
Truly it is not unknown that this noble knight and valyant captain Camille
did other things as great, and greater than this: but because it was done
within the circuit of Rome, it was esteemed above all his other acts and
prowes. And herein the Romans swarued not far from reason, for that
amongst all princelye virtues is esteemed to be the chiefest and worthyest,
which is employed to the profyt of the common wealth. The Romayne Croniclers
with tears cease not to lament the ruin of their country, seeing that
variety of time, the multitude of tyrauntes, the crueltye of cyuill wars
were occasion that the aunciente state of the Romayn government came to utter
destruction, and in steed thereof a new and evil trade of life to be placed.
And hereof no man ought to marvel, for it chaunseth throughout al realms and
nations, by often changing governors that among the people daily spryngeth
sundry new vices. Pulio says, that for no alteracion which befell to the
common weal, for no calamitye that ever Rome suffered, that privilege was
taken away from the Image of Camilli (I mean the government of the high
Capitol) except it were in the time of Silla the consul, when this familye was
soore persecuted, for none other cause but for that they favored the consul
Marius. This cruel Silla being dead, and the piteful Julius Caesar
preuailinge, all the banyshed men from Rome returned home again to the
commonne wealth. As touching the ancestors of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, what has been their trade of life, estate, pouertye, or riches,
standinge infauour or displeasoure, what prosperity or adversity they have
had or suffered, we find not in wrytinges, though with great dilygence they
have been serched for. And the cause hereof was, for that the ancient writers
of ye Roman histories, touched the lives of the emperors fathers (specially,
when they were made princes) more for the good merits that were in the
children, then for ye great estimacio^ that came from the fathers. Julius
Capitolinus says that Annius Verus (father of Marcus Aurelius) was Praetor of
the Rhodian armies, and also wardein in other frontiers, in the time of Traian
the good, Adrian the wise, and Antonye the merciful. Which Emperors trusted
none with their armies but discrete and valiant men. For good princes chose
always such captains as can with wisdom guide the army, and with
valiauntnes give the battle. Though the Romans had sondrye wars in
diverse places, yet chefelye they kept great garrisons always in four parts
of the world. That is to say, in Bizance (which now is Constantinople) to
resist the Parthiens, in Gades (which now is called Galiz) to withstand the
Portugales: in the river of Rein, to defend them selves from the Germans: and
at Colosses (which now is called the I Will of Rhodes) for to subdue the
Barbariens. In the month of January when the Senate distributed their offices,
the dictatoure being appointed for 6. months: and the. 2. Consulles chosen
for one year: incontinently in the.3. place they chose 4. of the most renowned
persons to defend the said 4, dangerous fro^tiers. For the Romans neither
feared the pains of hell, nor trusted for reward in heaven: but sought by all
occasions possible in their life to leave some notable memory of them after
their death. And that Roman was counted most valiante and of the Senate best
favored, to whom they committed the charge of the most cruel and dangerous
wars. For their strife was not to bear rule and to be in office to get money:
but to be in the frontiers to overcome their enemies. In what estimacion these
4. frontiers were we may easily perceive, by that we see the most noble Romans
have passed some part of their youth in those places as captains, until such
time that for more weyghtie affairs they were appointed from thense to some
other places. For at that time there was no word so greauous and injurious to
a citezin, as to say go, thou have never ben brought up in the wars: and to
prove the same by examples, the great Pompey passed the winter season in
Constantinople, the aduenturous Scipio in Colonges, the courageous Caesar in
Gades, and the renowned Marius in Rhodes. And these. 4. were not only in the
frontiers before said in their youth, but there they did such valiant acts,
that the memory of them remained evermore after their death. These things I
have spoken to prove, sithe we find that Marcus Aurelius father was captain
of one of those.4. frontiers: it follows that he was a man of singular
wisdom and prowess. For as Scipio said to his friend Masinissa. in affrike
it is not possible for a Roman captain to want either wisdom or courage,
for thereunto they were predestined at their birthe. We have no autentike
authorities that shows us from whence, when, or how, in what countries and
with what persons this captain passed his youth. And the cause is, for that
ye Romain Croniclers were not accustomed to write the things done by their
prince before they were created: but only the acts of young men, which from
their youth had their hearts stoutlye bent to great aduenturs. And in my
opinion it is well done. For it is greater honor to obtain, an empire by
policy and wisdom then to have it by descent, so yt there be no tirannie.
Suetonius Tranquillus in his first book of Emperors counts at large the
aduenturous enterprises taken in hand by Julius Caesar in his young age, and how
far unlikely they were from thought that he should ever obtain the Roman
Empiree writing this to show unto princes, how earnestlye Julius Cesars heart
was bent to win the Romayne Monarchy, and likewise how wisdom failed him in
behauing him self therein. A philosopher of Rome wrote to Phalaris the
tiraunt, which was in Cicilia, asking him why he possessed the Realm so long
by tirannye? Phalaris answered him again in another Epistle in these few
words Thou call me tyrant because I have taken this realm and kept it
this.32. years I grant the (quod he) that I was a tiraunte in vsurpyng it: For
no man occupyeth another man's right but by reason he is a tyraunte. But yet
I will not agree to be called a tyraunte, sith it is now.xxxii. years sins I
have possessed it. And though I have atcheued it by tyranny, yet I have
governed it by wisdom. And I let thee to understand, that to take an other
man's goods, it is an easy thing to conquer, but a hard thing to keep an easy
thing: but to keep them, I ensure the it is very hard. The Emperor Marcus
Aurelius married the daughter of Antonius Pius, the 16. Emperor of Rome, and
she was named Faustina, who as sole heir had the Empire: and so through
marriage Marcus Aurelius came to be Emperor: this Faustine was not so honest
and chaste: as she was fair and beautiful. She had by him two sons,
Commodus, and Verissimus, Marcus Aurelius triumphed twice, once when he
overcame the Perthians, and an other time when he conquered the Argonantes He
was a man very well learned and of a deep understanding, He was as excellent
both in the Greek and latin, as he was in his mother tongue. He was very
temperate in eating and drinking, he wrote many things full of good learning
and sweet sentences: He dyed in conquering the realm of Pannonia, which is
now called Hongarie. His death was as much bewailed, as his life was desired.
And he was loved so intierlye in the city of Rome, yt every Roman had a
statue of him in his house, to the end the memory of him (among them) should
never decay. The which was never red that they ever did for any other king or
Emperor of Rome, no not for Augustus Caesar who was best beloved of all other
Emperors of Rome. He governed the empire for the space of 18. years with
vprighte justice: and dyed at the age of 63 years with much honor, in the year
clymatericke, which is in the 60. and 3. years wherein the life of man ronneth
in great peril. For then are accomplyshed the nine seuens, or the seven nynes.
Aulus Gelius writes a chapter of this matter in ye book De noctibus Atticis.
Marcus Aurelius was a prince of life most pure, of doctrine most profound, and
of fortune most happy of all other princes in the world, save only for
Faustine his wife and Commodus his son And to the end we may see what
Marcus Aurelius was from his infancy, I have put here an epistle of his which
is this.

Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Pulio, wherein he
declares the order of his whole life: and amongst other things he makes
mention of a thing that happened to a Roman Censor with his host of Campagna.
Cap. ii.
MArcus Aurelius only Emperor of Rome greteth the his old friend Pulio wishes
health to thy parson, and peace to the commen wealth. As I was in the temple of
the vestall virgens, a letter of thine was presented unto me, which was written
long before, and greatly desired of me: but the best thereof is, that thou
writing unto me briefly, desire that I should writ unto the at large. Which
is indecent for the authority of him that is chief of the empire, in especial
if such one be covetous: for to a prince there is no greater infamy, then to be
lauishe of words, and scant of rewards. Thou wrytest to me of thy grief in thy
leg, and that thy wound is great: and truly the pain thereof troubles me
at my heart, and I am right sorry that thou want that which is necessary for
thy health, and that good that I do wish the. For in the end all the
travails of the life may be endured, so that the body with diseases be not
troubled. Thou let me understand by thy letters that thou art arrived at
Rhodes, and requireste me to write unto the how I lived in that place when I
was young, what time I gave my mind to study, and likewise what the
discourse of my life was until the time of my being Emperor of Rome. In this
case truly I meruell at the not a little that thou should ask me such a
question, and so much the more that thou did not consider, yt I cannot
without great trouble and pain answer thy demand. For the doings of youth
in a young man were never so upright and honest, but it were more honesty to
amend them, then to declare them. Annius Verus my father showing unto me his
fatherly love (not accomplishing yet fully 13 years) drew me from the vices of
Rome, and sent me to Rhodes to learn science, howbeit better acccompanyed with
books, then laden with money, where I used such dilygence, and fortune so
favored me, that at the age of 26. years I red openly natutall and moral
philosophy, and also Rethoricke: and there was nothing gave me such occasion to
study, and read books, as the want of money, for poverty causes good men's
children to be virtuous, so that they attain to that by virtue, which others
come unto by riches. Truly friend Pulio I found great want of the pleasures of
Rome, specially at my first coming into the I Will, but after I had read
philosophy 10 years at Rhodes, I took my self as one borne in the country,
And I think my couersacion among them caused it to seem no less. For it is a
rule that never fails, that virtue makes a stranger grow natural in a
strange country: and vice makes the natural a stranger in his own country.
Thou know well how my father Annius Verus was 15. years a captain in the
frontiers against the Barbarous, by the commandment of Adrian my lord and
master, and Antonius Pius my father in law, both of them princes of famous
memory: which reco^mended me there to his old friends, who with fatherly
counsel exhorted me to forget the vices of Rome, and to accustom me to the
virtues of Rhodes. And truly it was but nedeful for me, for the natural love
of the country often times brings damage to him that is borne therein leadinge
his desire still to return home. Thou shall understand that the Rhodians are
men of much curtesy, and requyting benevolence, which chaunseth in few Isles:
because that naturally they are persons deceitful, subtle, unthankful, and
full of suspicio^. I speak this because my fathers friends always succored me
with counsel and money: which two things were so necessary, that I could
not tell which of them I had most need of. For the stranger makes his profit
with money to withstand disdainful poverty, and profitteth him self with
counsel to forget the sweet love of his country. I desired then to read
philosophy in Rhodes so long as my father continued there captain, But that
could not be, for Adrian my lord sent for me to return to Rome, which pleased
me not a little, albeit (as I have said) they used me as if I had been borne in
that Island, for in theend although the eyes be fed with delyght to see
strange things, yet therefore the heart is not satisfied. And this is all that
touches the Rhodians. I will now tell the also how before my going thither I
was borne and brought up in mount Celio (in Rome) with my father from mine
infancy. In the common wealth of Rome there was a law used, and by custom well
observed, that no citize^ which enjoyed any liberty of Rome (after their
sons had accomplyshed.10. years) should be so bold or hardy to suffer them
to walk the streates like vacabondes. For it was a custom in Rome, that the
children of the senators should suck til two years of age, til 4. they should
live at their own wylles, till 6. they should reed, till 8 they should write,
till 10. they should study gramer, and 10. years accomplished they should then
take some craft or occupacion, or give them selves to study, or go to the
wars, so yt throughout Rome no man was idell. In one of the laws of the 12
tables wear written these words. We ordeine and command that every cytizen
that dwells within the circuit of Rome or lybertyes of the same, from 10
years vpwardes to keep his son well ordered. And if perchance the child
being ydel, or that no man teaches him any craft or science, should thereby
peradventure fall to vice, or commyt some wicked offense, that then the father
no less then the son should be punyshed. For there is nothing so much
breadeth vice amongst the people, as when the fathers are to neclygent, and
the children to bold. And furthermore another law said. We ordeine and
command that after 10. years be past, for the first offense that the child
shall commyt in Rome, that the father shall be bound to send him forth some where
else, or to be bound suertye for the good demeanor of his son. For it is not
reason that the fond love of the father to the son should be an occasion why
the multitude should be sclaundered: because all the wealth of the Empire
consists in keeping and mayntaynyng quiet men, and in banishyng and expellyng
sedycious persons. I will tell the one thing my Pulyo, and I am sure thou
wylt meruell at it, and it is this. When Rome tryumphed and by good wysedom
governed all the world, the inhabitants in the same surmounted the number of
two hundredth thousand parsonnes, which was a maruelouse matter. Amongeste whom
(as a man may judge) there was above a hundredth thousand children. But they
which had the charge of them kept them in such awe and doctrine, that they
banyshed from Rome one of the sons of Cato vticensis for breakyng an erthen
pot in a maidens hands which went to fetch water. In like manner they
banyshed the son of good Cinna, only for entering into a garden to gather
fruit, And none of these two were as yet fyftyne years old. For at that time
they chastised them more for the offenses done in gest, then they do now for
those which are don in good earnest. Our Cicero says in his book De legibus,
that the Romans never took in any thing more pains, then to restreine the
children as well old as young from ydlenes. And so long endured the fear of
their law, and honor of their common wealth, as they suffered not their
children like vacabondes idelly to wander the streates. For that country may
above all other be counted happy, where each one enjoys his own labor,
and no man lives by the swette of another. I let the know my Pulio, that when
I was a child (although I am not yet very old) none durst be so hardy to go
commonly through Rome, without a token about him of the craft and occupacion
he exercysed, and whereby he lived. And if any man had been taken contrary,
the children did not only cry out of him in the streates as of a fool: but
also the Censour afterward condemned him to travail with the captynes in
common works. For in Rome they esteemed it no less shame to the child which
was idle, then they did in Greece to the philosopher which was ignorant. And to
the end thou may se this I write unto the to be no new thing, thou ought
to know, that the Emperor caused to be borne before him a brenning brand, and
the counsel an axe of arms, the priests a hat in manner of a coyfe, The
Senators a crusible on their arms, the Judges a little balance, the Tribunes
Maces, the governors a scepter, the Bishops hattes of flowers, The Orators
a book, the cutlers a swerd, the goldsmithes a pot to melt gold: and so forth
of al other offices, strangers excepted, which went al marked after one sort in
Rome: For they would not agree that a stranger should be apparailed and
marked according to the children of Rome. O my friend Pulio, it was such a joy
then to behold the discipline and prosperity of Rome, and it is now at this
present such a grefe to see the calamity thereof, that by the immortal gods
I swear to the, and so the god Mars guide my hand in wars, that the man
which now is best ordered, is not worth so much as the most dissolute person
was then. For then amongst a thousand they could not find one man vicious in
Rome, and now among twenty thousand they cannot find one virtuous in all
Italye. I know not why the gods are so cruel against me, and fortune so
contrary, that this 40. years I have done nothing but weep and lamente to see
the good men die, and immediately to be forgotten: and on the other side to see
the wicked live and to be always in prosperitye. Universally the noble heart
may endure all the troubles of man's life, unless it be to see a good man
decay, and the wicked to prosper: which my heart cannot abide, nor yet my tongue
dissemble. And touching this matter my friend Pulio, I will write unto the one
thing which I found in the books of the high Capitol, where he treats
of the time of Marius and Sylla, which truly is worthy of memory and that is
this. There was at Rome a custom and a law inviolable, since the time of
Cinna, that a Censour expressly commanded by the senate should go and visit
the provinces which were subject unto it through out all Italye: and the
cause of those visitacions was for three things. The first, to see if any
complained of justice, the second, to see in what case the common wealth
stood. The third, to the end that yearelye they should render obedience to
Rome. O my friend Pulio, how think thou? if they visited Italye at this
present, as at that time they surueyed Rome, how full of errous should they
find it: And what decay should they see therein think thou? Truly (as
thou know) they should see the common wealth destroyed, justice not
ministed, and moreover Rome not obeyed, and not without just cause. For of
right ought that common wealth to be distroyed, which ons of al other has
been the flower, and most beautified with virtues: and after becomes most
abominable and defiled with vices. The case was such, that two years after
the wars of Sylla, and Marius, the Censor went yearly to Nola (which is a
place in the province of Campania) to visit the same country as the custom
was. And in those days the time and season being very hot, and the province
quiet, not dysturbed with wars, and perceiuyng that none of the people came to
him. The censour said to the host which lodged him.

Friend I am a judge sent from the Senators of Rome to visit this land.
Therefore go thy ways quicklye and call the good men hither which be among
the people, For I have to say unto them from the sacred senate. This host
(who peradventure was wyser then the Romayne judge, although not so rich)
goes to the graves of the dead, which in that place were buried, and spoke
unto them with a loud voice saying. O ye good men, come away with me
quickelie, for the Romayne Censour calls you. The judge perceiuyng they came
not, sent him again to call them: and the host as he did at the first time, so
did he now at the second. For when he was at the graves with a loud voice he
said. O ye good men come hither, for the censour of Rome would talk with you.
And likewise they were called the third time, with the selfsame words. And the
Censour seeing no body come, was marvelous angry, and said to the host. Sith
these good men dysdayne to come at my commandment, and show their allegiaunce
to the sacred senate of Rome (to thintente I may punyshe this their
dysobedience) I will go unto them my self, Come and go with me. The poor
host without any words, taking the censour by the hand, led him to the graves
where he had been before, and again with a loud voice cried unto the dead men
and said. O ye good men, here is the Roman censor come to speak with you. The
censor being angry said to him, what meanest thou by this host? I sent the to
call them that are alive, and not those that are dead? the host made answer: o
thou Roman Judge if thou were wise, thou would not marueil at that that I
have done. For I let the understand, in this our city of Nola all the good men,
(all I say) are now dead, and lie here buried in these graves, Therefore thou
have no cause to marvel, nor yet to be dyspleased with my answer: but I
rather ought to be offended with thy demand, willing me to enquire for good
men, and thou thy self doste offend with the evil daily. Wherefore I let
the know (if thou be ignorant thereof) if thou will speak with any good man,
thou shalt not find him in all the hole world: unless the dead be revived, or
except the gods will make a new creation. The Consul Sylla was five months
our captain in this our city of Nola in Campania, sowinge the fruit which
ye other Romans gathered: that is to say, he left children without fathers,
fathers without children, daughters without mothers, and husbands without
wives: wives without husbands, uncles without nephews, subjects without
Lords, Lords without tenauntes, gods without Temples, Temples without
priests, mountains without heardes, and fields without fruits. And the
worste of all is, that this cursed Sylla, dispeopled this our city of good
and virtuous men: and replenyshed it with wicked and vicious persons Ruin
and decay never destroyed the walls so much, neither the mothes ever marred
so many garments, ne the worms rotted so much fruits, nor yet the hayle
beat down so much corn, as the disorder and vices of Sylla the Roman
Consul did harm, which he brought unto this land of campania. And although
the evils that he did here to the men were many fold great, yet much greater
herein was that which he did to their customs and manners. For in the end, the
good men which he beheaded are now at rest with the dead: but the vices which
he left us. In this land there are none but proud and arrogant men that desire
to command. In this land there are none other but envious men that know
naught else but malice. In this land there are idle men which do nothing but
lose their time. In this land there are none but gluttons, which do nothing
but eats. In this land there are non but thieves, which entende naught else but
robberies. In this land there are none but rebels, that do nothing but
stir sedicion. And if thou and all the Romans esteem these men for good,
tarry a while I will go to call them al to the. For if we should kill and put in
the shambles all the ill men and wey them as we do the flesh of sheep, or
other like beasts: all the neighbors and inhabitants of Italye should have
meat sufficient to eat. Behold Censor, in this land of Campania they case
none good but those which are quiet, sober, wise, and discret men. They call
none good but the pacient, honest, and verteous men. Finally I say that we call
none good but those which will do no harm, and will occupy them selves in
good works without tears. I speak not that which I will say, that is: if we
seek for any of them we shall find none but in these graves. For the just
judgment of god it was, they should repose them selves in the intrailles of the
earth, whom the public weal deserved not to have alive Thou come to visit
this land where thou shall imediatly be served with the wicked: and to hyde
their faults, their dissolute life, and their vices, thou shall not be a
little solicited. Beliue me if thou will not undo thy self and be deceived.
Trust thou rather these rotten bones, then their deceiptful hearts. For in the
end, the examples of the dead that were good do profit men more to live well:
than the counsel of the living that be wicked do interre and burye al those
that be now living.

Marcus Aurelius concludes the letter, and declares at large the sciences he
learned, and all the masters which he had. And in the end he recites five
notable things, in the obseruaunce of which the Romans were very curious.
Cap. iii.
I Have recyted these things unto the, my friend Pulio, to the end thou
should know what an infinite number there is of the wicked sort in yt world,
and how small and scant a number there is in Italye of the good, and this
proceeds of none other thing, but because the Fatheres do not bring up their
children as our ancestors did. It is impossible a young child should be
vicious, if with due correction he had been instructed in virtues. Annius Verus
my father in this case deserves as much praise, as I do reproach. For whiles
I was young, he never suffered me to sleep in bed, to sit in chair, to eat
with him at his table, neither durst I lift up mine eyes to look him in the
face. And oftentimes he said unto me, Marcus my son, I had rather thou
shoudest be an honest Romayne, than a dissolute Philosopher. Thou desyrest me
to write unto the how many masters I had, and what scyences I learned in my
youth. Know thou that I had many good masters, though I am become an evil
scoller. I learned also diverse scyences, though presently I know little, not
for that I forgote them, but because the affairs of the empire of Rome
excluded me from them, and caused me to forsake them. For it is a general rule,
that science in that place is never permanent, where the person is not at
liberty. I studied grammar with a master called Euphermon, who said he was a
Spaniard borne, and his head was hoar for age. In speech he was very
temperate, in correction somewhat severe, and in life exceadyng honest. For
there was a law in Rome, that the childrens masters should be very old: so that
if the disciple were.10. years of age, the master should be above fifty. I
studied a long time Rethorick, and the law, under a greek called Alexander,
borne in Lycaony, which was so excellent an Orator, that if he had had as
great a grace in writing with his pen, as he had eloquence in speaking with
his tongue, truly he had been no less renowned among the Gretians, then Cicero
was honored among the Romans. After the death of this my master (at Naples) I
went to Rhodes, and heard rethoricke again of Orosus of Pharanton, and of
Pulio, which truly were men expert, and excellent in the art of oratorie,
and especially in making comedies, tragedies, and enterludes, they were very
fine, and had a goodly grace. Commodus Calcedon, was my first master in
natural Philosophy. He was a grave man, and in great credit with Adrian, he
translated Homere out of greek into latin. After this man was dead, I took
Sextus Cherone^sis for my master, who was nephewe to Plutarche the great,
which Plutarche was Traianus master, I knew this Sextus Cheronensis at.35.
years of age, at what time I doubt whether there has been any Philosopher
that ever was so well esteemed throughout the Romain empire as he. I have him
here with me, and although he be four score years old, yet continually he
writes the Histories and gestes done of my time. I let the know, my friend
Pulio, that I studied the law.2. years, and the seeking of the laws of many
nations was occasion that I knew many antiquities: and in this science Volucius
Mecianns was my master, a man which could read it well, and also dispute of
if better. So that on a time he demanded of me merrily and said. Tell me
Mark, do thou think there is any law in the world that I know not? and I
answered him: Tell me master, is there any law in the world that thou
obseruest? The fyfte year that I was at Rhodes there came a marvelous
pestilence, which was occasion of the dissolution of our scoole, which was in
a narowe and little place, and being there a certain painter paintinge a rich
and exellent work for the Realm of Palestine, I then for a truth learned
there to draw and painte, and my master was Diogenetus, who in those days was
a famous painter. He painted in Rome.6. worthy Princes in one table, and 6.
other tirannous Emperors in an other. And amongst those evil Nero the cruel
was painted so lively, that he seemed a live to all those that saw him: and
that table wherein Nero was so liuelye drawn, was by decrees of the sacred
senate commanded to be burnt. For they said that a man of so wicked a life,
deserved not to be represented in so goodly a table. Others said that it was
so natural and perfect, that he made all men afraid that beheld him, and if
he had been left there a few days, that he would have spoken as if he had
been alive. I studied the art of Nigromancie a while with all the kinds of
gyromancye and chiromancye. In this science I had no particular master, but
that somtymes I went to hear Apolonius lecture. After I was married to
Faustine, I learned Cosmographye in the city of Argeleta, which is the
chiefeste town of Illyria: and my masters were Iunius Rusticus, and Cyna
Catullus, Croniclers and counsaylers to Adrian my master, and Antonius my
father in law. And because I would not be ignorant in any of those things
that man's debilitie might attain to, being at the wars of Dalia I gave my
self to music, and was apt to take it, and my master was named Geminus
C^modus a man of a quick hand to play, and of as pleasant a voice to singe,
as ever I heard Romayne tongue prompte to speak. This was the order of my
life, and the time that I spente in learning. And of good reason a man so
occupied can not chose but be virtuous. But I swear and confess to the that I
did not so much give my self to study, but that every day I lost time
enoughe. For youth and the tender flesh desires liberty, and although a man
accustom it with travails, yet he finds vacant time also for his pleasours.
Although all the ancient Romans were in diverse things very studious, yet
notwithstanding amongst all over and besides these, there were five things
whereunto they had ever a great respect: and to those that therein offended,
neither requests auayled, rewards profited, nor law (old nor new) dispensed.
Truly their good wills are to be commended, and their dyligence to be exalted.
For the princes that govern great Realms, ought to employe their hearts to
make good laws, and to occupy their eyes to se them dulye executed
throughoute the common wealth. These five things wear these.

1 The first, they ordained that the priests should not be dishoneste. For
in that Realm where priests are dyshonest, it is a token that the gods
against the people are angrye.

2 The second, it was not suffered in Rome that the Virginnes vestalles should
at their pleasoure stray abroad. For it is but reason that she which of her
own fre will has heretofore promised openly to be good, should now if she
change her mind be compelled in secret to be chaste.

3 The third, they decreed that the judges should be just and vprighte. For
there is nothing that decays a common wealth more, then a judge who has not
for all men one ballaunce indifferent.

4 The fourth was, that the Captains that should go to the wars should not
be cowardes: for there is no like danger to the common wealth, nor no like
sclaunder to the Prince, as to commit the charge of men to him in the field,
who wylbe first to command, and last to fight.

The fifthe was, that they which had charge of bringinge up of children
should not be vicious. For there is nothing more monstrous and more
sclaunderous, then he that is master of children, should be subject and
servant to vices. How think thou my friend Pulio when al these things were
observed in Rome? Think thou that the youth was so dissolute as at this
present? thinkeste thou in deed that it is the same Rome wherein (in times
past) were so notable good and ancient men? beleuest thou that it is that Rome
wherein (in the golden age) the old men were so honest, and the children so
well taught, the armies well ordered, and the judges and Senators so upright
and just? I call God to witness, and swear to the that it is not Rome, neither
has it any likeness of Rome, nor yet any grace to be Rome: and he that would
say that this Rome was the old Rome, knows little of Rome. The matter was
this, that the ancient and virtuous Romans being dead, it seems to the
gods, that we are not yet woorthye to enjoy their houses, So that either this
is not Rome, or else we be not the Romans of Rome. For considering the
prowess and virtuous deeds of the ancient Romans, and wayeng also our
dissolute lives: it were a very great infamy for them, to call us their
successors. I desire my friend Pulio, to write unto the all these things, to
thend thou may se what we were, and what we are. For great things have need
of great power, and require a long time before they can grow and come to their
perfection: and then afterward at one moment and with one blow they fall down
to the ground. I have been more tedious in my letter than I thought to have
been, and now I have told the that which with dyligence (by reason of my great
affairs) in three or four times I have written of that that wants in thine
and is to much in mine, we shall make a reasonable letter, and since I pardon
the for being to brief, pardon thou me also for being to long. I saw the ones
enquire for unicorns horn in Alexandry, wherefore now I send the a good piece
and likewise I send the a horse which in my judgment is good. Advertise me if
thy daughter Drusilla be alive, with whom I was wont to laugh, and I will
healpe her to a marriage. The immortal gods keep the O my Pulio, thy wife, thy
stepmother and thy daughter, and Salut them all, from me and faustine. Mark of
Mount Celio Emperor of Rome with his own hand writes unto the.

Of the excellency of christian religion, which manyfesteth the true God, and
disproueth the vanitye of the auncyents having so many Gods And that in the
old time, when the enemies were reconcyled in their houses, they caused also
that the gods should embrace each other in the Temples. Cap. iiii.
HE that is the only divine word, begotten of the Father, lord perpetual of
the Hierarchies, more aunciente then the heavens, Prince of all holiness,
chief head from whom all had their beginning, the greatest of all gods, and
creatore of all creatures, in the profundnesse of his eternal sapience,
accords all the harmony and composition of Christian religion. This is such
a manner of sure matter, and so well laid, that neither the miseries which
spring of thinfections of naughty Christians can trouble, nor yet the
boisterous winds of the heretics are able to move. For it were more likely
that heaven and earth should both perish, then it should suspend for one
day, and that there should be no Christian religion. The ancient godds which
were inuentours of wordly things, as the foundation of their reproved sects
was but a flienge sand, and an unstable ground full of dangerous and erroneous
abuses: so some of those poor wretches, lokyng perhaps like a ship ronning
upon a rock, suspectynge nothing, were drowned. Other like ruyned buildings
were shaken in sonder and fell down dead, finally these gods which only bare
the name of gods shall be for evermore forgotten. But he only shall be perpetual,
which in god, by god, and thorough god has his beginning. Many and sundry
were the multitude of the nations which have been in times past. That is to
wit, the Sirians, ye Assirians, Persia^s, Medians, Macedonia^s, Grecians,
Cythians, Arginians, Corinthia^s, Caldea^s, India^s, Athenians, Lacedaemonians,
Africans, Vandales, Svveuians, Allains, Hongarians, Germaignes, Britons,
Hebrews, Palastines, Gentiles, Iberthailides, Maurians, Lucitanians, Goths,
and Spaniardes. And truly in all these look how great the difference
amongst them in their customs and manners was: so much diversity was of the
ceremonies which they used, and of their gods which they honored. For the
gentiles had this error, that they said one alone was not of power sufficient
to create such a multitude as were created. If I were before all the sages that
ever were, they would not say the contrary, but without comparison the gods
whom they worshypped and invented were greater in multitude, then the realms
and provinces which they conquered and possessed. For by that folly the
ancient poets durst affirm in their writings that the gods of one nation
and country were mortal enemies to the gods of another province. So that the
gods of Troy envied the gods of Greece, more then the princes of Greece, envied
the princes of Troy. What a strange thing was it to see the Assirians in what
reverence they worshypped the god Belus. The Egiptia^s the god Apis. The
Caldeans the god Assas. The Babilonia^s the devouring dragon. The pharaones the
statue of gold. The Palestines Beelzebub. The Romans honored the god Jupiter.
The Affrica^s the god Mars. The Corinthians the god Apollo. The Arabians the
God Astaroth. The Arginians the Son. Those of Acaia the Moon. The Cidonians
Belphegorn. The Amonites Balim. The Indians Baccus. The lacedaemonians Osiges
The Macedonians did sacrifice to Marcury. The Ephesians to their goddess
Diana. The Greeks to Juno. The Armenians to Liber. The Troia^s to Vesta. The
Latins to Februa. The Tarentines to Ceres. The Rhodians (as says Apolonius
Thianeus,) worshypped the God Ianus, and above all things we ought to
marvel at this. That they striued oftentimes amongst them selves, not so
much upon the possessions and signories of Realms, as upon a certain
obstinacy they had to maintain the gods of the one, to be of greater power
then the others. For they thought if their gods were not esteemed, that the
people should be impouerished, unfortunate, and persecuted. Pulio in his second
book De dissolatione regionum orientarum, declares that the first province
that rebelled against the Emperor Helius Adrianus (which was the fiftenth
Emperor of Rome) was the land of Palestine, against the which was sent a
captain named Julius Seuerus, a man of great courage and very fortunate and
aduenturous in arms. This captain did not only finishe the wars, but he
wrought such an outrageous destruction in that land, that he besieged 52.
cities and raced them to the ground, and burned 680. villages, and slew so many
in battle schermidge, and by Justice, that amounted to the nombre of.5000.
persons. For unto the proud and cruel captains victory can never be
glorious, unless they water the ground with the bludde of their enemies. And
furthermore in the cities and towns besieged, the children old men and women
which died through hunger and pestilence were more in nombre, than those
which were slain in the wars. For in wars the sword of the enemies
lights not upon all: but pestilence and famine has no respect to any. After
this war of ye Palestines was ended, immediately after arose a more crueller
betwixt the Allaynes, and Armenians. For there are many that se the beginning
of the troubles and miseries which arise in Realms: but there are few that
consider the end, and seek to remedy the same. The occasion of this war
was, as they came to the feast of the mount Olimpus they fell in disputacions
whither of their gods were better, and which of them ought to be preferred
before other. Whereof there sprange such contradictions, and such mortal
hatred, that on every part they were furiouslye moved to wars: and so under
a color to maintain the gods which they honored, both the common wealths
were brought into great poverty, and the people also into much misery. The
Emperor Helius Adrianus, seeing such cruel wars to arise upon so light
occasion, sent thither the captain above named, Julius Seuerus, to pacifye
the Allaines and Armenians, and commanded him that he should persecute those
with wars, which would not be ruled by his arbitrament and sentence. For
those iustlye deserve the sword, which with no reasonable conditions will
condescende unto peace. But Julius Seuerus used such pollicye that he made
them good friends, and never touched them nor came nere them. Which thing was
no less acceptable to the Emperor, then profitable to the realms. For the
captain which subdueth the country by entreatye, deserves more honor,
then he which overcomes it by bataile. The agreement of the peace was made
upon such condition, that the Allayns should take for their gods the Armenians
gods, and the Armenians on the contrary the gods of the Allains: and further
when the people should embrace and reconcile them selves to the senate, that
then the gods should kiss the one the other, and to be reconciled to the
temple. The vanity of the auncientes was such, and the blindness of mortal
men so great, and so subject were they to deuillishe devises, that as easily
as the eternal wisdom creates a true man now a days: so easelye then a
vain man might have invented a false god. For the Lacedaemonians had this
opinion, that men had no less power to invent gods, then the gods had to
create men.

How the Philosopher Bruxellus was greatly esteemed amongst the auncientes for
his life, and the words which he spoke unto the Romans at the hour of his
death. Cap. v.
PHarasmaco in his 20. book De liberate deorum (whereof Cicero makes mention
in his book De natura deorum) says: that when the Goths took Rome and
besiged the high capitol, there came amongst them a philosopher called
Bruxellus, the which (after the Goths were repulsed out of Italy) remained
with Camillus at Rome. And because at that time Rome wanted Philosophers, this
Bruxellus was had in great veneracion amongst all the Romans, so that he was
the first stranger of whom (being alive) a statue was ever made in the Senate.
The Romans used to make a statue of ye Romans being alive: but not to
strangers til after their death. The age of this Bruxellus was 113. whereof.65.
he had been an inhabitaunt of Rome. And among other things they recite.7.
notable things of his life. 1 The first, that in.60 years no man ever saw him
issue out of the walls of Rome. For in the old time the Sages were little
esteemed, if in their behauiours they were not upright.

2 The second, that in 60 years no man heard him speak an idel word: for ye
words that are superfluous, do greatly deface the authority of the person. 3
The third, that in all his time they never saw him loase one hour of time. For
in a wise man there is no greater follye, then to see him spend a moment of an
hour idelly.

4 The fourth, that in all his time he was never detected of any vice. And let
no man think this to be a small matter. For few are they of so long life,
which are not noted of some infamy after their death.

5 The fifthe, that in all the 60. years he never made quarrel, nor striued with
any man: and this thing ought to be no less esteemed then the other. For
truly he that lives a long time without offering wrong to another, may be
called a monsture in nature.

6 The sixth, that in three or four years he never issued out of the temple, and
in this case this philosopher showed himself to be a good man. For the virtuous
man ought not to content him self only to be void of vices: but he ought
also to withdraw him self from the vycious.

7 The seventh and last, that he spoke more often with the gods then with men.

This philosopher now drawinge nere to the hour of death, all the Senate came
to vysite him, and to thank him for that he had lived so long amongst them in
so good conuersacio^, and that so willingly he cared and watched for the wealth
of Rome. And likewise all the people of Rome were right sorye for his sickness and
that they should lose the company of so excellent and virtuous a man. The good
philosopher in the presence of them all spoke these words unto the Senate.

Of that the sage Philosopher Bruxellus spoke to the Senate of Rome, at the
hour of his death. Cap. vi.
SInce you are wise (o worthy senators) me thinks you should not lament my
death, since I my self so joyfully do receive it. For we ought not to lament
the death we take, but the wicked life we lead. That man is very simple that
dreadeth death, for fear to loase the pleasures of life. For death ought not
to be feared for loss of life, but because it is a sharp scourge of ye wicked
life I dye (noble Senators) in joy and pleasure: First, because I do not
remember that ever I did any evil in all my life, or displeasour to any of the
common wealth. And I am certain, that the man which did no evil to men in his
life, the gods will do him no harm at ye hour of his death. Seco^darily I die
joyfully, to se al Rome lament ye loss of my life. For ye man is very wicked
and unhappy, whose life the people lament, and at whose death they do rejoice,
Thirdly I dye joyfully, only to remember that the 60 years which I have been in
Rome, always I have travailed for ye common wealth. For the just gods told me,
that there is no death with pain, but where life is without profit. Fourthly I
dye joyfully, not so much for the profit I have don to men, as for ye service I
have done to the gods. For regarding to how many profitable things we employ
our life, we may say, we live only the time which is employed to the service
of god. Ceasinge to speak further of my person, I will (worthy Senators)
disclose unto you a high secret, which touches your common wealth, and this it
is. That our father Romulus founded Rome, Numa Pompillius erected the high
Capitol, Aneus Marcius enclosed it with walls, Brutus delivered it from
Tyraunts: the good Camillus drove out the frenchmen Quintus Scicinnatus
augme^ted her power: but I leave it peopled with gods, which shall defend Rome
better then walls or men. For in the end, ye fear of one god is more worth,
then the strength of al men. When I came to Rome it was a confusion to se how
it was peopled with men, and unfurnished of gods. For there were but 5. gods, yt
is to wete, Jupiter, Mars, Ianus, Berecinthia, and the goddess Vesta. But now
it is not so. For there remains for every one a private god. Me thinks it an
unjust thing yt treasouries should be full of gold, and ye temples void of gods.
As there is 28000 housholdes, so you may account your selves happy yt I leave
you 28000. gods: by the virtue of ye which I co^iure you Romans, yt each of you
be contented with the god of his house, and have no care to apply to himself
the gods of the common wealth. For he that empropreth to him self that which
ought to be common to al, is to be blamed of god, and hated of me^. This shall be
therefore the order that you shall keep and have toward the gods, if you will not
err in their service. That is to understand, ye shall keep the mother
Berecinthia, to pacify ye ire of the gods, ye shall keep the goddess Vesta, to
turn from you the wicked destenies. Ye shall keep the god Jupiter, and shall
commit unto him the government of your common wealth. And also ye shall keep him
for the god above all the gods in heaven and earth. For if Jupiter did not
temper the ire, which the gods above have against you: there should be no
memory of men here beneth in earth. Of other particular gods which I leave
you, use your particular profit. But yet notwithstanding in the mean season
(Romans) take you head to your selves, and if at any time fortune should be
contrary, let no man be so hardy to speak evil of the god, which he has in
his house For ye gods tell me, that it was sufficient enough, to dissemble with
them which serve them not: and not to pardon those that offend them. And do
not deceive your selves in saying yt they are private gods, and not able to
help themselves. For I let you know, that there is not so little a god, but is of
power sufficient to revenge an iniurye. O Romans, it is reason that al from
hensforth live joyfully, and in peace, and furthermore think your selves
assured not to be overcome by your enemies: because now your neighbors of
you and not you of them shall desire to borow gods, and because ye shall se me
no more, ye think I must dye, and I think because I dye. I shall begin to
live. For I go to the gods, and leave among you the gods, because I depart.

How the Gentiles thought that one God was not able to defend them from
their enemies, and how the Romans sent throughout all the Empire to borow gods
when they fought against the Goths. Cap. vii.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome 1164. which according to the count of
the Latins was 402. from the incarnacion (as Paulus Orosus in the sixte book De
machina mundi says, and Paulus Diaconus in the 12. book of the Roman
histories) The goths (which as Spartian says, were called otherwise Gethules,
or Meslagethes) were driven out of their country by ye Huns, and came in to
Italy to seek new habitacions, and became natural, and built houses. At this
time there was an Emperor of Rome named Valentine, a man of small reputacion
and courage in wars, and endued with few good co^dicions, for yt he was of
Arian his sect. The kings of these Goths were two renowned men, whose names
were Randagagismus, and Alaricus. Of the which two Randagagismus was the
chiefest and most puissaunt, and he had a noble mind and a very good wit. He
led with him at the least. 2000000. Goths, the which all with him and he with
them made an oath, to shed as much blood of the Romans as they could, and
offer it to their gods. For the barbarous people had a custom, to noynte the
god (which was at that time in the temple of Venus) with ye blood of their
enemies whom they had slain. The news of the coming of this cruel tiraunt
was published throughout all Italy, Whose determinacion was not only to race
ye walls of Rome down to the earth, batter towers, dungions, houses, walls,
and buildings: but also he purposed to abolyshe and utterly to bring to
naught the name of Rome and likwyse of the Romans. Of this thing all the
Italiens were in great and merueilous fear. And the most puissaunt and
courageous knights and gentlemen, agreed togethers to retire within the walls
of Rome, and determined to die in that place to defend the liberty thereof. For
among the Romans there was an aunciente custom, that when they created a
knight, they made him swear to keep three things.

1 First, he swear to spend all the days of his life in the wars. 2
Secoundarely, he swear that neither for poverty nor riches nor for any other
things he should ever take wages but of Rome only. 3 Thirdly, he swear that
he would rather choose to dye in liberty, then to live in captivity.
After all the Romans (scatered abroad in Italy) were together assembled in
Rome, they agred to send letters by their pursiuantes, not only to their
subjects, but also to al their confederate. Theffecte whereof was this.

Of a Letter sent from the senate of Rome to all the subjects of the Empire.
Chap. viii.
THe sacred Senate, and all the people of Rome, to all their faithful and
loving subjects, and to their dear friends and confederates, wysheth health
and victory against your enemies. The variety of time, the negligence of you
all, and the unhappy success of our adventures, have brought us in prosses of
time, that where as Rome conquered Realms, and governed so many strange
signoryes, now at this day comes strangers to conquer and destroy Rome: in
such sort, that the Barbarous people (whom we were wont to keep for sclaues)
swear to become our lords and masters. We let you know now how all the
Barbarous nation has co^spired against Rome our mother, and they with their
king have made a vow to offer all the Romans blood to their gods in the
temples. And peradventure their pride and fyersenes being seen, and our
innocence known, fortune will dispose another thing. For it is a general rule,
that it is impossible for a prince to have the victory of that war, which
by malice is begone, and by pride and fyersenes pursued. It has seemed good
unto us (since their cause is unjust, and our righteous) to endeavor our
selves by all means how to resyst this Barbarous people. For often times that
which by justice was gotten, by negligence is lost. For the remedy of this
mischief to come, the sacred senate has provided these things following: and
for the accomplyshing thereof your favor and aid is necessary.

1 First of al we have determined to repair with all dylige^ce our diches,
walls, gates, and bulwarks: and in these places to arm al our friends. But
to accomplish that and diverse other for the necessity of warfare we lack
money: for ye know well inoughe that the war cannot be prosperous, where enemies
abound, and money is scarce.

2 Secondarilye we have commanded that all those which be sworn knights and
soldiers of Rome, repair immediately to Rome: and therefore ye shall send to us
all those which are under thage of 50. and above thage of 20. For in great
wars, aunciente men for counsel, and young men and lustye to execute the
same are required.

3 Thirdly we have agreed and concluded that the city be provided of
victualles, municion, and defense at the least for 2. years. Wherefore we desire
ye yt ye send us from you ye tenth part of wine, the fifth part of flesh, and
the third part of your bread. For we have al sworn to die, yet we mean not to
dye for famine, asseged as fearful me^: but fighting in plain feld, like
valiant Romans.

4 Fourthly we have provided (since the unknown barbarous come to fight with
us) that you bring us to Rome strange gods to help and defend us. For you
know well enough, that since the great Constantine we have been so pore of gods,
that we have not but one god, whom the Christians do honor. Therefore we desire
you that you will succor us with your gods in this our extreme necessity. For
amongst the Gods we know no one alone sufficient to defend all the Roman
people from their enemies. The walls therefore being well repaired, and all the
young and warrelike men in garrison in the city, the batteries well furnished,
and the treasour house well replenished with money, and above all the temples well
adourned with gods, we hope in our gods to have the victory of our enemies. For
in fighting with men and not against gods, a man ought always to have hope of
victory. For there are no men of such might, but by god and other men may be
vainquished. Fare ye well. etc. After this letter was sent through all the
dominion of the Romans, not taryenge for answer of ye same, they forthwith
openly blasphemed the name of Christ, and set up idolles in the temples, used
the ceremonies of the gentiles: and that which was worse then yt, they said
openly that Rome was never so oppressed with tirantes, as it has been since
they were Christians. And further they said, if they called not again all the
gods to Rome, the city should never be in safeguard, for that they had
dishonored and offended their gods, and cast them out of Rome, and that
those Barbarous were sent to revenge their injury. But the divine providence
which gives no place to humayne malice to execute his forces, before the
walls were repaired, and before the messaungers brought aunsweare, and before
the strange gods could enter into Rome, Randagagismus, king of the Goths,
with 2000000. of barbarous (without the effusion of Christian blood) sodainlye
in the mountains of Vesulanes, with famyne, thirste, and stones which fell
from heaven, lost all his army, not one left alive but himself, who had his
head strycken of in Rome. And this thing the eternal wisdom brought to
pass, to the end the Romans should see that Jesus Christ the true God of
the Christians had no need of strange gods to defend his servants.

Of the true and living god, and of the maruailes he wrought in the old law to
manifest his divine power, and of the supersticion of the false gods. Cap. ix.
O Gross ignorance, and unspeakable obstinacy. O Judgments of God
inscrutable. What think these gentyles by ye true god? They searched the false
gods to help them, and had a living god of their own: they sought gods full of
gyle and disceyte, and worse then that, they thought it necessary yt that God,
which created al things should be accompanied with their gods to defend them
which could make nothing. Let now all their gods come forth into the fyeldes
on the one side, and I will go forth alone in godly company, that is to say
with the high god on the other part. And we will compare the deades and prove
the aids of their false God, against and with the least work of our true god.
And they shall clearelye perceive their falsehode and our truth. For the tongue
that speaks of God can never bear with any lie, and that which speaks of
Idolles can never dysclose any truth. If they esteem him much for creatinge
the world with his might: is it any less to preserve and govern it by his
wisdom? For many things are done in a moment, for the preseruacion whereof
long time is requysyte, and much paynfull travail necessary. I demand
further what God of the gentyles could do that which our God has done? that is
to know, within one Arcke to make quiet the Lion with the leoperd, the wolf
with the lamb, the Bear with the Cow, the Tigar with the Cocodryll, the
stoned horse with the Mare, the Dog with the Catte, the fox with the Hens,
the hounds with the hares, and so of other beasts: whose enmytye is greater
the one against other, then that of man is against men. For thenmyty among men
proceadeth of malice, but that of beasts proceeds of nature. Also I demand
what God (if it were not the true God so mighty) could sley and drown in one
hour and moment so many men women, and beasts: so that al those which were in
the world (eight only excepted) perrisshed in the deluge of Noy. The judgment
of god by ordinance, and their offenses deserved this so marvelous a damage.
For god never executed any notable punishment, but first it came through our
wicked offenses. And if this be counted for a great thing, I will that
another thing be had in great estymacion. Which is, that if god showed his
rygorous justice in this punishment, incontinently he showed his might and
clemency in remedyeng it, in that of these eight persons (which were but few)
the generation did multiplye in so great a number that they did replenysh many
and great Realms. Whereon a man ought to marueil, for according as Aristotle
says, the great things are easily put to destruction and brought to naught,
but with great diffyculty they are remedyed and repaired again, And further I
demand what God of the gentiles was so puissaunt to do this, which the god of
the Hebrews did in that ancient and opulent realm of the Egypcians? That is
to wit, when he would, and when it pleased him, he made the ryuers run
blood, infected the flesh, darkened the air, dried the seas, and slew the
first begotten, obscured the son, and did wonders in Chanaan, and other
wonderful things in ye read sea. Finally he commanded ye sea to drown ye
prince alive with all his Egypcians, and that it should let ye Hebrews pass
dry. If one of these false gods had done any one of these things, it had been
to be maruailed at: but ye true god doing it we should not marvel at al. For
according to our little understanding it seems a great thing, but in respect of
that the deuyne power can do, it is nothing. For where God puts his hand,
there are no men so mighty, no beasts so proud, nor heaven so high, nor sea
so deape, that can resyst his power. For as he gave them power, so can he take
it from them at his pleasure, Further what God of the gentyles (altough they
were assembled together) could have had the power to have destroyed one man
only, as the true God did? the which in the time of king Zedechias) made an
hundredth and four score thousand of the camp of the assiryans dye, the
Hebrews being a sleep which were their mortal enemies. And truly in this case
god showed to princes and great lords how little their monnye, and their
subtyle wits prevail them in feats of war, when god has determined
another thing for their deserts. For in the end the first inuencion of
wars proceadeth of man's ambicion and worldly malice, but the victory of
them proceeds of the divine pleasoure. What god of ye gentyles could have done
that which our true God did? when he brought under the feet of the renowned
Captain Iosue, two and thirty kings and Realms, whom he depryued not only
from their lands, but also bereft them of their lives, in tearing them in
pieces, and deuydyng the miserable realms into 12 Tribes. Those realms (which
in old time belonged unto the Hebrews) were more then 2000 years kept of them
in tyranny: wherefore God would that by the hands of Iosue they should be
restored. And though god differred it a long time, it was to give them
greauous torments, and not for that god had forgotten them. And although
princes do forget many wrongs and tirannies, yet notwithstanding rivers of
blood cease not to run before the face of the dyuine Justice. If all the
ancient gods had had power, would not they also have helped their
princes? since the gods lost no less in losinge their temples, then men
lost in losing their realms, For it touched more the case of the auncyentes,
to lose one little Temple: then for men to lose a noble Realm We see that ye
gods of the trojans could not resist the greeks, but that both men and gods,
gods and men came into Carthage, and from Carthage in to Trinacrie, and from
Trinacrie into Italy, and from Italy tino Laurentum, and from Laurentum into
Rome. So they went about flieng, declaring that the gods of Troy were no less
conquered of the gods of Greece: then the Dukes and captains of greece, were
vanquished of the captains of Troy, the which thing is hard to them that
presume to be gods. For the true god does not only make himself feared: but
also beloved and feared both. That we say of the one, the same we may well say
of ye others. That is to know, that all the gods in the realms and temples,
wherein they honored and served: but we see the one destroys the other, as it
is declared by the Hebrews which were in bondage of the Assirians: the
Assirians of the Persians: the Persians of the Macedonians: the Macedonians of
the Medes: the Medes of the Greeks: the Greeks of the Penians: the Penians of
ye Romans: the Romans of the Goths: the Goths of the Moors: So that that
there was no realm nor nation but was conquered. Neither the writers can deny,
but they would have exalted their gods and ceremonies, that the gods and their
worshippers should not have end. But in the end both gods and men had al end
except the christian religion, which shall never have end For it is founded of
that which has neither beginning nor ending. One of the things which
comfort my heart most in the christian religion, is to see that since the
time the churches were founded, the kings and princes most puissant have been
always their enemies, and the most feeble and poor, always greatest helpers
and defenders of the same. O glorious militaunte church, which now is no other
then gold amongst the rust, a rose amongst the thorns, corn amongst the
chafe, marye amongst the bones, Margarites amongst ye peble stones, a holy
soul amongst the rotten flesh, a Phoenix in the cage, a ship rokking in the
raging seas, which the more she is beaten the faster she sayleth.

And there is no Realm so little, nor no man of so little favor but, when
other do persecute him, he is by his friends, parents and defendoures,
favored and succored, so that many times those which think to destroy are
destroyed: and those which seem to take their part were their chiefest enemies.
Does not that proceed of the great secret of god? For though God suffered the
wicked to be wicked a while, god will not therefore suffer that one evil man
procure an other to do evil. The Palestines, and those of Jerusalem, had not
for their principal enemies but the Caldeans: and the Caldians had for their
enemies the Idumeans: the Idumeans the Assirians: ye Assirians the Persians,
the Persians the Arginians: the Arginians the Athenians: the Athenians had for
their principal enemies the Lacedaemonians, and ye Lacedaemonians the Sydonians:
the Sydonians the Rhodians: and the Rhodians the Scithians: the Scithians the
Hunnes: the Hunnes had the Alaines: the Alaines the Svveuians: and the
Svveuians the Vandales: the Vandales the Valerians: the Valerians the
Sardinians: ye Sardinians the Affricanes: the Affricanes the Romans: the
Romans the Dacia^s: the Dacians the Goths: the Goths the Frenchmen: the
Frenchmen the Spanyardes: and the Spanyardes the Mores.

And of all these realms the one has persecuted the other. And not al one:
but our holy mother the church has always ben oppressed and persecuted with
those realms, and has been socoured of none but of Jesus Christ only, and he
has ever succored and defended it well. For the things that God takes charge
of, although all the world were against them, in the end it is impossible for
them to perish.

How there is but one true God, and how happy those Realms are which have a
good christian to their king, and how the gentiles affirm that the good princes
after their death were changed into gods and the wicked into devils: which
thing the Auctoure proves by soundry examples. Cap. x.
ALthough the common opinion of the simple people was, that there were many
gods, yet not withstandinge all the Philosophers affyrmed that there was but one
God (who of some was named Jupiter) the which was chief above al other gods.
Others called him the first intelligence, for that he had created al ye world.
Others called him the first cause, because he was the beginner of all things.
It seems that Aristotle understood this thing, and was of this opinion,
forasmuch as he says in his.12. book of his metaphisickes. All superior and
inferior things would be well ordered, and many things much better by
tharbitrement of one, then by the advice of many. Marcus Varro in his book De
theologia mistica, and Tullius in his book De natura Deorum, although these
were gentyles, and curious enoughe of the Temples, yet they do mock the
gentiles which believed there were many gods, and that Mars and M^rcury, and
likewise Jupiter, and the whole flock of gods (which the gentyles set up) were
al mortal men as we are. But because they knew not that there were good nor bad
angels, nor knew not that there was any paradise to reward ye good, nor hell to
torment the evil: They held this opinion, that the good men after their death
were gods, and the evil men devils. And not contented with these folysh abuses,
ye devil brought them into such an error, yt they thought it consisted in the
Senates power to make some gods, and other devils. For when there dyed at Rome
any Emperor, if he had been well willed of the Senate, immediately he was
honored for a god: and if he died in dyspleasure of ye Senate, he was
condemned for a devil. And to the end we do not speak by favor, but by
writting. Herodian says, yt Faustine was the daughter of Antonius Pius, and
wife of Marcus Aurelius, which were Emperors the one after the other. And truly
there were few either of their predecessors, or of their successors, which were
so good as they were, and in mine opinion more better: and therefore was she made
a goddess, and her father a god. An Emperor that coueteth perpetual memory,
must note 5. things which he should have in his life. That is to say, pure in
life, upright in justice, aduenturous in feats of arms, excellent in
knowledge, and well-beloved in his provinces, which virtues were in these 2.
excellent Emperors. This Empress Faustine was passing fair, and the wrytters
praise her beauty in such sort, yt they said it was impossible for her to be
so beautiful, but that ye gods had placed some divine thing in her. Yet not with
standing this added thereunto, it is doubtful whether the beauty of her face was
more praised: then the dishonestie of her life discommended.

For her beauty maruelously amazed those yt saw her, and her dishonesty
offended them much that knew her. Yet after the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had
triumphed over the Parthians, as he went visitinge the provinces of Asia, the
goodlye Faustine in 4. days dyed in the mount Taurus (by occasion of a
burning fever) and so annealed was carried to Rome. And since she was the
daughter of so good a father, and wife of so dearly beloved an Emperor,
among the Gods she was canonyzed, but consideringe her unconstant or rather
incontinent lief, it was never thought that the Romans would have done her so
much honor. Wherefore ye Emperor reioysed so much, that he never ceased to
render thanks unto the Senate. For truly the benefit ought to be acceptable
to him that receives it, especially when it comes unlooked for. The contrary
came to the death of Tiberius, third Emperor of Rome, which was not only
killed and drawn through the streates by the Romans: but also the priests of
all the Temples assembled together, and openly prayed unto the gods that they
would not receive him to them, and prayed to the infernal furyes that
greauously they would torment him, saying it is justly required, yt the Tirant
which dispraiseth the life of ye good in his life, should have no place
amongst the good after his death. Leaving the common opinion of the rude
people, which in the old time had no knowledge of the true god, and declaring
the opinion of Aristole, which called god ye first cause: ye opinion of the
Stoickes, which called him the first intelligence: and the opinion of Cicero,
which under the color of Jupiter, puts none other god but him: I say and
confess (according to the religion of christian faith) there is but one only
God, which is the creator of heaven and earth, whose excellency and puissaunt
majesty is little to that our tongue can speak. For our understanding can not
understand, nor our judgment can determine, neither our memory can
comprehend, and much less our tongue can declare it. That which princes and
other faithful ought to believe of god is, that they ought to know god to be
almighty and incomparable, a god immortal, incorruptible, immouable, great,
omnipotent, a perfect and sempiternall God: for all man's power is nothing in
respect of his divine majesty. I say that our lord god is the only high
god, that if the creature has any good, it is but a mean good. For a man
comparing well the good which he possesses, to the misery and calamity which
persecute him: with out doubt the evil which follows him is greater, then
the good which accompanies him.

Also our god is immortal and eternal, which like as he had no beginning, so
shall he never have ending. And the contrary is to the miserable man, which if
some see him borne, others see him dye. For the birth of the children, is but a
memory of the grave to the aged. Also God only is incorruptible, the which in
his being has another corruption nor diminution: but al mortal men suffer
corruption in their souls through vice, and in their bodies through worms,
for in the end no man is priuileged, but that his body is subject to
corruption, and his soul to be saved or damned. Also God is no chaungelyng,
and in this case though he changes his work, yet he changes not his
eternal counsel. But in men it is all contrary, for they oftetimes begin
their busynes with grauitye, and afterward chaung their counseill at a better
time, and leave it lyghtlye.

I have now showed you that God only is incomprehensible, ye majesty of whom
can not be attained, nor his wisdom understood, which thing is above man's
intelligence. For there is no man so sage nor profound, but yt an other in an
other time is as sage and profound as he. Also God only is omnipotent, for
that he has power not only over the lyuinge, but also over the dead: not only
over the good, but also over the evil: For the man which does not feel his
mercy to give him glory, he will make him feel his wrath in giuinge him pain.
O ye Princes of this world, truly it is both just and necessary that you
acknowledge subjection unto the Prince of heaven and earth, which in the end
although ye be great, and think your selves to be much worth, although
that you have much, and can do much yet in respect of the supreme prince
you are nothing worth, neither can ye do any thing. For there is no Prince in
the world this day but can do less than he would, and would more than he
has. Since all that we have spoken of before is true, let Princes and great
Lords see how consonaunte it is to reason, that sithe all the creatures were
not created but by one: Why then do they not honor one above all? For as a
Prince will not suffer that an other be called king in his realm: so likewise
god will not permit that any other be honored in this world but he only. The
father did a great benefit to us, for to create us without the desire of any
man: and also the son to redeem and by us without the healpe of any man, and
above all the holy ghost to make us christians without the desert of any
man. For all the good deeds and services which we are able to do, are not
sufficient to requite the least benefit that he showed unto us. Princes ought
greatly to esteem such a gift, that god has created them men, and not
beasts: and much more they should esteem that they are made Lords, and not
servants: but most of all they ought to rejoice, that god has made them
christians, and not gentiles, nor Moors. For it profits them little to have
scepters and realms to condemn, if they shall not acknowledge the holy
church, without the which no man ca^ be saved. O divine bounty, how many
paynims had been better peradventure than I, if thou haddeste chosen them for
the church: and if thou had made me a Paynime, I had been worse than they.
Thou leauest them which have served the, and haste chosen me a sinner which
offend the. Lord God thou know what thou do, and where thou art: but I
know not what I do, nor what I speak. For we are bound to praise the works
of god, and have not the license to call them back. The Emperors and paynem
kings, which have been good and virtuous, (as there has been many) so much
less they have to answer, for that in time of charge they were not called.
And likewise the contrary to the wicked christian princes. The more goodness
they have received without measure: so much the more torments shall be given
them in eternal fire. For according to the ingratitude which they have
showed, for the benefits by them received in this world: so shall the
bitterness of their pains be, which they shall receive in hell. Princes are
much bound to do well, because they were created of god reasonable men: but
they are much more bound, because they be christians, and more then others
bound, because they were made mighty, and placed in so high estate, for the
greatest power is not for a prince to have and possess much, but to profit
much. They do not require of a little and weak tree much, but that he bear
his fruit in dew time. For a great and high tree, is bound to give wood to
heat them that be a cold, shadow to refreshe the very trauailours, and fruit
to confort the neady, and also it ought to defend it self from all importunate
winds. For the virtuous prince, ought to be a shadow and resting place, where
the good may cover them selves being wearye. The church does move us to do
many things, and our conscience wills us to observe more. But if the princes
will promise me they will do.2. things only, that is to say, that they will be
faithful in the law of god whom they honor, and that they will not use tyranny
against their people whom they govern: from hensforthe I promise the^ the
glory and felicicie which they desire. For that prince only dies in
safegarde, which dies in the love of our savior Jesus Christ, and has lived
in the love of his neighbor. Princes and great lords which presume to be good
Christians, should watch greatly that all things might be done to the service
of god, begone in god, followed in god, and ended in god. And if they will
watch in this, I let them know, that as touching the exaltacion of faith they
should watch so much, that all should know, that for the defense of the
same they are ready to dye. For if the prince believe that there is pain for
the evil, and reward for the good in an other life: it is impossible but that
he amend his life, and govern well his common wealth. Think this for a surety,
that where the princes fear not god, neither them selves nor their realms can
prosper. For the felicity or misery of Realms, proceadeth not of the pains
and travails that the kings and people do take: but of the merits which the
kings and realms deserve. In great peril lives that realm, whose prince is
an evil christian. Happy and sure is that common wealth, whereof the prince
has a good conscience. For the man that is of a good conscience, will not do
any evil thing to the common wealth.

Of sundry gods which the auncientes worshipped, of the office of those gods,
how they were revenged of them when they displeased them, and of the Twenty
elect gods. Cap. xi.
THough to men of clear judgment, the works of God are great of them
selves, without any comparison to others: yet that the white may be better
known from the black, I will satisfye somewhat the curious reader, in
rekenyng up a flock of false gods, that by them and their power, men shall see
how much the princes are bound to the true God. The ancient Panyms had gods
of diverse sorts, how be if the chief of al were these, which they called
Diis electi. They would have said gods of heaven: which gods (as they
thought) sometime descended from heaven to earth. These gods were.xx. in
nombre: as Ianus, Saturnus, Jupiter, Genius, Marcurius, Apollo, Mars, Vulcanus,
Neptunus, Sol, Orcus, Vibar, Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Minerua, Luna, Diana, Venus,
Vesta. These.viii. last rehearsed were goddesses, and.xii. of the first were
gods. No man might take any of those as his own God, but as common and
indifferent to all.

Their office was to profit all, I mean all of any one Realm, one province
singular, or one noble city. And first note, they had one God whom they
called Cantius, whom they honored much, and offered unto him many sacrifices, to
the end that God might give them wise children. And this if they had demanded
of the true God, they should have had reason. For the impostumation of humain
malice is swelled in such wise, that that man is in great ieopardie, whom God
has not endued with wise judgment. They had also an other Goddess, whom they
named Lucina, to whom they did commend women, quick and great with child, to
send them safe delivery. And without the walls of Rome, in a streate called
Salaria, she had a great church, wherein all the Roman women conceived with
child, did sacrifice to their goddess Lucina: and as Fronten declares de
Veneratione deorum, there they remained nine days and nine nights, making
their vow. Numa Pompilius buylte the church of this goddess, which was
plucked down by the Consul Rutilius, because a daughter of his (great with
child) made her vow, and kept her nine Vigilles, and upon more devotion, was
desirous to be delivered in the said temple. Such was her mishappe, that her
delivery was not only evil, but her death was much worse. Whereupon Rutilius
in his rage, caused the temple secretly to be burned. For we read many times,
that when the Gentyles saw they were distressed and in great necessity, they
recommended them selves to their Gods: and if they did not then succor them in
their necessity, immediately they took from them their sacrifice, bette down
their temples, or changed their Gods. And further, the Gentiles had an other
god called Opis, which was called ye God of the babe new borne even as Lucina
was goddess of the mother which bare it. The custom was, that during all the
nine months, that the woman was quick with child, she carried the image of
the God Opis hanging upon her belly, tied to her girdle, or sowed to her
garments, and at the hour of her delivery, the mydwyfe took in her hands the
said image, and even in the very birth before herself laid hands upon it,
she first of all towched the child with the Idol. If the child were well
borne, the parents that day made great oblations to the Idol: but if it were
evil or dead borne, straight way the parents of the child did beat the
image of the poor God Opis to powder, or else burned it, or drowned it in the
river. Also the Gentyles worshipped an other God called Vaginatus, and unto him
they did great sacrifice, because their children should not weep much: and
therefore they carried the image of this god Vaginatus, hanged about their
necks, for the Gentiles thought it an evil sign and token, when the Babe
wept much in his infancy, he should have very evil fortune in his age. They
had also an other God called God Cuninus, him they honored with sacrifice, to
thend that he should be their Patron for the safety of their children in
their cradels. And those which were poor, had the God Cuninus hanged upon the
cradell, but the rich had very sumptuouse cradelles, wherein were painted many
gods Cunini* Herodian, and Pulio, declares in the life of Seuerus, that when
the Emperor Seuerus was in the war against the Gavvles, his wife (whose name
was Iulia) was delivered of a daughter, which was her first. And it happened,
that a sister of this Iulia named Mesa (native of Persia, and of the city of
Mesa) sent unto her sister at Rome a cradell, all of an Unicorns horn, and
fine gold: and about the same was painted many images of the god Cuninus. The
cradel was of so great value, that many years after it was kept in the
Treasury of Rome: Though in deed the Romans kept those things, more for the
desire of memory, than for the love of riches. The Romans had likewise an
other god, whom they called god Ruminus, which was as much to say, as God of
sucking Babes: and to him the matrones of Rome offered diverse sacrifices, to
the end he would keep their breasts from corruption, and give them milk
enough for their little children. And all the while they gave the child suck,
they had the image of this god about their necks hanging down to their
breasts. And every morning before she gave the child suck, the mother sent a
dishe full of milk to offer to the God Ruminus, and if she happened to be in
such place where there was no church dedicated to the God Ruminus, then she
bathed her god Ruminus she had with her, in milk. They had also an other
God, whom they called God Stellinus, and him they impropered to their children
when they began to go. To this god the matrones offered many gifts, that
their children might not be lame, Dwarfes, nor impotent or decrepite, but that
they might be able to go well. For among the Romans, those that were Criples
or Dwarfes, were had in such contempt, that they could neither bear office in
the Senate, nor be admitted priests in the temples. Hercules in his third
book, De repub. says that Cornelia, (that worthy woman and mother of the
Gracchi) had her two first sons, the one lame, and the other a Dwarf.
Whereupon supposinge the god Stellinus had been wrath with her, she bylte him a
Temple in the.xii. region, near to the fields Gaditanus, amongst the Gardens
of Detha, and this temple remained till the time of Randagismus, who besieging
Rome, destroyed the Temples, and brake up their gardines about Rome. They had
also an other god, called Adeon, and his chardge was, that when the child
could go well, he should go to his mother and make much of her. And allbeit
Cicero in his book De natura Deorum, puts this god amongst the other gods,
yet I do not remember that I have ever read that this god had any Temple in
Rome till the time of Mammea, mother of the Emperor Antoninus. This
excellent woman being left a wydowe, and with two little children, desiering
that they might be well and virtuously brought up, and that they should
increase their love toward her, she buylte to the god Adeon, a sumptuous
Temple in the.xii. region Vaticanus, near to the gardens of Domicilius, and
hard adjoining to that also, she erected one other edifice called Sacellum
Mammae, where she abode solitarely for a time. For the manner and custom at
that time was, that all wydowes (which would bring up their children in good
discipline) should immediately sever themselves far from the dangerous
pleasures of Rome. The auncientes had also an other god called Mentallis, which
was in effect god of wit. That is to wit, he had authority and power to give
children good or evil sense. And to this god the auncientes did great
sacrifices, especially the Greeks, much more than the Romans. For as much
as Seneca says, that he does marvel nothing at all of that the Greeks
knew: but that which made him most to marvel, was of that they knew not,
since they had the temple of the god Mentallis, within their schools. All the
children whom they sent to learn Philosophy, were (by the laws of Athens)
bound to serve three years in that temple. And to omyt that, which Seneca
spoke of the Greeks, I dare boldly say and affirm (to many which at these
days are living) that if it be true, he gave sense and understanding to men,
that they would to day, rather than to morrow, withdraw them selves to go
into those temples, and there offer their vows. For nothing in the world
happens to men more, then the want of wit and understanding how to
govern them selves, and live in quiet. They had also an other God Volunus, and
a goddess called Voluna, these two had the charge of affiaunce in wedlock:
and therefore they were two, because the one should healpe the man, and the
other should help the woman. The manner was such, that during the time of their
marriage, each of them ware the image of their own god about their necks, and
those were of gold or silver. And after they were married, the bridegroom gave
unto his spouse the goddess Voluna, and the bride unto her husband the god
Volunus. At such times as the consulles were created at Rome, and the kings
banished, and before the coming of the Emperors, a little before the
Cornelians moved civil commocions in Rome, there was one Consul amongeste all
these whose name was Balbus. It is said he was the first that builded the
temple of Volunus, and Voluna. It did stand in the nynth ward of the city,
near unto the gate Corinthia and was called Scripta Balbi. And nighe unto it
was an other building called Theatrum Balbi. All the Consuls, Senators, noble
and renowned barons, were married in the Temple which Balbus builte. That night
that Pompey the great married Julius Caesar's daughter, there were some that
said, that Pompey refused to marie her in the temple of the gods Volunus, and
Voluna, whereupon they diuined straight that the marriage would not endure long
betwixt them. As writes Publius Victor in his third book De nuptijs
antiquorum. The ancient Pagans honored a god called Agrestes, as much to
say, as the god of fields and fruits: to him they offered no sacrifice but
twyse in the year, that is to wete, in seed time, and in harvest. The
Phrigians (that is the Troyans and Cicilians) greatly observed this god
Agrestes, and it was for that in those two countries there was gathered such
plenty of corn to make bread, that Phrigia was the great garner of Asia, and
Trinacria (that was Cicilia) was the corn house of Europe. They had another
god called Belus, which was patron of men of war. For even as the Christians
(when they come to the point to give the battle) make their prayers unto
god: so likewise the auncientes in the same point did knele down, and
recommende them selves to god Belus. Liuie declares, that in all other things
which were done, and whereof the Roman knights were accused in the battle
of Cannas (against Hannibal) was for that they did not recommende them selves
at all to the god Belus, when they should give battle, saying the Carthagians
remained conquerours, because they a little before honored the god Mars: and
the Romans were vanquished, for that they offered no sacrifice to god Belus.
When Pirrus, king of the Epirotes (that is of Albanie) came into Italy, and
that the Romans were advertised, he brought with him many engines, and subtle
inventions for the war, they agreed to build a Temple for the god Belus,
within the walls of Rome, in the nynth ward nere the gate Carmentalle, and it
was named Edes Beloe, in the front whereof was a marvelous sumptuous and
stately pyller, wherein was graven thorder of battle. The Gentiles had
another god called the god of victory, to whom the Romans (more then any
other nation) did sacrifices, to the end they might obtain victory of their
enemies. Of this god Victoria, there was many magnificall temples in Rome, but
the chiefest and the greatest was adjoining to the gate Venia, in the twelfte
ward, in the place called Della victoria. It was builte in the year of the
foundation of Rome, four hundredth, three score and seuentene. And it was for
thoccasion of the victory, that Appius Claudius, and Quintus Fabius had in
Scicill, the first time the Roman people fought against the Affricanes,
Herones being king. Of this war and victory, rose the cruel, long, and
perilous wars between Rome and Affrike. There was another god amongst the
gods, whom the auncientes called Honorius, which had the charge that the
Inkeapers should honor and gently intertaine Pylgrimes, and strangers: so
that they should be well handled, through the provinces and realms whereby
they passed. And there was a custom in Rome, that ever when any Roman should
go any vyage, his wife immediately should go to the temple of god Honorius to
do her sacrifices. In the fiftene year after that Hannibal passed into
Italy, the Romans knew by a prophecy, that as soon as they brought the
image of the goddess Berecinthia (mother of all the gods) into Rome: so sone
Hannibal should retire out of Italy. And to bring this to pass, the Romans
sent their Ambassadors into Phrigia, which is one part of Asia, to the end
they should bring the goddess Berecinthia to Rome. And because their
Ambassadors should go well and return safe, and that in coming and going
through the Realms, they should entertain them well, and do them honor:
they buylt a temple for the god Honorius within the walls of Rome, in the
fourth ward, in a place which they called Forum Transitorium.

Of other more natural and peculiar Gods, which the ancient people had. Cap.
xxii.
AND because it should not be to tedious a thing, to name all the gods which
the Gentiles worshipped, and semblably in whose time and reign they honored
them most, and what Realms were more replenished then others, and furthermore
for what causes so many temples, and buyldynges, were ordained and erected for
them: I will make mention only of those Gods, which were called natural
Gods, and particular Gods, and declare why the Gentiles honored them.

And this only moves me to it, because those which shall see this my
wrytinge may know what a special grace God has given to them, which are
borne in the time of the Christian law. Know you therefore, that the god
Esculanus was the god of Mines of gold and silver. Pecunia was the goddess of
metalles: and they prayed unto her, to give them treasures and riches. Fessoria
was the goddess of trauaylours and Pylgrimes: and they prayed to her, that she
would not suffer them to be weary that trauayled on foot. Pelonia was a
goddess which had the charge to drive the ennemies out of the land.
Esculapius was the god and patron of sick men, and if the malady were great,
they called upon the God Apollo, which was father to Esculapius Spinensis was
a god whom the auncientes prayed to keep the corn from thistles and thorns.
Rubigo was a god which kept the Vines from worms, and the corn from
locustes. Fortuna was the goddess of good fortune: and to her the ancient
wives of Rome made a temple, in the time of Silla and Marius. Muta was the
goddess to whom the auncientes prayed, that she would not suffer their
ennemies to speak, when they would speak evil of them. Genoria was a
goddess that had the charge to chase slothfulness from them, that
recommended them selves to her: and the Greeks honored her, especially the
Philosophers, when they entered into study and universities. Stimula was a
gods which hastened the^ of their busynes, to thend they should not forget
any thing they had to do. And her image was at Rome over the gate of ye Senate
house, for she was taken for advocate of the pleaders. Murcia was a goddess
and an advocate for men and women, which desired not to be lean nor weak of
their bodies, and to this goddess the women of Rome offered many gifts, to the
end they might be fat. For in Rome, maidens and women are forsaken because
they be lean and sclender, and not for that they be foul and fat. Busina
properly was a goddess of the fields, and to her the auncientes offered
sacrifice, because she should look to the grass that grew in the fields. And
the Scithians were great worshippers of that goddess, because they had no
houses in towns but kept the fields even with their flocks, which if they
wanted grass died immediately, and then they were utterly undone. Iugatiuus was
he that was called the god of the high mount, and to him the auncientes made
a lodge and aulters in the top of the highest mountains, whereunto they went
oftentimes to do sacrifice, especially when it thundered and lightened. Vallonia
was the goddess of the valleis, and she had the charge to bridle the waters
that descended from the mountains, to the end they should not endomage the
meadows and milles whereby they passed. Ceres was a goddess of all nations
honored, for that she was goddess of corn and of other sovereign seeds:
and the au^cientes had a custom to offer her a loaf of all the seeds and
corn that they sowed. Her lodges and aulters to do sacrifice were in the
fields, but besides those she had a temple in Rome in the ninthe ward, in the
fields of Mars, hard by the gardens of Lucullus, and it is said that out of
this temple came first the fountain of Scipio. Segecia was a goddess that
had the charge to make the seeds to grow after they were sown. I do not
remember I have read that she had any temple in Rome. Tutillina was a goddess,
whose office was to entreat Jupiter not to beat down the corn with
haylestones when it was ready to be repte. And the auncientes painted her in
such sort, that it seemed Jupiter did cause it to rain stones, and that this
goddess Tutilina should gather them all. She had a temple in Rome in the
tenth ward, in the market place of Apollo, nere unto the house of Romulus. And
at every time when it thundered, immediately the Romans lyghted a great nombre
of candelles in the temple to appease the goddess that she should keep their
corn and seed from hurt. Flora was the merciful goddess of the Vines, that
preserved them from froste. And those of Capua were great worshippers of this
goddess, for they say that they were the first that planted Vynes in Italy.
Matura was a goddess that had the charge to ripe grapes: and the auncientes
used a custom, to offer the first grapes which were ripe, in the place where
the goddess was. And for the more part every man that had Vynes, made in the
field a lodge and an altar to sacrifice unto her. Ruana was a goddess and
advocate for them that gathered the corn and other graynes, to the end they
should do no hurt in cutting away the ear, nor should mar the straw, and
that in cuttynge, the corn should not shake from the ear. And therefore the
auncientes painted her, holding in her right hand a handful of straw, and
the ears were whole. Forculus was the God of Lockesmythes, and the auncientes
sacrificed him, because he should lock fast the doors, and should not suffer
them to be broken open, nor picked, nor adultered keys to be made: the
auncientes painted this God holdinge a chain in one hand, and two doors in
the other: his image was over the gate of Trigemine, and specially over their
doors that had enemies. Limentimen was God of the hammers of the gates. I
could not find what the entention was to inuente this God, but as I think
(not for that I have found it written) they prayed this God that when there
should come any ennemy of theirs to the house, that he should cause them
stumble, and fall before the door, if perhaps by negligence it were left
open. Portulus was the god of the gates, and the auncientes did paynte him with
two gates in his hands, and did sacrifice him, because no man should open the
gates to the enemies when they slepte: and to him the Romans did sacrifice in
all the gates of Rome, and those which had enemies, would paynte him in the
gate of their house. Cardea was a Goddess of the bars and hingies of the
gates, and the cause why the auncientes did sacrifice to her, was that no man
should break the gates, nor lift up the hingies, and that if they went about
to put to their hands, immediately the hingies should make a noise to wake the
master of the house that he might hear it, and know that his enemies were at
the gate. There was another god who was called Siluanus, and he was most
honored among the auncientes, especially among all the Romans. This god had
the charge to keep those from peril and misfortune that went for their
pleasure and recreation to the Gardeynes, as Plynie says in an epistle he
wrote to Rutilius. The first that buylte a temple for the god Syluanus, was
Mecenas, which was in the time of Augustus. And he desired above all other
men, to make feasts and bankettes in Gardens. This temple was in the eleventh
ward, in the field of the goddess Venus, near unto the house of Murcea,
which was destroyed in the time of the Emperor Antonius Pius through an
earthquake, whereby many buyldinges and houses fell in Rome. Iugatibus was the
god of marriages, who had charge to make the love which begone in youth, to
endure till the old age. It was wonderful to see how the women newly married,
went on pylgremage for devotion unto this god, and what gifts and presents
they offered in his temple. Suetonius Tranquillus says, that there was a
Temple of this God, but I find not in writing by whom it was buylte: saving
that Helius Spartianus says, that the Emperor Heliogabalus found much
richesse in the Temple of Iugatibus, the which he took away to maintain his
wars.

Bacchus was the God of, drunkardes, and the custom in Rome was, that only
mad men and fools celebrated the feast of this God, and if there were found
any of wit and understanding (were it never so little) they thrust him forthewith
out of the Temple, and sought in his stead another drunkard. The Temple of
Bacchus was in the tenthe ward, in the meadows which they call Bacchanales,
without the city, in the way of Salaria, by the Aulters of the Goddess
Februa, and it was bilte by the Gauls, when they besieged Rome in the time of
Camillus. Februa was a goddess for the fevers, and they used in Rome when any
was taken with the fever, immediatelye to send some sacrifice unto her.

This Goddess had no temple at al, but her Image was in Pautheon, which was
a temple wherein all the gods were, and in this place they sacrificed unto
her. Pauor was the God of fear, who hadd the charge to take fear from the
Romans hearts, and to give them stout courage against their enemies. The
Temple of this god Pauor was in Rome, in the sixte ward, in the place of
Mamuria, nere the old Capitol: and ever when they had any enemies, the
Romans forthewith offered in this place sacrifices, and there was in the same
temple a statue of Scipio the Affricane all of silver, which he offered there
when he triumphed over the Carthagians.

Meretrix was the goddess of dishonest women, and as Publius Victor says,
there was in Rome forty streates of common women, in the myddest whereof the
temple of this Meretrix was. It chaunsed in the time of Ancus Martius (the
forth king of the seven Romayne Kings) that there was in Rome a courtizan,
native of Laurento, which was so fair, that with her body she gained great
riches, whereof she made all the Romayne people partakers. Wherefore in memory
of her the Romans bilt there a temple, and made her Goddess of all the common
women in Rome. Cloatina was Goddess of the stool, and to this goddess all
those commended them selves which were troubled with the Collycke, to thend
she would healpe them to purge their bealies. Quies was the goddess of rest,
and to her the Romans did great sacrifices, because she should give them
pleasour and rest, especially one that day, when there was any triumph in
Rome, they gave in this Temple many gifts, because she should preserve the
glory and joy of the triumphs. Nunia Pompilius (second King of the
Romans) builte the temple of this Goddess, and it was without the city, for
to note that during the life of man in this world, he could neither have
pleasoure nor rest. Theatrica was a goddess, that had the charge to keep the
Theaters and Stagyes, when the Romans celebrated their plays: and thoccasion
of inuenting of this Goddess was, because when the Romans would set forth
their tragedies, they made so solemn theaters, that there might well stand
xx. thousand men above, and as many underneath for to behold the spectacle.
And sometime it happened, that for the great wayghte of them above, the wode
of the theaters and stages brake, and killed all those which were underneath:
and so after this sort all their pastime turned into sorrow. The Romans
(which were provided in all things) agred to do sacrifice unto ye Goddess
Theatrica, to the end she should preserve them from the dangers of the
Theaters, and built her a temple in the nynth ward, in the Market place of
Cornelia, near to the house of Fabij Domitian the xii. Emperor of Rome
dystroyed this Temple, because in his presence one of the Theaters brake, and
killed many men. And for that the goddess Theatrica did not preserve them, he
made the Temple to be beaten down. Peradventure those that have red little shall
find these things new inoughe: but let them read Cicero, in his book De
natura Deorum: John Bocchas, of the genealogy of gods: and Pulio of the
aunciente Gods: and Saint Augustine in the first, xi. and the xviii. book of
the city of God, and they shall find a great number more then is spoken of.

How Tiberius the knight was chosen governor of the empire, and afterward
created Emperor, only for being a good Christian. And how God deprived
Justinian the younger, both of his empire and senses for being an heretic. Cap.
xiii.
THe fiftye Emperor of Rome, was Tiberius Constantinus, who succeeded Justinian
the younger which was a cruel Emperor. And Paulus Diaconus says, that he
was an enemy to the poor: a thief to the rich, a great lover of riches, and
an enemy to him self in spending them. For the property of a covetous man is
to live like a beggar all the days of his life, and to be found rich at the
hour of his death. This Justinian was so covetous, that he commanded
coffers and chestes of iron to be made, and brought into his palayce to keep
the treasours which he had robbed. And of this you ought not to meruel, for
Seneca says, that covetous Princes do not only suspect their subjects, but
also them selves. In those days the church was greatly defiled, by the
heresye of the Pelagians, and the maynteyner of that sect was this wicked
Prince Justinian: so that for him self he procured riches, and for the Devil
he cheapned souls. For those that are once forsaken of the hand of God, do
not only become servants of the devil, but also labor to allure others to
hell. Wherefore since the sins of men are diverse, and the judgments of God
kept secret, and that yet the living God is so merciful, that not with
standing his mercy would save the souls, he will also with justice chastise the
bodies. And therefore seeing the obstinacye of this Emperor to be such that the
longer he lived the more he augmented his damnacion, the wrath of God lighted
upon him, and suddenly with out any grudge or toke^ of sickness, this Emperor
Justinian was derriued of his senses and became a fool: and because the matter
was so sudden, it caused in Rome great fear, and admiracion, for that the
Prince was a fool, and all the Empire changed. And in deed This Emperor was
so stryken, that his life and follye ended both in one day. For the dyseases
which God sendethe to Princes, comes not through fault of humors, but
through the corrupcion of manners. Also there is no medicyne that can resist it,
nor yet any other thing that can remedy it. The people perceiuyng how the
Emperor through his sins was (according to the divine pleasoure) become a
fool, agreed (sithe there was no remedy for his dyssease) to choose some good
person to whom the charge of the publyke weal might be given. For truly a man
needs greater patience and wisdom to govern another man's, then for that
which is his own proper. The lotte befell to a Knight Tiberius so called, a
man for a truth both chaste, just, profitable, sage, virtuous, hardy,
merciful, charitable, in feats of arms aduenturous, and above all a good
Christian. And let not this thing be little regarded that the Prince be a good
Christian. For there is no state so happy as that, which is governed by a
Prince of a good and faitheful conscience, and because he wanted no virtues to
adorn a Prince, he was both feared of many, and beloved of all. Which thing
ought not lyghtlye to be esteemed, for it is the chiefest thing that
belongethe to Princes, that is to wete, for their gentle conversation to be
beloved, and for their vprighte justice, to be feared. This Emperor Justinian
had a wife, whose name was Sophia Augusta, which was beautiful and sage, and
as touching her person, of good renown sufficient. For women must take great
respect, least they give strangers occasion to speak of them, but
notwithstanding al these things, this dame was noted of covetousness. For she
toyled always to hourde up monye, and delighted to see and tell it, but to
spend or give it, was always her greatest grief. For covetous parsones little
regard to shorten their life, so that they may augment their riches. Tiberius
Constantine, as governor of the Empire (saying the Empress Sophia Augusta
rich, and desiring more the profit of the common wealth, then the
enrychement of him self or of any other) did nothing else but build
monasteryes, repair hospytalles, marye Orphans, and redeem captyues. For
speaking according to the Christian laws, that that a man has more then
necessary, ought to be employed to the use of the poor, and to works of
mercy. Finally this virtuous prince did that which Christian Princes should
do, and not as tirauntes do, which made him of great excellencye. For the
property of a tyraunte is to heap great treasours of other men's goods, and
afterward to spend and consume them viciously: but Tiberius found them
gathered together by one and he disparsed them to many: Sophia Augusta, seeing
Iustinia become a fool, and not knowing how to get more money of the people,
nor how to rob the rich, and that Tiberius spente her riches without
compassyon, partelye to satisfy her sorrowful heart, and partly to see if in
time to com she could remedy it, called one day Tiberius a part and spoke unto
him these words in secret.

Of the words the Empress Sophia spoke unto Tiberius Constantinus then being
governor of the Empire, which only tended to reprove him for that he
lauishely consumed the treasure of the Empire gotten by her. Cap. xiiii.
Thou reme^brest well Tiberius, that though thou art now after Justinian
governor of the Empire: yet when thou waste in Alexandrie, thou thoughtest
little to deserve it, and if thou did, thou thoughtest thou could not
attayn unto it. For thou art a wise man, and the sage man (according to the
little or much which fortune gives him) does rain or slack always the
brydell of his thoughts. Those which have a vain hope, and thoroughe power
only will enforce fortune to be favorable unto them, shall live always a
troublesome life.

For there is nothing that shorteneth more the life of man, then vain hope,
and idle thoughts. Thou being such a man as thou art, and so well willed and
beloved of Justinian my husband, art demanded of the Roman people, and
chosen by the Senate, received by the soldiers, and all the Empire rejoice at
thy election.

And thou ought not a little to regard it. For the wills of all do not
always favor one. I let the to understand Tiberius, that it did not displease
me thou should be Emperor of Rome, since Justinian was deposed: and if I had
perceived that which I do perceive, or had known that which I do know, I
am certain that I had neither said with it nor against it. For we women are
of so little credit, that it prevails us more to approve the least of that
which other say, than it does to speak very well our selves. Since fortune
has brought the to so high estate, I beseech the, admonish the, and advise
the, that thou know how to keape and govern thy self therein. For to arise
to honor, it suffices the body to sweat water: but to maintain it, it is
necessary that the heart weep blood. Thou knowe^t right well, that to
command more, to do more, and to have more then other (as touching the
affairs of Princes) oftentimes is given more thoroughe worldly care, then for
the deserte of the person. And this God suffers very often, to the end we
may see those discende and fall through infamy: whom we saw mount and prosper
by pride. Thou art a man, and I a woman, Thou have wisdom and knowledge, but I
have large and long experience, and if thou know much, I have seen in the
world enough, but in faith for that I have said I tell the, that men of thy
sort are undone in the palaice of princes by 2. ways. The one, if they think
they deserve much, and they can do little. For hauty minds bring always
alteration in the heart. The other is, that one alone will command the
Emperor and the empire: whereunto if any man come, it is by great travail,
and he shall sustain it with danger, and shall possess it but a short time.
For it is impossible yt to a man of much arrogancy, fortune should be to long
faithful.

Though thou be wise and sage, I counsel the always to profit with an other
man's counsel, chiefly in things concerning the gouernemente of the state.
For to know to obey, and to know to command differ much.

For to know to obey, comes by nature: but to know to command, comes by
long experience. Take this of me for a general rule, that whereas thou see
they prayer to be acceptable, never take upon the commandment: for by
commandment thou shalt be feared, and by prayer thou shalt be beloved. Know
thou Tiberius, the things that content the^ worste, which are in ye court of
Princes: are to do little, to have little, and to be little worth.

For the man that is without favor, in his heart is half dead. For the
contrary, the thing which most perilleth the favored of Princes and makes
them loase their frendshipp, is to be of great power, and great in authority,
and more over than this, to profit more of will then of knowledge, of
authority than of reason. For a man can not live long in frendshyppe, which
does what he will in the common wealth. I have spoken all this to the end thou
should know that I greatly maruayle at thy prudence, and have no less
wonder of my patience. To see that the treasours which Justinian heaped
together by great travail, kept and preserved with great care, thou wastest
without respect what thou doeste. And do not marvel at this: For there is no
patience can suffer to se the proper gods wasted and spent by the hands of an
other, which with so great care has been gathered together. I let the know
Tiberius, that now we have neither money to keep, nor to give to others, which
thing is very peryllous for the palace of Princes. For the fame to have great
treasours, causes Princes to keape their enemies in fear. It is necessary
for princes to be stout, and also rich, for by their stoutnes they may
govern their own, and by their riches, they may repress their enemies. It is
not only necessary that the Prince be not poor, but also it is requisitie
that his common wealth be rych. For where the people are poor, of their
enemies they are nothing regarded: and where the common wealth is rich, the
Prince can not be greatly poor. I will not denay but that it is well done to
help the poor, and succor the needy. But yet I say, that no man ought to give
the treasour to any one particulerly, which is kept for the preservation of
al. For oftentimes the prince which is to lyberal in giving his own, is after
wards through necessity compelled to be a Tyranne, and take from others. I
let the wete Tiberius, that thou shalt find few Princes but are proud,
maglignaunt, or vicious. For of a troth wantonness, liberty, youth, and
riches, are cruel enemies to honesty, I will not say that all princes have
been evil, but I will say there has been but few good, and those which are or
will be good, ought to be greatly honored. For no time ought to be called
happy, but that wherein virtuous Princes do reygne.

And I say to the further Tiberius, if Princes become Tyrants for want of
riches, so do they become vicious through abundance of treasurs, and in this
case, vicious princes are chastened in the same vice. For avarice has such
power over them, yt it suffers them not to taste their own delight.

And I let the wete Tiberius, that there are many Princes which are of good
nature, and yet become Tyrants, for nothing else but because they be oppressed
with poverty.. For truly the noble heart refuses no danger, seeing him self
assaulted with poverty.

Therefore I demand of the which is better, or otherwise which of these two
euilles is least: that the Prince be poor, and with that a Tiranne: or that
he be rich, and therewith vicious.

In mine opinion it were much better to be rich and viciouse, then a tiranne
and poor: for in the end if he do evil by vice, he should be evil to no man
but to himself: by riches he should profit all the people. And if he be poor
and a tyranne, he should do great evil to many, and by poverty he could profit
no man. For the poor prince cannot maintain the rich, and much less succor
the poor, without comparison it is more profitable to the common wealth, and
more tolerable to men, that the Prince be an evil man, and therwithall a good
prince: than an evil Prince, and therwithal a good man. For as Plato says,
the Athenians would always rather seek a profitable, then a stout Prince: and
the Lacedaemonians did err, in willing rather a stout Prince then profitable.
Therefore see Tiberius, it is more sure and profitable for the common wealth,
that Princes have treasours to give lyberalye among their servants: then that
they should be poor and enforced to oppress their people with taxes and
subsidies. For princes oftetimes through poverty, take occasion to leauy
great subsedies in their realms and seignories.

The answer of Tiberius unto the Empress Sophia Augusta: Wherein he declares
that noble Princes neade not to hourd up great treasures: And of the hidden
treasure this good Emperor found by reuelacion, in the Palace where he
remained. Cap. xv.
Tiberius heard very patiently the admonicion of the Empress, wherefore with
great reverence he answered, and with sweet and gentle words he spoke to her
in this sort. I have heard and understood what you have told me (most noble
Princess Sophia, always Augusta): and do receive your gentle admonicions,
most humblye thankinge you for your loving counsel, which principally you
give me in so high a style. For oftentimes sick men abhor meats, not for
that ye meats are not good, but because they are not well dressed. If it were
gods pleasour, I would I knew as well how to do these things, as you know how
to speak them. And do not marvel though I make hereof a doubt, for we
greatly desire to praise virtuous works: but to put them in ure we are very
slow. Speaking therefore with such reverence (as is due unto so high a Lady)
to every one of these things which your excellency has told me, I will
answer in one word. For it is reason, sith you have spoken that which you
perceive of my deeds: that I speak that which I gather of your words. You
tell me that when I was in Alexandrie I thought not to be governor of the
empire after Justinian, and that I thought not my self worthy to deserve it,
nor yet looked to come unto it. To this I answer, that though by reason I
governed my self at that time, yet I ought not to think to deserve such a
dignity, nor to come to so high an estate. For those which by virtues
deserve great dignities are but few: and fewer are those which attain unto
them though they deserve them. But if this matter be judged according to
sensuality, I tell you truly (dame Augusta,) that I thought not only to deserve
it, but also I thought to come unto it. And hereof marueyle not, for it is an
infallible rule, where leeste desert is, there is most presumption. You say you
esteemed me for a wise man, and that by wisdom I could overcome any
disordinate appetite. To this I answer, that you knew my wisdom either in
mine own business, or else in other men's affairs. If in other men's affairs,
(where it did coast me naught) I was always a lover of justice. For there is
no man in the world so evil, that does not desire (if it be without his own
coast) to be counted lyberall. But if you judge me (Dame Augusta) on mine own
business, give not to light credit. For I will that you know, there is no man
so just, nor of so clear a judgment, that does not show him self frail in
matters which touch his own interest. You say that men which have their
thoughts high, and their fortune base, live always a pensife life. Truly it
is as you say. But in mine opinion, as the members of the bodies are but
instruments of ye mind, so is it necessary for men to have quick and sharp
wits, if they will not be neglygente. For if Alexander, Pyrrus, Julius Caesar,
Scipio, and Hanniball, had not been high minded, they had not been (as they
were) so noble and stout Princes.

I let you understand, most noble Princess, that men are not lost for having
their thoughts high, nor for having their hearts courageous, neither for being
hardy and stout: but they are undone, because they begin things through
folly, pursue them without wisdom, and atchieue them without discression.

For noble men enterprising great things, ought not to employ their force as
their noble heart wills, but as wisdom and reason teaches. You say, you
marvel why I wast the treasours without care, which Justinian and you
gathered togethers with great pain. To this I answer, you ought not to
marvel if all the treasours you heaped together of so long time, were spent
and consumed in one day. For there is an ancient malediction on riches hid,
and treasours buried, which Epimenides casts out saying these words. All the
treasours hurded up by the covetous, shall be wasted by the prodigal. You say
through that I wast in few days, you shall have neither to give, to wast, nor
yet to eat at the years end. To this I answer most gracious princess, that
if you had been as ready to releue the poor, as you and Justinian were
dilygent to rob the rich: then you should justly have complained, and I
worthily might have repented. Till now we have not seen, but that of the rich
you have made poor, and notwithstanding this, yet you have not gotten enoughe
to buyld an Hospital for the poor. You say ye Princes to resist their enemies
have need of great treasours. To this I answer, if Princes be proud,
gready, and of strange realms ambicious, it is most certain that they need
great treasours to accomplish their disordinate appetites. For the end of a
tyra^nous prince is, by hook or by crook to make him self rich in his life.
But if the Prince be or will be a man reposed, quyte, virtuous, paciente,
peaceable, and not covetous of the good of an other man, what need has he of
great treasours? For to speak truly, in princes houses there is more offense in
that yt auaunceth, then in that that wants. I will not wast many words in
aunsweringe, sith I am much more liberal of deeds then of words: but I
conclude, that there is no Prince which in virtuous deeds wastes so much, but
if he will, he may spend much more. For in the end, princes become not poor
spending their goods upon necessaries: but for wasting it upon things
superfluous. And take this word for all, yt for this he shall not be the porer,
but rather ye richer: For it is a general rule in Christian reglion, ye god will
give more to his servant in one hour, the^ they will wast in 20. years.
Justinian was Emperor.11. years, who (being a fool, and obstinate in the
heresye of Pellagien) died to the great offense of the Roman people, whose
death was as much desired, as his life abhorred. For the tirannous prince, that
makes many wepinge eyes in his life, shall cause many rejoicing hearts at his
death. Justinian being dead, Tiberius was elected Emperor, who governed ye
empire through so great wisdom and justice, yt no man was able to reprove him
if ye histories in his time did not deceive us. For it seldo^ hapeneth to a
prince to be as he was, upright in justice, pure in life, and clean in
conscience. For few are those princes which of some vices are not noted Paulus
Diaconus in his 18 book of ye Romain gestes, declare a thing merueilous which
be fell to this emperor at that time, and very worthy to know at this present.
And it is, that in the City of Constantinople the Roman Emperors had a
palace very sumptuous, and besemyng the authority of the imperial majesty,
which was begone in the time of Constantine the great, and afterward as the
succession of good or evil Emperors was, so were the buildings decayed or
repaired. For it is the deed of a virtuous Prince, to abolyshe vices of the
common wealth, and to make great and sumptuous buildinges in his country. This
Emperor Tiberius had spent treasours to redeem poor captives, to build
hospitalles, to erect monasteries, to marie and provide for the Orphans and
widows, in this he was so prodigal, that it came almost to pass that he had
nothing to eat in his palaice. And truly this was a blessed necessity. For
catholic Princes ought to think that well employed, which in the service of
Christ is bestowed. And hereof the Emperor was not ashamed, but thought it a
great glory, and that which only grieved him was, to see the Empress rejoice
so much at his miserye. For the high and noble hearts which feel them selves
wounded, do not so much esteem their own pain, as they do to see their
enemies rejoice at their grief. God never forsook them that for his sake
became poor, as it appears by this: It chanced one day that even as the
Emperor Tiberius walked in the midst of his palace, he saw at his feet a
marble stone, which was in form of the cross, of the reademer of the world.
And because it had been to unjust a thing (as he thought) to have spurned
that with his feet, wherewith we trust from our enemies to be defended: he
caused the stone to be taken up, (not thinking any thing to be there under) and
immediately after they found an other, wherein likewise was the form of the
cross, and this being taken up, they found an other in like manner, and when
that was pluct up from he bottom, there was found a treasor which contained
the some of 2. millions of Duckettes, for the which the good Emperor Tiberius
gave unto all mighty god most high thanks, and whereas before he was lyberal,
yet afterward he was much more bountiful: For all those treasours he
distrybuted amongst the poor and needye people. Let therefore mighty princes,
and great lords see, read, and profit by this example, and let them think
them selves assured, that for giving alms to the poor, they need not fear to
become poor: for in the end the vycious man cannot call him self rich, nor the
virtuous man can count him self poor.

How the Chefetaine Na^setes overcame many battles, only for that his whole
confidence was in god. And what happened to him by the Empress Sophia Augusta:
wherein may be noted the unthankfulness of Princes toward their servants.
Cap. xvi.
IN the year of the incarnacion of Christ. 528 ( Justinian the great being
Emperor, who was the son of Iustines sister his predecessor in ye Empire)
the histories say, in especially Paulus Diaconus in the 18. book Degestis
Romanorum: that there was a knighte of Greece in Rome, who from his tender years
had been brought up in Italye. He was a man of mean stature of a
colericke complexcion, and in the Law of Christ very devout, which was no
small thing. For at that time not only many knights, but almost all the
Bishops of Italye were Arrians.

This knights name was Narsetes, and because he was so valliant in arms and
so aduenturous in wars: he was chosen Chefeteyne general of the Roman
Empire. For the Romans had this excellency, that when they had a valiant and
stout captain (although they might have his weighte of gold given them) they
would never depart from his person. He enterprised so great things, he
overcame such mighty realms, and had such notable victories over his enemies,
that the Romans said he had in him ye strength of Hercules, the hardiness of
Hector, the noblenes of Alexander, the policye of Pirrus, and the fortune of
Scipio. For many of the vain gentiles held opinion, that as the bodies did
distribute their goods in the life: so did the souls part their gifts after
the death. This Narsetes was a pitefull captain, and very constant in the
faith of Christ, lyberall to give alms, effectuous to build new monasteries,
and in repairing churches a man very careful. And truly it was a rare thing.
For in great wars (upon small occasions) captains use to beat down
Churches, and that which was greatest of all, was ye he served god deuoutlye,
visited the hospitalles, said his deuocions with great tears, and above al,
resorted very often to the church in the night, And this excellency was no less
then the other. For that captains in such an hour, are readier to kill men
in their camp then to be wail their sins in the church. Finally he was a
christian and so devout, that god gave him the victories more through the
prayers which he used, than through the weapons wherewith he sought. For there
was never man that saw him shed ye blood of his enemies in bataile, before
he had shed the tears of his eyes in the temple. And to the end Christian
princes and captains may see how much better it is* to pacifye god by tears
and prayers, then to have their camp full of soldiers and riches, of many of
his doings I will declare part as here follows.

Justinian the Emperor being in Alexandrye, Totila king of the Goths, did
many mischeues and great domages through out all Italy, so that the Romans
durst not go by the way, nor could be in safeguard in their houses. For the
Goths in the day kept the ways, and in the night robbed and spoiled all the
people, wherefore Justinian the Emperor not knowinge the matter, sent the noble
Narsetes as captain general against the Goths, who being arrived in Italye
immediately confedered with the Lumbardes, the which at that time had their
mansion in Hungary, and sent his messangers to king Alboinus, (at that time
their king) for aid against the Goths, and in so doing he said he should
see how faithful a friend he would be to his friends: and how cruel an
ennemy to his enemies. Alboinus hearing the message of Narsetes was very
glad, and without delay immediatlly armed a great and puisant army, which by
the Adriaticale sea came into Italy: so yt the answer and the offer came both
at one time with effect, and so together arrived in one day (for the succor
of Narsetes) the 2. armies: yt is to say, that of the Romans and of the
Lumbards, the which assembled al in one and marched under the banner of their
captain Narsetes. Wherefore Totila, king of the Goths being advertised, (as
one that had not proved the happy fortune of Narsetes, nor the force of the
Lumbardes) sent to offer them ye battle, which was given in the fields of
Aquileia: and it was of both parts so fierce and cruel, that infinyte were
they that dyed: but in the end Totilla king of the Goths was overcome, and
neither he nor any of his host escaped alive. The good captain Narsetes, after
the battle gave many and noble gifts to the Lumbardes, and so with riches
and vyctorie, they returned into Hu^^^rie toward their king Alboinus. And
truly this Narsetes did as he was bound to do. For the friend cannot be
recompensed by riches, when for his friend he puts his life in ieopardy. When
the Lumbardes were gone, Narsetes caused all the spoil of his camp to be
divided amongeste his souldyers, and that which belonged unto him, he gave it
wholly to the poor monasteries: so that by this vyctorie Narsetes got triple
renown. That is to wete, very bountiful in that he gave to the Lumbardes,
charitable in that he gave to the poor, and valyant in that he vanquished so
puissant enemies. Dagobert king of France beyond the alps, being a coragyous
young Prince, and very desirous of honor (for no other cause but to leave of
him some memory) determined him self in parson to pass into Italy, although
he had no just title thereunto. For the hearts puffed up with pried little pass
though they war of an unjust quarrel. His myshape was such, that the same
day he passed the river of Rubico (where the Romans in old time limyted the
marches of Italye) news came to him that his own country was up, and those
which were there, one rebelled against the other, the which was not without
the great sufferaunce of God. For it is but reason that that king should
loase his own realm by divine justice, which will take other men's only through
man's folly. The king Dagobert assembling all the chiefeste of his realm to
counsel, it was agreed and concluded by all, that he alone in person
should return into France, and for his reputacion should leave all the army
in Italy. Whereof remained captains, Buccelinus, and Amingus. For it is better
for a prince to defend his country by justice, then to conquer another by
tira^ny. As this army of Buccelinus was great, so was he courageous, and
wrought many and great domages in Italy, especially in the land of Campagnia.
And worse then that, all the riches yt he had sacked, and all the captives he had
taken, he would neither restore nor yet suffer them to be raunso^med: but so
sone as he took them he sent them unto the king, as one that showed him self
more desirous to rob and spoil, then to fight and wage battle. This
captain Buccelinus the^ being in Campagnia, retired into a place called
Tare^tum with all his army because of winter, Narsetes suddenly came upon him
and gave him battle, That was between them very cruel, wherein Buccelinus
was vanquyshed and left dead in the field, amongst the other captains of the
Gauls. Which news brought to Amingus ears being the other captain of ye
Gauls, And seeing his companion dead, he confedered with Auidinus captain of
the Goths, and they together came against the Romans (which thing was not
unknown unto Narsetes) to give the battle, near to Gaietto whereas those
captains were conquered and taken alive. Of whom Amingus was beheaded by the
comaundeme^t of Narsetes: and Auidinus was sent by him prisoner to the
emperor to Constantinople. The captain Narsetes wanne another battle
against Syndual, king of Brytons, which came into Italye with a huge multitude
of people to recover the Realm of Partinopolis, which now we call Naples, for
he said it apperteyned unto him of right, as to one of the lynage of
Hercules, who in aunciente time was king of that Realm. This king Synduall
within a while became friend unto Narsetes, and behaved him self outwardly as a
friend and confederate: but in secret, conspired against the Romans, and
would have been king of the Romans, and rained alone in Italye: through the
which there sprange between him and Narsetes cruel wars, wherein fortune was
a long time variable. For there is not so aduenturous a captain, to whom in
long wars fortune is always prosperous. Finally the king Syndual and
Narsetes, agred to hasard their men, and also their lives in one day unto the
discrecion of fortune, so that both the armies joined together, and fought
between Verona, and Trento, where king Syndual was conquered, and taken alive,
and the same day without any delay was hanged openly. And because that Narsetes
was not accustomed to use such cruelty against those that were overcome, and
especially against kings and worthy Knights, he commanded his title to be
set on the gibbet, whereon the king hanged, which said this.

A simple cord, here stopped king Synduals breath.
By fautles doom, of hye Narsetes hest.
Not that he sought, by warlike deeds his death.
But that in peace, he did a Traitor rest.
Such and many other battles and victories had this aduenturous and good
captain, not only in the borders of Italye, but also in Asia, where for many
years he had the government of the country. And as he was a good christian, so
almighty god in all his affairs did prosper him. After all these wars past,
Justinian the younger sent him to the kingdom of constantinople, to be chief
governor of al those provinces, and although he did well in warlike affairs:
yet he did much better in the administracion of the common wealth. For men that
are accustomed to travail in wars, have a good lerning how to govern the
people in peace. For this occasion (amongst all mortal men) Narsetes was
praised and esteemed, that is, for his valyauntnes in the batailes which he
overcame, for his riches through the spoils that he took, and for the justice
he ministered to all men where he ruled. Narsetes because he was a Gretian borne
was envied of ye Romans, and chiefly because he daily increased both his
honor and riches. For truly virtue, honor, and riches in a man, are but a
brond to light envy to al ye world. And thus was the case. One day there came
many noble Romans to the emperor Justinian, and to the Empress Sophia
Augusta, to complain of Narsetes, and of his behavior and governing, and said
these words unto them. We let you to wete, most noble prince, and sovereign
lady, yt we had rather (of ye two) to serve the Goths, then to obey the
Greeks: and we speak this, because that the Eunuch commanded us more to his
own service, then he does to yt of yours, and the worst is that you know it
not, and if you know it, at the lest you do not remedy it. Chose therefore one
of these two things, whether you will deliver us from ye government of the
greek, or suffer yt we put Rome and our selves into ye hands of the Goths. For
it is less grief for ye Romans, to be subject to a puisant king: then to an
effeminate Eunuch, and a tiraunt Narsetes being present, hearing these
quarelles) as they say) said thus. O noble prince, if I have committed any
evil, it is impossible for me to find one that will do me good: but if I have
done well, no man shall be able to do me wrong. The empress Sophia of long time
before had hated Narsetes, some said it was because he was an Eunuch, other
think it was because he was rich, and some other judge because he was in
greater authority in the empire then she. Wherefore perceuing she had good
occasion, and opportunity for ye same, she spoke a word much to his reproach:
which was this. Since thou art an Eunuch Narsetes, and not a man, it is not fit
for the to have a man's office: therefore, I command the to work with my
handmaidens, and there thou shall serve to spin and weaue clothes, Narsetes took
this word heavily, and truly it was with great spite spoken. Wherefore he stoutly
and courageously spoke unto the Empress Sophia these words, and said: I had
rather (most excellent Princess) thou had chastised me as a noble dame,
then to have reproved me with a word as a simple woman: but since it is so that
you have liberty and authority to comaund me, know you also, that I have ye
self same to obey you, and therefore I take my leave, and now I go to weaue my
web which perhaps your self whilst you live, shall never untwine. Narsetes
immediately went his way and came into Italye, into the city of Naples (chief
and head of Campagnia) and from thense he depeached his imbassadours immediately
to the king of Hungary (where the Lumbardes at ye time had their mansion place)
cou^sailing them to forsake that land, so evil tilled, so barren, cold and
little, and that they should come and enhabite Italye, which was a plain
country, fartile and ample, temperat and very rich, and that now or never
they should conquer it. And Narsetes therewith not contented (but to provoke
his friends the more, and make them the more covetous) sent them part of every
good thing yt was in Italy, that is to wete, light horses, rich armor, sweet
pleasant and dainty fruits, fine mettailes, and many kinds of ointments very
odiferous, silks and marchau^dises of many and diverse sorts. The ambassadors
arrived in Panony (which now is called Hungary) were honorably received, and
the Lumbardes seeing that there were such, and so many goodly things in Italy,
determined to leave Pannonia, and go spoil and conquer Italy, although it
belo^ged to Rome, and were at ye season friends with the Romans, yet
notwithstanding they had little respect to this. And hereat no man ought to
merueile, for in ye place there is never perfect frendshippe, where he that
commands is constrained to demand help of others. The Lumbards determined
to pass into Italy: and at ye time there was seen of the Italians visibly in ye
air, sundry armies of fire, the one cruelly killing the other. Which things
greatly feared the hearts of the people. For by this they knew that with in a
short space, much of their blood and of their enemies also should be shed. For
it is an old ancient custom, yt when any great matter does chance to any
Realm, first ye planetes and elements do declare ye same by secret tokens. The
ingratitude of ye Emperor Justinian against Narsetes his captain, and the
evil words which Sophia spoke unto him, were thoccasio^ that the Lumbardes
invaded, and destroyed al Italy. which thing valiant Princes ought well to note,
to keep them selves from ingratitude toward their servants, who has don
them great service, For it is a general rule, yt the ingratitude of a great
benefit, makes ye servant despair of recompense, or of a faithful
servant, makes him become a cruel and mortal enemy. And let not Princes trust
men, because they be native of their realms, brought up and nourished in their
palaces, and always have been faithful in their services, that therefore they
will not of good subjects be turned to evil, nor yet of faithful become
disloyal. For such imaginacion is vain. For the Prince that in his doings is
unthankful, cannot keape nor reteyne any honest man long in his service.
One thing the noble Justinian did with Narsetes, whereof all noble and sage
Princes ought to beware, that is to know, he did not only give ear unto his
enemies and believed them: but also before them he did dishonor him, and shame
him to his power, which thing made him utterly to despair.

For there is nothing that spiteth a man more, then to have before his enemies
any injury or dishonor done unto him of his superior. The empress Sophia
therefore deserved great reproach for speakinge such dishonest words to
Narsetes, to send him to thread the nedels in that occupacion where the damsels
wrought. For it is the duty of a noble princess, to mitigate the ire of
Princes when they are angry and not to provoke them further to anger. Narsetes
then always dowting ye empress Sophia, never after returned into Naples
where she was, but rather came from Naples to Rome, a year before the
Lumbardes came into Italy: where he received all the sacraments, and like a
devout Christian dyed. His body was carried to Alexandria in a coffine of silver
al set with precious stones, and there was buried. And a man cannot tell
whither the displeasour were greater that all Asia had not to see Narsetes
alive, or the pleasour that Sophia had to see him dead. For the impatient heart
(especially of a woman) has no rest, until she see her enemy dead.

Of a letter the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to the King of Scicile, in
which he records the travails they endured togethers in their youth, and
reproves him of his small reverence toward the temples. Chapter xvii.
MArcus Aurelius sole Emperor of Rome, borne in mou^te Celio, called the old
tribune, wishes health and long life to the Gorbin, Lord and king of Sicile.
As it is the custom of the Roman Emperoures, the first year of my reign I
wrate generallye to all that I Will: the second year I wrate generallye unto thy
court and palace, and at this present I write more particulerlye to thy
parsone. And although that Princes have great Realms, yet they ought not
therefore to cease to communicate with their old friends. Since I took my pen
to write unto the, I stayed my hand a great while from writing, and it was not
for that I was slothful, but because I was a shamed to see all Rome offended
with the. I let the to we^e (most excellent prince) that in this I say I am thy
true friend, for in my heart I feel thy trouble and so said Euripides, that
which with the heart is loved, with the heart is lamented. But before I show
thee the cause of my writing, I will reduce into thy memory some things past
of our youth, and thereby we shall see what we were then, and what we are now:
for no man does so much rejoice of his prosperity present, as he which
calls to mind his miseries past. Thou shall call to mind (most excellent
Prince) that we two togethers did learn to read in Capua, and after we
studied a little in Tarentum: and from thense we went to Rhodes, where I read
Rhethorike, and thou hardest philosophy. And afterward in the end of x.
years, we went to the wars of Pannonia, where I gave my self to music: for
the affections of young men is so variable, that daily they would know strange
realms, and change offices. And in all those iourneis, with the forse of
youth, the sweet company, with the pleasant communicacion of sciences, and
with a vain hope we did dissemble our extreme poverty, which was so great,
that many times and often we desired not that which many had, but that little
which to few abounded. Do thou remember, that when we sailed by the goulfe
Arpin to go into Helesponte, a long and tempestuous torment came upon us,
wherein we were taken of a pirate, and for our ransom he made us row
about.ix. months in a gally, whereas I cannot tell which was greater, either
the want of bread, or the abundaunce of stripes which we always endured?
Have thou forgotten also that in the city of Rhodes, when we were beseged of
Bruerdus, puissaunt king of Epirotes, for the space of fourtene months, we
were ten without eating flesh, save only.ii. cattes, the one which we
stole, and the other which we bought? remember that thou and I (being in
Tarent) were desired of our host to go to the feast of the great goddess
Diana: into the which temple none could enter that day, but those which were
new apparelled. And to say the truth, we determined not to go thither: thou
because thy garments were torn, and I because my shoes were broken: and that
both the times we were sick in Capua, they never cured us by diet: for our
dyseases never proceeded of excess but of extreme hunger. An often times
Retropus ye phisician, for his pleasour spoke to us in the university and
said. Alas children, you dye not through surfeting and much eatinge. And truly
he said troth, for the country was so dear, and our money so scarce, that we
did never eat until the time we could endure no longer for famine. Do thou
not remember the great famine that was in Capua, for the which cause we were in
the war of Alexandria, wherein my flesh did tremble, remembering the great
perilles which we passed in the goulfe of Theberynthe. What snowes all winter,
what extreme heat all summer, what general famine in the fields, what
outrageous pestilence amongst the people, and worste of all, what persecution
of strangers, and what evil will we had of ours? remember also that in the
city of Naples, when we made our prayer to the profetesse Flauia, she told us
what should become of us, after we left our studies She told me that I
should be an Emperor, and said that thou should be a king.

To the which answer we gave such credit, that we took it not only for a
mock: but also for a manifest iniurye. And now I do not merueile, in that
then we both marueled wonderful much. For enuyous fortune practiced her
power more in pluckyng down the rich, then in setting up the poor. Behold
(excellent Prince) the great power of the goddess, the whele of fortune, and
the variety of times: who would have thought when I had my hands all rough
and scuruy with rowing in the galley, that between those hands the scepter of
the Romayne Empire should have been put? who would have thought when I was so
sick for lack of meat, I should ever have surfited by to much eating: who
would have thought when I could not be satisfied with cattes flesh, that I
should have then glutted with to much dainty meats? who would have thought at
that time when I left going into the temple because my shoes were broken, that
another time should come when I should ride triumphyng in chariotes, and upon
the shoulders of other men? who would have thought that that which with my
ears I hard of the prophetess in Campagnia, I should see here with my eyes in
Rome. O how many did hope (at the time we were in Asia) to be governors of
Rome, and lords of Sicille, which not only failed of the honor that they
desired, but also obtained the death which they never feared? for oftentimes it
chances to ambitious men, that in their greatest ruff, and when they think
their honor sponne and wouen, then their estate with the web of their life
in one moment is broken. If at that time one had demanded the Tiraunt
Laodicius (aspiring to the kingdom of Sicille) and Ruphus Caluus who looked to
be Emperor of Rome, what they thought of them selves: assuredly they would
have sworn their hope to have been as certain, as ours was doubtful. For it
is natural to proud men, to delight them selves, and to set their hole mind
upon vain devises. It is a strange thing and worthy memory, that they having
the honor in their eyes failed of it, and we not thinking thereof in our hearts
should obtain it. But herein fortune showed her might, that she provided hope
for those which looked for least: and despair for others that hoped for most:
which thing greaued them at the very heart. For no patience can endure to se a
man obtain that without travail, which he could never compass by much
labor. I cannot tell if I should say like a simple Roman, that those
things consist in fortune: or if I should say like a good philosopher, that
all the gods do ordeine them. For in the end, no fortune nor chance can do
any thing without the gods assent. Let the proud and envious travail as much
as they will, and the ambicious take as much care as they can, I say and
affirm, that little avails human dilygence to attain to great estates, if
the gods be their enemies Suppose that evil fortune do ordeine it, or that the
god and gods do suffer it, I see those which have their thoughts high,
oftentimes are but of base estate: and so in fine to come to mischief or
extreme poverty, and those that have their thoughts low, are humble of heart,
and for the more part are greatly exalted by fortune. For many oftentimes
dream that they are lords, and men of great estate, which when they are awake,
find them selves slaves to all men. The condition of honor is such, as I never
read the like: and therefore such as have to do with her, ought to take good
head. For her conditions are such, she enquireth for him whom she never saw,
and she renneth after him that flies from her, she honoreth him that estemeth
her not, and she demands him which wills her not, she gives to him that
requires her not, and she trusts him whom she knows not. Finally honor
has this custom, to forsake him that estemeth her: and to remain with him
which little regards her. The curious travelers ask not what place this or
that is, but do demand what way they must take to lead them to the place they
go. I mean, that princes and noble men ought not directly to cast their eyes
upon honor: but in the way of virtue, which brings them to honor. For daily
we se many remain defamed, only for seking honor: and others also exalted and
extemed for flying from her. O miserable world, thou know I know the well,
and yt which I know of the is: that thou art a sepulcher of ye dead, a prison
of the living, a shop of vices, a hangeman of virtues, oblivion of antiquitye,
an enemy of things present, a pitfall to the rich, and a burden to the
poor, a house of pilgrames, and a den of thieves. Finally O world, thou art a
sclaunderer of the good, a rauenour of the wicked, and a deceuer and abuser of
al, and in the O world, to speak the truth, it is almost impossible to live
contented, and much less to live in honor. For if thou will give honor to ye
good, they thnke them selves dishonored, and esteem thy honor as a thing of
mockery. And if perchance they be evil and light, thou suffrest them to come
to honor by way of mockery, meaning infamy and dishonor unto them. O immortal
gods, I am oftentimes troubled in my thought whose case I should more lament,
either ye evil man auaunced with out deserte, or the good man overthrown without
cause. And truly in this case, the pitiful man will have compassion on them
both. For if the evil live, he is sure to fall: and if the good fall, we doubt
whether ever he shall rise again. If al falls were alike, al would be healed
and cured with one salve: but some fall on their feet, some on their sides,
others stumble and fall not, and other fall down right, but some do give them a
hand. I mean some there are which fall from their estate, and loase no more but
their substance: others fall, and for very sorrow loase not only their goods,
but their life with all. Other there are that fall, who neither loase their life
nor goods, but their honor only. So according to the discrecio^ of fortune,
the more they have, ye more still he takes from them, and I greatly muse why
the gods do never remedy it, for when fortune once begins to overthrow a
poor man, she does not only take al he has from him, but all those which may
and will succoure him.

So that the poor man is bound more to lament for another man's evil: then for
his own proper. There is a great dyfference between the mishappes of the good,
and adventures of the evil. For of the ill we cannot say that he discendeth,
but that he falls: and of the good we may only say that he discendeth and
falls not. For in the end, the true honor does not consist in the perfection
and dignity that a man has, but in the good life that he leads, It is a
misery to se the vain men of this world, when they go about to get any
thing, and to compass any great matter of importance, to mark their early
rising in a morning, their late going to bed at night, and the look which they
cast upon other men, to note how importunate they are to some, and how
troublesome they are to others, and afterward (notwithstanding their long
suit and great pain) an other man which little thought thereof, comes to
that honor rejoicing and without travail: which he before by so great
pains, and with so great expenses of money has sought: so that in seeking
honor by travail, he comes to infamye with shame. For I my self have seen
sundry things lost by negligence, and many more by to much dilygence.

The Emperor proceeds in his lettter, to admonish princes to be fearful of
their gods, and of the sentence which the Senate gave upon this king: for
pulling down the Church. Cap. xviii.
AL these things (most excellent prince) I have told ye for none other cause,
but to agrauate this case, and to show ye peril thereof. For the good physician
(to take away ye bytternes of ye pille) ministers some sweet sugar, to delight
the pacient withal. The xx. day of ye month of January (here before ye Senate)
was presented a long and large informacio^ of ye, and it was sent by ye Consul,
which went to visit that I Will of Cicillia, which (as thou know) is an old
order of Rome, from three months to three months, to visit all the land and
country subject to the same. For those princes are unjust, which have more
care to take up their rentes, then dyligence to know if their people be well
ordered by justice. Of the informacion taken of the and thy person (if my
memory deceive me not) this was the effect, that thou art temperate in eating,
moderate in expenses, pitiefull to widows, father to orphans, gentle to those
that serve the, pacient with those that offend the, dilygent to keep and
maintain peace, and faithful to observe league, and thou art accused only
to be negligent in the service of God.

By one little gate left open, oftentimes a great City besieged is lost: by one
only treason, the infinite services past are not esteemed. I mean (most
excellent prince) that it little preuayleth to think much of worldly matters,
and to forget all divine services. For the good Prince ought first to shut the
gates against vices, that they enter not into his subjects: before he does
fortifye the walls against his enemies. Let every man be as he will, and say
what he list, I for my part think it sure, that the man which is not a
studious seruer of the gods, all his virtues shall be turned into vices, and
esteemed as sclaunders.

For it is a general rule in hye Philosophy, that a work is not called
virtuous, because I work it only, but it is virtuous because it is acceptable
to the gods.

O excellent prince, do not thou know that there is no man so wise, neither so
sage, but erreth more through ignorance, than he does good by wisdom? And
do not thou know that there is no man so just, but wants much to execute
true justice? And finally I say that there is no virtue so virtuous, but it
wants more then it has to be parfite. Wherefore al our justice ought to be
made perfect to the divine justice: and the virtue which we lack, ought to be
supplied under the great perfection wherewith the gods abound. Among us
Romans we have this law, (which is the chief of all the phisophers) that here
amongst mortal men, nor of mortal men, nor with mortal men any thing is
perfyte, unless it be by the Gods confirmed. Since men are feeble and frail,
it can not be chosen but they should commyt many frayleties. And in such case,
the sage Princes ought and should bear with all the frayleties that men
commyt, those excepted which are not injurious to the gods, whom (if it were
possible) unawares ought to be punyshed.

For the Prince should not be called a Prince but a Tyrant, that is desirous
to revenge his own iniurye, and in chasteninge those which are against the
gods shows him self negligente.

Let them think what they list, and complain what they will, that Prince
which will enlarge his dominious, and give occasion that the service of God be
diminished, such a man we will not call a king that governs, but a Tyraunte.
If we call him a Tyraunte that spoileth the people, sleeth the men, persecuteth
the innocente, dishonors virginnes, and robs realms: Tell me excellent
Prince, what lacks he of a Tyrant, that plucketh down Churches, and little
estemeth the gods? There is no token more manifest that the Prince is a
tyrant, then when he takes upon him any thing which is contrary to the will
of the gods.

For he has small regard toward men, that so little fears the Gods.
Licurgus the famous king of the Lacedaemonians says in one of his ancient
laws these words. We ordeyne and command, that no Lacedemonian presume to
receive mercy or favor of the Prince, which will not enforce him self to
serve the Gods. For he is not only evil, but of all other most wicked. O
excellent king, O glorious world, O fortunate realm, wherein those auncientes
would their Prince should be so just, that the gifts were not esteemed,
unless their lives were honest: for they thought that of no value, which by
the hands of evil men was given. Thou haste done one thing very dishoneste
(most noble Prince) the which to write unto thee I am ashamed, which is: for
to enlarge thy new palace, thou have plucked down an old Temple, the which
thing thou should neither have done nor yet have thought. For in the end,
though the stones of the temple be of small importance, yet the Gods to whom
they were dedicated were of much value. Pardon me (excellent Prince) though I
let thee understand that this fact has been done in such sort, that thereby
I was amazed, and all Rome also offended, the sacret Senate thou haste greatly
vexed, and further all judge thee a dissolute man, and all men procure that
thou may be extremely punished, and hereof maruayle not. For in Rome they
believe that the Prince which dare pluck down temples, does little fear the
Gods. For that thou art a noble Prince, and an old friend of mine, I have
travailed to bring thee in favor with the Senate, and because thou haste no
means to excuse thy error committed: they do not determine to forgive thee
this fault, before they see in thee a token of amendment. And of truth me
thinks they have reason. For there is nothing that troubles poor men more,
than to see that they and not the rich for their offenses are chastised and
punyshed. That which the sacred Senate has ordained is, that forthwith thou
begin to build the temple a new, and that it should be more large, hye,
beautiful, and rycher, then ever it was. So that thou take as much of thy
palace to enlarge the temple, as thou tokest of the temple to beautify thy
palace. After thou haste performed this, though now thou think thy self
half dishonored, thou will than think thy self very happy. For not thou of
the Gods but the Gods of thee shall have taken thy house to make their temple.
I believe well it will be great cost and charges unto thee before thou haste
finished the temple. Wherefore I send thee forty thousand sexterces to
healpe thy buylding, and to the end it should be more secret, I send thee
them by my Secretary Panuntius, to whom, in all, and for all, thou shall give
credit. I send the likewise a collar of gold, which one brought me from
the river of Nyle, and because it was to narow for me, I suppose: it will be
fytte for the.

One has brought me moyles out of Spain, whereof I send the.2. Panuntius my
secretary brings with him a very good moyse, the which he estemeth much: So
that theris no man that can either by her or borow her. I delyght in her so
much, that I desire thou cause her either to be boughte, or stolen, and sent
unto me here in Rome. My wife Faustine saluteth the, and to the excellent
queen thy wife, of her part and mine as much as is possible do our
commendacions, and these Popingeys, Faustine presents unto her. Marcus the
Roman Emperor writes to thee with his own hand.

How the Gentiles honored those which were devout in the service of the Gods.
Cap. xix.
THE ancient Romayne historiographers agree, that at the beginning there were
seven kings, which governed Rome for the space of.xxiiii. years. The second
whereof was named Pompilius, who amongst all the other was most highly
esteemed, for none other cause, but for that he was a great worshipper of the
Gods, and a sumptuous builder of the temples. For the Roman princes were as
much beloved for serving the gods, as they were honored for vanquishing their
enemies. This man was of such sort, that he allowed Rome wholly for the Gods,
and made a house for him self without the city. For it was an ancient law
in Rome, that no man should be so bold to dwell in any house consecrated for
the Gods. The fifte king of the Romans was Tarquinius Priscus. And as
Tarquinius Superbus was vicious and abhorred of the people, so was this
virtuous and well-beloved of the gods: and was greatly praised in all his doings
because he feared God, and continually visited the temples, and not contented
with those which were finished but buylte also in the high Capitol the
sacred temple of Jupiter. For that no Prince could build any house in Rome for
him self, unless first he made a temple for the Gods, of the common wealth.
This temple was had in so great reverence, that as the Romans honored
Jupiter for the God above all other Gods, so was that temple esteemed above al
other temples. In the wars between the Falisques and the Carpenates, two
Roman captains were vanquished, of the which the one named Gemetius died:
whereupon rose such a great fear among them, that many flyeng from the
wars, came back again to Rome. For the victorious has always this
privilege, that though they be few, yet they are always feared of them that
be overcome. This occasion moved the Romans to chose new captains, and
truly they did like wise men. For oftentimes it happens by alteringe the
captains of the wars, fortune likewise changes her doings. And the
captain that was elected for the wars, was Marcus Furius Camillus, who
though he were stout and hardy, yet before he went to the wars he offered
great sacrifices to the Gods, and made a vow that if he returned to Rome
victorious, he would build a solemn temple. For it was the custom in Rome,
that immediately when the Roman captain would enterprise to do any notable
thing, he should make a vow to build temples. Now when Camillus returned
afterward victorious, he did not only build a temple, but also furnished it
with all manner of implementes thereunto belongyng, which he got by spoil,
and vanquishing his enemies. And sith he was for this reprehendid of some,
saying that the Roman captains should offer their hearts to the Gods, and
divide the treasours among the Soldiers, he answered these words. I like a
man did ask the gods but one triumph: and they like gods gave me many.
Therefore considering this, it is but just sith I was brief in promysinge,
that I should be large in perfourminge. For even as I did thank the^ for that
they gave me double, in respect of that I demanded: so likewise shall they
esteem yt which I do give, in respect of yt which I promised. At that time when
the cruel war was betwixt Rome and the city of Neye, the Romans kept it
besieged five years togethers, and in thend by policy took it. For it chaunseth
sundry times in war, that that city in short time by pollycy is won, which
by great strength a long time has been defended. Marcus Furius dictatour of
Rome, and at that time captain, commanded a proclamation to be had through
his host, that incontinently after the city was taken, none should be so
hardy as to kill any of the citezens, but those which were found armed. Which
thing ye enemies understanding, unarmed them selves all and so escaped. And
truly this example was worthy of noting. For as the captains ought to show
them selves fierce, and cruel at the beginning: so after the victory had of
their enemies, they should show them selves meke and pitiful. This dictatour
Camillus, for an other thing he did, was much commended above the residue. That
is to wete, he did not only not consent to rob the temples, nor dishonor the
gods: but he him self with great reverence, took the sacred vessels of the
temples, and the gods which were therein, (especially the goddess Juno) and
brought the^ al to Rome. For amongst the auncie^tes there was a law, that the
gods of them which were vanquished, should not come by lot to the captains
being conquerours. Therefore he made in the mount Auentino a sumptuous temple,
wherein he placed all the gods togethers, with all the other holy relics which
he wan. For the greater triumph the Romans had over their enemies, so much ye
better they handled the gods of ye people vanquished. Also you ought to know,
that the Romans after many victories, determined to make a crown of gold very
great and rich, and to offer it to the god Apollo. But sith the common
treasour was poor because there was but little silver, and less gold to make
that crown: the Roman matrons defaced their Jewels and ouches of gold and
silver to make ye crown with all. For in Rome there never wanted money (if it
were demanded) for the service of gods, to repair temples, or to redeem
captives. The Senate esteemed the well willing hearts of these women in such
sort, that they granted them three things: that is to wete, to wear on their
heads garlandes of flowers, to go in chariottes to the common places, and to go
openly to the feasts of the gods. For the ancient Romans were so honest,
that they never ware gold on their heads, neither went they at any time to the
feasts uncovered. A man ought not to marvel, that the Romans granted such
privileges unto the ancient matrones of Rome. For they used never to be
obliuious of any benefit received, but rather gentill, with thanks and
rewards to recompense the same. An other notable thing chaunsed in Rome, which
was that the Romans sent two tribunes, the which were called Caulius and
Sergius, into the I Will of Delphos with great presents, to offer unto ye god
Apollo. For as Titus Liuius says, Rome yearly sent a present unto the god
Apollo, and Apollo gave unto the Romans counsel. And as the Tribunes went
out of the way, they fell into the hands of pirates and rouers on the sea,
which took them with their treasours, and brought them to the city of Liparie.
But the citizens understanding that those presents were consecrated to the god
Apollo, did not only deliver them all their treasure again: but also gave
the^ much more, and guydes therewith to conduicte them safely (both going and
coming) from all peril and danger. The Romans being advertised of their
gentleness by the messengers, which were come safe and alive, did so much
rejoice, that they ordained in Rome, that the nobles of Liparie should be made
Senators of Rome, and all the others should be confederate and of aliaunce
unto the^. And they caused further that two priests of Lipari should always
remain in the temple of Jupiter, which privilege was never granted to any
other strangers but to them only. For the Romans had so great zeal, and
love to their gods, that in the services of the temples they trusted none, but
those which were native and ancient of Rome, and also were both wise and
virtuous. When Quintus Fabius and Publius Decius, were in the wars against
the Samnites and Toscanes, and likewise against the Vmbres, many marvelous and
terrible signs were seen in Rome, which things did not only fear those that
saw them, but also those which heard of the^. Upon which occasion the Romans
and the Roman matrones (both night and day) offered great sacrifices to the
gods. For they said, if we can once pacify the wrath of the gods in Rome, we
shall never neade to fear our enemies in the field. The thing was this, that
as the Roman matrones went visiting the temples, to appease the ire of the
gods, many Senators wives came to the temple of chastity to offer sacrifice.
For in the time of the puissant power of the Romans, the women did sacrifice
in the temples of the gods. At that time came Virginea, the daughter of Aureus
Virgineus, the Consul Plebeian, the which was forbidden to do sacrifice, for
that she was none of the Senators wives but a Plebeian, as much to say as a
crafts woman, and no gentilmans daughter borne. For the noble women were had
in so great veneration, and so highly esteemed, that all the other seemed (in
respect of the^) but handmaides, and sclaues. The noble Roman Virginea, seeing
her to be so repulsed and disdained of the other matrons, made of her own
propre house a se^ple to the goddess of chastity, and with much devotion and
reverence honored her. The which thing being published abroad throughout
Rome, many other women came thither to do sacrifice likewise. For fortune is
so variable, that oftentimes those which of pride have forbidden us their
houses, come after by humility, to serve us at ours. For this cause this
Virginea the foundresse was so greatly praised, that the Romans in her life
made her patrice (that is a noble Roman) and after her death caused her image
and statue to be made and set up in the high Capitol: and above this image
were graven certain Greek letters, the effect whereof was this.

Patrice the great, this Image does present
That in her life, did give with mind devout
The Gods her house, and therefore to them went
When lively breath, by death was chased out.
Of all these hystories above named, Titus Liuius makes mention in his first
decade, the second fifth, and ninth book, and though he declares the^ more at
large, yet this shall suffice for my purpose. I have sought among ye gentiles
these few examples to reprove christian princes, to thend they might se how
studious and fervent our fathers were in the service of their Idols: and
contrariwise how cold and negligent we are, to honor and serve our true and
living god. It is a shame to tell how the ancient Romans with all their hearts
did serve ye gods without any understanding, and how those which are christians
(for ye most part) serve the true God, not in truth, but with hypocrisy and
dissimulation. Fo the children of this world will take no pains, but for to
provoke the pleasures of the body. Many wondered for what occasion God did so
much for them, and they did nothing for God. To this may be answered, that if
they had known one true God, all the sacrifices they had done to their other
gods, they would have done to him only: and as God is just, so he rewarded them
in their temporal prosperities, not for that they did well, but for that they
desired to do well. For in our divine law, God does not regard what we are,
but what we desire to be. Christian princes maruayle much what the occasion
should be, that they are not so fortunate as the Gentiles were. To this may be
answered, that either they be good or evil. If they be good, truly God should
do them wrong, if for the payment of their faithful services, he should
recompense the^ with those worldly vanities. For without doubt one only loving
countenance of god in the world to come is more worth, then all the temporal
goods of this world present. But if these such great lords be evil in their
persons, ambitious in governing their dominions, not pitiful to wydowes and
fatherless, not fearful of god nor of his threatninges, and moreover never to
have mind to serve him, but only when they see them selves in some great
ieopardie, in such case God will not hear them, and much less favor them.
For without doubt the service is more acceptable, which of free will
proceadeth: than that which of necessity is offered.

For five causes princes ought to be better Christians then their subjects.
Cap. xx.
IN mine opinion, Princes ought and are bound to be virtuous for five causes.
I say virtuous, in that they should love, and fear God. For he only may be
called virtuous, which in the catholic faith of the church, and in the fear
of God has always remained constant. First, princes should fear, love,
serve, and love one only god whom they worship, for that they acknowledge
him only and none other to be the head both of heaven and earth. For in the
end there is nothing so puissaunt, but is subject to the divine power. And
truly the prince is is great peril of damnation of his soul, if in his
government he has not always before his eyes, the fear and love of the
supreme prince, to whom we must render of all our doings an account. For the
prince has great occasion to be vicious, thinking that for the vice he shall
not be chastised. I have read in diverse and sundry writings, and I never
found one ancient prince to be contented with one only god, but that they had
and served many gods. Julius Caesar carried five gods painted in a table, and
Scipio the great carried seven portered in metal. And furthermore they were
not contented to have many: but yet in sacrifices, and services, they offered
unto them all. The Christian princes which keep and have but one very true and
omnipotent god, are so unthankful, that they think it much to serve and
give acceptable service unto him. And though peradventure some say, that it is
more painful to serve one true god, then all these false gods, to this I
answer. That to serve them, it is both travail and pain: but to serve our
god, it is both joy and felicity. For in serving those, it is costly, and
without profit: and in serving God great profit ensues. For those gods
require great and rich sacrifices, and our God demands nothing but pure
and clean hearts. Secondarely princes should be better Christians then others
because they have more to lose then all. And he that has more to lose then any
other, ought above al other to serve god. For even as he alone can give him, so
likewise he alone and none other can take from him. And if a subject take any
thing from his neighbor, the prince whom he serves makes him render it
again: but if the Prince be iniuried with any other tyraunte, he has none to
complain unto, nor to demand help of, but only of his merciful God. For
in the end, one that is of power can not be hurt, but by an other that is
likewise mighty. Let princes behold how the man that will make any great
assault, first comes running afar of as fast as he can. I mean, that the
prince which will have God merciful unto him, ought to be content with his
only god. For he in vain demands help of him, to whom before he never
did service. Thirdly princes ought to be better Christians then others, and
this shall be seen by that they succoure the poor, provide for those that are
unprovided, and visit the temples, hospitalles, and churches, and endeavor
them selves to hear the divine service, and for all these things they shall
not only receive rewards, but also they shall receive honor. For through
their good example, others will do the same. Princes not fearinge God, nor his
commandments, cause their Realms and subjects to fall into great misery.
For if the fountain be infected, it is impossible for the streams (that issue
thereof) to be pure. We see by experience that a brydell maistereth a horse, and
a stern rules a ship. I mean, that a prince (good or bad) will lead after
him all the whole Realm. And if he honor God, all the people do likewise, if
he serve God, the people also serve him, if he praise God, the subjects also
praise him: and if he blaspheme god, they likewise will do the same. For it is
impossible yt a tree should bring forth other leaves or fruits, then those
which are agreeable to the humor that are in the roots Princes above all
other creatures have this preeminence, that if they be good Christians, they
shall not only receive merit for their own works, but also for all those
which others shall do, because they are occasion that the people work well.
And for the contrary, they shall not only be punished for the evil which
they shall do: but also for the evil which by occasion of their evil
examples others shall commit. O ye princes that now be alive, how greatly do
I wyshe that ye should speak with some one of those princes which now are
dead, especially with those that are condemned to the eternal fiery flames:
then ye should see that the greatest torments which they suffer, are not for
the evils that they did commit, but for the evils which through their occasion
were done. For oftentimes princes and prelates sin more, because they
dissemble with others, then for that they do commit them selves O how
circumspect ought princes and great lords to be in that they speak, and how
diligently ought they to examine that which they do. For they serve not God
only for them selves, but they serve him also in generallye for their
subjects. And contrariwyse princes are not only punished for their own
offenses, but also for the sins of their people. For the sheaperd ought
grievously to be punished, when by negligence the ravening woulfe deuoureth the
innocent lamb. Fourthly princes ought to be better Christians the^ others,
because that to God only they must render account of their estates, for as
much as we are sure that god, to whom we must render account is just, so
much the more we should travail to be in his favor: because whether he
find or not find in our life any fault, yet for love and pities sake he may
correct us. Men one with another make their accomptes in this life because
they are men, and in the end count they well or evil all passes among
men, because they are men: but what shall the unhappy Princes do, which shall
render no account but to God only, who will not be deceived with words,
corrupted with gifts, feared with threatninges, nor answered with excuses.
Princes have their Realms full of cruel judges, to punish the frailty of
man: they have their courts full of advocates, to plead against them that
have offended: they have their palaces full of loyterers, and promoters, that
note the offenses of other men: they have through all their provinces
auditors, that ouersee the accomptes of their rentes: and besides all this,
they have no remembrance of the day so streighte, wherein they must render
account of their wicked life. Me thinks (since all that which princes
receive, comes from the hands of God) that the greatest part of the time
which they spend, should be in the service of God, and all their trade in God,
and they ought to render no account of their life but unto God: then sith they
are gods in thauthoritie which they have over temporal things, they ought to
show them selves to resemble god more then others by virtues. For that Prince
is more to be magnified, which reformeth two vices among his people: then he
which conquereth.x. realms of his enemies. But we will desire them from
henceforth they presume not any more to be gods on the earth, but that they
endeavor them selves to be good Christians in the common wealth. For all the
wealth of a Prince is, that he be stout with strangers, and loving to his
own subjects. Fifthly Princes ought to be better Christians then others. For
the prosperity or adversity that chances unto them, comes directly from
the hands of god only, and none other. I have seen sundry times Princes,
which have put their whole hope and confidence in other princes, to be on a
sodeine discomfaited: and for the contrary, those which have little hope in men,
and great confidence in god, have always prospered. When man is in his
chiefest bravery, and trusts most to men's wisdom, then the secret judgment
of God sonest discomforteth him. I mean, that the confederates and friends of
princes might help and succor the^, but god will not suffer them to be helped
nor socoured, to thend they should see that their remedy proceadeth not by
ma^s diligence, but by divine providence. A prince that has a realm, does not
suffer any thing to be done therein without his advise: therefore sith god is
of no less power in heaven, then princes are on the earth: it is reason that
nothing be done without his consent, sins he takes account of al men's deades,
and as he is the end of al things, so in him, and by him, al things have their
beginning. O Princes, if you knew how small a thing it is to be hated of men,
and how great a comfort to be beloved of god, I swear that you would not
speak one word (although it were in ieste) unto men, neither would you cease
night nor day to commend your selves unto god: for god is more merciful to
succor us, then we are diligent to call upon him.

For in conclusion, the favor which men can give you, other men can take from
you: but the favor that god will give you, no man can resist it. All those
that possess much, should use the company of them which can do much: and
if it be so, I let you princes wete, that all men can not think so much,
togethers, as god him self is able to do alone. For the cry of a Lyo^ is
more fearful then the howling of a woulfe. I confess that princes and great
lords may sometimes gain, and wynnne of them selfs: but I ask them whose
favor they have neade of, to preserve and keep them? we see oftentimes that
in a short space many come to great authority, the which neither man's
wisdom suffiseth to govern, nor yet man's force to keep. For the authority
which the Romans in six hundred years gained, fighting against the Eothes:
in the space of three years they lost. We see daily by experience, that a man
for the government of his own house only, needs the council of his
friends, and neighbors: and do princes and great lords think by their own
heads only, to rule and govern many realms and dominions?

What the Philosopher Byas was: of his constancy when he lost all his goods,
and of the ten laws he gave worthy to be had in memory. Cap. xxi.
AMong all nations and sorts of men, which auaunt them selves to have had
with them sage men, the Gretians were the chiefest, which had and thought it
necessary to have not only wise men to read in their schools: but also they
chose them to be princes in their dominions. For as Plato says, those which
governed in those days were Philosophers, or else they said and did like
Philosophers. And Laertius writes, in his second book De antiquitatibus
Grecorum, that the Gretians auaunted them selves much in this, that they have
had of all estates persons most notable, that is to wete: seven women very
sage, seven Queens very honest, seven kings very virtuous, seven Captains
very hardy, seven cities very notable, seven buildinges very sumptuous, and
seven Philosophers well learned: which Philosophers were these that follow.

The first was Thales Milesius, that invented the Card to sail by.

The second was Solon, that gave the first laws to the Athenians.

The third was Chilo, who was in the Orient for Ambassador of the Athenians.

The fourth was Pittacus Quintilenus, who was not only a philosopher, but also
Captain of the Mitelenes.

The fifth was Cleobolus, that descended from the ancient lineage of Hercules.

The sixte was Periander, that long time governed the realm of Corinth.

The seventh was Bias Prieneus, that was prince of the Prieneans.

Therefore as touching Bias, you must understand that when Romulus reigned at
Rome, and Ezechias in Judea, there was great wars in Grecia between the
Metinenses, and the Prieneans: and of these Prieneans, Bias the philosopher was
prince and Captain, who because he was sage, read in the university: and for
that he was hardy, was chiefetaine in the war, and because he was wise, he
was made a Prince, and governed the common wealth. And of this no man ought to
marvel: for in those days the Philosopher that had knowledge but in one
thing, was little esteemed in the common wealth. After many contentions had
between the Met^nenses, and Prienenses, a cruel battle was fought, whereof
the philosopher Bias was captain and had the victory: and it was the first
battle that ever any Philosopher gave in Greece. For the which victory
Greece was proud, to see that their Philosophers were so aduenturous in
wars, and hardy of their hands: as they were profound in their doctrine, and
eloquente in their toungues. And by chance one brought him a number of women
and maidens to sell, or if he listed to use them otherwise at his pleasure: but
this good philosopher did not defile them nor sell them, but caused them to be
apparailed, and safely to be conducted to their own native countries. And let
not this liberality that he did be had in little estimation, to deliver the
captives, and not to defloure the virgins. For many times it chaunseth, that
those which are overcome with the weapons of the conquerours, are conquered
with the delights of them that are overcome. This deed amongst the Greeks
was so highly commended, and likewise of their enemies so praised, that
immediately the Metinenses sent Ambassadors to demand peace of the
Prienenses. And they concluded perpetual peace upon condition, that they
should make for Bias an immortal statue, since by his hands and also by his
virtues, he was the occasion of the peace and ending of the wars between
them. And truly they had reason, for he deserves more praise which wynneth
the hearts of the enemies in his tents by good example: then he which gets
the victory in the field by shedding of blood. The hearts of men are noble,
and we see daily, that oftentyme one shall sooner overcome many by good, then
many overcome one by evil: and also they say, that the Emperor Seuerus spoke
these words. By goodness the least slave in Rome shall lead me tied with a
here whether he will: but by evil, the most puissaunt men in the world can
not move me out of Italy. For my heart had rather be servant to the good, then
Lord to the evil. Valerius Maximus declares, that when the city of Priene
was taken by enemies and put to sack, the wife of Bias was slain, his
children taken prisoners, his goods robbed, the city beaten down, and his
house set on fire, but Bias escaped safe and went to Athens. In this pytiful
case the good philosopher Bias was no whit the sadder but rather sang as he
went by the way, and when he perceived that men marueiled at his mirthe, he
spoke unto them these words. Those which speak of me for wantinge my city,
my wife, and my children, and losing all that I had, truly such know not what
fortune means, nor understand what philosophy is. The loss of children and
temporal goods, cannot be called loss, if the life be safe and the renown
remain undefiled. Whether this sentence be true or no, let us profoundly
consider, if the just god suffer that this city should come into the hands of
the cruel tyrauntes, then this provision is just: for there is no thing more
conformable unto justice, then that those which receive not the doctrine of
the Sages, should suffer the cruelties of the Tyrauntes.

Also though my ennemies have killed my wife, yet I am sure it was not
without the determynation of the Gods, who after they created her body,
immediately appointed the end of her life.

Therefore why should I bewail her death, since the gods have lent her life but
until this day? The great estimation that we have of this life, causes that
death seems unto us sudden, and that the life unawares with death is
overtaken: but these are words of the children of vanity, for that by the will
of the gods, death visits us, and against the wylles of men, life forsakes
us. Also my children be virtuous philosphers, and albeit they be now in the
hands of tyrauntes, we ought not therefore to call them captives, for a man
may not call him a captive which is laden with irons: but him which is
overwhelmed with vices. And although the fire have burnt my house, yet I know
not why I ought to be sad, for of truth it was now old, and the wind did
blow down the tyles, the worms did waste the wood, and the waters that ran
down perished the walls, and it was old and like to fall, and perchance
would have done greater displeasure. For most commonly, envy, malice, and old
houses, suddenly without any warning or knocking at the door assaulteth
men: finally there came the fire which quited me of many troubles. First of
the trouble that I should have had in repairing it, secondarely it saved me
money in pluckinge it down, thirdly it preserved me and mine heirs from much
cost and many dangers. For oftentimes that which a man consumes in
repayring an old house, would with advantage by him a new. Also those which
say that for the taking away of my goods, I lack the goods of fortune, such
have no reason so to think or say. For fortune never gives temporal goods
for a proper thing, but to those whom she list, and when she will dispose
them: therefore when fortune sees that those men whom she has appointed as
her distributers, do hourde up the same to them and to their heirs: then she
takes it from them to give it to an other. Therefore by reason I should not
compain that I have lost any thing: for fortune recommendeth unto an other
the temporal goods: but I carry patience and Philosophy with me, so that they
have discharged me from all other, and have no more charge but for my self
alone. Laertius declares in his fifth book of the sayings of the Gretians. That
this Bias determined to go to the plays of Mount Olimpus, whereunto resorted
people of all nations: and he showed him self in this place of so high an
understanding, that he was counted supreme and chief of all other
philosophers, and won the name of a true philosopher. Other philosophers then
being in the same plays Olimpicalles, asked him many questions of sundry
matters, whereof I will make mention here of the chiefest.

The questions demanded of the Philosopher Bias.
THe first question was this. Tell me who is the unhappiest man in the world?
Bias answered. He is most unhappy that is not paciente in adversities. For
men are not killed with the adversities they have: but with the impacience
which they suffer.

The second was, what is most hardest and troublesome to judge? he answered.
There is nothing more difficulte, then to judge a contention betwixt two
friends. For to judge between two enemies, the one remains a friend: but to be
judge between two friends, the one is made an enemy.

The third was, what is most hardest to measure? whereunto Bias answered.
There is nothing that needs more circumspection then the measuring of time:
for the time should be measured so justly, that by reason no time should want to
do well, nor any time should abound to do evil. The fourth was, what thing is
that that needs no excuse in the accomplishment thereof? Bias answered the
thing that is promised must of necessity be parformed. for otherwise he that
does lose the creadite of his word, should lose more then he that should lose
the promise to him made. The 5 was, what thing that is wherein the men as well
good as evil should take care? Bias answered, men ought not in any thing to
take so great care, as in sekinge counsel, and counselours: for the
prosperous times cannot be maintained, nor the multitude of enemies resisted,
if it be not by wise men and grave counsayles. The sixte was, what thing that
is wherein men are praised to be negligent? he answered: in one thing only men
have license to be neglygente, and that is in chosing of friends. Slowly ought
thy friends to be chosen, and they never after for any thing ought to be
forsaken. The seventh, what is that which the afflyeted man does most desire?
Bias answered. It is the change of fortune: and the thing which the
prosperous man does most abhor, is to think that fortune is mutable. For the
unfortunate man hops for every change of fortune to be made better, and the
wealthye man fears through every change to be deprived of his house. These
were the questions which the philosophers demanded of Bias in the plays of the
mount Olimpus, in the 60 Olimpiad. The philosopher Bias lived 95. years, and as
he drew nere his death, the Prienenses (showing them selves to be marvelous
sorofull for the loss of such a famous man) desired him earnestly to ordeine
some laws, whereby they might know how to chose captains or some Prince,
which after him might govern the Realm. The philosopher Bias understanding
their honest requests, gave them certain laws in few words which
follow. Of the which the divine Plato makes mention in his book De legibus,
and likewise Aristotle in the book of Occonomices.

The Laws which Bias gave to the Prienenses
WE ordeine and command that no man be chosen to be prince among the people,
unless he be (at least) 40 years of age. For governors ought to be of such
age, that nether youth nor small experience should cause them to err in their
affairs: nor weakness through overmuch age should hinder them from taking
pains. We ordeine and command, that none be chosen amongst the Prienenses
governor, if he be not well learned in the greek letters. For there is no
greater plague in the publik weal, then for him to lack wisdom which
governs the same. We ordeine and command that there be none amongst the
Prienenses chosen governor, unless he has been brought up in the wars 10.
years at the least. For he alone does know how precious a thing peace is,
which by experience has felt the extreme miseryes of war. We ordeine and
command that if any have been noted to be cruel, that he be not chosen for
governor of the people. For that man that is cruel, is likely to be a tyrant.
We ordeine and comaund yt if the governor of ye Prienenses be so hardy or dare
presume to break the ancient laws of the people that in such case he be
deprived from thoffice of the governor, and likewise exiled from the people.
For there is nothing that destroys sooner a public weal, then to ordeine new
and fond laws, and to break the good ancient customs. We ordeine and
command that the governor of the Prienenses do worship and honor the gods,
and that he be a lover of the sacred temples. For otherwise he that honoreth
not god, will never mynister equal justice unto men. We ordeine and command
that the prince of Prienenses be contented with the wars which his auncetours
left him, and that he do not forge new matters to invade any other strange
countries: and if perchance he would, that no man in this case be bound
neither with money nor in person, to follow or serve him. For the god Apollo
told me, that that man which will take another man's goods from him by force,
shall lose his own by justice. We ordeine and command that the governor of
the Prienenses go to pray and worship the gods twice in the week, and likewise
to visit them in the temples, and if he do the contrary, he shall not only be
deprived of the government, but also after his death he shall not be buried. For
the prince that honoreth not god in time of his life: deserves not his bones
should be honored with sepulture after his death.

How god from the beginning punished men by his justice, and specially those
Princes that despise his Church, and how all wicked Christians are
parishioners of hell. Cap. xxii.
WHen the eternal creator (who measures the things by his Omnipotencye, and
wayeth them by his effectual wisdom) created al things, as well celestial as
terrestial, vysible as invisible, corporate as incorporate, not only promised
to the good which served him, but also threatened the evil with plagues which
offended him. For the justice and mercy of god go always together, to the intent
the one should encourage the good, and the other threaten the evil. This thing
seems to be true: for that we have but one god, which has created but one
word, wherein he made but one gardeine, in the which garden there was but one
fountain, and near to that fountain he appointed only one man, one woman,
and one serpente, nere unto which was also one tree only forbidden, which is a
thing marvelous to speak, and no less fearful to see: how god did put into
the terrestial paradyse (the same day that the creacion of the world was
finyshed) booth a sword, and gibet. The gibet was the tree forbidden, whereof
they did eat: wherefore our fathers were condemned. And ye sword was the
punishment, wherwyth we al (as miserable children) at this day are beheaded.
For truly they did eat the bytternes of their fault: and we do feel the
grief of the pain. I mean not to show how our God by his power doothe
raise up that which is beaten down, how with his wisdom he guides those
which are blind, how by his will he dissembleth with the evil doers, neither
will I tell how he through his clemency pardons the offenses, and through his
light lyghtneth the darkness, nor how through his ryghteousnes he amendeth that
which is broken, and through his liberality paieth more then we deserve: But I
will here declare at large, how our omnipotente God through his justice
chastises those which walk not in his paths. O Lord god how sure may thy
faithful servants be, for their small services to receive great rewards:
and contrary the evil ought always to live in as great fear, lest for their
heinous offenses thou should give them cruel punishments. For though god of
his bounty will not leave any service unrewarded, nor of his justice will
omit any evil unpunished: yet for all that we ought to know, that above
all, and more than all, he will rigorously chastise those, which maliciously
despise the holy catholyke faith. For Christ thinks him self as much
iniuried of those, which persecute his church: as of those that laid hands
on his person, to put him to death. We read that in times past god showed
sundry grievous and cruel punishments, to diverse high lords and princes,
besides other famous and renowned men. But rigor had never such power in his
hand, as it had against those which honored the infamed Idol, and violated
the sacred temples. For to god this is the most heinous offense, to forsake the
holy catholic faith in his life, and to despair in his mercy at the hour of
his death. Would to god we had so much grace to acknowledge our offenses, as
god has reason to punish our sins. For if it were so, the^ we would amend
in time to come, and god would grant us a general pardon for all that is past.
I see one thing wherein (as I think) I am not deceived, which is this: that the
frailnes and miseries which we commit we think them natural, and in the
satisfaction and amendment of the same we say they are strange: so that we
admit the fault, and condemn the pain which thereby we do deserve. The secret
judgments of god do suffer it, and our offenses do deserve it: I do not deny
but that the evil may hold and possess this life at their pleasour: but I
swear unto them, when they shall lest think of it, they shall lose their life
to their great displeasour: for the pleasurs of this life are so unconstant,
that we scarce begin to taste the^, when they vade out of their sight. It is a
rule infallible, which both of the good and evil has been proved: that all
naturally desire rather to abound than to want: and all that which greatly is
desired, with great diligence is serched, and through great travail is
obtained: and that thing which by travail is attained, with love is possessed,
and that which by love is possessed, with much sorrow is lost, bewailed, and
lamented. For in thend we can not deny, but that the watery eyes do manifestly
show the sorrowful hearts. To the fine wits and stout hearts this is a
continual torment, and endless pain, and a worm that always gnaweth: to call
to mind that he must lose the joyful life, which so entierly he loved: and
taste the fearful death, which so greatly he abhorred. Therefore to prove this
matter, which I have spoken of before, it is but reason that princes know, if
they do not know, that even as the divine providence exalts them to high
estates, they not deserving the^: so likewise his rigorous justice will bring
them to naught, if they be unthankful for his benefits. For the ingratitude
of benefittes received, makes the man not worthy to receive any mo. The more a
man through benefits is bound, the more grievous punishment (if he be
unthankful) he deserves. Al wise men should find (if they apply their minds
thereunto) that in chastising god calls those offenses first to his mind,
which are furthest from the thoughts of men. For before the tribunal of god,
our secret faults are always casting out blood, to thend he should execute of
our persons open justice. And further I say, yt in this case I do not see
that the prince is exempted more, though he live in great felicity: than the
poor labourer, who lives in extreme misery. And also we see it eftsoon by
experience, that the sudden lightning, tempests and the terrible thonder,
forsakes the small and low cotages, and battereth forthwith the great and
sumptuous buildinges. Gods will and determination is, that for as much as he
has exalted them above al others, so much ye more they should acknowledge him
for lord above all others: For god did never create high estates because they
should work wickedness: but he placed them in that degree, to thend they should
thereby have more occasion to do him service. Every prince that is not a good
Christian, a feruente lover of the catholic faith, nor will have any respect
to the divine service: let him be assured that in this world he shall loase his
renown, and in the other he shall hazard his soul. For that all evil
Christians are the parishioners of hell.

The author proves by twelve examples that princes are sharply punished when
they usurp boldly upon the churches and violate the temples. Cap. xxiii.
Why the children of Aaron were punished.
IT is now time that we leave to persuade with words and reasons, and to begin
to prove that which we have said, by some excellent histories and notable
examples. For in thend, the hearts of me^ are stirred more through some little
examples, then with a great multitude of words. In the first book of the
Leuitici, the.x. chap is declared, how in the time of Moses, the son in law
of Iethro priest (that was of Media) who was chief prince of all the image of
Seph, with whom the brother of Mary the Iepre had charge of the high priesthod.
For among all the laws where god at any time put his hands unto, he provided
always that some had the government of civil affairs: and others
thadministration of the divine mysteries. This high priest had then two
children, whose names were Nadab, and Abihu, which two were young and
beautiful, stout and sage, and during their infancy served their father, and
helped him to do sacrifice. For in the old law they suffered that priests
should not only have wives and children: but also that their children should
succeed the^ in their temples, and inherit their benefices. There came a great
mischaunce, for the two children being apparailed in white, their bodies bound
with stoels, their hands naked, in one hand holding a torche, and in the other
the senser, being negligent to light the new fire, and contrary to that the law
had ordained, and taking coals which were prohibited, a marvelous thing was
seen in the sight of the people, which was, that suddenly these two children
fell flat on ye earth dead, and al their sacrifice burned. Truly ye sentence was
marvelous, but it was just enough. For they well deserved to lose their lives,
sithen they durst sacrifice ye coals of an other. This thing seemed to be true,
for those young children saved their souls, and made satisfaction of the fault
with their lives: but other wicked men god permits to live a short time,
because they shall loose their souls for ever.

The cause why the Azotes were punished.
THe realm of Palestine being destitute of a king, at that time an honorable
old man governed the realm, which was father to two knights, named Albino,
and Phinides, for at that time the children of Israel were not governed by
kings that did moleste them by injuries: but by sage men which did maintain
them by justice. It chanced that the Azotes made war against the
Palestines, and were a kind of the Arabians, stout, and warrelyke: the which
fought so courageously, that the Palestines and Hebrews were constrained to
bring their Arc into the mids of the battle: which was a relicke (as a
man should have put the holy sacrament) to divide a great multitude of people.
But fortune showed her countenance unto them so frowningly, that they were not
only overcome, but also were spoiled of the Arc, which was their chief
relicke. And besides that, there were.400. Palestines slain. The Azotes carried
away the Arc full of relics unto their temple, in the city of Nazote, and
set it by Dagon their cursed Idol. The true God (which will not suffer any to
be coequall with him in comparison, or in any thing that he represents)
caused this Idol to be shaken, thrown down, and broken in pieces no man
touching it. For our god is of such power, that to execute his justice he
needs not worldly help. God not contented thus (though the Idol was broken
in pieces) caused those to be punished likewise which worshipped it, in such
sort that all the people of Azote, Ascalon, Geth, Acharon, and of Gaza (which
were five ancient and renowned cities) were plaged both man and woman inwardly
with the disease of the Emerodes, so that they could not eat sitting, nor ride
by the ways on horseback. And to the end that al men might see that their
offenses were greauous (for the punishment they received by the divine justice)
he replenished their houses, places, gardens, seeds, and fields full of
rattes. And as they had erred in honoring the false Idol, and forsaken the
true god, so he would chastise them with two plagues, sending them the Emerodes
to torment their bodies, and the rattes to destroy their goods. For to him
that willingly gives his soul to the devil, it is but a small matter that
god (against his will) deprive him of his goods. This then being thus, I would
now gladly know, whether of them committed most offense, either the Azotes
which set the Arc in the temple, which (as they thought) was the most
holiest: or the Christians, which (without the fear of God) rob and pylle
the Church goods to their own private commodity in this world. Truly the
law of the Azotes differed as much from the Christians, as the offense of the
one differs from the other. For the Azotes erred not, believing that this Arc
was the figure of the true God, but we believe it, and confess it, and without
shame commit against it infinite vices. By this so rare and sudden a
punishment, me thinks that Princes and great Lords should not only therefore
acknowledge the true god, but also reverence and honor those things which to
him are dedicated. For man's laws (speaking of the reverence of a Prince) do
no less condemn him to die, that robs his house: then him which violently
lays hands on his person.

The cause why Prince Oza was punished.
IN the book which the son of Helcana wrote, that is the second book of
the kings, and the sixth Chapter he says: that the Arc of Israel with his
relikes (which was Manna, the rod, and two stones) stood in the house of
Aminadab, which was the next neighbor to the city of Gibeah, the son of
Esaye (who at that time was king of the Israelites) determined to transpose the
relickes into his city and house, for it seemed to him a great infamy, that to
a mortal Prince, a house should abound for his pleasours: and to the
immortal God there should want a temple for his relickes.

The day therefore appointed when they should carry the relicke of Gibeah to
Bethleem, there met thirty thousand Israelites, with a great nombre of noble
men which came with the king, besyds a greater nombre of strangers. For in
such a case those are no which come of their own pleasure, then those which
are commanded. Besides all the people, they say that all the nobility of the
realm was there, to thend the relicke should be more honored, and his person
better accompanied. It chanced that as the lords and people went singing, and
the king in person dancing, the whele of the chariot began to fall, and go
out of the way: the which prince Oza seeing, by chance set to his hand and
his shoulder against it, because the Arcke (where the relick was) should not
fall nor break: yet notwithstanding that, suddenly and before the^ all he fell
down dead. Therefore let this punishment be noted, for truly it was fearful,
and ye ought to think, that since god (for putting his hand to the chariot to
hold it up) stroke him with death, that a prince should not hope (seking the
destruction and decay of the church) that god will prolong his life. O
princes, great lords, and prelates, since Oza with such diligence lost his
life, what do ye hope or look for, since with such negligence ye destroy and
suffer the church to fall? Yet once again I do return to exclaim upon
you, O princes, and great lords, sith prince Oza deserved such punishment,
because without reverence he advanced him self to stay the Arc which fell:
what punishment ought ye to have, which through malice help the church to
fall.

Why king Balthazar was punished.
Darius king of the Perses and Medes besieged the ancient city of Babylon in
Chaldea, whereof Balthazar son of Nabuchodonosor ye great was king and lord.
Who was so wicked a child, that his father being dead, he caused him to be cut
in.300. pieces, and gave him to.300. hawks to be eaten, because he should not
revive again to take the goods and riches from him which he had left him. I
know not what father is so folishe, that lets his son live in pleasures,
and afterward the intrelles of the hawk wherewith the son hauked, should
be the woeful grave of the father, which so many men lamented. This Balthazar
then being so besieged, determined one night to make a great feast and banquet
to the lords of his realm that came to aid him, and in this he did like a
valiant and stout prince, to the end the Perses and Medes might see that he
little esteemed their power. The noble and high hearts do use when they are
environed with many trauayles, to seek occasions to invent pleasours: because
to their men they may give greater courage, and to their enemies greater fear.
He declares of Pirrus king of the Epirotes, when he was besieged very
straightly in the city of Tharenta, of ye Romain captain Quintus Dentatus,
that then he spoke unto his captains in this sort. Lords and friends be ye
nothing at al abashed (since I never here before saw ye afraid) though the
Romans have compassed our bodies, yet we have besieged their hearts. For I
let you to wete, that I am of such a complexion, that the streighter they keep
my body, the more my heart is at large, And further I say, though the Romans
beat down ye walls, yet our hearts shall remain invincible. And though there
be no wall between us, yet we will make them know that the hearts of Greeks
are harder to overcome then the stones of Tarentine are to be beaten down. But
retourninge to king Balthazar. The banquet then being ended, and the greatest
part of the night spent, Balthazar the king being very well pleased that the
banquet was made to his co^tentation (though he was not the sobrest in drynking
wine) commanded all the cups of gold and silver with the treasour he had,
to be brought and set on the table, because all the bidden gestes should
drink therein. King Balthazar did this, to that end the princes and lords
with all his captains, should manfully help him to defend the siege, and
also to show that he had much treasour to pay them for their pains. For to
say the truth, there is nothing that encourages men of war more, than to
see their reward before their eyes. As they were drinking merrily (at the
banquet) of these cups which Nabuchodonosor had robbed from the temple of
Jerusalem, suddenly by the power of God and the deserte of his offenses, there
appeared a hand in the wall without a body or arm, which with his fingers wrote
these words. Mane, Thetel, Phares, which signifies. O king Balthazar, god
has seen thy life, and finds that thy malice is now accomplished. He has
commanded that thou and thy realm should be wayed, and has found yt there
lacks a great deal of just weight, wherefore he comaundeth, that thy life for
thine offenses be taken from thee: and that thy realm be put into the hands
of the Perses and Medes, which are thine enemies. The vision was not
frustrate, for the same night without any longer delay, the execution of the
sentence was put in effect by the enemies. The king Balthazar died, the realm
was lost, the treasours were robbed, the noble men taken, and all the Chaldeans
captives. I would now know, since Balthazar was so extremely punished only
for giving his concubines and frindes drink in the sacred cups, what pain
deserves princes and prelates then, which rob the churches for profane
things? How wicked so ever Balthazar was, yet he never changed, gave, sold,
nor engaged the treasours of the Sinagoge: but wat shall we say and speak of
prelates, which without any shame, wast, change, sell, and spend the church
goods. I take it to be lesser offense, to give drink in a chalice as king
Balthazar did to one of his concubines: then to enter into the church by
symony, as many do now a days. This tyrant was overcome more by folly, than
by covetousness: but these others are vanquished with folly, covetousness, and
simony. What means this also, that for the offense of Nabuchodonosor in
Jerusalem, his son Balthazar should come and be punished. For this truly me
think not consonaunt to reason, nor agreeable to man's law: that the father
should commit the theft, and the son should requite it with seven double. To
this I can answer: that the good child is bound to restore all the good that
his father has left him evil gotten. For he that enjoys the theft,
deserves no less punishment, then he that commits the theft. For in thend
both are thieves, and deserve to be hanged on the galowes of the divine justice.

Why King Ahab was punished.
IN the first book of Malachie, that is to wete, in the third book of kings,
the.viii. chap. It is declared, that Asa being king of Judea, and prophecieng
in Jerusalem, at that time Omri was king of Israel, and after him succeeded
Ahab his son, being of the age of.xxii. years. This Ahab was not only young
of years but younger of understanding, and was nombred among the wicked kings:
not only evil, but to evil: for the scriptures use to call them by names
infamed, whose lives deserved no memory. The vices of this king Ahab were
sundry and diverse, whereof I will declare some as hereafter follows. First of
all he followed altogether the life and steps of the king Iheroboam, who was
the first that entised the children of Israel to commit Idolatry: which
thing turned to his great reproach and infamy. For the Prince erreth not in
immitinge the paths of the good: but offends in following the ways of the
evil. Secondarily this king Ahab married the daughter of the king of the
Idumeans, whose name was Iesabel, which was of the stock of the Gentyls, and
he of the Hebrews. And for a troth the marriage was unadvisedly considered. For
sage Princes should take wifes conformable to their laws and conditions,
unless they will repent them selves afterward. Thirdly he buylt again the
city of Hierico, which by the commandment of God was destroyed, and
commanded that upon greauous pains it should not be reedified again:
because the offenses that were therein committed were so great, that the
inhabitants did not only deserve to loase their lives: but also that in
Hierico there should not one stone remain upon an other. Fourthly king Ahab
buylte a sumptuous temple to the Idol Baall, in the city of Samaria, and
consecrate a wood unto him which he had very pleasant, and set in the temple
his image of fine gold: so that in the reign of this cursed king, Baal the
wicked Idol was so highly esteemed, that not only secretly, but also openly
they blasphemed the true and living God. The case was such, That one day Ahab
going against the king of Siria, to take him and his city called Ramoth
Galaath, being in battle was shot into the breaste with an arrowe, wherewith
he not only lost his life, but also the dogs did lap up his blood that
fell to the earth. O Princes and great Lords, if you will give credit unto
me, you shall have nothing more in recommendation then to be good Christians.
Sith ye see that as this Prince in his life did serve strange Idols: so it was
reason that after his death, his blood should be buried in the intrelles of
ravenous dogs.

Why king Manasses was punished.
THE king Manasses was the son of Ezechias, and father of Amon, which were
all kings. And truly they differed so much in manners, that a man could
scarcely judge, whether the virtues and prowesses of the father were more to be
desired: or the vice and wickedness of the children to be abhorred. This
Manasses was a wicked Prince, for as much as he builte new temples to Baal,
and in the cities made heremitages for the Idols, and in the mountains
repaired all the aulters that heretofore were consecrated to the devil. He
consecrated many forestes and woods to the Idols, he honored the stars as
the gods, and did sacrifice to the planets and elements. For the man that is
abandoned by the hand of God, there is no wickedness that his obstinate heart
does not enterprise. So that he had in his Palace al manner of false prophets,
as southsaiers, prophesiers, witches, sorcerers, enchaunters, and coniurers,
the which daily he caused to give sacrifice to the idols: and gave such credit
to sorcerers, and enchaunters, that his servants were all for the most part
sorcerers, and in them was his chief delight and pleasure. And likewise he was
skilful in all kind of mischief, and ignoraunte in all virtues. He was so
cruel and spilt so much innocent blood, that if it had been water put together
and the bodies of them that he slew laid on heaps, it would both have
covered their carcases and also have drowned the living Yet he not contented
with that I have spoken of, set in the Temple of our Lord an old idol that
stood in the wood, for the punishmente of which fact, God suffered his
servants to kill his eldest son. Afterward God would not suffer these such
sondrye myscheues of man's malice, but of his divine justice caused these words
to be proclaimed in Jerusalem Sith the king Manasses has been so bold to
contemn me, and himself alone to commit thoffences of al, I will chastise him
alone with the same correction that he has showed unto others. By these
words let Princes note here, how the divine vengeance extends no further,
then our offenses deserve: so that if our fault be little, the punishment which
he gives us is very temperate, but if the prince be stubburne and obstinate in
his wyckednes, let him be sure that the punishment shall be extreme.

Why Iulyus, Pompeius, Xerxes, Catilina Germanicus, and Brennus were punyshed.
WHen pompeius the great passed into the Orrient, with all the host of the
Roman people, and after he had subdued al Sirie, Mesopotamia, Damasco and
Arabia: he passed into the realm of Palestin, which otherwise was called
Judea, where he committed diverse and sondrye euilles, so that many of the
Romans and Hebrews dyed there. Finally by force of arms he took the puisant
city of Jerusalem, which as Plynie says, was the best of al Asia: And Strabo
says of the situacion of the world, that Rome was the chief of al Italy, and
of Affrike ye principal was Carthage: of Spain, Numantia: of Germany,
Argentine: of Caldea, Babilone: of Egypt, Thebes: of Greece Athens: of Phenice.
Tira: of Cappadocea, Cesarea: of Thrace, Constantinople: and of palestine,
Jerusalem. Pompeius therefore not contented to kill all the auncientes in that
war, to impryson the youth, to behead the elders, to force the mothers, to
defile the virgins, to tear in pieces the children, to beat down buildinges,
and to rob the tresours: but increasing evil upon evil, and putting all the
people to destruction, he made of the Temple a stable for his horses: which
before god was abominable, that where always heretofore he had been a
conqueroure, and had triumphed over 22. kings, ever after he was unlucky and
overcome in battle. The famous rebel Catilina (as Saluste affirms) had
never been overcome, if it had not been for the robbing and destroying of the
Temples, which were consecrated to the gods. The noble Marcus Marcellus (to
whom no Roman is to be compared in virtues) the same day that he caused the
Temple of the goddess Februa to be burnt, was himself slain in battle. The
noble Roman captain Drusius Germanicus that was so well wylled and beloved,
because he gave a calfe meat to eat, (which was the god of the Caldeans) being
prohybited and forbidden within a month after dyed, whose death was greatly
lamented in Rome. Suetonius says, that after Julius Caesar, had robbed the
Temple of the Gawles, the gods always made him afraid in the night. And
Xerxes, which was the son of king Darius, when he passed into Italye to wage
battle, before all other things he sent four thousand horsemen to Delphos
(where the Temple of God Apollo was) to beat it down: for the pride of Xerxes
was so great that he would not only subdue men, but also conquer the gods. It
chaunsed that even as they approached nere the Temple to beat it down, a
sudden tempest fell upon them, so that with stones and thunder boltes they
were al killed in the fields, and so dyed.

Brennus was one of the renowned Captains of the Goths, who sith he had
conquered and subdued the Greeks, determined also to rob the treasours of
the temples, saying that gods should give unto men, and not men unto gods, and
that it was great honor to the gods, that with their goods men should be
made rich. But as they began to rob the Temple, there fell a multitude of
arrows from heaven that the Captain Brennus dyed there, and all his men with
him, not one left alive. After that Sextus Pompeius was vanquished in the
battle by sea, near unto Scicile, by Octavus Angustus, he retired him self
into the Arkes Lacinii, where there was an ancient Temple consecrated to the
godesse Juno, endewed with marvelous treasours. And it chaunsed one day that
his souldyers asking him money, and he being then without, he commanded
them to beat down the Temple of the goddess Juno, and to pay them selves
with the spoil of her treasure. The historiographers say, that within a while
after it chaunsed Sextus Pompeius to be taken of the knights of Marcus
Antonius, and when he was brought before Titus general of the army, he spoke
unto him these words.

I will thou know Sextus Pompeius, I do not condemn the to dye for thoffences
thou have committed against my Lord Marcus Antonius. But because thou have
robbed and beaten down the Temple of the Goddess Juno.

For thou know, that the good Captains ought to forget the offenses
against men: and to revenge the iniuryes done unto the Gods.

How Valentine the Emperor because he was an evil Chrystian, lost in one
day both the Empire and his life, and was burned alive in a shepecote. Cap.
xxiiii.
WHen Julian, the Apostate was Emperor of Rome, he sent to conquer Hongarie,
of no just title he had to it, more then of Ambicion to unite it, to the
Roman Empire. For tyrannous princes use all their force to usurp others
realms by crueltye, and little regard whether they may do it by justice. And
because the Roman Empire was of great force, this Ambicious Emperor Julian,
had in that wars a mighty and puysant Army, which did wonderful much harm
through all the countries they came. For the fruits of wars is, to bereue
the enemies of life, and to spoil the men of their goods. It chaunsed one day
as. 5 knights went out of the camp to make a rode, they found a young man
that carried a halter in his hand, and as they would have taken it away from
him to have tied their horses to let them feed, he was so hardy and stout that
he defended him self from them all: so that he had more strength alone then
they five altogethers, The Romayne knights amazed to see this young man
defend him self from them all so stoutly, very instauntly desired him to go to
the Roman camp with them, and they promised him he should have great
interteynment. For the Romans were so dyligent, that they would omit no good
thing for want of money, so that it were for the public weal. This young man
was called Gracian, and was borne and brought up in the country of Pannonia, in
a city they called Cibata: his lynage was not of the lowest sort of the
people, nor yet of the most esteemed Citizens, but were men that lived by the
sweet of their brows, and in love of the common people. And truly it is no
small benefit that God had made him of a mean estate: for to be of base
lineage, makes men to be despised and not regarded: and to come of a noble
blood and high synage, makes men to be proud and lofty. This young man being
come into the Romans camp, the fame was immediately spread, how that he alone
had vanquished five knights. And his strength and courage was so highely
esteemed, that within a while after he was made Pretour of the army. For the
Romans, not according to favor, but according to ye habilytie of men,
divided the offices and degrees of honor in wars. Time therefore working his
nature, and many estates being decayed, after this young Gracian was made
Pretour of the army, and that he was sufficiently tried in the wars,
fortune, which many times brings that to pass in a day: that man's malice
cannot in many years, raised this Gracian to be Emperor of Rome. For truly
one hour of good success is more worth, then al worldly favor.

This Gracian was not only singular in strength, courageous in battle,
fortunate in all his affairs: but also he was luckye of children. That is to
wete, he had two sons which were Emperors of Rome, the one was called
Valente, the other Valentinian. In this case the children might glory to have
a father so stout: but the glory of the father is greater to have sons of
such nobilytie. For there is no greater felicity in this world, then duringe
life, to come to honor and riches: and after death, to leave good children to
enjoy them. The eldest of ye two sons was the Emperor Valente, who ruled in
the Orient for the space of.iiii. years, and was the xxxix. Emperor of Rome,
from Julius Caesar: though some do begin at the time of Octauian, saying that
he was virtuous, and that Julius Caesar usurped the Empire like a tiraunt. This
Valente was beautiful of person, but poor of virtues: so that he was more
beautiful then virtuous, more courageous then merciful, more rich then
charitable, more cruel then pitefull. For there are many Princes, that are
very expert to devise new orders in a common wealth: but there are few that
have stout hearts to put the same in execution. In those days the sect of
Arrian the cursed heretic flourished, and the Emperor Valente was greatly
blinded therein: in so much that he did not only favor the Arrians. but also he
persecuted the Christians, which was showed for so much as he killed and caused
to be killed (for that occasion) many lay men, and took many clerks, and
banished many Bishopps, overthrew many Churches, robbed the goods of ye
Chrishia^s, and did infinite other mischeues in the comcomon wealth, For the
prince which is infected with heresy, and lives without fear of the Church,
there is neither mischief nor treason but he will commit. In the deserts of
Egipte in the mountains of Armenia and in the cities of Alexandrie, there was
a great multitude of friars and relygious men, amongst whom were many wise
men, and pure of life, constant in the defense of the Church, and pacient in
persecutions. For he is a true relygious man, that in time of peace is
charitable to teach the ignorant: and bold in the time of Scismes, to confound
the heretyques. The Emperor Valente was not only not a friend to the Arrians,
and an enemy to the Christians, but also he was a persecutour of the devout
and religious friars. For he commanded proclamacyons, to be had through all
his realms and domynions, that all the relygious that were young in years,
hole of their bodies, and sound of their lymmes, should immedyately cast of
their cowles and hoodes, leauyng their monasterye, and take soldiers wages in
the camp. For he said Monasteryes were invented for nothing else, but to
maintain those that were deformed, blind, lame, and maimed, and upon this
occasion he showed great tyranny. For many monasteryes were left naked, many
notable constitucions were broken, many hermites were martyred, many friars
whypped, many notable barons banyshed, and many good men robbed of their
goods. For the virtuous men desired rather the bitter life of the monastery:
then the sweet and pleasant liberty of the world. This Emperor yet not
contented with these things, as by chance his wife commended unto him the
beautye of a Roman called Iustina, without any more delay he married her, not
forsaking his first wife, and immedyatly made a law throughout all his Empire,
that without incurring any danger, each Christian might have two wives, and
mary with them by the law of matrymony. For the tyrannous Princes (to cloak
their vices) make and enstablyshe the laws of vices. The shame was not little
that the Emperor Valente (against the commandment of the Church) would
marie with two women at one time: but the less shame he had, the greater was
his iniquytye to put it in excucion, and to cause it to be publyshed through
his realm as a law. For a particular vice corrupts but one alone, but a
general law distroyeth al. At that time the puissaunt Goths were in the
parties of the orient, the which were in feats of arms very valiant and
courageous: but in things of faith they were evil brought up, although the
greateste part of them were baptized. For then the Church was very poor of
prelates, howbeit those that they had were very notable men. After the Goths
were baptized, and the fury of the wars somewhat appeased, they sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor Valente, desyring him that immedyatlye and
forthwith he would send them holy and catholyke Bishops, by whose doctrine
they might be instructed and brought to the christian faith. For it was thought
that the Emperoures of Rome could have no bishops in their countries:
unless they were virtuous. This wicked Emperor sithe he was now entangled
with heresye, and that he had perverted the customs of the good Emperors
(that is for having about him evil Bishops) as he was enuyronned with all
evils and myscheues, so he sent to the Goths a bishop called Eudoxius, the
which was a rank Arrian, and brought with him many Bishops which were
heretyques, by the which the kings and Princes of the Goths were Arrians, for
the space of 200 years.

The catholyke Princes ought to take great care to watch, and in watching to be
ware and circumspect, that they, their Realms, neither their subjects, should
in their time be defiled with heresy. For the plague of heretykes and heresies
is not of light occasion bannished the place, where ons it has reigned. We have
declared of the small faith that this Emperor had in Jesus Christ, and of
the great myscheues he did to the Church. Let us now see what was the end of
his miserable life. For the man of wicked life seldom comes to good end.
The matter was this, that as the Goths were driven out of the Realm by some
of the Hunnes, they came immedyately to the Realm of Thracia, which then was
subject to the Romans. And the Emperor Valente without any couenaunte
received them into his land, wherein he committed great folly, and used little
wisdom. For it is a general rule, where rebels, vacabondes, and strangers
come to inhabyte, there always the Realm and dominions is destroyed.

The Goths remained certain years among them without any discencion or
quarrelling against the Romans: but afterward through the covetousness of
Maximus chief Captain of ye Romans, that denied the Goths of their
prouysion, which so long time remained friends, arose between them so cruel
wars, that it was the occasion of the loss and utter undoing both of Rome
and of all Italye. For truly there is no enmetye does so much hurt, as that of
friends when they fawle out once at dyscorde. The war now being kindeled, the
Goths were scatered through the Realm of Thrace, and they left no forte but
they battered, they came to no villagyes nor cytyes but they sacked, they took
no women but they forced, they entered into no house but they robbed. Finally
the Goths in short time showed the poison that they had against the Romans.
And let no man marvel that the Goths committed so many cruel and heinous
factes, since we that are Chrystians do commyt daily greater offenses. For among
rebels it is a common error, that that which they rob in the wars, they
say they are not bound to restore in peace. The Emperor Valente was then in
the city of Antioche, and since he had assembled there a great army, and had
great aid out of Italy, he determined himself in person to go into the camp
of the Romans, and to give thonset against the Goths, wherein he showed
himself more bold then wise. For a Prince in battle can do no more then one
man, nor fight more then one man, and if he die, he is the occasion of the
death and destruction of them all. When both the hosts of the Romans and the
Goths joined, there was between them a cruel and mortal fight: so that in
the first brunt the Goths showed them selves so valiaunte, that they put to
flight the Romans horsemen, leaving their fotemen alone in great ieopardy,
the which in short space after were discomfited and slain not one left alive.
For the barbarous swear that that day the Goths should al dye, or else utterly
they would destroy the name of the Romans. And in this first charg ye
Emperor Valente was mortally wounded who perceiving he had his deaths wound
and that the battle was lost, he determined to fire and save himself. But
when fortune begins to persecute any man, she leaves him not until she se
him dead, or beaten down without recover. Therefore as this wicked Emperor
(thincking to save himself) came into a shepecotte, the enemies seeing him, in
the end set fire on the shepecote, and burnt him alive. So in one day he lost
his person, his life, his honor, and his empire. It is mete that princes and
great lords should lift up their eyes to consider well this history of
Valente, that they straye not from the Catholic, Church, that they dishonor
not Gods mynisters, and maintain heresies. For as this accursed Emperor
Valente for his wicked doings was condignely punished by the hands of the
almighty God: So let them be assured, the self same god will not pardon their
offenses. For it is a rule infallible, that the prince which is not a good
christian, shall fall into the hands of his cruel enemies.

Of the Emperor Valentinian and Gracian his son, which reigned in the time
of saint Ambrose: which because they were good Christians, were always
fortunate, and that god gives victory unto Princes, more through the tears
of them that pray, then through the weapons of those that fight.
I Valentinian and Valent were brethrene, and the eldest of them was
Valentinian, who succeeded in the Empire (after the death of his father) to be
praetor of the armies. For among the Romans there was a law in ure, that if
the father died in the favor of the people, of right the son without any
other demand was heir. This Valentinian was a lusty young man, of a sanguine
complexion, and of his body well shaped, and above al he was a good Christian,
and of all the people generallye well-beloved: For nothing adorneth the noble
man more, then to be counted civil and corteous of behauior. At that time where
the Emperor Julian persecuted most the chrisstians, Valentinian was praetor
of the armies, and when Julian was advertised that Valentinian was a christian,
he sent unto him and bad him do sacrifice to the idols of the Roman Emperor,
or else to forsake the office of his pretorship. Julian would gladly have killed
Valentinian, but he durst not: For it was a law inviolable among the
Romans, that no citizen should be put to death without decre of the Senate.
Valentinian receiving the message of this Emperor Julian advertised of his
will, (which was to renownce his faith or to leave his office) he did not only
resign his office but therwithal forgave the Emperor all the money he ought
him for arreragies of his service. And because he would live with a more
quyete conscience, he went from Rome into a cloister, where he bannyshed him
self for two years and a half, and for this he was hyghlye esteemed and
commended.

For it is a good sign that man is a good Christian, which of his own free
will renounceth worldly goods. Shortly after It happened that Julian the
Emperor went to conquer the Realm of Persia, wherein a battle he was very
sore wounded, and fell down dead in the present place. For to the mishappes
of fortune, the Emperor with all his estate and pleasours is as much subject:
as is the poorest man that lies in the streates. When the news came to Rome
that Julian was dead, by the consent of all, Valentinian was created Emperor,
so that he being bannyshed for Christ's sake, was called again, and crowned
Prince of the Roman empire. Let no man care to lose all that he possesses,
let no man way to see him self despised for Christ's sake: For in the end, no
men can in a thousand years so much abase us: as god in one hour can exalt
us. In the same year, which was from the foundation of Rome a thousand, a
hundred, and.xix. in a city called Atrobata, it rained very fine wull, so that
all the city became rich. In the same year, in the city of Constantinople
it hailed such great stones, that they killed many men, and left no herdes in
the fields alive. At the same time there came an earthquake throughout Italy,
and so likewise in Scicille, that many housen fell and slew sundry persons,
and above all the sea rose in such sort, that it drowned many cities nighe
thereunto. Paulus Diaconus in the.xi. book De gestibus Romanorum, says, that
the emperor Valentinian was of a subtle wit, of grave countenance,
eloque^t in speech, yet he spoke little, stout in his affairs, and diligent
in his business, in adversities pacient, and a great enemy of the vicious,
temperat in eating and drinking, and a friend of religious persons: so that they
said he resembled the emperor Aurelius. For after that the emperor Marcus
Aurelius died (with whom the felicity of the Roman empire ended) they ever
used thenceforth in Rome to compare and liken the young and new come princes
to the ancient emperors their antecessours. That is to wete: if the prince
were courageous, they said he was like Julius Caesar, if he were virtuous, they
said he was an other Octauian, if he were fortunate, that he was Tiberius, if
he were rash, they said he was Caligula, if he were cruel, they compared him
to Nero, if he were merciful, they said he was like to Traian or Antonius
Pius, if he were beawtifull, they likened him to Titus, if he were idle, they
compared him to Domitian, if he were pacie^t, they called him Vespasius, if he
were te^perat they likened him to Adrian if he were devout to their gods, then
he seemed Aurelianus, finally he that was sage and virtuous, they compared him
to the good Marcus Aurelius. This emperor Valentinian was a good Christian,
and in all his affairs touching the empire very wise and circumspecte, and yet
he was noted for one thing very much, and that was, that he trusted and
favored his servants so much, and was so led by his friends, that through
their occasion (they abusinge his love and credit) there arose many
dissentions emonges the people. Seneca said once to the Emperor Nero, I will
that thou understand (Lord) that there is no patience can suffer, that two
or three absolutely command all, not for that they are most virtuous: but for
that they are most in favor with thee. O princes and great Lords, if you
were as I am, I know not what you would do: but if I were as you be, I would
behave my self in such sort to them of my house, that they should be
servants to serve and obey me, and not boste themselves to be in such
favor to command me: For that prince is not sage that to content a few,
gets the hatred of all. The Emperor Valentinian died in the five and fifty
year of his birth and eleven year of his Empire, of so long sickness,
that his veins were so dried up, that they could not draw one drop of
blood out of his body. And at the day of his funeralles, where the dead corpse
was greatly bewailed. Saint Ambrose made anexcellent sermon in commendation of
him, for in those days, when any prince departed that favored much the
Church, all the holy Bishops mete at his burial.

The two brethren being Emperors, that is to wete, Valentinian, and Valent,
through the desire of the father in law of Gracian, that was father to his
wife, and desirous to have one of his daughters children, chose Valentinian to
bring up, who had a son named Gracian: which was created emperor so young,
that as yet he had no berde. And truly the Senate would not have suffered it,
if the father had not been virtuous, and the child sage. But the Senate would
have done this, and more also for Valentinian, because he did deserve it well
of the Roman people. For it is reason in distributing of the offices, that
princes have more respect to the deserts of the fathers, then to the tender
age of the children. This young Gracian began to be so temperate, and was so
good a Christian in favoring the church, that it was much quiet, and great
pleasure to the Roman people to have chosen him, and greater joy to the
father (being alive) to have begotten him: so that he left for him after his
death, an immortal memory of his life. For the child that is virtuous, is
always the memory of the father after his death.

In the year of the foundation of Rome a thousand a hundredth thirty and two,
she said Gracian the younger was created sole heir of the whole empire, his
uncle Valent and his father being departed the world. After Gracian came to
the empire, many Bishops which were banished in the t me of his uncle
Valent, were restored to the curche again, and banished all the sect of the
Arrians out of his region. Truly he showed him self to be a very religious and
catholic prince. For there is no better justice to confound human malice,
then to establishe the good in their estate. In the first year of the reign
of Gracian emperor, all the Germans and the Goths rebelled against the
Roman empire, for they would not only not obey him, but also they prepared an
huge army to enuade his empire, Imagining that sith Gracian was young, he
neither had the wit nor yet the boldness to resist them. For where the prince
is young, there oftimes the people suffered much wrong, and the realm great
misery. News come to Rome, how that the Gauls and Germans were up, the
emperor Gracian wrote to all the catholic bishops that they should offer in
their churches great sacrifices, with prayers unto God, and in Rome likewise it
was ordained that generally processions should be had, to the end almighty god
should moderate his ire against his people. For good Christians first pacify
god with prayers, before they resist their enemies with weapons. This good
prince showed him self to be no less warlike in his outward affairs, then a
good Christian in his religion. For god gives victories unto princes, more
through tears, then through weapons. These things thus finished, and his
affairs unto god recommended, the noble emperor Gracian determined to march
on, and him self in person to give the battle. And truly as at the first he
showed him self to be a good christian: so now he declared him self to be a
valiant emperor. For it were a great infamy and dishonor, that a prince by
negligence or cowardnes should lose that, which his predecessors by force of
arms had gotten. The army of the enemies exceaded far ye Romain army in
nombre, and when they met togethers in a place called Argentaria, the Romans
being inferior to their enemies in number, were afraid. For in the wars the
great multitude of ennemies and their puissaunte power, makes often times the
desired victory to be doubtful. This thing seen of the Romans, and by them
considered, importunatly they besought the Emperor not to charge the battle,
for they said he had not men sufficient. And herein they had reason. For the
sage prince should not rashely hazard his person in the war, nor yet should
lightely put his life in the hands of fortune. The Emperor Gracian not
changing countenance, nor stopping in his words, to al his knights which
were about him answered in this wise.

Of the godly Oration, which the Emperor Gracian made to his soldiers,
before he gave the battle. Cap. xxvi.
Valiant knights, and companions in war, most thankefully I accept your
service, in that you have sold your goods, and do offer your lives here to
accompany me in the wars, and herein you show your duties: for of right you
ought to lose your goods, and to venture your lives, for the defense and
suertie of your country. But if I give you some thanks for your company,
know you that I give much more for your good counsel which presently you give
me: for in great conflictes seldom is found together, both good counsel and
stout hearts. If I have enterprised this battle in hope of man's power, then
you had had reason that we should not give the battle, seeing the great
multitude that they have, and the small number that we are, for as you say, the
weighty affairs of ye public weal should not unadvisedly be committed, to
the incertaintie of fortune. I have taken upon me this dangerous and perilous
wars, first trusting that on my part justice remains, and since god is the
same only justice, I trust assuredly he will give me the victory in this
perilous conflict: For justice avails princes more that they have, then the
men of war do which they lead. Wherefore since my cause is just, and that I
have god the only judge thereof on my side, me thinks if for any worldly
fear I should cease to give the battle, I should both show my self to be a
prince of small faith, and also blaspheme god, saying he were of small justice.
For god shows most his power there, where the fraylenes of man has lest
hope. Then sith I begin the war, and that by me the war is procured, and
for me you are come to the war, I have determined to enter into the battle,
and if I perish therein, I shall be sure it shall be for the memory of my
person, and the salvation of my soul. For to die through justice is not to
die, but to change death for life. And thus doing if I lose my life, yet
therefore I lose not my honor, and all this considered I do that which for
the common wealth I am bound. For to a prince it were great infamy and
dishonor, that the quarrel being his own, should by the blood of others be
revenged. I will prove this day in battle whether I was chosen Emperor by
the divine will or not. For if god this day causes my life to be taken from
me, it is a manifest token he has a better in store for me: and if through his
mercy I be preserved, it signifies that for some other better thing he
grants me life. For in the end the sword of the enemy is but the scourge
of our offenses. The best that I see therefore in this matter to be done is,
that til three days be passed the battle be not given, and that we confess
our selves this night, and in the morning prepare our selves to receive our
redemer, and besides this that every man pardon his christian brother, if he
have had any wrong or injury done him. For oftimes though the demand of the
war be just, yet many mishaps befall therein, through the offenses of those
which pursue and follow the same. After the three days are past, and each
thing according to my sayings before accomplished in every point as behooves,
then let god dispose things as he shall see good, for now I am fully
determined to adventure my life in battle. Wherefore my valiant and stout
warriers, doubt not at all, for this day I must either vanquishe mine enemies,
or else suffer death: and if I die, I do that which needs I must. Wherefore I
will now cease to exhort you any more, desiring you to consider that, whereunto
your duty leads you, remembering that you are come as knights, and in the
defense of your country you wage battle: for now we are come to that
pinche, that deeds must more avail us then words. For peace ought to be
mainteyned by the tongue, but wars ought to be achieved by the sword. All
these words then ended, and the three days past, the emperor Gracian in
parsone gave the battle, where the conflicte and slaughter on both sides was
marvelous terrible: yet in the end the emperor Gracian had the victory over
his enemies, and there died in that conflicte.xxx. thousand Goths and
Almaines, and of the Romans there were not slain but five thousand. For
that army only is preserved, which to the divine will is conformable. Let all
other princes take example by this noble prince, let the^ consider how much
it avails them to be good Christians, and that in great wars and conflictes
they need not fear the great nombre of their enemies, but they ought greatly
to se that the wrath of god be pacified. For the heart is more dismayde with
the secret sins, then it is feared with the open enemies.

That the captain Theodosius, which was father of the great Emperor
Theodosius, died a good Christian. And of the king Hismarus, and the bishop
Siluanus, and of a council that was celebrated, with the laws which they
made and established in the same. Cap. xxvii.
THe two brethren being emperors, that is to wete, Valentinian and Valent, in
the costs of Affryke, and the realm of Mauritania, a tyrant usurped the
place of a king against the Romans. Who was named Thyrmus, a man hardy in
travails, and in dangers stout: For the aduenturous hearts oftimes do commit
many tyrannyes. This tyran Thyrmus by much cruelty came possessed of the
realm of Mauritania, and not contented therewith but also by tyranny possessed
a great part of Affrike, and prepared (as Ha^nibal did) an huge army to pass
into Italy, to die in chale^ging the empire of Rome. This was a renowned
tyrant that never took pleasure in any other thing so much, as to spoil and
rob others of their goods. The Romans that in all their doings were very
sage, and of the tyranny of tyrauntes sufficiently monished, immediately
prepared a great army to pass into Affryke, and to spoil ye realm, and to
destroy the tyrante by the commandment and decre of the Senate, and that for
no pacte or covenant the tyrant should live. And without doubt this
commandment was just. For to him that is a destroyer of the common wealth, it
is not punishment enough to take away his life. At that time there was a
knight in Rome, whose name was Theodosius, a man well stryken in years, and
yet better approved in wars, but he was not the richest: howbeit he vau^ted
him self (as truth was) to be of ye blood of Traian the great Emperor, upon
which occasion he was greatly honored and feared in Rome, for the commons were
so noble and gracious toward their princes, that all those which from the
good and virtuous Emperor descended, were of the whole common wealth greatly
esteemed. This noble Theodosius was of years so ancient, and so honored in
his old age for his graye hears, so noble of lineage, and so approved in
wars, that he was by the authority of the Emperor Valentinian, by the
consent of all the Senate, and by the good wylles of the whole people, chosen
to go to the conquest of Afrike, and truly their reason was good. For
Theodosius desired much to fight against that tyrant Thirmus, and all the
people were glad that such a captain led the army. So this Theodosius
embarked with his army, departed from Rome, and in few days arrived at Bona,
which was a city greatly replenished with people, situated in a haven of the
sea in Afrike. And as he and his army were landed, the tyran Thirmus forthwith
encamped his army in the field in the face of the Romans, and so all being
planted in the plain, the one to assault, and the others to defend:
immediately the two armies joined, and the one assaulting the other fiercely, on
both sides was great slaughter. So that those which to day were conquered,
to morrow did conquer: and those which yesterday were conquerours, afterward
remained conquered. For in long wars, fortune changes. In the province of
Mauritania, there was a strong city called Obelista, and as the captain
Theodosius by his force occupied all the field, the tyran Thirmus fortified him
self in that city, the which valiauntly being assaulted of the captain
Theodosius, and almost with his men entering into the same, the tyranne Thirmus
(because he would not commit him self unto the faith of other men) slew him
self with his proper hands. For the property of proud and disdainful hertes
is rather to die in liberty, then to live in captivity. At that time the
Emperor Valent, by the art of Nigromancie, wrought secretly to know what
luck should succeed in the Roman Empire. And by chance a woman being an
enchauntresse had answer of the devil, that the name which with these
letters should be written, should be successor to the Empire, and the letters
were these. T.E.O.D. The Emperor Valent diligently enquired of all the names,
which with these four letters could be named, and they found that those
signified the Theodotes, the Theodores, and the Theodoses: wherefore Valent
furthwith put all those to the sword that were of that name: Such was the
wickedness of the Emperor Valent, supposing they would have taken the Empire
from him being alive. For the tyranous Prince lives ever in gelousie and
suspicion. The excellent captain Theodosius (the tyranne Thirmus being dead,
and having subdued all Affrike to the Roman Empire) was burdened that he was
a secret traitor to the Empire, and that he compassed to win the same by
tyranny, for this cause therefore the Emperor Valent gave sentence he should
be beheaded. And this was done he never hearing of it, and much less culpable
thereof: for all Princes that be wylfull in their doings, are very absolute of
their sentence. This come to the ears of Theodosius, and seeing that he was
condemned to be beheaded, he sent incontinent for the Bishop of Carthage, to
whom he demanded the water of the holy Baptism, and so being baptized, and
in the faith of Christ instructed, was by the hangeman put to execution. Of
this so grievous, outtragious, and detestable fact every man judged this
Theodosius to suffer as an innocent, and that the Emperor Valent had judged
evil and like a tyrant. For the innocence of the good, is the great enemy of
the evil. At the same time when Theodosius demanded baptism (according to ye
saying of Prosper in his cronicle) he said unto the bishop, which should
baptize him, these words. O bishop saint Roger, I do conjure thee by the
creator which made us, and do desire thee for the passion of Jesus Christ
who redeemed us, to give me the water of baptism: for I have made a vow to
become a Christian, if god granted me victory. Wherefore I will accomplish my
vow, for those things which necessity causes us to promise, our own free
will ought to accomplish. I am sorry with all my heart that being a Christian
I can live no longer, and since it is so I offer my life for his sake, and into
his merciful hands I commend my soul. I leave a son of mine, who is called
Theodosius, and if the fatherly love begile me not, I think he will be a
virtuous and stout young man, and besides that he will be wise, and sith by
thy hands he has been baptized, I require thee holy father that thou through
thy wisdom wilt bring him up in the true faith: for if he be a good
Christian, I trust in god he will be a great man in the Empire. This Theodosius
was the father of the great Emperor Theodosius, so that the father was a
Christian, and the son a Christian. Not long after the Emperor Valent had
caused Theodosius (which was father to the great Emperor Theodosius) to be
executed, Valent by the commandment of God was by the Goths persecuted, and
in thend put to death, and truly this was the just judgment of god. For he of
right should suffer death him self, which unjustly procures the death of
others. Rufinus in the second book of his histories says, that after the
tyrant Thirmus was put to death by the captain Theodosius, and that the
Emperor Valent had caused this Theodosius to be put to death, and that the
same Valent was slain of the Goths, the Romans created a king in Afrike,
whose name was Hismarus, called for a right Christian in that time, which was
from the buylding of Rome.377. There was in the city of Carthage a holy bishop
called Siluanus, a man in human and divine letters excellently well learned,
and sith the king was so just, and the bishop so holy, both the faith
increased, and also the affairs of the common weal prospered. For commonly
the wars begin rather through the pride of the highest, then through
disobedience in the lowest. Therefore this holy bishop and good Christian king,
being desirous in their time to give good example to the subjects, and for the
time to come to leave good precepts, they celebrated in the city of Bona a
counsel, with all the bishops of Affryke, in the which king Hismarus was
in person. For in ancient cou^selles the kings were not only there in
persons, but also all the lords and hie estates of their Realms. Amongst
many excellent things, which Rufinus mentions that were ordained in this
place, it seemed good unto me to remember here these few, to the end christian
princes now present, may see what devout christians those kings were in times
paste.

A collection or Purport of the counsel of Hyponense.
THese were the things which in the sacred counsel of Hyponense were
ordained, where there was in person the catholyke king Hismarus, and the
relygious bishop Siluanus, and in that which was ordained, the king spoke
in some of them, and does counsel in other some. Because in such semblable
affairs, it is both mete and requisite, that the royal preheminens be
reverenced: and the authority of the Church not diminished. We ordeine that
from two years to two years all the Bishops, Abbottes, and prelates of our
Realm do assemble and celebrate a prouintial counsel, and that in this
counsel there be no temporal matters spoken of, but of the disorders and
misgouernaunce of Churches, for the Church is not lost for the lack of
scarsitie of money: but for the to great abundance of riches.

We ordeine, and all prelates which are now and shall be here after we desire
that when they will call any counsel in our Realms, that before the
celebracion of the same they certifye us lest that under the color or cloak
of a holy counsel, there should some suspicious assembly be had.

We ordain that from henceforth the Princes and great Lords be bound to
repair to the sacred counsel, with all the company of the holy Bishops.
For it were more mete they should come to destroy false heretics, in winning
their souls: then to fight against their enemies, in losinge their lives. We
ordeine that the Prince which comes not to the counsels through
negligence, that unto him the Sacrament of the body of Christ be not
ministered, until the next counsel be celebrated. And if perchance he refuse
not to come through negligence, but through malice, we will that then they
proceade against him as a suspect parson in the faith of Christ. For the
Christian Prince that of malice only commits an offense is not parfitte in
the holy catholyke faith. We ordain that at the first assembly of the
counsel, all the prelates togethers openly, and afterward each one by him
self priuatelye shall say the creed singynge, the which thing finished, the
King him self alone shall say the creed likewise. For if the prince be
suspected of the holy catholyke faith, it is impossible that his people should
be good Christians. We ordain that in this counsel the prelates have
lybertye and authority to say unto the king that that is comelye and
decente, and the king likewise to say in the counsel what he think best,
so that the prelates might tell the king without fear of his little care, he
has in destroyenge the heretics and heresies of his realm: and likewise the
king might tell the prelates their negligence that they use in the charge of
their flock. For the end and intencion of counsayles ought not to be any
otherwise then a scourge for offenses paste, and a reformacion of the evils to
come. We ordain that all the princes of Affricke, immediately before they do
any other thing in the morning, do openly and dilygently come to morning
prayer: and we will also that there be present al his courtiers and private
counselors, which with them ought to enter into counsel. For that creature
can not give any good counsel, who has not reconsiled himself unto god
before. We ordain, that ye Archbishoppes, Bishops, and Abbottes, continually
duringe the time of the counsel, do every day confess them selves, to
almighty god, serving him devoutly, and that one of them do preach to ye people
gods word. For if every prelate be bound to give good example alone, then being
altogether they shall give it much better. We ordain ye princes (as much as
lies in them do give unto their subjects good examples, and that on the
sabbotte day in especially and other Festival days they repair unto the
cathedral Church to here divine service, and there reconcileng them selves to
god, yt they publicly in the presence of the congregation receive ye holy
comunion and supper of the Lord. For it would be a great sclaunder to Princes,
which ought to reprehend others of their faults, that a man should never see
them come to the Church, and be partakers of that holy Sacrament. We ordain,
that at Easter chiefly Princes do go to the church Cathedral and that the
Metropolitan be there in person to celebrate the holy communion: and the gospel
being said, the Prince himself shall be bound to say with a loud voice, the
creed confirmed in the sacred counsel of Nicene. For the good Princes ought
not only in their hearts to be faithful unto Jesus Christ, but are also bound
openly with their mouths to confess it before the people. We ordeine, that
Princes be not so hardy to have in their court above two bishops, the one
to give him ghostlye counsel, and the other to preach unto him the word of
God. And those we will that the counsel assign unto him, and that they be
bound to find two persons of the most ancient and virtuous, which shall
remain in the court no more but two years, and that afterward others be
placed there in their steades. For there is nothing more monstrous, then to
see the Church long without prelates.

What a goodly thing it is to have but one Prince to rule the public weal:
for there is no greater enemy to the common weal, then he which procures
many to command therein, as by reasons following it shall be proved. Cap. xxviii.
Often times with my self alone I consider, that sith the divine providence,
which does all things by weight and measure, and that of her and by none other
all creatures are governed, and that furthermore with God there is no accepcion
of persons, for he makes the one rich, and the other poor: the one sage,
and the other simple: the one hole, and other sick: the one fortunate, and the
other unlucky: the one servant, and the other master: and let no man
merueile though I muse thereat: for the variety of time, is the beginner of
dissencions among the people. In man's judgment it seems that it were better
all were alike in apparel, al equal in commanding, none greater then others in
possessions, al to content them selves with one kind of meat, and that the
names of commanding and obeing were utterly abolysshed and brought to naught.
So that if the myseries of the one, and prosperities of the other were put out,
from that day forward I protest there should be no envy in the world. Layeng
aside man's opinion, (which ought not to be compared to the divine mystery) I
demand now what reason sufficed to think, that of two brethren (that is to
wete Jacob, and Esau, both children of holy and devout persons) the divine
prouydence would the one should be chosen, and the other despised, that the
one should command, and the other obey, the one to be disherited being the
eldeste, and the other to inherit being the yongeste? That which chanced to
Jacob with Esau, the same chanced to the children of Jacob and Joseph: who
being patriarchs and chosen, God provided and ordained that to Joseph being
the youngeste, his brethren should serve and obey him. This thing was
repined at of all the eleven brethren, how be it their intencions auayled not:
for it is impossible for man's malice to disorder that, which the divine
providence has appointed: we se daily nothing else but that which man decrees
in a long time, god disposes otherwise in one moment. Truly it is not evil
done, but well ordained. For in the end, sith man is man, in few things he
can be either certain or assured: and since God is God, it is impossible that
in any thing he should err. It is a great benefit of the creator, to be
willing to reform and correct the works of the creatures. For if God would
suffer us to do after our own minds, we should be quyte contrary to his
pleasure. God without a great mysterye did not ordeine, that in one family
there should be but one father, among one people there should be but one
citizen that should command, in one prouynce there should be but one governor
alone, and also that one king alone should govern a proud Realm, and
likewise that by one only captain a puissant army should be led. And
furthermore and above all, he wills that there be but one Monarchyall king
and Lord of the world. Truly all these things are such, that we with our eyes
do see them and know them not, we hear them with our ears and understand them
not, we speak them with our tongues and know not what we say. For truly man's
understanding is so dull, that without doubt he is ignorant of more then he
knows. Appolonius Thianeus compassing the most part of Asia, Affricke, and
Europe, that is to say from the bridge of Nilus where Alexander was, unto Gades
where the pillars of Hercules were, he being one day in Ephese, in the Temple
of Diana, the priests asked him what thing he wondered at most in all the
world? for it is a general rule, that men which have seen much, always do
note one thing above another. Although the Philosopher Appolonius greatlyer
esteemed the works, then the speakinge of them that demanded this question,
yet forthwith he made them this answer, I let you know priests of Diana,
that I have been throughout France England, Spain, Germany, through the
Laces, and Lidians, Hebrews, and Greeks, Parthes, and Medes, Phrigians, and
Corinthians, and so with the Perses, and above all in the great Realm of
India: for that alone is more worth, then all these Realms together. I will
you understand that all these Realms in many and sondrye things do dyffer,
as in languages, persons, beasts, metals, waters, flesh, customs, laws,
lands, buyldinges, in apparel, and fortes, and above all diverse in their Gods
and Temples. For the language of the one dyffereth not so much from the
language of the other: as the Gods of Europe differ from the Gods of Asia, and
the Temples and gods of Asia and Europe, differ from them of Affrike. Among
all things which I have seen, of two only I did marvel, which is, that in
all the parts of the world wherein I have travailed, I have seen quiet men
troubled by sedycious parsones, the humble subject to the proud, the just
obedient to the tyrant, I have seen the cruel commanding the merciful, the
coward ruling the hardye, the ignorant teaching the wise, and above al, I saw
that ye most thieves hunge the innocent on the gallows. The other thing whereat
I marueiled was this, yt in all ye places and circuit where I have been, I know
not, neither could I find any man that was everlasting, but that all are mortal
and in the end both high and low have an end: for many are laid to night
into their grave, which the next day following thought to be alive. Leave aside
the divine judgment, in that he spoke he said highly and like a Philosopher,
for it seems to be a pleasant thing, to see how men govern the world.
Therefore now to the matter, it is but reason we know the cause of this so
ancient a noueltye, which is: that God wylleth and ordeinethe that one only
command all, and that all together obey one. For there is nothing that God
does (though the cause thereof be unknown to us) that wants reason in his
eternal wisdom. In this case speaking like a Christian I say, that if our
father Adam had obeyed one only commandment of God, which was forbidden
him in the terrestial Paradise, we had remained in liberty upon the earth, and
should have been Lords and masters over al. But since he would not then obey
the Lord, we are now become the slaves of so many Lords. O wicked sine, cursed
be thou, since by the only the world is brought into such a bondage: without
tears I cannot speak that which I would, that through our first fathers,
(which submitted them selves to sin) we their children have lost the sygnorye
of the world. For sith they were prisoners to sin in their hearts: little
avails the liberty of their bodies. There was great dyuersitie betwixt the
opynions of Pythagoras, and the opinyons of Socrates, for so much as those of
Socrates scoole said, that it were better all things should be common, and
all men equal. The Other of Pythagoras scoole said the contrary, and that the
common wealth were better wherein each one had his own proper, and all, should
obey one, so that the one of them did admit and grant the name of servants,
and thothers did despise the name of Lords. As Laertius in his first book of
the life of Philosophers says, that the Philosopher Demostenes was also of the
same opinyon, that to the end the people should be well governed, he would two
names should be utterly abbolished, and taken a way: that is to wete, Lords and
subjects, masters and servant: for the one desirous to rule* by fyersnes,
and thothers not willing to obey by tyranny, would shed the blood of the
innocent, and would be vyolent against the poor: they would destroy the
renowned and famous people, and tyrannes would wax stout, the which things
should be taken away, if there were no sygnorye, nor seruytude in the world.
But notwithstanding these things, the Philosopher in his first book of his
pollitiques says, that by four natural reasons we may prove it to be very
necessary, that Princes do command, and the people obey. The first reason is
of the parts of the Elements, simple, and mixed. For we se by experience, that
the Elements do suffer (to the end they would be joined together) the one to
have more power then al: the which is showed by experyence, forasmuch as the
Element of the fire, the Element of the air, and the Element of the water do
obey, the Element of the earth does command. For against their nature he
brings them all to the earth. But if all the noble and chiefest Elements were
obedyente to the most vile Element, only to form a body myxt: it is a greater
reason, that al obey to one virtuous person, that the common wealth might
thereby the better be governed. The second reason is, of the body and the
soul, in the armony whereof the soul is the mistress which commands, and
the body the servant which obeys, fo the body neither sees, hears, nor
understands without ye body. The sage Philosopher by this will infer, that the
sage men should naturally be lords over others. For in the world there is
nothing more m^nstrous, then that fools should command, and wise men obey.
The third reason takes his ground on beasts: for we se by experience that
diverse beasts by thonely knowledge of men are governed, therefore it is but
mete that many men, which are more lyker beasts then the beasts them selves,
do suffer them selves to be governed and ruled by wise men. For the common
weal is more profited by a brute beast, then it is by a witless man. The
fourth reason proceadeth of women: for we se, that they being created to the
image of God, god commands and ordayneth that they should be subject to man,
presupposing their knowledge not to be so great, as the knowledge of men.
Therefore if this thing be thus, why could not diverse mortal men (who with out
comparison know less then women) take them selves for happy that one alone
would command and govern them: so that such one were a sage and virtuous
parson. Sith man is naturally pollytike, which is to be a friend of company,
the company engenders envy, and afterward discord norisheth war, and war
brings in tyranny, and tyranny destroys the common wealth, and the common
wealth being lost, all men think their lives in peril. Therefore it is very
necessary that in the common wealth many be governed by one alone, for to
conclude, there is no common wealth well governed but by one alone. The great
trauayles and inconuenyences which the auncientes found in times past, were the
occasion that it was ordained in the publyke weal, that all should obey one.
Sithe that in a camp one only Captain is obeyed, and in the sea one Pilot
followed, in the monasterye all obey one prelate, and in the Church all obey
one bishop, and syns in a hyue of bees, one be only leads all the rest:
it were not reason that men should be without one king, nor the common wealth
without a governor, Those men that will not have a king in a common wealth,
are like unto drones and waspes which without travail eat the sweet of
others. And mine opinion in this case should be, that every man that will not
be commanded, as an abject of the common weal should be expulsed and cast out
thereof. For in a common wealth there can be no greater enemy then he, that
desires that many should rule therein. In that public weal where one alone
has care for all, and al obey the commandment of one only, there God shall be
served, the people shall profit, the good shall be esteemed, and the evil despised,
and besides that tirannes shall be suppressed. For a governance of many is not
profitable, unless they refer them selves to the judgment of a few, and
to the arbitermente of one alone. Oh how man^e people and Realms (because
they would not obey their princes by justice) have since by cruel tirannes
been governed with tyranny. For it is even a just plage, that they which
disire the scepters of righteous Princes, should feale and prove the scourge
of cruel tirauntes. Always it was, and shall be, that in the world there was
one to command, another to obey, one to govern, and another to be
governed. In this case let no man say, I am excepted, for until this day
there has no Prince nor Knight been seen, but has trauayled under this
yooke, I warn and pray, and importunatelye require you all, that you be
loyal, and faythefull servants, to the end you may deserve to have loving
Lords. For generally the prince yt is wicked, causes his subjects to rebel,
and ye sedicious subject makes his lord to become a tiraunt. It is a great
thing to the people, that their Princes be good or evil, For there are no
Princes so stable, nor so temperate, that always will dissemble the evil: nor
there is no governor so very a tyraunte, but sometimes will acknowledge the
good. Oftimes god suffers, that there be Emperors in the Empire, kings in
realms, and governors in the provinces, Lords in the cities, and prelates in
the churches, not al only as yt common wealth desires, nor as the good
gouernmente requires: but as the offense of the multitude deserves. For now a
days we se many ye have the charge of souls in ye church, which deserve not
keep ye sheape in ye field. That to be true, plainly it does appear. For such
do not govern but disorder, they do not defend but offend: they do not resist
the enemies, but engage and sell the innocent: they are no judges, but tirannes:
they are not gentil pastores, but cruel hangmen: they are not incre asers of
the common wealth, but distroyers of justice: they are not ordeynors of laws,
but inuentors of trybutes: their hearts wake not to good, but to invent and
work al mischefe: and finally God sends us such prelates and governors, not
for that they should be mynisters of his laws, but for that they should be
scourges for our offenses.

That in a public weal there is no greater destruction: then where princes
daily consent to new orders, and change old customs. Cap. xxix.
IN the first book of the Kings, the viii. Chapter, of the holy and sacred
scripture is said, that Samuel (when he was old) in his stead placed his two
sons to govern the people, whose names were Iohel, and Abiah for that
naturally the fathers are desirous to advance their children to honor. The
sons of Samuel were residente and held the judgment in the city of
Beersheba, which was the fortheste part of Judea, and the old Samuel went
to dwell in the city Ramah. The honorable and most aunciente men (among
the people of Jerusalem) assembled together and decreed to send Ambassadors to
Samuel, which should be the wisest men of all the Sinagoge. For the auncientes
in those days were so circumspect that they never committed any affairs of
the common wealth, into the hands of young men. The auncientes then being
arrived at Ramah: spoke these words unto Samuel. Samuel thou art now old, and
for thy years thou can not govern the people, therefore thou like a pytefull
father have committed the gouernmente of the people into the hands of thy
children.

Wherefore we let the know in this case, that thy children are covetous. First
they do receive brybes of the suitors. And secondarilye they do great injury to
the people. Therefore we are come to require the to give unto us a king, that
may govern us, and that might lead us in battle. For we will no more judges
to judge us, but kings for to govern us. The aged Samuel hearing the
imbassage, was ashamed of that the auncientes of Judea had told him. First
seeing his children to be evil. Secondarily because they would take their
offices from them. And truly herein Samuel had just occasion, both to be
ashamed and also sorye. For the vices and wickedness of the young children, are
swords that pass through the hearts of the old and aunciente fathers. Samuel
seeing that the Hebrews were determined to deprive them of their office, and
government of the people, had none other remedy but even to make his moan to
god of his grief, and god hearing his complaints said unto him. Samuel be not
sad, nor lament not, for their demanding a king (as they do) they do not
mislike thy parson, but they dispraise my prouydence, and marvel not though
they forsake thy children, for they are somewhat to young, since they have
forsaken me their god, and worship false idolles. Sith they demand a king, I
have determined to give them one, but first tell tow the^ the co^dicions of ye
king, which are these. The king whom I will give you, shall take your children,
with your chariottes and beasts, and shall send them laden with burdens. And
yet therewith not contented, he shall make your children posts by the ways,
tribunes and ce^turions in his battles, and shall make them laborers and
gardyners in his gardins, he shall make them sow his seeds and past his bread,
and furbishe his harnes, and armor. You shall have besides delicate and tender
daughters, the which you shall little enjoy, for the king that I will give you,
shall command them to keep and attend those that are wounded in the wars, he
shall make them cooks in his palace, and caters of his expenses. The king that
I will give you, if he ha^del your sons and daughters evil, much worse he will
handle your goods. For on the beasts and fertile feldes that you have, his
herd shall feed, he shall gather the best grapes of your vines, he shall chose of
your olive trees the best olyues and oils, and if any fruit afterward
remain in your feilds, he will they shall be gathered not by you but of his
workmen, and afterward ye king that I will give you shall oppress you much
more. For of every pecke of corn you shall give him one, of ten sheep you
must needs give him one, so that of al things which you shall gather, against
your wylles, you shall give the tenth: of your slaves the king shall be served
sooner then you, and he shall take al your Oxen that labor and travail in your
own possessions, and shall bring them to ploughe in his own ground, and
tenements. So that you shall pay tribute, and the king shall take his own
profit, for the wealth and commodity of his palace. And al this which I have
rehearsed before, ye King shall have whom I will give you. The historye which here
I have declared, is not Ouide, neither yet the Eglogges of Virgil, ne yet ye
fayninge of Homer, but it is the sentence and the very word of god. O mortal
ignorance, that we demand and know not why nor wherefore, to whom nor where,
neither when we demand? which causes us to fall into sundry errors. For few
men are so wise that they offend not in chosing, and that they can ask with
reason. The Hebrews asked (as they think) ye better, and god gives them the
worse: they ask one to govern them, and god gives them a Tiraunt to destroy
them: they ask one yt should maintain them in justice, and he threatens them
with tyranny: they require one that should give them, and he gives the^ one
which robs the^: they require one to deliver them from bondage, and he
ordains one to keep them as slaves. And finally the Hebrews trusting to be
delivered of their judges, which ruled not according to their appetites, god
shall give them a king yt shall take they* goods from them by force. O how many
times ought we to pray unto god to give us princes in our common wealth, and
prelates in our churches, which do know how to govern us, and minyster unto
us, not according to the weight of our soul, but according to the measure of
his mercy. Plato sath in the first book of laws, that one of ye most
excellent laws which the Siciones had in their province, was to keep the
Cities, that they should not change nor alter any thing therein. Truly those
Barbarous were sage in doing, and Plato was very discrete to commend them
therein. For nothing destroys a common wealth sooner, then to suffer chaunges
oftetimes therein. Al these things seemed to be true in ye Hebrews, the which in
their government were very rash, and indiscreet. For first they governed them
selves by Patriarchs, as Abraham was. After they were governed by prophets,
as Moses by captains, as Iosue: by judges, as Ge^eo: by kings, as David, and
after they governed theymselues by Bishops, as Abdias was: and in the end the
Hebrews not contented with all these, God suffered that they should fall into
the hands of Antiochus, Ptolomeus and Herodes, all tyrauntes. This punishment
fell (according to the just judgment of God) upon them for their offenses:
for it was even mete, that they yt would not enjoy the pleasant liberty of
Judea, should taste the cruel servitude of Babylone. The condition which
chanced in the government to the unconstant Hebrews: the same happened unto
the proud Romans. The which in the beginning of their Empire were governed
by kings, afterward by ten men, then by the Consulles, so by the
dictators, by the Censours, and afterward by the Tribu nes, and Senators:
and in the end, they came to be governed by Emperors, and tirannous princes.
The Romans invented all these alteracions in their governments, for none
other cause, but to see whether they could be delivered from the commandment
of an other. For the Romans in this case were so proud hearted, that they had
rather dye in liberty, then live in captivity God had so ordained it, and
their woeful case did so promise it, when they were above al other kings and
realms of the earth, that then the slave should be obedyent to his yronnes,
and the subject should acknowledge the homage to his master. And though the
subjects do move wars, though kings also do win Realms, and Emperors
conquer Empyres: yet will they or nyl they (both great and small should
acknowledge them selves for servants.

For duringe the time of our fleshlye life, we can never withdraw our
selves from the yooke of servitude. And say not you Princes, for that you are
puyssaunte princes, that you are excepted from servitude of men. For without
doubt it is a thing more intolerable, to have their hearts burdened with
thoughts, then their necks laden with yrons. If a slave be good, they take
from him some yrons: but to you that are princes, the greater you are, they
greater cares you have. For the prince that for his common wealth takes care,
has not one momente of an hour quyete. A slave hops to be delivered in his
life, but you can not look to be delivered till after your death.

They lay yrons on the slave by weyghte, but thoughts burdenne you without
measure. For the woeful heart is more burdened with one hour of care: then
the body is pressed, with twentye pound of yrone. A slave or prysonner if he
be alone, many times fylethe of his yrons, but you Princes that are alone,
are more greuouslye tormented with thoughts: for soletarye places are
Arbours, and Gardeyns to woofull and heavy hearts.

A slave has nothing to care for but himself alone: but you that be Princes
have to satisfy and please al men. For the prince should have a time for
himself, and also for those which are above him. The divine Plato said well,
that he that should have the lest part of a prince, and belonging to a prince,
ought to be the prince himself. For to the end the prince should be al his
own, he ought to have no part in himself. Though a slave work and travail
in the day, yet he slepeth without care in the night: but you princes pass the
days in hearing importunate suetes, and the night in fetching innumerable
sighs. Finallye I say, that in a slave (be it well, or be it evil) al his pain
is finished in one year, or is ended at his death: but what shall a woeful prince
do when he dies. If he were good, there is but a short memory of his goodness:
and if he has been evil, his infamy shall never have end. I have spoken these
things to the end that great and small, lords and servants should confess
and acknowledge, the true signory, to be only unto him, who for to make us
lords above, became a servant here beneath.

When the tirannes began to reign, and upon what occasion commanding and
obeying first began. And how the auctorytie, which the prince has, is by the
ordenaunce of God. Cap xxx.
CEasing to speak any further of ye poetical histories, and ancient feynings,
and speaking the truth according to the divine histories, the first that did
love in this world, was our father Adam: who did eat of the fruit forbidden,
and that not so much for to trespass the commandment of one, as for not to
displease his wife Eve. For many now a days, had rather suffer their
conscience a long time to be infected: then one only day to se their wives
displeased. The first homicyde of the world was Cayn. The first that died in ye
world was Abel. The first that had.ii. wives in ye world was Lamech. The first
city of the world was by Enoch built in the fields of Edon. The first
musician, was Tubalcaim. The first which sailed in yt world was Noe. The first
tirant of ye world was Nembroth, The first priest was Melchysedech. The first
king of ye world was Anraphel. The first duke was Moses. The first which was
called Emperor in ye world, was Julius Caesar. For until this time they which
governed, were called Co^sulles, Censors and Dictators. And from Julius Caesar
hitherto have been called Emperors. The first battle yt was given in the
world (as we read) was in the wild valleis, which now they call ye dead and salt
sea. For a great part of that, yt then was the maine land, is now ye dead sea.
The holy scriptures cannot deceue us, for it is full of al truth, and by them it
is declared, that a thousand and eight hundred years after the world began,
there was no battle assembled, nor company that met to fight in the field:
for at that time when they had no ambition nor covetousness, they knew not what
battle mente. It is reason therefore that in this wrytinge we declare the
cause, why the first battle was fought in the world, to the end princes may
thereof be advertised, and the curious reader remain therein satisfied. The
manner was thus, that Bassa being king of Sodom, Bersa king of Gomorrhe, Senaab
king of Adamee, Semebar king of Seboime, and Vale king of Segor, were al five
tributaries to Chodor laomor king of the Aelamites, which five kings
conspired against him because they would pay him no tribute, and because they
would acknowledge no homage unto him.

For the Realms payeng tribute, have always rebelled and sowed sedicions,
This rebellion was in the 13 year of the reign of Chodor Laon^or king of the
Aelamytes, and immediately the year following, Anraphel king of Sernaar, Arioch
king of Ponte, and Aradal king of the Allotali, joined with Chodor-Laomor.
The which altogether began to make wars, to destroy cities and countries
upon their enemies. For the old malice of the war is, that where they
cannot have their enemies which are in the fault: they put to sack and
distroy those which are innocent and giltlesse. So the one assaulting, and the
other defending, in the end all come to the field, they gave battle as two
enemies, and the greatest part was overcome of the fewest, and the fewest
remained victorious over the greatest, which thing GOD would suffer in the
first battle of the world, to the end princes might take example, that all
the mishappes of the wars come not, but because they are begone of an unjust
occasion. If Chodor Laomor had held himself contented as his predecessors
did, and that he had not conquered Realms in making them subject, and had
not caused them to pay trybute: neither they unto him, would have denied
reason: nor he with them would have waged battle. For through the
covetousness of the one, and the ambition of the other, enmyties grew between
the people, This considered which we have spoken of sygnorye, and of those
which came into contentions for signoryes, Let us now se from whence the first
oryginal of servitude came, and the names of servants and lords which were
in the old time, and whether servitude was by the discord of virtuous men,
first brought into the world: or else invented by the ambytion of Tyrauntes.
For when the one commands, and the other obeys, it is one of the novelties
of the world as the holy scripture declares unto us in this manner. The
patriarche Noah had 3. sons, which were Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, and the second
son (which was Ham) begotte Cush, and this Cush begot Nimrod. Nimrod made him
self a honter of wild beasts, in the woods and mountains, he was the first
yt began to play the tyrant amongeste men, inforcynge their persons, and
taking their goods, and the scriptures called him Oppressor hominum, which is
to say, an oppressor of men. For men of evil life, always commit much evil in
a common wealth. He taught the Chaldeans to honor the fire, he was the first
that presumed to be an absolute lord, and the first that ever required of men
homage and service. This cursed tyraunte ended his life in the golden world,
wherein al things were in common, with the common wealth. For the auncientes
used their goods in common: but their wills only they reserved to them
selves. They ought not to think it a light matter, for his person to have
been a Tiraunt: but they ought to think it a greater matter, to have been a
rebel in a common wealth. And much more they ought to take and esteame it
as an evil matter in him, which has been (as he was) a disturber of the
good customs of his country: but the most unjust of all is, to leave behynd
him any evil custom brought into the common wealth. For if he deserve
great infamye which woorketh evil in his life: truly he deserves much
moore, which trauayleth to bring that evil in ure after his death. Eusebius
seems to affirm, that after this Nimrod had destroyed the realm of Chaldea
by his plagues, he came to dwell in Italy with viii. sons, and built the city
of Camesa, which afterward, in Saturnes time was called Valentia, and in the
time of Romulus it was called as it is at this present, Rome. And sith this
thing was thus, a man ought not to marvel that Rome in ancient time was
possessed with tyraunts, and with tirauntes beaten down, since by so famous
and renowned tyraunts it was founded. For even as Jerusalem was the daughter
of the pacient, and the mansion of the quiet kings in Asia: so was Rome the
mother of proud princes in Europe. The histories of the gentiles (which knew
not the holy scripture) declare in an other sort the beginning of Signorye and
servitude, and when they came into the world: for the Idolatrers not only did
not know the creatoure of the world: but also they were ignoraunte of many
things which began in the world. They therefore say, that the Tyranne Nimrod
(amongst the others) had a son called Belus. and that this Belus was the
first, ye reigned in the land of Syria, and that he was the first that invented
wars on the earth, and that he set up the first monarchy among ye Assirians
and in the end he died after he had reigned 60 and 5. years in Asia and left
the world in great wars. The first monarchy of the world, was that of the
Assirians, and continued 132. years. The first king was Belus, and the last
king was Sardanapalus, whom (at that time when he was slain) they found
spinninge with women having a distaffe in his hand, wherewith they use to
spinne: and truly this vile death was to good for such a cowardly king. For the
prince ought not to defend that with the distafe, that his predecessors had
won with the sword. As we have said Nimrod begat Belus: who had to wife
Semyramis, which was the mother of Ninus, which Ninus succeeded his father in
tyranny, and in the empire also: and both the mother and the son not
contented to be Tyraunts, invented statues of new gods. For man's malice
poursueth rather the evil, which the wicked do invent: then the good which
virtuous men begine. We would have showed you how the graundfather and the
father, ye mother and the son, were Idolatrers and warlicke, to the end
princes and great Lords might se, that they began their Empyres, more for
that they were ambitious parsonnes, then for that they were good paciente: or
virtuous men Albeit that Nimerod was the first that ever committed any
tyranny, and whether it be true or not, that Belus was the first that invented
wars, and that Chodorlaormor was the first that invented battayles, and that
there be others, whereof the writings make no mention: every man taking for
himself, and afterward all togethers: those were occasions of evil enough in
the world, to agree unto those things. Our inclinacion is greatly to be blamed,
for those which have credit for their evil, are many: and those which have
power to do well, are very few.

Of the golden age in times past, and worldly misery which we have at this
present. Cap. xxxi.
IN the first age and golden world, al lived in peace, each man took care for
his own lands, every one planted and sowed their trees and corn, eueryone
gathered his fruits and cut his vynes, kned their bread, and brought up their
children, and finally all lived by their own proper swette and travail, so
that they all lived without the prejudice or hurt of any other. O worldly
malice, O cursed and wicked world, that thou never suffer things to remain
in one estate, and thought I call the cursed, marvel not thereat: for when we
are in most prosperity, then thou with death persecutest us most cruelly.
Without tears I say not that I will say, that 2000 years of the world were past
before we knew what the world meant, god suffering it, and worldly malice
inuenting it, ploughes were turned into weapons, oxen to horses, goades to
lances, whippes to arrows, slinges to crosbowes, simplycitye into malice,
travail into Idleness, rest to pain, peace to war, love to hatred, charity
to cruelty, Justice to tyranny, profit to damage, alms to theft, and above
al, faith into Idolatry. And finallye the sweet they had to profit in their
own goods, they turned to blood sheading, to the damage of the common wealth.
And herein the world shows it self to be a world, herein worldly malice
shows it self to be malicious, in so much as the one rejoices, and the other
lamenteth: the one reioceth to stomble, to the end the other may fall and
break his neck, the one rejoices to be poor, to the end the other may not
be rich: the one reioyseth to be dispraised, to the end the other may not be
honored: the one delights to be sad, to the end the other should not be
merye: and to conclude we are so wicked, that we banishe the good from our own
house, to the end that the evil might enter in at the gates of an other man.
When the creator created the whole world, he gave to each thing immediately his
place: that is to wete, he placed intelligence, in the vppermoste heaven: he
placed the stars, in the firmament: the planettes, in the orbs: the birds
in the air: the earth on the center: the fyshes in the water: the serpents,
in the holes: the beasts in the mountains: and to al in generallye he gave
place to rest them selves in. Now let princes and great Lords be vain
glorious saying that they are Lords of the earth, for truly of all that is
created, god only is the true Lord thereof, because the miserable man for his
part, has but the use of ye fruit, for if we think it reasonable that we
should enjoy the profit of that which is created: then were it more convenient
we should acknowledge god to be the Lord thereof. I do not deny, but confess,
ye God created al things, to the end they should serve man upon condition, that
man should serve God likewise: but when the creature rises against god,
immediately the creator resists against man. For it is but reason yt he be
disobeyd, who one only commandment will not obey. O what evil fortune has ye
creature, only for disobeying ye commandment of his creator. For if man had
kept his commandment in Paradise, god had conserved to the world ye signorie:
but the creatures whom he created for his service, are occasion to him of
great troubles: for the ingratitude of benefit, heapeth great sorrow to ye
discret heart. It is great pity to behold the man that was in paradise, and yt
might have been in heaven: and now to se him in the world, and above al to be
interred in ye intrailes of the earth. For in terrestiall paradise, he was
innocent, and in heaven he had been blessed, but now he is in the world,
enuirouned with cares, and afterward he shall be thrown into his grave, and
gnawen of the worms. Let us now see the disobedience we had in the
commandment of GOD, and what fruit we have gathered in the world. For he is
very simple, that dare commit any vice, taking no delight nor pleasure thereof
in his body. In my opinion, through the sins which our forefathers committed
in paradise, the servitude remains in us their children which are on the
earth. For so much as if I enter into the water I drown, if I touch the fire
I burn, if I cone near a dog he biteth me, if I threaten a horse he casts
me, if I resist the wind it blows me down, if I persecute the serpent he
poysoneth me, if I smite the bear he destroieth me, and to be brief I say,
that the man that without pity eats men in his life: the worms shall eat
his intrailes in the grave after his death. O princes and great lords, lode
your selves with cloth of gold, heap up your great treasours, assemble many
armies, inuente Iustes and Torneis, seek your pastimes, revenge your selves of
your enemies, serve your selves with your subjects, marrye your children to
mighty kings, and set them in great estate, cause your selves to be feared of
your enemies, imploye your bodies to al pleasures, leave great possessions to
your heirs, raise sumptuous buildinges to leave memory of your persons, I
swear by him that shall judge me, that I have more compassion to see your
sinful souls, then I have envy to see your vicious lives. For in the end all
pastimes will vanishe away, and they shall leave you for a gage to the hungry
worms of the earth. O if princes did consider (though they have been borne
princes, created and norished in great estates) that the day they are borne,
death immediately comes to seek the end of their life, and takes them here
and there when they are whole, and when they are sick, now tombling, then
rising, he never leaves them one hour until their woeful burial. Therefore
since it is true (as in deed it is) that that which princes possess in this
life is but small, and that which they hope in the other is so great: truly I
marvel why princes, the which shall lie so straight in the grave, dare live in
such and so great largenes in their life. To be rich, to be lords, and to
have great estates, men should not thereof at al be proud, since they see how
frail man's condition is: for in thend life is but lone, but death is
enheritage. Death is a patrimony and heritage, which successively is
inherited: but life is a right, which daily is surrendered. For death counts
us somuche his own, that oftimes vnwa^es he comes to assault us: and life
takes us such strangers, that oftetimes we not doubting thereof it vanishes
away. If this thing the^ be true, why will princes and great lords presume to
command in a strange house, which is this life: as in their own house which
is the grave? Leaving aside the said opinions, I say that for sin only
servitude came to dwell in us, and entered into the world: for if there had been
no sinners, we ought to believe there had been no lords, nor servants. For as
much as servitude generally entered into the world through sin, I say that the
signorie of princes is by the divine commandment, for he says: by me the
king does govern, and by me the prince does minister justice. I conclude in
this sort, with this reason, that since it is true princes are sent by ye
hands of god for to govern us, we are bound in all and for all to obey them:
for there is no greater plague in a public weal, then to be disobedient to
the prince.

How king Alexander the great after he had overcome king Darius in Asia, went
to conquer the great India, and of that which happened unto him with the
Garamantes, and how the good life has more power then any force of war.
Cap. xxxii.
IN the year of the creation of the world.4970. in the first age of the
world, and in the.4027. years of the foundation of Rome, Ia^o being high
priest in Jerusalem, Decius and Mamilius at Rome consulles, in the third
year of the monarchy of the Greeks, Alexander the great (son to Philipe of
Macedonia king) gave the last battle to Darius king of Persia, wherein king
Alexander escaped very sore wounded, and Darius slain, so that the whole
Empire of the Perses, came under the governance of the Greeks. For the
unfortunate princes do not only lose their lives with which they came into
the world: but also the realms which they did inherit. After that Darius
was dead, and Alexander saw him self lord of the field, and that the Perses
and Medes were become subject to the Gretians: though many kings and lords
died in those cruel battayles, yet it seemed to Alexander a trifle to be
governor of all Asia, wherefore he determined in person to go conquer the
great India. For proud and stout hearts, obteining that which they desire,
immediately begin to esteem it as little. All his armies repaired, and placing
governors in all the realms of Asia, Alexander departed to conquer the great
India: for he had promised and sworn to his gods, that through all the world
there should be but one Empire, and that that should be his: and more over
that he would never pass through any strange realm or country, but it
should give obedience unto him, or else forthwith he would destroy it. For
tyrannous hearts have never any regard to the damage of another, until they
have obtained their wicked desiers. Alexander then going to conquer realms,
and destroy provinces, by chance one said unto him, that on the other side of
the mountains Riphei (toward the parts of India) was a barbarous nation
which were called Garamantes, as yet never conquered, neither by the Perses,
Medes, Romans, nor Greeks, neither any of the^ ever triumphed over them. For
they had no weapons, nor esteemed them not, sith they had no riches. King
Alexander (who for to subdue realms and strange countries was very diligente
and hardy, and to see new things very desirous) determined not only to send
to see that country: but also to go him self in person, and in that place to
leave of him some memory, which thing forthwith he accomplished. For he left
them Alters, as Hercules left in Gades pillars. For man's heart is so stout,
that it trauayleth not only to compare with many, but also to excel all. The
Ambassadors of Alexander were sent to Garamantes, to advertise them of the
coming of king Alexander the great, and of the terrible and cruel battayles
which he in wars had overcome, and to declare unto them how the puissaunt
king Darius was slain, and that all Asia was under his subjection, and how
every city did yield them selves, against whom he neither lifted spear nor
sword, because all yielded to his commandment. With these and such other
like things they would have feared them, for words oftimes makes men more
afraid, specially when they are spoken of stout men: then do the swords
of cowards. Lucius Bosco says, in his third book of the antiquities of the
Gretians (of whom the original of this history is drawn) that after the
Ambassadors of Alexander had spoken to the Garamantes, they were nothing at
all troubled for the message, neither did they fly from Alexander, nor they
prepared any war, neither took they in hand any weapons, nor yet they did
resist him. Yea and the chiefest of all was, that no man of all the country
ever departed out of his house, finally they neither answered the Ambassadors
(of Alexander) to their message, nor yet spoke one word unto them. And truly
the Garamantes had reason therein, and did in that right wisely: for it is a
folly for a man to persuade those men with words, which enterprise any thing
of will. It is a marvelous matter to hear tell of the histories of those
Garamantes (that is to say) that all their houses were of equal height, all
men were appareled a like, the one had no more authority then another, in
fedyng they were no gluttons, in drynking wine they were temperate, of plees
and debates they were ignorant, they would suffer no idle man to live among
them, they had no weapons, because they had no ennemies, and generally they
spoke few words, but that which they spoke was always true. King Alexander
being somewhat informed of those Garamantes, and their life, determined to
send for them, and called them before his presence, and instantly desired
them, if they had any wise men among them, to bring them unto him, and by
wrytinge or by word of mouth to speak somewhat unto him. For Alexander was
such a friend to sage men, that all the realms which he overcame, immediately
he gave to his men, excepting the sages which he kept for his own person.
Quintus Curtius, by king Alexander says, that a prince does well spend his
treasours to conquer many Realms, only to have the conversation of one wise
man. And truly he had reason, for to princes it is more profit, in their life
to be accompanied with sages: then after their death, to leave great treasures
to their heirs. Certain of those Garamantes then being come before the
presence of Alexander the great, one among them (as they thought the most
auncientest) him self alone (the residue keapynge silence) in the name of them
all spoke these words.

Of an oration which one of the sages of Garamantia made unto king Alexander.
A goodly lesson for all ambitious men. Cap. xxxiii.
IT is a custom king Alexander, amongst us Garamantes, to speak seldom one
to another, and scarsely never to speak with strangers, especially if they be
busy and unquiet men: for the tongue of an evil man is no other, but a plain
demonstration of his envious heart. When they told us of thy coming into this
country, immediately we determined not to go out to receive thee, nor to
prepare our selves to resist thee, neither to lift up our eyes to behold
thee, nor to open our mouths to salute thee, neither to move our hands to
trouble thee, ne yet to make war to offend thee. For greater is the hate
that we bear to riches and honors, which thou love: then the love is that
thou have to destroy men, and subdue countries, which we abhor. It has
pleased thee we should see thee, not desiring to see thee, and we have obeyed
thee, not willing to obey thee, and that we should salute thee, not desirous
to salute thee, wherewith we are content, upon condition that thou be pacient
to hear us. For that which we will say unto thee, shall tend more unto the
amendment of thy life: then to diswade thee from conquering of our country.
For it is reason that princes which shall come hereafter do know, why we
living so little esteem yt which is our own: and why thou dieng taking such
pains to possess that which is an other man's. O Alexander, I ask thee one
thing, and I doubt whether thou can answer me thereunto or no: for those
hearts which are proud, are also most commonly blinded. Tell me whether thou
go? from whence thou come? what thou meanest? what thou think? what
thou desire? what thou sekest? what thou demaundest? what thou searchest? and
what thou procurest? and further to what realms and provinces thy disordinate
appetite extends? without a cause I do not demand thee this question, what
is that thou demaundest, and what it is that thou sekest: for I think thou thy
self know not what thou would. For proud and ambitious hearts know not
what will satisfy them. Since thou art ambitious, honor deceives thee: sith
thou art prodigal, covetousness begileth thee: sith thou art young,
ignorance abuses thee: and sith thou art proud, all the world laugheth
thee to scorn: in such sort, that thou followest men and not reason, thou
followest thine own opinion and not the counsel of another, thou embrasest
flatterers, and repulsest virtuous men. For princes and noble men had rather
be commended with lies, then to be reproved with truth. I can not tell to what
end you princes live so disceiued, and abused, to have and keep in your
palaces mo flatterers, iuglers, and fools: then wise and sage me^. For in a
princes palace if there be any which extolleth their doings, there are ten
thousand which abhor their tyrannies. I perceive by these deeds (Alexander)
that the gods will sooner end thy life, then thou will end thy wars. The man
that is brought up in debates, discentions, and strife, al his felicity
consists in burning, destroying, and bloudsheding. I see thee defended with
weapons, I see thee accompanied with tyrauntes, I see thee rob the temples, I
see thee without profit wast the treasours, I see thee murder the innocent,
and trouble the pacient, I see thee evil willed of all, and beloved of none,
which is the greatest evil of al euilles. Therefore how were it possible for
thee to endure such and so great trauayles, unless thou art a fool, or else
because god has appointed it to chastise thee. The Gods suffer oftetimes that
men being quiet, should have some weighty affairs, and that is not for that
they should be honored at this present, but to the end they should be punished
for that which is past. Tell me I pray thee, peradventure it is no great folly
to empoueryshe many, to make thy self alone rich? it is not (peradventure)
folly that one should command by tyranny, and that all the rest lose the
possession of their signorie? It is not folly perchance to leave (to the
damnation of our souls) many memories in the world of our body? It is not
folly perchance that the Gods approve thy disordinate appetite alone, and
condemn the will and opinion of all the world beside? peradventure it is not
folly to win (with the tears of the poor, and comfortless wydowes) so
great and bloody victories? peradventure it is no folly, willingly to wette
the earth with the blood of innocents, only to have a vain glory in this
world? Thou think it no folly peradventure, god having divided the world
into so many people, that thou should usurp them to thee alone? O
Alexander, Alexander, truly such works proceade not from a creature noryshed
among men on the earth: but rather of one that has been brought up among the
infernal furies of hell. For we are not bound to judge men by the good nature
they have: but by their good and evil works which they do. The man is
cursed (if he have not been cursed he shall be cursed) that lives to the
prejudice of all other in this world present: only to be counted courageous,
stout, and hardy in time to come. For the gods seldom suffered them to enjoy
that quietly in peace, which they have gotten unjustly in the wars. I would
ask the, what insolency moved the to rebel against thy lord king Darius after
whose death thou have sought to conquer all the world, and this thou do
not as a king that is an inheriritour: but as a tyrant that is an oppressor.
For him properly we call a tyrant, that without justice and reason takes that
which is an other man's. Either thou searchest justice, or thou searchest peace,
or else thou searchest riches, and our honor, thou searchest rest, or else thou
searchest favor of thy friends, or thou searchest vengeance of thine
enemies. But I swear unto thee (Alexander) that thou shall not find any of
all these things if thou seakest by this means, as thou have begone: for the
sweet sugar is nor of the nature of the bitter gumbe. How shall we believe thou
searchest justice, since against reason and justice, by tyranny thou rulest all
the earth? how shall we believe thou searchest peace, sith thou causest them
to pay tribute which receives thee: and those which resist thee, thou
handlest them like enemies? how can we believe that thou searchest rest, sith
thou troublest all the world? How can we believe thou searchest gentleness,
sith thou art the scourge and sword of human fraylnes? how can we believe
that thou searchest riches, sith thine own treasure suffiseth thee not,
neither that which by the vanquished comes unto thy hands, nor that which
the conquerours offer thee? how shall we believe thou searchest profit to thy
friends, sith that of thine old friends thou haste made new enemies? I let
thee understand Alexander, that the greatest ought to teach the least, and
the least ought to obey the greatest. And frendshippe is only amongst
equalles. But thou, sith thou suffer none in the world to be equal and
like unto thee, look not thou to have any friend in the world. For princes
oftymes by ingratitude loase faithful friends: and by ambicion win mortal
enemies. How shall we believe thou searchest revenge of thine enemies, sithe
thou take more vengeance of thy self being alive: then thine enemies would
take of thee if they took the prisoner? though perchance in times past they
used thy father Philip evil, and have now disobeied thee his son. It were
better counsel for thee, to make them thy friends by gentleness: then to
confirm them ennemies by cruelty. For the noble and pitiful hearts, when
they are revenged of any, make of them selves a bucherye.

We can not with truth say, that thy trauayles are well employed to win
such honor, sithe thy conversation and life is so inconstant. For truly
honor consists not in that flatterers say, but in that which Lords do.
For the great familiarity of the wicked, causes the life to be suspected.
Honor is not gotten by lyberall geuinge of treasoures at his death, but by
spending it well in his life. For it is a sufficient proof, that the man
which esteameth renown, does little regard money: and it is an apparaunte
token, that man, who little esteameth money, greatly regards his renown.

A man wynneth not honor by murdering innocents, but by destroying tyrauntes:
for all the armonie of the good government of princes is, in the chastising of
the evil, and rewarding the good. Honor is not won in taking and snatching
the goods of an other, but in giving and spendinge his own. For there is
nothing that beautifieth the majesty of a prince more, the^ to show his
noblenes in extending mercy and favor to his subjects: and giving gifts and
rewards to the virtuous. And to conclude, I will let the know who he is, that
wins both honor in this life, and also a perpetual memory after his death:
and that is not he which leads his life in wars, but he that takes his
death in peace. O Alexander, I see thou art young and that thou desire
honor, wherefore I let thee understand that there is no man farther from
honor, then he which procures and desires the same. For ye ambicious me^
not obteining that which they desire, remain always defamed: and in wynning
and getting that which they search, honor notwithstanding will not follow
them. Believe me in one thing Alexander, that the true honor ought through
worthy deades to be deserved, and by no means to be procured: for all the
honor that by tyranny is won, in the end by infamy is lost. I am sorry for
thee Alexander, for I see thou want justice, since thou love tyranny. I
see thou lackest peace, because thou love war. I see thou art not rich,
because thou have made all the world poor. I see thou lackest rest, because
thou sekest contention and debate. I see thou have no honor, because that thou
winnest it by infamy. I see thou want friends, because thou haste made them
thine ennemies. Finally I see thou do not revenge thy self of thy ennemies,
because thou art (as they would be) the scourge to thy self. Then since it is
so, why art thou alive in this world, sith thou lackest virtues for the which
life ought to be desired? For truly that man, which without his own profit,
and to the damage of another leads his life: by justice ought forthwith to
lose his breath. For there is nothing that sooner destroieth the weal publyke,
then to permit unprofitable men therein to live. Therefore speaking the
truth, you lords and princes are but poor. I believe thou conquerest the
world because thou know not thy superior therein, and besides that thou
will take life from so many, to the end that by their death thou may win
renown. If cruel and warrelike princes (as thou art) should inherit the
lives of them whom they slaye, to augmente and prolonge their lives, as they
do inheritie goods to maintain their pride, although it were vnmeate, then
war were tolerable. But what profits the servant to lose his life this
day, and his masters death to be differred but until the morrow? O Alexander,
to be desirous to command much, having respite to live but little: me
thinks it were a great folly and lack of wisdom. Presumptuous and ambicious
men which measure their works not with the few days they have to live, but
with the arrogant and haughty thoughts they have to command. They lead
their life in travail, and take their death with sorrow. And the remedy hereof
is, that if the wise man cannot obtain that which he would, he should content
him self with that which he may. I let thee know Alexander, that the
perfection of men is not to see much, to hear much, to know much, to procure
much, to come to much, to travail much, to possess much, and to be able to
do much: but it is to be in in the favor of the gods. Finally I tell thee
that that man is perfect, who in his own opinion deserves not that he has,
and in the opinion of another deserves much more then that he possesses. We
are of this opinion among us, that he is unworthy to have honor, who by such
infamous means searches for it. And therefore thou Alexander deseruest to be
sclaue to many, because thou think to deserve the signorie over all. By the
immortal gods I swear, I can not imagine the great mischief which entered
into thy breast, so unrighteously to kill king Darius (whose vassale and friend
thou were only) because thou would possess the Empire of the whole world?
For truly servitude in peace is more worth, then signorie in war. And he that
shall speak against that I have spoken, I say he is sick and has lost his
taste.

The sage Garamante continues his oration, showing that perpetuity of life
can not be bought with any worldly treasure. Among other notable matters he
makes mention of the seven laws which they observed. Cap. xxxiiii.
Thou will not deny me Alexander, that thou were more healthful when thou
waste king of Macedonia, then thou art now being lord of all the earth: for
the excessive travail brings men out of all order. Thou will not deny me
(Alexander) that the more thou gettest, the more thou desire: for the heart
which with covetousness is set on fire, cannot with wood and bows of riches,
but with the earth of the grave be satisfied and quenched. Thou will not deny
me (Alexander) but the abundance that thou thy self have, seems unto thee
little, and the little which an other man possesses, seems unto thee much:
for the gods, to the ambicious and covetous hearts gave this for penance, that
neither with enough nor with to much they should content them selves. Thou will not deny me (Alexander) if in deed thy heart be covetous, that first the
pleasures of life shall end before thy covetousness: for where vices have had
power long time in the heart, there death only and none other has authority
to pluck up the roots. Thou will not deny me (Alexander) that though thou
have more then all, yet thou enioyest least of any: for the prince that
possesses much, is always occupied in defending it: but the prince that has
little, has time and leisure in quiet to enjoy it. Thou will not deny me
(Alexander) though thou call thy self lord of all, yet thou have but only
the name thereof, and others thy servants and subjects have all the
profits: for the gredy and covetous hearts do travail and toil to get, and
in wasting that which they have gotten they pyne away. And finally
(Alexander) thou will not deny me, that all that which thou have in the long
conquest gotten, is little: and that which of thy wisdom and quietness thou
have lost, is much. For the Realms which thou have gotten are innumerable,
but the cares, sighs, and thoughts which thou have heaped upon thy heart are
infinite. I let the know one thing, that you princes are poorer then the poor
subjects: for he is not rich that has more then he deserves, but he that
desires to have less then that he possesses. And therefore princes you have
nothing, for though you abound in great treasures: yet you are poor of good
desires. Now Alexander let us come to the point, and cast account, and let
us see to what end thy conquest will come. Either thou art a man, or thou art
a God. And if thou be any of the gods, command or cause that we be immortal:
and if thou can do any such thing, then take us and our goods withal. For
perpetuity of the life, by no riches can be boughte. O Alexander, I let thee
understand, that therefore we seek not to make war with thee: for we see
that both from thee and also from us, death will shortly take away the life.
For he is a very simple man, that thinks always to remain in an other man's
house, as in his own. If thou Alexander could give us as god everlasting
life, each man would travail to defend his own house: but sith we know we
shall die shortly, we care little whether to thee or any other our goods and
riches remain. For if it be folly to dwell in an other man's house as in his
own, it is a greater folly to him that loses his life, in taking thought and
lamenting for his goods. Presuppose that thou art not god but a man, I conjure
the then by the immortal gods, and do require the that thou live as a man,
behave thy self as a man, and covet no more then an other man, neither desire
more nor less then a man? for in the end thou shall die as a man, and shall be
buried as a man, and thrown into the grave, and then there shall be no more
memory of thee. I told thee before that it grieved me to see thee so hardy and
courageous, so apt and so young, and now it greueth me to see thee so
deceived with the world: and that which I perceive of thee is, that then thou
shall know thy folly, when thou shall not be able to find any remedy. For if
the proud young man before he feleth the wound, has all ready the ointment.
You which are Grecians call us Barbarous, because we enhabite the mountains.
But as touching this I say, that we rejoice to be Barbarous in our speech, and
Greeks in our doings: and not as you which have the Grecians tongue, and do
Barbarous works. For he that does well, and speaks rudely, is no barbarous
man: but he which has the tongue good, and the life evil. Sith I have
begone to that end nothing remaynd unspoken, I will advertise thee of our
laws and life, and marvel not to here it, but desire to observe and keep it:
for infinite are they which extolle virtuous works, but few are they which
observe the same. I let thee wete (Alexander) that we have short life, we are
few people, we have little lands, we have little goods, we have no
covetousness, we have few laws, we have few houses, we have few friends,
and above all we have no enemies. For a wise man ought to be friend to one, and
enemy to none. Besides all this we have amongst us great frendshippes, good
peace, great love, much rest, and above all we hold our selves contented. For
it is better to enjoy the quietness of the grave, then to live a discontented
life. Our laws are few, but in our opinions they are good, and are in seven
words only included as here follows. We ordain that our children make no
more laws then we their fathers do leave unto them: for new laws makes
them forget good and old customs. We ordain that our successors shall have
no mo Gods then two, of the which the one god shall be for the life, and the
other for the death: for one God well served is more worth, then many not
rewarded. We ordain that all be appareled with one cloth, and hosed of one
sort, and that the one have no more apparel then the other: for the
diversity of garments edgendreth folly among the people. We ordeine that when
any woman which is married has had three children, that then she be separated
from her husband: for the abundance of children causes men to have covetous
hearts. And if any woman has brought forth any mo children, then they should
be sacrificed unto the gods before her eyes. We ordeine that all men and women
speak the truth in all things, and if any be taken in a lie, committing no
other fault, that immediately he be put to death for the same. For one liar is
able to undo a whole multitude. We ordeine that no woman live above.xl. years,
and that the man live until fifty, and if they die not before that time, that
then they be sacrifised to the gods: for it is a great occasion for men to be
vicious, to think that they shall live many years

That princes ought to consider, for what cause they were made princes, and
what Thales the philosopher was, of the.xii. questions asked him, and of his
answer he made unto them. Cap xxxv.
IT is a commen and an old saying (which many times by Aristotle the noble
prince has been repeted) that in the end all things are done to some
purpose: for there is no work (neither good nor evil) but he that does it,
means it to some end. If thou demaundest the gardener to what end he
waters so often his plants, he will answer thee it is to get some money for
his herbs. If thou demaundest why the river runs so swift, a man will
answer thee that his end is to the sea from whence it came. If thou
demaundest why the trees budde in the spring time, they will answer, to the
end they may bear fruit in harvest. If we see a trauayler pass the
mountains in the snow, the ryuers with peril, the woods in fear, to walk
in extreme heat in summer, to wander in the night time in the cold winter,
and if by chance a man does ask one of them saying: friend whether go thou?
wherefore take thou such pains? and he answers truly sir I know no more
then you to what end, neither can I tell why I take so much pains. I ask
thee now what would a wise man answer to this innocent trauayler? Truly
(hearing no more) he would judge him to be a fool: for he is much
unfortunate, that for all his travail looks for no reward. Therefore to our
matter, a prince which is begotten as an other man, borne as an other man,
lives as an other man, dies as an other man, and besides all this commands
all men, if of such one we should demand why god gave him signory, and that
he should answer he knows not, but that he was borne unto it, in such case
let every man judge, how unworthy such a king is to have such authorie. For it
is impossible for a man to minister justice, unless he know before what
justice means. Let princes and noble men hear this word, and let them
imprinte it in their memory, which is, that when the living god determined to
make kings and lords in this world, he did not ordeyne them to eat more
then others, to drink more then others, to sleep more then others, to speak
more then others, nor to rejoice more then others: but he created them upon
condition, that sith he had made them to command more then others, they
should be more just in their lives then others. It is a thing most unjust,
and in the common wealth very sclaunderous, to see with what authority a
puissaunt man commands those that be virtuous: and with how much shame,
himself is bound to all vices. I know not what lord he is that dare punish
his subject for one only offense committed, seeing him self to deserve for
every deed to be chastised. For it is a monsterous thing that a blind man
should take upon him to lead him that sees. They demanded great Cato the
Censor, what a king ought to do that he should be beloved, feared, and not
despised, he answered. The good prince should be compared to him that sells
tryacle, who if the poison hurt him not, he sells his triacle well. I mean
thereby, that the punyshement is taken in good part of the people, which is
not ministered by the vicious man. For he that makes the triacle shall never be
credited, unless the proof of his triacle be openly known and tried. I mean
that the good life is none other, then a fine triacle to cure the common
wealth. And to whom is he more like which with his tongue blaseth virtues,
and imployeth his deades to all vices: then unto the man, who in the one hand
holds poison to take away life, and in the other tryacle to resist death?
To the end that a lord be wholly obeyed, it is necessary that all that he
commands be observed first in his own person: for no lord can nor may
withdraw him self from virtuous works. This was the answer that Cato the
Censor gave, which in mine opinion was spoken more like a Christian, then any
Roman. When the true god came into the world, he employed thirty years
only in works, and spente but two years and a half in teaching: For man's
heart is persuaded more with the work he seeks, then with the word which
he hea^eth. Those therefore which are lords, let them learn and know of him
which is the true lord, and also let princes learn why they are princes: for
he is not a Pylot which never sailed on the seas. In mine opinion if a prince
will know why he is a prince, I would say to govern well his people, to
command well, and to mainteyne all in Justice, and this should not be with
words to make them afraid, neither by works which should offend them: but
by sweet words which should encourage them, and by the good works that
should edify them. For the noble and gentle heart can not resist him, that
with a loving countenance commands. Those which will rule and make tame
fierce and wild beasts, do threaten and rebuke them a hundred times, before
they beat them once: and if they keape them tied, they show them sondrie
pleasures. So that the wyldenes of the beast is taken away, only by the
gentle and pleasant usage of the man. Therefore sith we have this experience
of brute and savage beasts (that is to wete) that by their well doing, and by
the gentle handling of them, they voluntarely suffer them selves to be
governed: much more experience we reasonable men ought to have, that is to
know, that being right and well governed, we should hu^blye and willingly
obey our sovereign lords. For there is no man so hard hearted, but by gentle
usage will humble him self. O princes and noble men. I will tell you in one
word what the lord ought to do, in the government of his common wealth.
Every prince that has his mouth full of troth, his hands open to give
rewards, and his ears stopped to lies, and his heart open to mercy, such a one
is happy, and the realm which has him may well be called prosperous, and the
people may call them selves fortunate.

For where as truth, liberality, and clemency rules in the heart of a prince,
there wrongs, injuries, and oppressions do not reign. And contrariwyse where
the prince has his heart flesshed in cruelty, his mouth full of tyrannies,
his hands defiled with blood, and enclineth his ears to hear lies, such a
prince is unhappy, and much more the people the which by such one is
governed. For it is impossible that there is peace and justice in the common
wealth, if he which governs it, be a lover of lies, and flatterers. In the
year four hundredth and forty, before the incarnation of Christ, which was in
the year.244. of the foundation of Rome, Darius the fourth being king of
Persia, and Brutus and Lucius at Rome Counsulles, Thales the great Philosopher
floryshed in Greece, who was prince of the seven renowned sages, by the which
occasion, all the realm of Greece had and recovered renown. For Greece
boasted more of the seven sages which they had, then Rome did of all the
valiant captains which she nouryshed.

There was at that time much contention between the Romans and the Greeks,
for so much as the Greeks said they were better, because they had mo sages,
and the Romans said the contrary that they were better, because they had
always mo armies. The Greeks replied again that there were no laws made but
in Greece. And the Romans to this answered, that though they were made in
Greece, yet they were observed at Rome. The Greeks said, that they had great
universities to make wise men in. And the Romans said they had many great
temples to worship their Gods in: for that in the end they ought to esteem
more one service done to the immortal gods: then all the other commodities
that might come unto men. A Thebane knight was demanded, what he thought of
Rome and Greece? and he answered, me thynkes the Romans are no better then
the Greeks, nor the Greeks than the Romans. For the Greeks glory in their
tongues, and the Romans in their lances. But we refer it to virtuous
works. For one good work is more worth, then either the long staves of the
Romans, or the eloquent tongues of the Greeks. Therefore touching my matter,
this philosopher Thales was the first that found the pole (called the north
star) to sail by, and the first that found the division of the years, the
quantity of the Son and the Moon, and the first that said souls were
immortal, and that the world had a soul. And above all he would never mary,
for the care to content the wife, and the thought to bring up the children,
does much dull the wits of wise men. This philosopher Thales was very poor,
wherefore (some disdayninge him for his poverty) to declare and show that he
was more rich then all they, he bought the next year all the Olyues he could
get: for by Astronomy he knew that in the third year there would be a
great want and scarsitie thereof throughout all the country. Wherefore all
were compelled to come to him for Olives, which at his own price he sold:
and in this sort he showed them that mocked him, that he wyllingly despised
riches, and lovingly embraced poverty. For he that willingly in this world is
poor ought not to be called poor. This philosopher Thales was a mirror
amongst the sages of Greece, and was greatly reverenced of all the kings of
Asia, and highlye renowned in Rome. And further he was so wise and had so ready
a wit, that to all sudden questions he was demanded, he gave present answer
furthwith: which thing declared him to be of a marvelous wit, and truly it
was a great matter. For the most part of mortal men can not tell how to
answer, nor what to demand. Many and diverse questions we asked him, as
Diogenes Laertius affirms, in the answering whereof he showed great wisdom,
the treasure of memory, and subtlety of understanding.

First he was asked what god was, Thales answered: of all the most antiquities
God is the most ancient thing. For all the auncientes past neither saw him
take beginning, nor those which shall come shall se him have ending

Secondarily he was asked what thing was most beautiful, he answered the
world: because no artificial painting could make the like.

Thirdly he was asked what was the greatest thing, to that he answered, place,
wherein all things do stand. For the place which contains all, of
necessity must be greater then all.

Fourthly it was asked him who knows most, he answers: that no man was
wyser then time, because time always only invented new things, and is he
which renueth the old.

Fifthly they asked him, what was the lightest thing, he answered: the wit
of man, because that without travail and dangers it passes the sea, to
discover and compass all the whole earth.

Sixthly they asked him, what was the strongest thing, he said: the man that is
in necessity, for necessity reuiueth the understanding of the rude, and
causes the cowarde to be hardy in peril.

Seventhly they asked him, what was the hardest thing to know, he answered:
for man to know him self, for there should be no contentions in the world if
man knew him self.

Eighthly they asked him, what thing was swetest to obtain, he answered:
desire, for the man reioyseth to remember the pains past, and to obtain to
that which he desires present.

Ninthly they asked him, when the envious man is quiet, he answered: when he
sees his enemy dead or utterly undone. For truly the prosperity of the enemy
is a sharp knife to the envious heart.

Tenthly he was asked, what man should do to live uprightly, he answered: to
take ye counsel to him self, which he gives to an other. For ye undoing of al
men is, that they have plenty of council for others, and want for them selves.

The eleventh question was, they asked him what profit he has that is not
covetous, whereunto he answered: that such a one is delivered from the torments
of his avarice, and besides that he recouereth friends for his person: for
riches tormenteth the auaricions because he spends them not.

The.xii. they asked him what the prince should do to govern others, he
answered: he ought first to govern him self, and then afterward to govern
others. For it is impossible the rod should be right, where the shadow is
crooked. By the occasion of this last answer I did bring in here all these
questions, to the end princes and rulers might see, how that every one of the^
is as the rod of justice, and that the common wealth is none other but a
shadow of them, which in all, and for all ought to be right. For immediately it
is perceived in the shadow of the common wealth, if the justice or life of him
which governs be out of his order. Therefore concluding all that I have
spoken before, if a prince would ask me why he is a prince, I would tell him in
one word only, that he which is the high prince has made you a prince in this
world, to the end you should be a distroyer of heretykes, a father of orphans,
a friend of sages, a hater of malicyous, a scourge of tirauntes, a rewarder of
good, a defender and protector of Churches, a plague of the wicked, a only
lover and friend of the common wealth, and above al you ought to be an upright
mynister of justice: beginning first with your parson and palace, for in all
things amendment is suffered, except in justice, which ought to be equal
between the prince and the common wealth.

What Plutarch the Philosopher was. Of the wise words he spoke to Traian the
Emperor, And how the good Prince is the head of the public weal. Cap.
xxxvi.
IN the time of Traian the Emperor, there flourished in his court a Philosopher
named Plutarch, a man very pure, and of good life, wise in science, and well
esteemed in Rome. For Traian the Emperor desired greatly to have wise men in
his company, and to make notable and sumptuous buildings in every place where he
came, It is he which wrote the lives of many noble Greeks and Romans, and
above all he made a book entytuled the doctrine of Princes, which he offered
to the Emperor Traian, in the which he shows his virtues, the zeal which he
had to the common wealth, ye highness of his eloquence: and the profoundnesse of
his knowledge. For he was elegant in writing, and pleasant in speaking, and
among all other things which he wrote in his book, were these words
following, worthy to be noted, and written in golden letters: and they are such.
I let the to wete Lord Traian, that thou and the Empire are but one mystical
body, in manner and form of a lively body, for they ought to be so agreeable,
that the Emperor should rejoice to have such subjects, and the Empire ought
to be glade to have such a Lord. And to the end we may describe the mistical
body, which is the Empire in the form and shape of an natural man, you shall
understand that the head which is above al, is the prince which commands al:
the eyes whereby we se, are the good men in the commonwealth whom we follow: the
ears that hear what we say, are the subjects which do what we command them:
the tongue wherewith we speak, are the sages of whom we here the laws and
doctrines: the heeres which grows on our heads, are those which are vexed and
grieved, and that demand justice of the king: the hands and the arms, are the
knights which resist the enemies: ye feet which susteineth the members, are
the tillers of the ground which gives meat to al estates: the hard bones that
susteineth the feeble and soft flesh, are the sage me^ which endure the travail
of the common wealth: the hearts which we see not outwardly, are the priuye
councillors: Finally the neck that knitteth the body with the head, is the
love of the king and of the Realm, which make a common wealth. All the
words above named spoke Plutarche the great, to Traian the Emperor. And
truly the inuencion and grace of him, proceaded of a high and deape
understanding: for the head has three properties, which are very necessary
for the gouernoure of the common wealth. The first is, that even as the head is
of al other members of the body ye highest: so the authority of the prince,
exceadeth ye estates of al others. For the prince only has authority to
command, and al others are bound to obey. Admyt therbe many stout, rich, and
noble men in the common wealth: yet al ought to know and acknowledge service to
the Lord of the same. For the noble and worthy princes, do daily ease many of
diverse services, but they will never except any from their loyalty, and
allegeaunce. Those which are valiant, and mighty in a Realm, should content
themselves with that, wherewith the battilments do upon a castle, (that is to
wete) that they are higher then the rampers wherein men walk on the walls, and
lower then the pinakelles which are in the top. For the wise man of high
estate, ought not to regard the prince which is the high pinnacle, but ought to
look on the alleys which are the poor comfortles. I would speak a word and
it greueth me (that is) whereas great lords desire in the common wealth to
command, is like unto him that holds his arms and hands over his head. For all that I have herd, and for all that I have read, and also for all that has
chanced in my time, I counsel, admonish, and warn all those which shall come
after this time, that if they will enjoy their goods, if they will live in
safeguard, and if they will be delivered from tirannye, and live quiet in the
common wealth, that they do not agree to have in one realm, above one king, and
one lord. For it a general rule, where there are many rulers in a common
wealth, in the end both it and al must perish. We se by experience, that
nature fourmed us with many synewes, many bones, with much flesh, with many
fingers, and with many teeth, and to all this one only body had but one head,
wherefore though with many estates the common wealth is ordained: yet with one
prince alone it ought to be ruled, If it consisted in men's hands to make a
prince, they would then also have the authority to put him down: but being
true, as it is most true in deed, that the prince is constituted by God, none
but god alone ought to deprive and depose him of his estate, but things that
are measured by the divine judgment, man has no power with rasor to cut them.
I know not what ambicion the mean can have, neither what envy the lowest can
have, nor what pride the highest can have, to command, and not to obey, since
we are sure, that in this mystical body of the common wealth he which is most
worth, shall be no more esteemed: then the fingers or paringe of the nails, or
the falling of an here from the head, Let every man therefore live in peace
in his common wealth, and acknowledge obedience unto his prince: and he that
will not do so, away with him: for even as the only offense proceeds of him,
so let the only pain rest upon him. For it is an old saying, that he that
takes up the sword against his master, will shortly after lay his head at
his feet. The second condition is, to compare the king to the head, because
the head is the beginning of man's life. The most part of things that ever god
created, according to their natures work their operacions, as in growing
high, and toward the heavens. We se the vapors ascend high, the plants
grows high, the trees budde out on height, the sourges of the sea mount
high, and the nature of fire is always to ascend and mount on high, only the
miserable man grows downward and is brought low by reasone of the feeble and
frail flesh, which is but earth and comes of earth, and lives on earth: and
in the end returns to earth again from whence he came. Aristotle says well,
that man is but a tree planted with the roots upward, whose root is the head,
and the stock is the body, the branches are the arms, the barcke is the
flesh, the knottes are the bones, the sap is ye heart, the rottennes is
malice, the gum is love, the flowers are words, and the fruits are the good
works. To make the man to go vprightlye, his head should be where his feet
are, and the feet where the head is, sith the head is the root, and the feet
are the bows: but in this case I swear, that we are, correspondaunte to our
beginning, for if our flesh be planted contrariwise, so much more contrary we
have our life ordered. Therefore concerning our matter I say, that the Realm
has no less his beginning of the king, then the king of the realm: which
thing is plainlye seen, for that the king gives laws and institucions to a
Realm, and not the Realm to the king. The gifts and benefits which the king
gives, comes to the Realm, and not from the realm to the king. To invent
wars, to take trewse, to make peace, to reward the good, and to punish the
evil, proceadeth from the king to the Realm, and not to the contrary. For it
apperteineth only to the majesty of a prince, to command and ordeine: and to
the common wealth to autorise and obey him. As in a great sumptuous bylding it
is more dangerous, where one stone of the foundation does fall, then when.x.
thousand tyles faule from the top: so he ought more to be blamed for only
disobedience committed and done to the king, and his justice, then for five
thousand offenses against the common wealth. For we have seen of a little
disobedience, a great slander arise in a common wealth. O it is a goodly
matter for a prince to be beloved of his subjects, and a goodly thing also for
the realm to be fearful of their king. For the king that is not loved of his
subjects, cannot live in peace nor quiet: and the realm that is not fearful
of their king, can not be well governed. The realm Sicilia had always mighty
Princes and governors: for in ancient time it was governed by virtuous
princes, or else by cruel and malicious tirauntes. In the time of Senerus the
Emperor, there reigned in Cecil, a king called Lelius Pius, who had so many
good things in him, that throughout all the empire he was very well esteemed, and
chiefly for four laws amongeste others he ordained in that Realm, which
were these following.

We ordain, that if amongeste equal persons there be any injuries offered,
that they be punished, or else that they be dissembled: for where envy is roted
between two, it profits more to reconsile their good wills, then to punish
their persons. We ordain that if the greatest be offended by the least, that
such offense be little reproved, and well punished: for the audacite and little
shame, and also the disobedience of the servant to ye master, ought not to be
reformed, but by grievous punishment. We ordain, that if any resist or speak
against the commandment of a prince, that presently (without delay) he suffer
death before them al: for they may boldly by the way of supplycacion,
reverently declare their grieffes, and not by slander rebellyously dysobeye
their lords. We ordain, that if any raise the common wealth against the
Prince, he that can first strycke of his head, may lawefullye with out
fearing any danger of punyshemente: for his head is iustelye taken from
him, that would there should be many heads in the common wealth. Of all
this before spoken, Herianus is the authoure, in his fourth book of the
kings of Sicille where he puts many and singular laws and customs which
the auncientes had to the great confusion of these that be present. For truly
the auncientes did not only exceade these that be present in their works and
doings: but also in speaking profound words. Therefore returning to our matter,
man's life greatly trauaileth always to defend the head, in such sort that a
man would rather suffer his hand to be cut of, then to suffer a wound to be
made in his head. By this comparison I mean that a fault in a common wealth,
is a cut, which cankereth and festereth, but the disobedyence to a prince is a
wound which forthwith kills. If a man did ask me what union princes should
have with their common wealth, I would answer them in this sort, that the
wealth of the king and realm consists herein. That the king should accompany
with the good, and bannishe the evil. For it is impossible that ye king should be
beloved of the common wealth, if the company he has about him be reputed
vicious. He should also love his Realm without dissymulacion, and the realm
should serve him unfeignedly: for the common wealth, which knows it to be
beloved of their Prince, shall not find any thing to hard for his service.
Further that the king use his subjects as his children, and that the
subjects serve him as a father: for generallye the good father can not suffer
his children to be in danger, neither the good children will dissobeye their
father. Also the king ought to be just in his commandments, and the
subjects faithful. For if it be a good thing in their services, to live under
a just law, it is much better to live under a just king. Also the king ought to
defend his subjects from enemies, and they ought well to pay him his tribute:
for ye Prince who defended his people from enemies and tirannye worthily
deserves to be lord of al their goods. Also the king ought to keep his common
wealth in quiet, and ought not to be presumptous of his person: so the prince
which is not feared and well esteemed, shall never be obeyed in his commandment.
Finally I say, that the good king ought to do his Realm pleasure, and the
faithful subjects ought to endeavor them selves never to displease their
king. For that prince cannot be called unfortunate, who of his common wealth,
is loved and obeyed.

As there are two senses in the head, smelling and hering: So likewise the
prince which is the head of the common weal ought to here the complaints
of al his subjects, and should know them al, to recompense their services.
Cap. xxxvii.
WE have showed, how the prince is the common wealth, and now we will let you
understand another notable thing, which is this: that as all senses are in the
head, so ought all estates to be in princes. For the verues which are in many
spread and skattered: should be in one prince found and gathered. The office of
the feet is not to se, but to go: the hands office is not to hear, but to
labor: the shoulders not to feel, but to bear: all these offices are not
semely for the members, which are his subjects, but apperteineth to the king
alone to exercise them. For the head to have eyes, and no other members,
means naught else, but that only to the prince, and to none other,
apparteyneth to know all: for Julius Caesar knew all those of his host, and
named them by their proper names. I counsel, and admonish you, O you princes,
which shall hear, see, or read this thing, that you do rejoice to visit, and
to be visited, to see, and to be seen: to talk, and to be talked with: for the
things which with your eyes you se not you cannot perfectly love. A man ought
also to know, that the head only has ears, to note, that to the king, and to
none other, apperteyneth to here all, and to keep the gates open for them that
have any sewtes: for it is no small matter to a common wealth, to have and
obtain of the prince easy audyence. Helius Spartiahus commends highly
Traian the Emperor, that when he was on horseback to go to the wars,
alyghted again to here the complainte of a poor Roman, which thing was
meruelously noted amongst all the Romans: for if men were not vain, they
should give a Prince more honor for one work of justice, then for the
victory of many battayles. Truly to a king it is no pleasure, but rather pain
and grief, and also for the common people auoyaunce, that the prince always
should be enclosed and shut up. For the prince which shuts his gates
against his subjects, causes them not to open there hearts wyllynglye to
obey him. How many and great slanders does their arise in the common wealth,
only for that the prince sometime will not speak. Julius Caesar was Emperor,
and the head of all the empire, and because he was musing of weighty matters,
and would not harken to him which would have reveled the treason conspired
against him, was that same day with.33. wondes in the Senate murdered. The
contrary is red of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, who was so famyliar with all
men, that howbeit he was chief of al, and that the affairs which now are
divided to many, depended then only of him: yet he never had porter of his
gate, nor chamberlayne of his chamber, and for any affairs that ever he had to
do with many men (were they never so great) he was never longer then one day
about them. For truly (if I may say it) that prince is not worthy to be
beloved, that is scarce of his words unto those, which faithfully serve him
with works: for wise princes should be quick in hearing, and grave in
determining. For many come to speak with princes, which think that their
counselles shall not be accepted, nor their requests granted, yet they desire
importunately to be hard, and of troth the prince ought to here them, for the
heavy heart with sorrows burdened, when it is heard, is greatly lightened, I would
know why the sense of smelling is only in the head, and not in the feet, nor
in the hands, neither in any other part of the body? truly it signifies
naught else, but that it apperteineth to the Prince (which is head of al) to
here and know al, and therefore it is necessary he be informed of all their
lives. For the prince cannot govern his common wealth well, unless he knows
the perticularities thereof. It is necessary that the prince know the good, to
the end he may prefarre them: for that common wealth is greatly slaundered,
wherein the evil are not punished, nor the good honored. It is necessary the
prince know the sage, to counsel with them: for the auncyente Romans never
admitted any for councillors but those which with philosophy were adorned. It is
necessary he know the evil for to correct them: for there is a great disorder in
that common wealth, where without any shame the wickedness of the wicked, is
cloked and unpunished. It is necessary the prince do know those that are able
to teach: for in the court of the Romayne princes, there were always
captains, which taught and showed how to handel their weapons, and wise men
which taught and instructed them scienses. It is necessary the prince know the
poor of his realm, for to aid and succor them: for the princes should so
govern their common wealth, that among the rich nothing should abound, nor
among the poor any thing should want. It is necessary ye prince know the
presumptuous, and malicious, for to humble them: for the poor by envy, and
the rich by pride, heretofore have destroyed great common wealths. It is
necessary the prince know the peace kepers, for to keep and maintain them in
peace: for it is the deutye of a prince, to pluck down the stout stomachs of
the proud, and to give wings of favor to the humble. It is necessary that
the prince know them which have done him service, to the end they may be
rewarded according to their merits: for the stout and noble heart for litel
favor showed unto him, binds himself to accomplish great things. It is
necessary the prince know the noble men of his realm, to the end that at
time of neade, he might retain and take them into his service: for it is but
mete, that the man which is adorned with virtue, and nobility, be preferred
above all other in the common wealth. Finally I say, ye prince should know the
murmerers, never to creadite them: and likewise to know those that tell the
truth, always to love them. For none should be more familyar, then the wise
man to give him counsel, and the upright man to tell the truth. And
contrariwise none ought to be more abhorred of the prince, then the flatterer,
and ignorant man. O how necessary it is for a prince, to know and understand
all things in his Realm, to thend no man might deceive him, as they do now a
days. For the most part of princes are deceived, for none other cause, but
for that they will not be councelled, and informed by wise and discrete men.
For many croutche unto princes with fair words (as though they meant him good
service) but their intent is contrary, by dysceite to get an office, and seek
their own profit. Helius Spartianus says, that Alexander Seuerus (the xxv.
Emperor of Rome) was a man very stout, and virtuous, and amongst all other
things they greatly commended him, because in his chamber he had a famyliar
book, wherein he had written all the nobles of his Realm, and Empire, and when
any office was void, they said nothing else to him but that it was void: for
the Emperor did not grant it to him that sought it, but (by the secret
informacion of his book) to him that deserved it. I will swear, and all other
princes shall affirm the same, that though they err in dystributynge their
offices, they do not err for that they would err. Yet they cannot deny but
that they err grievously, for that they will not be informed, and though they be
informed, yet it were better they were not informed at al: for he shall never
give the Prince good nor parfect counsel, which (by that counsel) intends to
have some proper interest, The chiefest thing of Princes is to know how to
chose the best in prosperytye, and how to avoid the worste in aduersytye, and
to know also how to reward the good men lyberallye. And truly in this case
Princes should have more consideracyon to them, which have done them worthy
service, then to the importunytyes of his famyliar friends: for he shall thank
the servant that procures it, but not the Prince that gives it. All that we
speak is to no other purpose, but to persuade, that sith the prince is Lord of
al, it is reason that he be informed of the state and condition of al. For
otherwise he shall be disceyued by a thousand malicious hearts, which are in ye
common wealth. Therefore to conclude I say if the prince be not informed of the
life of al, the skin will seame flesh, the brain meat, the straw corn, the
brass gold, the gaull honey, and the dregs good wine, I mean in deuyding his
offices, thinking to hit the white, he shall ofttymes mysse the butte.

Of the great feast the Romans celebrated to the god Ianus the first day of
Ianuarye, and of the bountye and liberalitye of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius
the same day. Cap. xxxviii.
Among the Solemn Feasts which the ancient Romans used, this was one to
the God Ianus, the which they celebrated the first day of the year, which now
is the first of Ianuarye: for the Hebrews began their year in March, and
the Romans began at Ianuarye. The Romans painted this GOD with two faces,
sygnyfyenge thereby the end of the year past, and the beginning of the year
present. To this god Ianus was dedicated in the city of Rome a sumptous Temple
which they called the Temple of peace, and was in great reverence throughout
all the city: for the citezens on this day offered great gifts and
sacrifices because he should defend them from their enemies. For there is no
nation nor people to whom war ever succeeded so prosperouslye, but that they
had rather live in peace then in war. When the Roman Emperors went to the
wars or came from the wars, first they vysited the Temple of Jupiter,
secondarilye the Temple of the vestall virgins, and thirdely they vysited the
Temple of the God Ianus: because there was a law in Rome that the Emperor
should at his going forth to the wars vysite the Temple of Jupiter last of
al, and at his return again, the Temple of Ianus first. And let them that be
desierous of antiquities here know, that when the Emperor should go to the
wars, in the Temple of the goddess Vesta they put upon his shoulders the
royal mantell, and in the Temple of Jupiter all the senators kissed his foot,
and in the Temple of Ianus the Consuls kissed his arm. For since the time that
the cruel Sylla, caused three thousand neighbors to dye which kissed his right
hand, they never after kissed the hands of any Emperor in Rome. Therefore since
the gentyles would not issue out of Rome before that first they had taken the
benediction of those vain Gods: how much more ought Christian Princes to do
it, which know well that their Temples are consecrated to the true God, and
ordained for his service only. For the man that forgets God, and commytteth
his affairs to men, shall see how his business will thrive in the hands of men.
Therefore procedinge forth, the day wherein the feast of the god Ianus was
celebrated, every man left his work and reioysed through all the streates of
Rome, no more then less then in the feasts of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Berecinthia: For the feasts of the other gods (since they were many in
number) were not celebrated, but in certain places in Rome. The Romans on
that day put on their best apparel, for they had a custom in Rome, that he
which had not that day change of apparel to honor the feast, should
either go out of Rome or else keep themselves locked in his house. That day,
they set on their houses many lyghtes, and made great bondfiers before their
doors, and had sundry and many plays, and pastimes, for the feasts of vain
men are more to delight their bodies, then to reform their minds. They watched
all the night in the Temples, and also they delivered all the prisoners which
were inprisoned for debt, and with the common treasures paid their dettes.
Furthermore they had a custom in Rome, that they should sustain all the
Senators (which were fallen into poverty) with the goods of the common
wealth. They had that day tables set before their doors, furnished with all
sorts of meats, so that that which remained and was left, was more worth:
then that which was eaten. For vain glorious men, auaunt them selves more of
that, which in bankettes and feasts is left, then they do of that which is
eaten. They sought all that day for poor men, because they should be provided
of all things. For it was an ancient law, that none should be so hardy to
make any open feast, except first he had provided for all them of his streate.
The Romans thought that if they spend lyberallye that day, the god Ianus
would deliver them from pouertye, because he was the God of the temperall
goods. And they said further, that the GOD Ianus was a God very thankeful,
and acknowledged the seruyces which were done unto him, and believed earnestlye
that if they spente frelye for his sake, he would requyte it doble In the
feast of this God Ianus many processions were made, not all togethers, but
the Senate went by them selves, the Censours by them selves, the people by
them selves, the Matrones by them selves, the maidens by them selves, the
vestal virgins by them selves, and all the strange Imbassadours went with the
captives in procession. There was a custom in Rome, that the same day the
Emperor should were the imperyal robe, all the captives which could touch him
with their hands were delivered, and all the transgressors pardoned, the
exules and outlawryes were called again. For the Romayne princes were never
present in any feast, but they showed some noble example of mercy, or
gentleness toward the people. At this time Marcus Aurelius was Emperor of
Rome, and married with the beautiful lady Faustina, who (in the feast of Ianus)
leuing in procession the company of the Senators came into the procession of
the captives, the which easelye touched his robe, whereby they obtained liberty
the which they so greatly desired: I say desired for truly the captive is
contented with a small thing. And because there is no good thing by any good
man done, but immediatlye by the wicked it is repined at, this deed was so
contrary to the evil, as joyful to the good. For there is nothing, be it never
so good, nor so well done, but forthwith it shall be contraried of them that be
evil.

Of this thing I have seen by experience (in this miserable life: sundry
examples) yt even as among the good one only is noted to be chief: so
likewise among the evil one is noted principal above the rest. And the worst
I find herein is, that the virtuous do not so much glory of their virtue: as
the evil and malicious has shame and dishonor of their vice: for virtue
naturally makleth a man to be temperate and quiet, but vice makes him to be
dissolute and rechlesse. This is spoken, because in the Senate of Rome there
was a Senator called Fuluius, whose berd and heeres were very white, but in
malice, he was most cankered black: so that for his years he was honored in
Rome of many, and for his malice he was hated of al. The Senator Fuluius made
friends in the time of Adrian to succeed in the empire, and for this cause he
had always Marcus Aurelius for his competytour, and whersoeuer he came he
always spoke evil of him as of his mortal enemy. For the enuyous heart can
never give a man one good word. This Senators heart was so puffed with envy:
that he seeing Marcus Aurelius to obtain the empire being so young, and that he
being so old could not attain thereunto: there was no good that ever Marcus
Aurelius did in the common wealth openly, but it was grudged at by Fuluius, who
sought always to deface the same secretlye. It is the nature of those which
have their hearts enfected with malice, to spitte out their poison with words
of spite. Often times I have mused which of these 2. are greater, the duty the
good have to speak against the evil, or else the audacitie the evil have to
speak against the good. For in the world there is no brute beast so hardye, as
the evil man is that has lost his fame. O would to God the good to his desire
had as much power to do good works, as the evil has strength to his affection,
to exercise wicked deeds. For the virtuous man finds not one hand to help
him in virtue to work, yet after he has wrought it, he shall have a thousand
evil tongues against his honest doings to speak. I would all those which read
this my writing, would call to memory this word (which is) that among evil
men the chefest evil is, that after they have forgotten them selves to be men,
and exiled both troth and reason, then with all their might they go against
troth and virtue, with their words, and against good deeds with their
tongues: for though it be evil to be an evil man, yet it is much worse not to
suffer an other to be good, which above al things is to be abhorred and not to
be suffered. I let you wete and assure you, you princes and noble men, that you
in working virtuous deeds shall not want slanderous tongues, and though you be
stout, yet you must be pacyente to break their malice. For the noble heart
fealeth more the envy of an other, then he doothe the labor of his own body.
Princes should not be dismayde, neither ought they to marvel, though they be
told of the murmuring at their good works: For in the end they are men, they
live with men, and cannot escape the miseryes of men. For there was never prince
in the world yet so high, but he has been subject to malycious tongues. Truly
aman ought to take great pytie of Princes, whether they be good or evil: for
if they be evil, the good hate them: and if they be good, the evil immediately
murmureth against them. The Emperor Octauian was very virtuous, yet greatly
persecuted with enuyous tongues, who on a time was demanded (since he did
good to al men) why he suffered a few to murmour against him? he answered: you
se my friends, he that has made Rome free from enemies, has also set at
liberty the tongues of malycious men. For it is not reason that the hard
stones should be at liberty, and the tender stones tied. Truly this Empepour
Octauian by his words declared himself to be a wise man, and of a noble
heart, and lightly to way both the murmuringes of the people, and also the
vanities of their words, which thing truly a wise and virtuous man ought to do.
For it is a general rule, that vices continually seek defendours, and virtues
always gets Enemies. In the book of laws the divine Plato says well, that
the evil were always double evil* because they wear weapons defensive, to
defend their malicious purpose: and also carry weapons offensive, to bleamyshe
the good works of others. Virtuous men ought with much study to follow the
good, and with more dilygence to fly from the evil. For a good man may
command al other virtuous men, with a beck of his finger, but to keep
himself only from one evil man, he had need both hands, feet, and friends.
Themistocles the Thebaine said, that he felt no greater torment in the world
then this, that his proper honor should depend upon the Imaginacion of an
other: for it is a cruel thing, that the life and honor of one that is good,
should be measured by the tongue of an other that is evil. For as in the forge,
the coals can not be kindled without sparks, nor as corruption can not be in
the synckes without ordure: so he that has his heart fre from malice, his
tongue is occupied always in sweet and pleasant communication. And contrary
wise, out of his mouth, whose stomach is infected with malice, proceadeth
always words bitter, and full of poison. For if out of a rotten fornayse ye
fire burns it is impossible that the smoke should be clear. It is but a small
time, that (in profane love) he that is enamored, is able to refrain his
love, and much less time is the wrathful man able to hyde his wrath. For the
heavy sighs are tokens of the sorrowful heart, and the words are those that
disclose the malycious man. Pulio says in the first book of Cesars, that the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius was very virtuous in all his works, sage in
knowledge, just in Judgment, merciful in punishment, but above all things
he was wise in dissemblyng, and herein he was very discrete: for there was never
pacyent man but prospered well in all his affairs. We se that through patience
and wisdom, many evil things become reasonable, and from reasonable are
brought to good, and from good to excellent. The contrary happens to them ye
are moved more then they need, for the man which is not pacie^t, looks not yet
for any good success in his affairs, though they are just. The Emperor
Marcus ofttimes was wont to say, that Julius Caesar wanne the empire by the
sweard, Augustus was Emperor by Inheritance, Caligula came to it, because his
father conquered Germany, Nero governed it with tyranny, Titus was Emperor,
for that he subdued Iuery, the good Traian came to the empire by his clemency
and virtue, but I (says he) obtained the empire through patience only. For it
is a greater patience, to suffer the Injuries of the malicious: then to dispute
with the sage in the university. And this Emperor said further in the
government of the empire, I have profited more through patience, then by
science: for science only profits for the quyetnes of the parson, but
pacyence profits the parson, and the common wealth. Julius Capitolinus
says, that the Emperor Antonius Pius was a prince very pacyent, and in such
sort, that oftentimes being in the Senate, he saw both those which loved him,
and also those that were against him with the people when they did rebel: yet
his patience was so great, that neither his friends for the unthankfulness of
them selves, remained sad: neither his enemies for any displeasure by him done
did at any time complain. Meaning therefore in this chapter to join ye end with
the beginning* I say that as the Emperor Marcus Aurelius put himself amongst
yt captyues, and that this deed in Rome of al men was commended: the Senator
Fuluius could not refrain from speaking, for that he had not the wit to endure
it, wherefore as it were scoffing he spoke these words to the Emperor. Lord I
marvel why thou yeldest thy self to al, which thing for the reputacion of
the Empire cannot be suffered, for that it is not decent for thy majesty. The
Emperor Marcus Aurelius seeing and hearing that in the present of them all, the
senator Fuluius spoke unto him these words, he took it patiently and with
pleasant countenance said. The questions the Senator Euluius proponeth, let
it be for to morrow, because my answer may be the ryper, and his collar the
quieter. Therefore the next day following, the Emperor Marcus came into the
high capitol (as Pulio declares in the life of Marcus Aurelius) and spoke
these words.

Of the answer the Emperor Marcus Aurelius made to the Senator Fuluius
before all the Senate, being reproved of him for his familiarity he used to al,
contrary to the majesty and authority of the Romayne Emperor, wherein he
paynteth envious men. Cap. xxxix.
FAthers conscript, and sacred Senate, I would not yester day answer to that
that the Senator Fuluius spoke unto me, because it was somewhat late, and for
that we were long in sacrifices, I thought that neither time nor place was
convenient to answer thereunto. For it is a sign of a little wisdom, and of
great folly, for a man to answer suddenly to every question. The liberty
that indiscreet men have to demand, the self same privilege has the sage
for to answer: For though the demand proceed of ignorance, yet the answer
ought to proceed of wisdom. Truly wise men were well at ease, if to every
demand they should answer the simple and malicious: who (for the most part)
demand more to vex other men, then for to profit themselves, more for to
prove, than to know, wherefore wise men ought to dissemble at such demaundes.
For the sages ought to have their ears open to hear, and their tongue tied
because they should not speak. I let you know (ancient fathers, and sacred
senate) that the little which I know, I learned in the isle of Rhodes, in
Naples, in Capua, and in Tharente. And al tutors told me, that the Intencion
and end of men to study, was only to know to govern them selves amongst the
malicious. For science profits nothing else, but to know how to keep his life
well ordered, and his tongue well measured. Therefore I protest to god that which
I will say before your sacred presence, I will not speak it of any malice or
ill will: but only to answer unto that which touches the authority of my
person. For the things which touch the honor, ought first by word to be
answered, and afterward by sword to be revenged. Therefore now beginning my
matter, and addressing my words to the Fuluius, and to that which thou spakest
unto me, asking why I show my self so to all men, I answer the. It is
because al men should give themselves to me. Thou know well Fuluius, that I
have been a Consul as thou art, and thou have not been an Emperor as I am.
Therefore believe me in this case, that the prince being despised, cannot be
beloved of his people. The gods will not, nor the laws do permyte, neither the
common wealth wyllyngly should suffer, that al princes should be lords of
many, and that they should not communicate but with a few. For princes which
have been gentile in their lives, the ancients have made them gods after their
deaths. The fisher, to fish for many fishes in the river, goes not with one
bote alone, nor the Mariner to fish in the deep sea, goes with one net only. I
mean, that the profounde wills, which are deeply enclosed in the hearts,
ought to be won some by gifts, other by promises, other by pleasant words,
and others by gentle enterteynement, For princes should travail more to win
the hearts of their subjects, then to conquer the Realms of strangers. The
gredy and covetous hearts care not, though the prince shuts up his heart, so
that he open his cofers: but noble and valiant men little esteem that which
they lock up in their cofers, so that their hearts be open to their friends.
For love can never but with love again be requited. Since Princes are lords of
many, of necessity they ought to be served with many: and being served with
many, they are bound to satisfy many: and this is as generally, as
perticulerly, they cannot dispense with their servant. For the prince is no
less bound to pay the service of his servant, then the master is to pay the
wages of the hired laborer. Therefore if this thing be true (as it is) how shall
poor princes do, which keep many Realms, and in keeping them they have great
expenses, and for to pay such charges they have little money. For in this case,
let every man do what he will, and let them take what counsel they like best,
I would counsel all others, as I my self have experimented, that is: that
the prince should be of so good a conversation, among those which are his, and
so affable and familiar with all, that for his good conversation only they
should think them selves well paid. For with rewards, princes recompense the
travail of their servants: but with gentle words, they rob the hearts of
their subjects. We se by experience, that diverse merchants had rather by
dearer in one shop, because the merchant is pleasant: then to ^ye better
chepe in an other, whereas the merchant is churlishe. I mean that there are
many, which had rather serve a prince, to gain nothing but love only: tha^ to
serve an other prince for money. For there is no service better employed, then
to him which is honest, good, and gracious: and to the contrary none worse
bestowed, then on him which is unthankful and churlyshe. In princes palaces
there shall never want evil and wicked men, malicious and deuelishe flatterers,
which will seek means to put into their Lords heads how they shall raise
their rentes, leauye subsidies, invent tributes, and borow money: but there are
none that will tell them, how they shall win the hearts and good wills of their
subjects, though they know it more profitable to be well beloved, then
necessary to be enriched. He that heapeth treasure for his prince, and
seperateth him from the love of his people: ought not to be called a faithful
servant, but a mortal enemy. Princes and Lords ought greatly to endeavor
themselves to be so conversant among their subjects, that they had rather serve
for good will: then for the payment of money. For if money want, their service
will quail, and hereof proceeds a thousand inconveniences unto princes, which
never happen unto those that have servants, which serve more of good will
then for money: for he that loves with all his heart, is not proud in
prosperity, desperate in adversity, neither complayneth he of poverty, nor
is discontented being fauourlesse, nor yet abashed with persecution, and
finallye love and life are never separated, until they come unto the grave. We
see by experience, that the rableme^t of the poor laborers of Scicil is more
worth, then the money of the knights of Rome. For the labourer every time he
goes to the field, brings some profit from thence: but every time the
knight shows him self in the market place, he returns without money. By
that comparison I mean, that princes should be affable, easy to talk with
all, pleasant, merciful, benign, and stout, and above all that they be
gracious and loving, to the end that through these qualities, and not by money,
they may learn to win the hearts of their subjects. Princes should greatly
labor to be loved, specially if they will find who shall succor them in
adversity, and keep them from evil will and hatred, which those princes can
not have that are hated: but rather every man rejoices at their fall and
misery. For each man enjoys his own travail, and truly the furious and
sorrowful hearts takes some rest, to see that others have pity and
compassion upon their griefs. Princes also should endeavor them selves to be
loved and well willed, because at their death they may of all their servants
and friends be lamented. For princes ought to be such, that they may be prayed
for in their life, and lamented and remembered after their death. How cursed is
that prince, and also how unhappy is that common wealth, where the servants
will not serve their Lord but for reward: and that the Lord does not love
them but for there services. For there is never true love, where there is any
particular intereste. With many stones a house is builded, and of many men and
one prince (which is the head of all) the common wealth is made. For he that
governs the common wealth, may be called a prince, and otherwise not: and the
common wealth can not be called nor said a common wealth, if it has not a
prince which is the head thereof. If Geometry do not deceive me, the lyme
which joins one stone with an other, suffers well that it be myngled with
sand, but the corner stone that lies on the top ought to be meddled with
vnslekyd lyme. And it sounds unto good reason. For if the nether stones
separate, the wall opens: but if the corner should slip, the buylding
incontinently falls. I suppose (fathers conscript) you understand very well
to what end I apply this comparison. The love of one neighbor with an other,
may suffer to be cold: but the love of a prince to his people, should be true
and pure. I mean that the love amongst friends may well pass sometimes
though it be cold: but the love between the king and his people, at all times
ought to be perfect. For where there is parfite love, there is no fained
words, nor unfaithful service.

I have seen in Rome many debates among the people to have been pacified in
one day: and one only which between the Lord and the common wealth aryseth,
can not be pacified until death. For it is a dangerous thing for one to
strive with many, and for many to contend against one. In this case, where the
one is proud, and the other rebels, I will not excuse the prince, nor let to
condemn the people. For in the end he that thinks himself most innocent,
deserves greatest blame. From whence think you comes it, that Lords now a
days do command unjust things by fury, and that subjects in just matters
will not obey by reason. I will tell you.

The Lord doing of will, and not of right, would cast the wills of all in
his own brain, and derive from him self all counsel. For even as princes
are of greater power then all the rest: so they think they know more then
all the rest. The contrary happens to subjects, who (being provoked I can
not tell you with what frenesy) despising the good understanding of their Lord,
will not obey that that their princes wills, for the health of them all, but
that which every man desires for him self particularly. For men now a days
are so fond, that every man thinks the prince should look on him alone.
Truly it is a strange thing (though it be much used among men) that one
should desire that the garments of all other should be mete for him: which is
as impossible, as one man's armor should arm a multitude. But what shall we
be (Fathers conscripte and sacred senate) since our fathers left us this world
with such folly, and that in these debates and stryfes, we their children, are
always in dissension and controversy, and in this wilfulnes, we shall also
leave our children and heirs. How many princes have I seen and read of in my
time, of my predecessors, which were utterly undone, by to much pride and
presumption: But I never read nor heard of any, which were destroyed for being
courteous, and loving to his subjects. I will declare by some examples, which
I have read in books, to the end that the Lords may see what they win by
their good conversation, and what they loase by being to haulty. The realm of
the Sydonians was greater then that of the Caldeans in weapons, and inferior
in antiquity, unto that of the Assirians. In this realm there was Debastia,
which was called a lineage of kings, that endured two hundredth and.xxv.
years, because all those kings were of a commendable conversation. And an
other of Debastia endured no longer then forty years. And our auncientes
took pleasure of peace, whereof we are destitute: and were ignorant of the
wars, which we now use so much. Always they desired to have kings which
should be good for the common wealth in peace, rather than valiant and
courageous for the war. As Homere in his Iliade says: the ancient
Egiptians called their kings Epiphanes, and had a custom, that Epiphanes
always should enter into the temples barefoote. And because it chau^sed the
Epiphane on a time to come into the church hoased, he was immediately for his
disobedience deprived, and expulsed from the realm, and in his stead an other
created. Homere declares here, that this king was proud, and evil
conditioned, wherefore the Egiptians deprived him, and banished him the realm,
taking occasion that he did not enter into the temple barefoote. For truly when
Lords are evil willed, and not beloved, for a little trifle and occasion the
people will arise and rebel against them. The said Homere said also, that
the Parthes called their kings Assacides, and that the sixte of that name was
deprived and expulsed the realm, for that of presumption he had him self to
the marriage of a knight, and being bidden and desired, would not go to the
marriage of a poor Plebeyan. Cicero in his Tusculanes says, that in old time
the people persuaded their princes to communicate with the poor, and that they
should abstain and fly from the rich. For among the poor they may learn to
be merciful, and with the rich they shall learn nothing but to be proud. Ye
know right well (Fathers conscript) how this our country was first called
great Greece, afterward it was called Latium, and then Italy. And when it was
called Latium, they called their kings Marrani, and truly though their borders
were but narrow: yet at the least their stoutnes was great. The Annals of
those times say, that after the third Siluius, succeeded a Marrane who was
proud, ambitious, and evil co^dicioned, in such sort, that for fear of the
people, always he slept locked up: and therefore they depryued and banished him
the Realm. For the auncientes said, that the king should lock his doors at
no hour of the night against his subjects, neither he should refuse in the
day to give them audience. Tarquine which was the last of the seven kings of
Rome, was very unthankful toward his father in law, he was an infamy to
his blood, a traitor to his country, and cruel of his person, who also
enforced the noble Lucretia, and yet notwithstanding this, they do not call
him unthankful, infamous, cruel, traitor, nor adulterer: but Tarquine the
proud, only for that he was evil co^dicioned. By the faith of a good man I
swear unto you (Fathers co^script) that if the miserable Tarquine had been
beloved in Rome, he had never been deprived of the Realm, for committing
adultery with Lucretia: for in the end if every light offense which in youth is
committed, should be punished, within short space there should be no common
wealth. All these evils (both before and after Tarquine) were committed by the
auncientes in the Roman empire, which were such as these (of this young and
light prince) and were nothing in comparison unto thee. For truly considering
the youth of the one, and the experience of the other: the greatest offense of
the young, is but a counterfaite to the least that the old commits. Julius
Caesar last dictatour, and first Emperor of Rome, (being a thing commendable
both to Senators to salute the Emperor on their knees, and to the Emperor
to rise against them and resalute each one according to his order) because of
presumption, and that he would not observe this ceremony, with.xxiii. wounds
they dispatched him of his life. Tiberius was an Emperor, whom they blame for
drunkenness, and Caligula was an Emperor also, whom they accuse of inceste with
his sisters. Nero was an Emperor, who (for that he slew his mother, and his
master Seneca) has for ever been named cruel. Sergius Galba was a devouring
and gluttonous Emperor, for that he caused for one only banquet seven thousand
birds to be killed. Domitian was an Emperor, who was greatly noted of all
evils. For all evils which in many were scattered, in him alone were found.
All these miserable princes in the end were betrayed, hanged, and beheaded.
And I swear unto ye (fathers conscript) that they died not for their vices,
but because they were proud, and evil conditioned. For finally the prince for
one vice only cannot much endomage the people: but for being to haulty, and
presumptuous, and of evil conditions, he may destroy a common wealth. Let
princes and great lords be assured, that if they give many occasions of evil
will, afterward one only suffiseth, to stir their subjects to destroy them.
For if the lord show not his hatred, it is for that he will not: but if the
subject do not revenge, it is for that he cannot. Believe me (fathers
conscripte, and sacred Senate) that even as the Physicians with a little triacle
purge many evil humors of the body: so the sage Princes with very little
benevolence, draw out of their subjects much fylthines of heart, diuerting
their ill wills into true and faithful love. And because the members should
be agreeable with the head, in mine opinion it behooves the people to obey the
commandment of the prince, and to honor and reverence his person: and the
good prince to be just and equal to all in generally, and gentle in
conversation with every one. O happy common wealth, wherein the prince finds
obedience in the people, and the people in like manner love in the prince. For
of the love of the Lord, springs obedience in the subject: and of the
obedience of the subjects, springs love in the Lord. The Emperor in Rome,
is as the spyder in the midst of her cobwebbe: the which being touched with
the needels point by one of the threedes of the same (be it never so little)
immediately the spider feels it. I mean, that all the works which the
Emperor does in Rome, are immediately published through out all the country.
For in fine, since princes are the myrrour of all, they cannot well cloak
their vices. I see (fathers conscripte) that I have been judged here of worldly
malice, because I accompanied the captives in procession, and also because I
suffered my self to be touched with them, to the end they might enjoy the
privilege of their liberty: and in this case I render most humble thanks to
the immortal gods, because they made me a merciful Emperor, to set those at
liberty that were in prysone: and that they made me not a cruel tyrant, to
set those in prison which were at liberty. For the proverb says, that with
one bean, a man may take two pigeons: even so chaunsed the like herein
yesterdaie. For the benefit was done for those miserable captives: but the
example of humanity was showed to all strange nations. And know ye not, that
when the prince vnloseth the irons from the feet of the captives, he byndeth
the hearts, lands, and goods of his subjects? concluding therefore I say,
that to princes it were more safety, and to the common wealth more profit,
to be served in their palaces by free hearts with love: then by subjects
which are kept under by fear.

Of a letter the emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Pulio, declaring
the opinion of certain philosophers concerning the felicity of man. Cap. xl.
MArcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, tribune of the people, high bishop, second
consul and monarche of all the Roman empire, wysheth to the Pulio his old
friend, health to thy person, and prosperity against thy evil fortune. The
letter that thou wrotest unto me from Capua, I received here at Bethinia, and
if thou did write it with a good heart, I did read it with willing eyes:
whereof thou ought somewhat to content thee. For it is an ancient saying of
Homere, that that which is well vewed with the eyes, is tenderly beloved of
the heart. I protest unto thee by the faith of the immortal gods, that I do
not write unto thee as a Roman emperor, that is to say, from the lord to
the servant, for in this sort I should write unto thee brief, and touching
the purpose: which thing ought not to be done to the peculier friend. For the
letters of grave men should never begin, and the letters of us friends should
never end. I write unto thee my friend Pulio, as to a private friend, to an
old companion of mine, and as to him, which is a faithful secretary of my
desires, and in whose company I was never displeased, in whose mouth I never
found lie, and in whose promise there was never breach made. And the thing
being thus, I should commit treason in the law of friendship, if I kept secret
from thee any of my inward conceits. For all the griefs, which lie buried in
the woeful heart, ought not to be communicate but with a faithful friend. Do
thou think Pulio, that the Roman emperor has little travail to write unto
thee as Emperor, to speak as Emperor, to walk as Emperor, and to eat as
emperor, and finally to be as emperor in deed? certes I do not marvel
hereat. For truly the life of the virtuous emperor, is but a dial which
orders or disordereth the common wealth: and that whereof I marvel, is of the
folly of Rome, and vanity of the common wealth. For as much as all say that
the prince (if he will seem grave, and be well esteemed of the people) ought to
go softly, to speak little, and to write briefly: so that for writing of
letters they will he be brief, and for conquering of strange realms they do
not rebuke him although he be long. Wise men should desire that their princes
be of a gentle condition, to the end they fall not to tyranny. That they have
their mind uncorrupted, to minister to all equal justice, yt their thought be
good, not to desire strange realms, that they have their hearts void from
wrath, that they be sound within to pardon injuries, that they love their
subjects to be served of them, that they know the good to honor them, and
that they know the evil to punish them: and as for the surplus, we little regard
whether the king go fast, whether he eat much, or write brief. For the danger
is not in that which is in the lack of his person: but is in the negligence
that he uses in the common wealth. I have received my friend Pulio great
comfort of thy letter, but much more I should have received of thy presence:
for the letters of ancient friends, are but as a remembrance of time past. It
is a great pleasure to the mariner, to talk of the perils past being in the
haven: and to the captain, to glory of the battle after the victory. I
mean above al pleasure this is the greatest to men, being now faithful
friends, to talk of the travail and dangers which they passed, when they
were young me^. Believe me in one thing, and do not doubt thereof. There is no
man that knows to speak, that knows to possess, nor that can judge or
take any pleasure, neither that knows well how to keep the goods which the
gods have given him, unless it be he that has bought it derely with great
travail. For with all our hearts we love that thing, which by our own proper
travail we have gotten. I ask thee one thing: who is he that owes most to
the gods, or that is most esteemed amongst men? of Traian the just, which was
brought up in the wars of Dace, Germany and Spain? or of Nero the cruel,
which was nourished in all the deliciousnes of Rome. Truly the one was none
other then a Rose among briers, and the other was but a nettel among flowers. I
speak this, because the good Traian has governed his life in such sort, that
always they will smell the rose by the pleasant savor: but the cruel Nero
has left the sting with the nettell of his infamy. I will not speak all,
because many are and were made good, but for the most part the princes which
were brought up deliciously, gave every man occasion that al should be
offended, for the evil governance of their lives in their realms: and because
they never experimented any kind of travail in them selves, they do little
esteem the pains of another. I will not that thou think my friend Pulio, that I
have forgotten the time yt is past, though the gods brought me to ye empire
present. For though we togethers were tossed with the torments of youth: yet
now we may repose our selves in the caulmes of our age. I do remember that
thou and I did study in Rhodes in letters, and after we had so wen weapons in
Capua, it has pleased the Gods that the seeds of my fortune should ripe here
in Rome, and to thee and to others better then I, fortune would not give one
only ear. I do not give the license that thy thought be suspicious of me,
sith thou of my heart art made a faithful friend: for if unconstant fortune
does trust me, to gather with travail the grape, know thou that here in my
palace thou shall not want of the wine. The gods will not suffer, that now in
this moment thou should find my heart shut from thee, whose gates I
found always (for the space of twenty years) open unto me. Sith that my
fortunes brought me to the Empire, I have always had two things before mine
eyes: that is to wete, not to revenge my self of mine enemies, neither to be
unthankful to my friends. For I pray to the gods daily, rather then
hereafter through unthankfulness my renown should be defamed: that even now
with forgetfulness my body should be buried. Let a man offer to the Gods what
sacrifices he will, let him do as much service to men as he can: yet if he be
unthankful to his friend, he ought in all and for all to be utterly
condemned. Because thou should see my friend Pulio, how greatly the ancient
friend ought to be esteemed, I will declare thee an example of a Philosopher,
the which to hear thou will somewhat rejoice. The ancient histories of the
Grecians declare, that among the seven sages of Greece, there was one named
Periander, who was prince and governor a great while: and he had in him such
liuelines of spirit on the one side, and such covetousness of worldly goods on
the other side: that the historiographers are in doubt whether was the
greater, the philosophy that he taught reading in the schools: or the tyranny
that he used in robbing in the common wealth. For truly the science which is
not grounded of trougthe, brings great domages to the person. In the second
year of my empire I was in the city of Corinthe, where I saw the grave
which contained the bones of Periander: where about was engraven in Greek
verses and old letter this Epitaphe.

WIthin the compass, of this narrow grave
Wretched Periander, enclosed lies
Whose cruel factes, could Greece alone not have
So small a soil, his hunger could suffice.
Here lodges eke, lo Periander dedde
His filthy flesh, the hungry worms do eat
And living he, with Orphelines goods was fed
His gredie guts, did crave such deintie meat.
The tyrant Periander, stays here
Whose life was buylte, to hinder all the rest
And eke whose death, such prefite large did bear
As brought relief, to him that had the lest.
Here wicked Periander, rests now:
His life did cause, great peopled realms decay
His death that forste, his living sprite to bow
Assurde them life, that stood in brittell stay.
The curssed Periander, here does lie
Whose life did shed, the poor and simple blood
And eke that clambe, to riches rule so hie
By others swette, that sought for wasting good.
Of Corinth lo, here Periander rest
To seem for just, that equal laws did frame
Yet flytting from the square, that they possessed
By virtues dome, deserude a tyrauntes name.
The catiue Periander, sleeps here
That finished has, his four score years with shame
And though his life, that thousands bought so dear
Be faded thus, yet bloometh still his blame.
THere were mo letters on the grave, but because it was alone in the field,
the great waters had worn it, so that scarcely the letters could be red: and
truly it was very old, and in his time it seemed to be a sumptuous thing, but
the negligence of reparation lost it quite: and it is not to be marueyled at,
for in the end time is of such power, that it cause the renowned men to be
forgotten, and all the sumptuous buildinges to decay, and fall to the earth.
If thou will know my friend Pulio, in what time the tyrant this philosopher
was, I will thou know, that when Catania the renowned city was builded, in
Cicilia near the mount Ethna, and when Perdica was the fourth king of
Macedonia, and that Cardicea was the third king of the Meedes, and when
Candare was fifth king of Libeans, and that Assaradoche was ninth king of the
Assirians, and when Merodache was twelft king of Caldeans, and that Numa
Pompilius reigned second king of the Romans, and in the time of those so good
kings, Periander reigned among the Assirians. And it is meet thou know an
other thing also which is this. That this Periander was a tyrant not only in
deed, but also in renown: so that they spoke of no other thing through Greece,
but it tended hereunto. Though he had evil works, he had good words, and
procured yt the affairs of the common wealth should be well redressed. For
generally there is no man so good, but a man may find somewhat in him to be
reproved: neither any man so evil, but he has some thing in him to be
commended. I do yet remember (of my age, being neither to young nor to old)
that I saw the emperor Traian my lord, suppe once in Agrippine: and it so
chanced that words were moved to speak of good and evil princes in times
past, as well of ye Greeks as of the Romans, yt al those which were present
there, commended greatly the emperor Octauian, and they al blamed the cruel
Nero. For it is an ancient custom, to flatter the princes that are present:
and to murmr at princes that are past. When the good emperor Traian was at
dinner, and when he prayed in the temple, it was marvel if any man saw him
speak any word: and that day, since he saw yt they excessiuely praised the
emperor Octauian, and that the others charged the emperor Nero with more then
neded, the good Traian spoke unto them these words. I am glad you commend the
emperor Octauian, but I am angry you should in my presence speak evil of the
emperor Nero, and of none other: for it is a great infamy to a prince being
alive, to hear in his presence any prince evil reported after his death.
Truly the emperor Octauian was very good, but ye will not deny me but he
might have been better: and the emperor Nero was very evil, but yet you will
grant me he might have been worse. I speak this, because Nero in his first
five years was the best of all, and the other nine following he was the worste
of all: so that there is both cause to disprayse him, and also cause to
commend him. When a virtuous man will speak of princes that are dead, before
princes which are alive, he is bound to praise only one of their virtues
which they had, and has no license to reuyle the vices whereof they were
noted. For the good deserves reward, because he endeuoreth him self to
follow virtue: and the evil likewise deserves pardon, because through
frayltie he has consented to vice. All these words the emperor Traian spoke
I being present, and they were spoken with such fiercenes, that all those
which were there present both changed their color, and also refrained their
tongues. For truly the shameless man feels not so much a great strype of
correction, as the gentill heart does a sharp word of admonition. I was
willing to show thee these things, my friend Pulio, because that since Traian
spoke for Nero, and that he found in him some praise, I do think no less of
the tyraunte Periander, whom though for his evil works he did we do
condemn: yet for his good words that he spoke, for the good laws which he
made, we do praise. For in the man that is evil, there is nothing more easier
then to give good counsel, and there is nothing more harder then to work
well. Periander made diverse laws for the common wealth of the Corinthians,
whereof here following, I will declare some. We ordeyne and command that if any
by multipliyng of words kill an other (so that it were not by treason) that he
be not therefore condemned to die, but that they make him slave perpetual to
the brother of him that is slain, or to the next of his kynne or friends: for
a short death is and less pain, then a long servitude. We ordeyne and
command, that if any these be taken he shall not dye, but with a hot iron
shall be marked on the forehead to be known for a thief: for to shammefaste men
long infaime is more pain, then a short life. We ordeyne and command, that
the man or woman which to the prejudice of an other shall tell any lie, shall
for the space of a month carry a stone in their mouth: for it is not meet
that he which is wont to lie, should always be authorysed to speak.

We ordeyne and command that every man or woman, that is a quareler and
sedicious person in the common wealth, be with great reproach bannished from
the people: for it is impossible that he should be in favor with the Gods,
which is an enemy to his neighbors. We ordeyne and command that if there be
any in the common wealth, that have received of an other a benefit, and that
afterward it is proved he was unthankful, that in such case they put him
to death: for the man that of benefits received is unthankful, ought not to
live in the world among men. Behold therefore my friend Pulio, the
antiquity which I declared unto thee, and how merciful the Corinthians were
to murderers, thieves, and Pirates: And contrary how severe they were to
unthankful people, whom they commanded forthwith to be put to death.

And truly in mine opinion the Corinthians had reason, for there is nothing
troubles a wise man more, then to see him unthankful to him whom he has
showed pleasure unto. I was willing to tell thee this history of Periander, for
no other cause, but to the end thou should see and know, that forasmuch as I
do greatly blame the vice of unthankfulness, I will labor not to be noted of
the same. For he that reproves vice, is not noted to be virtuous: but he which
utterly flies it. Count upon this my word that I tell thee which thou shall
not think to be fained, that though I be the Romain Emperor, I will be thy
faithful friend, and will not fail to be thankful toward thee. For I esteem
it no less glory to know how to keape a friend by wysedom: then to come to the
estate of an emperor by philosophy. By the letter thou sentest, thou
requiredst me of one thing to answer thee, for the which I am at my wits
end. For I had rather open my treasures to thy necessities, then to open the
books to answer to thy demaundes, although it be to my cost. I confess thy
request to be reasonable, and thou deseruest worthy praise: for in the end it
is more worth to know, how to procure a secret of antiquities past, then to
heap up treasures for ye necessities in time to come. As the philosopher
makes philosophy his treasour of knowledge to live in peace, and to hope and
to look for death with honor: so the covetous (being such a one as he is)
makes his treasure of worldly goods, for to keape and preserve life in this
world in perpetual wars, and to end his life and take his death with
infamy. Herein I swear unto thee, that one day employed in philosophy is
more worth, then ten thousand which are spent in heaping riches. For the life
of a peaceable man is none other, then a sweet peregrination: and the life of
sedicious persons is none other, but a long death. Thou requirest me my friend
Pulio, that I write unto thee wherein the auncientes in times past had their
felicity: know thou that their desires were so diverse, that some dispraised
life, others desired it: some prolonged it, others did shorten it: some did not
desire pleasures but travails, others in travails did not seek but pleasures:
the which variety did not proceade but of diverse ends, for the tastes were
diverse, and sundry men desired to taste diverse meats. By the immortal Gods
I swear unto thee, that this thy request makes me muse of thy life, to see
that my phylosophie answers thee not sufficiently therein. For if thou ask
to prove me, thou think me presumptuous: if thou demand in mirth, thou
countest me to be to light: if thou demaundest it not in good earnest, thou
take me for simple: if thou demau^dest me for to show it thee, be thou
assured I am ready to learn it: if thou demaundest it for to know it, I
confess I can not teach it thee: if thou demaundest it because thou may be
asked it, be thou assured that none wylbe satisfied with my answer: and if
perchance thou do ask it, because thou sleapinge haste dreamed it, seeing
that now thou art awake, thou ought not to believe a dream. For all that
the fantasy in the night does imagine, the tongue does publishe it in the
morning. O my friend Pulio I have reason to complain of thee, for so much as
thou do not regard the authority of my person, nor the credit of thy
phylosophie, wherefore I fear least they will judge thee to curious in
demaundinge, and me to simple in aunsweringe: all this notwithstanding, I
determine to answer thee, not as I ought, but as I can, not according to the
great thou demaundest, but according to the little I know. And partly I do
it to accomplish thy request, and also to fulfill my desire. And now I
think that all which shall read this letter, will be cruel judges of my
ignorance.

Of the Philosopher Epicurus.
IN the Olimpiade, the hundredth and three, Serges being king of Perses, and the
cruel tyrant Lysander captain of the Peloponenses, a famous battle was
fought between the Athenians and Lysander, upon the great river of Aegcon
whereof Lysander had the victory: and truly unless the histories deceive us, the
Athenians took this conflicte grievously, because the battle was lost more
through negligence of their captains, then through the great nombre of their
enemies. For truly many win victories more through the cowardlynesse that
some have, than for the hardiness that others have. The philosopher Epicurus
at that time flourished, who was of a lively wit, but of a mean stature, and
had memory fresh, being meanly learned in philosophy, but he was of much
eloquence, and for to encourage and counsel the Athenians he was sent to the
wars. For when the auncientes took upon them any wars, they chose first
sages to give counsel, then captains to lead the soldiers. And amongst
the prisoners, the philosopher Epicurus was taken to whom the tyrant Lysander
gave good entertainment, and honored him above all other: and after he was
taken he never went from him, but read philosophy unto him, and declared unto
him histories of times paste, and of the strength and virtues of many Greeks
and Troyans. The tyrant Lysander reioysed greatly at these things. For truly
tyrauntes take great pleasure to hear the prowess and virtues of auncientes
past, and to follow the wickedness and vices of them that are present. Lysander
therefore taking the triumph, and having a navy by sea, and a great army by
land, upon the river of Aegeon, he and his captains forgotte the danger of
the wars, and gave the brydel to the slothful flesh, so that to ye great
prejudice of the common wealth they led a dissolute and idle life. For the
manner of tyrannous princes is, to leave of their own travail, and to enjoy
that of other men's. The philosopher Epicurus was always brought up in the
excellent university of Athens, where as ye philosophers lived in so great
poverty, yt naked they slept on the ground, their drink was cold water, none
amongst them had any house propre, they despised riches as pestilence, and
labored to make peace where discord was, they were only defenders of the common
wealth, they never spoke any idle word, and it was a sacrilege amongst the^
to hear a lie: and finally it was a law inviolable amongst the^, that the
philosopher that should be idle should be banished, and he that was vicious should
be put to death. The wicked Epicurus forgetting the doctrine of his masters,
and not esteming gravity (whereunto ye sages are bound) gave him self wholly
both in words and deeds unto a voluptuous and beastly kind of life, wherein he
put his whole felicity. For he said there was no other felicity for slouthful
men, then to sleep in soft beds: for delicate persons, to feel neither heat
nor cold: for fleshly me^, to have at their pleasur amorous dames: for
dro^kardes, not to want any pleasant wines: and gluttons, to have their filles
of all delicate meats: for herein he affirmed to consiste all worldly
felicity. I do not marvel at ye multitude of his scholars which he had,
has, and shall have in ye world. For at this day there are few in Rome, yt
suffer not the^ selves to be maistred with vices: and ye multitude of those which
live at their own wills, and sensuality, are infinite. And to fell the
truth, my friend Pulio, I do not marvel that there has been virtuous,
neither I do muse that there has been vicious: for the virtuous hops to
rest him self with the gods in an other world, by his well doing: and if the
vicious be vicious, I do not marvel though he will go and engage him self
to the vices of this world, since he does not hope neither to have pleasure in
this, nor yet to enjoy rest with the gods in the other. For truly the
unsteadfast belefe of an other life (after this) wherein ye wicked shall be
punished, and the good rewarded: causes that now a days the vicious and vices
reigns so as they do.

Of the Philosopher Eschilus.
ARtabanus being the sixte king of Persians, and Quintus Cincinatus the
husbandman being only dictatour of the Romans, in the province of Tharse,
there was a philosopher named Aeschylus, who was evil favored of countenance,
defourmed of body, fierce in his looks, and of a very gross understanding,
but he was fortunate of credit: for he had no less credit amongst the
Tharses, then Homere had among the Greeks. They say that though this
philosopher was of a rude knowledge, yet otherwise he had a very good natural
wit, and was very diligent in hard things, and very paciente with those
that did him wrong, he was exceading courageous in adversities, and moderate in
prosperities. And the thing that I most delighted in him was, that he was
courteous and gentle in his conversation, and both pithie and eloquente in his
communication. For that man only is happy, where all men praise his life, and
no man reproves his tongue. The ancient Greeks declare in their histories,
that this philosopher Aeschylus was the first that invented Tragedies, and that
got money to represente them: and sithe the invention was new and pleasant,
many did not only follow him, but they gave him much of their goods. And
marueyle not thereat my friend Pulio, for the lightness of the common people is
such, that to see vain things all will run: and to hear the excellency
of virtues, there is not one that will go. After this philosopher Aeschylus
had written many books specially of tragedies, and that he had afterward
trauayled through many countries and realms, at the last he ended the residue
of his life, nere the Isles which are adjoining to the lake of Meatis. For as
the divine Plato says, when the ancient philosophers were young they
studied, when they came to be men they traueyled, and then when they were old
they retired home. In mine opinion this philosopher was wise to do as he did,
and no less shall men now a days be that will imitate him. For the fathers
of wisdom, are science and experience: and in this consists true knowledge,
when the man at the last returns home from the troubles of the world. Tell
me my friend Pulio I pray thee, what does it profit him that has learned
much, that has heard much, that has known much, that has seen much, that
has been far, that has bought much, that has suffered much, that has
proved much, that had much, if after great travail he does not retire to
repose him self a little: truly he can not be counted wise but a fool, that
willingly offreth him self to travail, and has not the wit to procure him
self rest. For in mine opinion, the life without rest, is a long death. By
chance as this ancient philosopher was sleaping by the lake Meotis, a hunter
had a hare with him in a cage of wood to take other hares by: whereon the egle
seized, which took the cage with the hare on hig, and seeing that he could not
eat it he cast it down again, which fell on the head of this philosopher and
killed him. This philosopher Aeschylus was demanded in his life time, wherein
the felicity of this life consisted? whereunto he answered: that in his
opinion it consisted in steaping, and his reason was this: that when we sleep,
the entisementes of the flesh do not provoke us, nor the enemy persecute us,
neither the friends do importune us, nor the cold winter oppress us, nor the
heat of the long Summer does annoye us, ne yet we are not angry for any thing
we see, nor we take any care for any thing we hear. Finally when we sleep, we
feel not the anguishes of the body, neither suffer the passion of the mind to
come. To this end ye must understand that when they were troubled, he gave
them drinks which caused them immediately to sleep, so that so sone as the man
did drink it, so sone he was a sleep. Finally all the study wherein the
Epicurians exercised the^ selves, was in eating and seking meats: and the
chief study of this Aeschilus, was in sleaping, and having soft beds.

Of the philosopher Pindarus.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome.262. Darius the second of that name,
king of Persia, who was the son of Histapsie, and in the image of kings,
the fourth king of Persia, Iunius Brutus, and Lucius Collatinus being co^sulles
in Rome which were the first consulles that were in Rome. There was in the
great city of Thebes in Egypt, a philosopher named Pindarus, who was prince of
that realm. They write of this philosopher, that in philosophy he excelled al
those of his time, and also in touching, singing, and plaiyng of music, he was
more excellent then any of all his predecessors: for the Thebanes affirmed,
that there was never any seen of such aptenes in speaking, and so excellent
delivering of his fingers in playing, as Pindarus was: and more over he was a
great moral philosopher, but not so excellent in natural philosophy. For he
was a quiet and virtuous man, and could better work than teach: which thing
is contrary now a days in our sages of Rome. For they know little, and speak
much: and worst of all in their words they are circumspect, and in their
deeds very negligent. The divine Plato in his book that he made of laws,
mencioneth this philosopher, and Iunius Rusticus in his Thebaide showed one
thing of him, and that is, that an Ambassador of Lides being in Thebes, seeing
Pindarus to be of a virtuous life, and very disagreable in his words, he spoke
unto him such words. O Pindarus, if thy words were so limed before men, as
thy works are pure before the gods, I swear unto thee by those gods the^
selves yt are immortal, that thou should be as much esteemed in life, as
Promotheus was: and should leave as much memory of thee after thy death in
Egypt, as the great Homere left of his life in Greece. They demanded of this
Pindarus wherein felicity consisted: he answered: in such sort ye ought to
know, that the in ward soul follows in many things (for the most part)
the outward body: the which thing presupposed I say, that he that feleth no
grief in his body, may well be called happy. For truly if the flesh be not
well, the heart can have no rest. Therefore according to the counsel of
Pindarus, the Thebanes were above all other nations and people most diligent,
to cure the diseases of their bodies, Annius Seuerus says that they were let
blood every month, for the great abundance of blood in their bodies They
used every week vomitacions for the full stomachs. They continued the bathes
for to avoid opilacions. They carried sweet savors about them against the
evil and infected airs: And finally they studied naught else in Thebes, but to
preserve and keep their bodies as diliciously as they could invent.

Of the philosopher Zeno.
IN the Olimpiade.133. Cneus Seruilius, and Caius Brisius the^ Consulles in
Rome* which were appointed against the Attikes in the month of Ianuarye
immediately after they were chosen, and in the.29. year of ye reign of Ptolom,
aeus Philadelphus, this great Prince Ptolomaeus built in the cost of
Alexandrye a great tower, which he named Pharo, for the love of a lover of his
named Pharo Dolouina, this tower was built upon.4. engines of glass, it was
large and high, made 4. square, and the stones of the tower were as bright and
shining as glass, so that the tower being 20. foot of breadth, if a candel
burned with in, those without might se the light thereof. I let the know my
friend Pulio, that the ancient historiographers did so much esteem this
buildynge, that they compared it to one of the vii. buildinges of the world.
At that time when these things flourished, there was in Egypt a philosopher
called Zeno, by whose counsel and industry Ptolomaeus built yt so famous a
tower, and governed his land. For in the old time the princes that in their
life were not governed by sages: were recorded after their death in ye register
of foles. As this tower was strong, so had he great joy of the same because he
kept his derely beloved Pharo Dolouina therein enclosed, to the end she should
be well kept, and also well contented. He had his wives in Alexandria, but for
the most part he continued with Pharo Dolouina. For in the old time, the
Perses, Siconians, and the Chaldeans did not marie, but to have children to
enherite their goods: and the resydue of their life (for the most part) to
lead with their concubynes in pleasure and delights. The Egiptians had in
great estymacion men that were great wrastlers, especially if they were wise
men, and above all things they maid great defiaunce against strangers: and
all the multitude of wrastlers was continually great, so there were notable
masters among them. For truly he that daily uses one thing, shall at the last
be excellent therein. The matter was thus. That one day as amongst them there
were many Egiptians, there was one that would not be overthrown nor cast by
any man unto the earth. This philosopher Zeno perceiving the strength and
courage of this great wrastler: thought it much for his estimacion if he might
throw him in wrastlyng, and in proving he threw him dead to the earth, who of
none other cold ever be cast. This vyctorie of Zeno was so greatly to the
contentacion of his person, that he spoke with his tongue, and wrote with his
pen, that there was none other felycitye, then to know how to have the
strength of the arms to cast down others at his feet. The reason of this
philosopher was, that he said it was a greater kind of victory to overthrow
one to the earth: then to overcome many in the wars. For in the wars one
only wrongefullye takes the vyctorye, since there be many that do win it:
but in wrestling, as the victory is to one alone, so let the only vyctorye and
glory remain to him, and therefore in this thing felicity consists: for
what can be more, then the contentacion of the heart. Truly we call him in this
world happy, that has his heart content, and his body in health.

Of the Philosopher Anacharsis.
WHen the king Heritaces reigned among the Meedes, and that Tarquin Priscus
reigned in Rome, there was in the coasts of Scithia a philosopher called
Anacharsis, who was borne in the city of Epimenides. Cecero greatly commended
the doctrine of this philosopher and that he can not tell which of these two
things were greater in him, that is to wete the profoundnes of knowledge that
the gods had given him, or the cruel malice wherewith he persecuted his enemies.
For truly as Pithagoras says. Those which of men are most evil wylled, of the
gods are best beloved. This philosopher Anacharsis then being as he was of
Scithia (which nation amongeste the Romans was esteemed Barbarous) it
chaunsed, that a malycious Roman sought to displease the Philosopher in
words, and truly he was moved thereunto, more through malice then through
simplicite. For the outward malycious words are a manifest token of the inward
envious heart. This Roman therefore said to the philosopher it is impossible
Anacharsis that thou should be a Sithian borne: for a man of such eloquence
cannot be of such a barbarous nation, to whom Anacharsis answered. Thou have
said well, and herein I assent to thy words, howbeit I do not allow thy
intencion: for as by reason thou may dispraise me to be of a barbarous
country, and commend me for my good life. so I justly may accuse the of a
wicked life and praise the of a good country. And herein be thou judge of
both, which of us two shall have the most praise in the world to come, either
thou that art borne a Roman, and leadest a barbarous life: or I that am borne
a Sithian and lead the life of a Roman. For in the end, in the Garden of
this life I had rather be a grene apple tree and bear fruit: then to be a
dry Libane drawn on the ground, After that Anacharsis had been in Rome long
time, and in Greece he determined for the love of his country (now being
aged) to return home to Scithia, whereof a brother of his named Cadmus was
king, who had the name of a king, but in deed he was a Tiraunt. Since this good
philosopher saw his brother exercise the works of a tyraunte, and seeing also
the people so dissolute, he determined to give his brother the best counsel
he could, to ordeyne laws to the people, and in good order to govern them:
which thing being seen of the Barbarous, by the consent of them al, as a man
who invented new deuyses to live in the world, before them all openly was put
to death. For I will thou know my friend Pulio, that there is no greater token,
that the common wealth is full of vice: then when they kill or banysh those
which are virtuous therein. So therefore as they led this philosopher to death,
he said he was unwilling to take his death, and loath to lose his life. Wherefore
one said unto him these words. Tell me Anacha^sis, since thou art a man so
virtuous, so sage, and so old, me thinks it should not grieve the to leave
this miserable life. For the virtuous man should desire the company of the
virtuous men, the which this world wants: the sage ought to desire to live
with other sages, whereof the world is destitute: and the old man ought little to
esteem the loss of his life, since by true experience he knows in what
trauayles he has passed his days. For truly it is a kind of folly for a man
which has trauayled and fynished a dangerous and long journey, to lament to
se himself now in the end thereof. Anacharsis answered him. Thou speak very
good words my friend, and I would that thy life were as thy counsel is: but it
greueth me that in this conflict I have neither understanding, nor yet sense to
taste, nor that I have time enoughe to thank the. For I let the know, yt there
is no tongue can express the grief which a man feels, when he ought
forthwith to dye. I die, and as thou see they kill me only for that I am
virtuous. I feel nothing that tormenteth my heart so much, as king Cadinus my
brother does, for that I can not be revenged. For in mine opinion, the chief
felycitie of man consists, in knowing and being able to revenge the iniurye
done without reason, before a man does end his life. It is a commendable thing
that the philosopher pardon injuries (as the virtuous philosophers have
accustomed to do) but it should be also just, that the injuries which we
forgive, the gods should therewith be charged to se reuengment. For it is a hard
thing, to se a tiraunt put a virtuous man to death, and never to se the
tiraunte to come to the like. Me thinks my friend Pulio, that this philosopher
put all his felycytie in revenging an iniurye, during the like in this world.

Of the Sarmates.
THe mount Caucasus as the Cosmographers say, does divide in the midst great
Asia, the which begins in India, and ends in Scithia, and according to the
variety of the people which inhabyte the vyllages: so has this mount diverse
names, and those which dwell toward the Indians, differ much from ye others.
For the more the country is full of mountains, so much the more the people are
Barbarous. Amongst all the other cities which are adjacent unto the same, there
is a kind of people called Sarmates, and that is the country of Sarmatia,
which stands upon the river of Tanays. There grow no vynes in the province,
because of the great cold: and it is true, that among all the oriental
nations there are no people which more desire wine then they do. For the thing
which we lack, is commonly most desired.

These people of Sarmatia are good men of war, though they are unarmed, they
esteem not much delicate meats, nor sumptuous apparaile: For all their
felicytie consists, in knowing how they might fill them selves with wine. In
the year of the foundation of Rome.318. our ancient fathers determined to wage
battle against those people, and other Barbarous nations, and appointed a
Consul called Lucius Pius. And since in that wars fortune was variable, they
made a truce, and afterward all their captains yielded themselves, and their
country into the subjection of the Roman empire, only because the Consul
Lucius Pius in a banquet (that he made) filled them with wine. After the wars
were ended, and all the land of Sarmatia subject: the Consul Lucius Pius came to
Rome, and for reward of his travail, required the accustomed triumph: the
which was not only denied him, but also in recompense of his fact he was openly
beheaded, and by the decre of all the Senate, about his grave was written this
Epitaphe.

WIthin this tomb, Lucius Pius lies,
That whilome was, a Consul great in Rome
And daunted eke (as shame his sclaunder cries)
The Sarmates stern not by Mauors his dome.
But by reproof, and shame of Romayne arms,
He vanquishte has, not as the Romans use
But as the bloody tyrauntes, that with swarms
Of huge deceites, the fyerse assaults refuse.
Not in the wars, by biting weapons stroke
But at the boorde, with sweet delighting food
Not in the hasard fight, he did them yoke
But feding all in rest, he stole their blood.
Nor yet with mighty Mars, in open field
He rest their lives, with sharp ypersing spears
But with the pusshe, of dronken Bacchus shield.
Home to hye Rome, the triumph lo he hears.
THE sacred Senate set this epitaphe here, because al Roman captains should
take example of him. For the majesty of the Romans consists not in
vanquishing their enemies by vices, and deliciousnes: but by weapons and
prayers. The Romans were very sore grieved with the audacitie of this Consul
Lucius Pius, and not contented to have beheaded him, and to have set on his
grave so defamous a title: but made proclamacion forthwith throughout Rome by
the sound of a trumpet, how all that which Lucius Pius had done, the sacred
senate condemned for nothing, and should stand to no effete. For there was an
ancient law in Rome, when they beheaded any man by justice, they should also
take away the authority he had in Rome. And not contented with these things,
the sacred senate wrote to the Sarmates, that they did release them of their
homage, making themselves subjects of the Romans: wherefore the restored
them again to their liberty. They did this thing, because the custom among
the stout and valiant Romans was, not to get nor win realms in making
their enemies druncke with delycate wines: but in shedding their proper blood
in the plain field. I have told the this my friend Pulio, because the Consul
Lucius Pius did perceive that the Sarmates put all their filicitye to ingurge
them selves with wine,

Of the Philosopher Chilo
IN the 15. Dinastia of the Lacedaemonians and Deodeus being king of Medes,
Gigion being king of Lides, Argeus being king among the Macedonians, and
Tullius Hostilius king of the Romans, in the Olimpiade* 27. there was in
Athens a philosopher borne of Greece, whose name was Chilo, one of the.7. sages
which the Greeks had in their treasure. In that time there was great wars
between the Atthenians, and the Corinthians, as we may perceive by the Greek
histories, which we see written. Since Troy was destroyed, there was never
peace in Greece, for the war betwixt the Greeks and Troyans was never so
great, as that which afterward they made among themselves. Sith the Greeks
were now wise men, they did divide the offices of the common wealth acording to
the abilytie of every person that is to know, that to the stout and hardy men
they gave the government: to ye sage they recommended the imbasies of strange
countries. And upon this occasion the Athenians sent the philosopher Chilo to
the Corinthians to treat of peace, who came unto the city of Corinthe.
Bechaunce on that day there was celebrated a great feast, wherefore he found all
men plaieng at dyce, the women solacing them selves in the gardens, the
priests sh^tte with the crosse-bowes in the temples, the senators played in
the consistorye at tables, the masters of fence played in the streates, and to
conclude he found them al playeng. The philosopher seeing these things, without
speakinge to any man, or lighting of on his horse returned into his country,
without declaringe his message: and when the Corinthians went after him and
asked him why he did not declare the cause of his coming, he answered.
Friends I am come from Athens to Corinthe, not without great travail, and now
I return from Corinthe to Athens not little offended: and ye might have seen
it, because I spoke never a word to any of you of Corinthe, for I have no
commission to treat of peace with vnthriftye players, but with sage
governors. Those of Athens commanded me not to keep company with those that
have their hands occupied with dyce: but with those that have their bodies
laden with harnes, and with those that have their eyes daseled with their
books, For those men which have war with the dice, it is impossible they
should have peace with their neighbors. After he had spoken these words, he
returned to Athens. I let the understand my friend Pulio, that the Corinthians
think it to be the greatest felicity in the world, to occupy days and
nights in plays: and meruel not hereat, neither laugh thou them to scorn.
For it was told we by a Greek being in Antioche, that a Corinthian esteemed it
more felycitie to win a game, then the Roman captain did to win a
triumph. As they say the Corinthians were wise and temperate men, unless it
were in plays, in the which thing they were to vycious. Me think my friend
Pulio that I answer the more ampely then thou requyrest, or that my health
suffers, the which is little: so that both thou shalt be troubled to read it,
and I here shall have pain to wryt it. I will make the a brief some of all the
others which now come unto my remembrance, the which in diverse things have
put their joy and chief felycities.

Of Crates the philosopher.
CRates the philosopher put his felycitie, to have good fortune in prosperous
nauigacions, saying: that he which sayleth by sea, can never have perfect joy
at his heart, so long as he considers that between death and life there is but
on bourde. Wherefore the heart never feels so great joy, as when in the haven
he remembers the perrils which he has escaped of the sea.

Of Estilpho the philosopher.
EStilpho the philosopher put all his felycitie to be of great power, saying
that the man which can do little, is worth little, and he that has little, the
gods do him wrong to let him live so long. For he only is happy which has
power to oppress his enemies, and has wherewith al to succor him self, and
reward his friends.

Of Simonides the philosopher.
SImonides the philosopher put all his felycitie, to be well beloved of the
people, saying that churlyshe men, and evil condicioned, should be sent to
the mountains amongst brute beasts. For there is no greater felycity in this
life, then to be beloved of all, in the common wealth.

Of Archita the philosopher.
ARchita the Philosopher had all his felycity in conquering a battle, saying
that naturallye man is so much friend to him self, and desires so much to
come to the chief of his enterprise: that though for little trifles he played,
yet he would not be overcome. For the heart willynglye suffers all the
trauayles of the life, in hope afterward to win the vyctorye.

Of Gorgias the philosopher.
GOrgias the philosopher put all his felycytie, to hear a thing which pleased
him, saying that the body feleth not so much a great wound as the heart does an
evil word. For truly there is no music that sounds so sweet to the ears, as
the pleasant words are sauoury to the heart.

Of Crisippus the philosopher.
CRisippus the Philosopher had all his felycitye in this world, in making great
buildings, saying that those which of them selves left no memory, both in
their life, and after their death deserved infamye. For great and sumptuous
buyldynges, are perpetual monumentes of noble courages.

Of Antisthenes the philosopher.
ANtisthenes the philosopher put al his felicye in renown after his death. For
says he there is no loss, but of life that flytteth without fame.

For the wiseman neade not fear to dye. So he leave a memory of his virtuous
life behind him.

Of Sophocles the philosopher.
SOphocles had all his joy in having children, which should possess the
inheritance of their father: saying that the graffe of him that has no
children, surmounteth above al other sorrows. For the greatest felicity in
this life is, to have honor and riches, and afterward to leave children
which shall inherit them.

Of Euripides the philosopher.
EVripides the Philosopher had all his joy, in keaping a fair woman, saying
his tongue with words could not express the grief which the heart endures,
that is accumbred with a foul woman: therefore of truth he which happens of a
goodly and virtuous woman, ought of right in his life to desire no more
pleasure.

Of Palemon the philosopher.
PAlemon put the felycytye of men in eloquence, saying and swearing that the
man that cannot reason of al things, is not so like a reasonable man, as he is
a brute beast: For according to the opinyons of many, there is no greater fely
city in this wretched world, then to be a man of a pleasant tongue, and of
an honest life.

Of Themistocles the philosopher.
THemistocles put all his felycity, in discending from a noble lynage, saying
that the man which is come of a mean stock, is not bound to make himself of
a renowned fame: For truly the virtues and prowesses of them that are past, are
not but an example to move them to take great enterprises which are present,

Of Aristides the philosopher.
ARistides the philosopher put all his felycitie, in keaping temporal goods,
saying that the man which has not wherewith to eat, nor to sustain his life,
it were better counsel for him, of his free will to go into ye grave, then to
do any other thing: For he only shall be called happy in this world, who has
no need to enter into another man's house.

Of Heraclitus the philosopher.
HEraclitus put all his felycitie, in heaping up treasoure, saying that the
prodygall man, the more he gets the more he spends, but he has the
respect of a wise man, who can keape a secret treasoure for the necessityes
to come. Thou have now sufficiently understood my friend Pulio how that.vii.
months since I have been taken with the fever quartaine, and I swear unto the
by the immortal gods, that at this present instaunt writing unto the, my hand
shakes, which is an evident token that ye cold does take me, wherefore I am
constrained to conclude this matter which thou demaundest me, although not
according to my desire. For amongst true friends though the works do cease
wherewith they serve: yet therefore the inward parts ought not to quail,
wherwyth they love. If thou do ask me my friend Pulio, what I think of all
that is above spoken, and to which of those I do stick, I answer the. That
in this world I do not grant any to be happy, and if there be any, the gods
have them with them: because on the one side, choosing the plain and dry way
without clay, and on the other side all stonye and myerie, we may rather call
this life the precipitacion of the evil, then the safeguard of the good. I will
speak but one word only, but mark well what thereby I mean, which is, that
amongst the myshappes of fortune we dare say, that there is no felycitie in
the world. And he only is happy, from whom wisdom has plucked envious
adversity: and that afterward is brought by wisdom, to the highest
felycitye. And though I would I cannot endure any longer, but that the
immortal gods have the in their custoditye, and that they preserve us from
evil fortune. Since thou art retired now unto Bethinie, I know well thou
would I should write the some news from Rome, and at this present there
are none, but that the Carpentines and Lusitaines are in great strife and
dissension in Spain. I received letters how that the barbarous were quiet,
though the host that was in Illiria were in good case: yet notwistanding the
army is somewhat fearful and timorous. For in all the coaste and borders, there
has been a great plague. Pardon me my friend Pulio, for that I am so sickely,
that yet I am not come to my self. For the fever quartaine is so cruel a
disease, that he which has it, contenteth himself with nothing, neither
takes pleasure in any thing. I send the.ii. of the best horses that can be
found in all Spain, and also I send the ii. cups of gold of the richest that
can be found in Alexandria. And by the law of a good man I swear unto the,
that I desire to send the ii. or.iii. hours of those which trouble me in my
fever quartaine. My wife Faustine saluteth the, and of her part and mine also
to Cassia thy old mother, and noble widow, we have us commended. Marcus the
Roman Emperor with his own hand writes this, and again commends him
unto his dear friend Pulio.

That princes and great Lords ought not to esteem them selves, for being
fair, and well proportioned. Cap. xli..
IN the time that Iosue triumphed amongst the Hebrews, and that Dardanus
passed from great Greece to Samotratia, and when the sons of Agenor were
seking their sister Europe, and in the time that Siculus reigned in Scicil, in
great Asia, in the Realm of Egypt, was builded a great city called Thebes,
the which king Busiris built, of whom Diodorus Sicculus, at large mencioneth.
Plynie in the.36. chapter of his natural history, and Homere in the second of
his Iliade, and Statius in all the book of his Thebiade, do declare great
meruelles of this city of Thebes, which thing ought greatly to be esteemed: for
a man ought not to think that feigned which so excellent auctours have
written. For a truth they say that Thebes was in circuit.40. miles, and that
the walls were.30. stades hye, and in breadthe.6. They say also that the city
had a hundredth gates very sumptuous and strong, and in every gate.ii. hundredth
horsemen watched. Through the midst of Thebes passed a great river, the which
by mylles and fish did greatly profit the city. When Thebes was in his
prosperity, they say that there were two hundredth thousand fires, and besides
all this all the kings of Egypt were buried in that place. As Strabo says De
situ orbis, when Thebes was destroyed with enemies, they found therein lxxvii.
tombs of kings which had been buried there. And here is to be noted, that al
those tombs were of virtuous kings. For among the Egiptians it was a law
inviolable, that the king which had been wicked in his life, should not be
buried after his death. Before the noble and worthy Numantia was founded in
Europe, the rich Carthage in Affricke, and the hardye Rome in Italy, the
goodly Capua in Campaigne and the great Argentine in Germany, and the holy
Helia in Palestine: Thebes only was the most renowned of all the world. For
the Thebanes amongst al nations were renowned, as well for their riches as for
their buyldings and also because in their laws and customs, they had many
notable and severe things and all the men were severe in their works, although
they would not be known by their extreme doings. Homere says that the
Thebanes had v. customs, wherein they were more extreme then any other nation.

1. The first was, that the children drawing to v. years of age, were marked in
the forehead with a hoote iron, because in what places so ever they came they
should be known for Thebanes by that mark.

2. The second was, that they should accustom their children to travail
always on foot. And the occasion why they did this was, because the Egiptians
kept their beasts for their gods: and therefore when so ever they trauayled
they never rydde on horseback, because they should not seem to sit upon
their god.

3. The third was, that none of the citizens of Thebes should mary with any of
strange nations, but rather they caused them to marrye parents with parents,
because that friends maryeng with friends, they thought the frendshippe and
love should be more sure.

4. The fourth custom was, that no Thebane should in any wise make a house
for himself to dwell in, but first he should make his grave wherein he should be
buried. Me thinks that in this point the Thebanes were not to extreme, nor
excessive, but that they did like sage and wise men: yea and by the law of
veryte I swear, that they were sager then we are. For if at the least we did
imploye our thought but two hours in the weke to make our grave: it is
impossible but that we should correct every day our life.

5. The fifth custom was, that all the boys which were exceeding fair in
their face, should be by them strangled in the cradell: and all the girls
which were extreme foul, were by them killed and sacrifised to the godds.
Saying that the gods forgotte themselves, when they made the men fair, and the
women foul. For the man which is very fair, is but an vnparfite woman: and
the woman which is extreme foul, is but a savage and wild beast. The greatest
God of the Thebaines was Isis, who was a red bull nourisshed in the river of
Nile, and they had a custom, that all those which had red here immediately
should be sacrify^ed. The contrary they did to the beasts, for sith their
God was a bull of tawnye couloure, none durst be so bold to kyl any beasts of
the same color. In such form and manner, that it was lawful to kill both
men and women, and not the brute beasts. I do not say this was well done of the
Thebaines to sley their children, nor yet I do say that it was well done to
sacrifice men and women, which had red or taunye here, nor I think it a
thing reasonable, that they should do reverence to the beasts of that
color: but I wonder why they should so much despise foul women, and fair
men, since all the world is peopled both with fair and foul. Then since those
barbarous (living as they did under a false law) did put him to death, whom the
Gods had adorned with any beauty? we then which are Christians by reason ought
much less to esteem ye beauty of the body: knowing that most commonly
thereupon ensues the uncleanness of the soul. Under the crystal stone lies
oftentimes a dangerous worm, in the faier wall is nourisshed ye venomous
Coluber, within the middell of the white tothe is ingendered great pain to the
gummes, in the fynest clothe the motes do most hurt, and the most fruitful tree
by worms is sonest perisshed. I mean, that under the clean bodies and fair
countenaunces, are hid many and abominable vices. Truly not only to children
which are not wise, but to all other which are light and frail, beauty is
nothing else but the mother of many vices, and the hinderer of all virtues. Let
princes and great Lords believe me, which think, to be fair and well disposed,
that where there is great abundance of corporal goods and graces, there ought
to be great bones of virtues to be able to bear them. For the most high
trees by great winds are shaken. I say, that it is vanytie to be vain
glorious, in any thing of this world, be it never so parfite: and also I say
that it is a great vanytie to be proud, of the corporal beautye. For among
all the acceptable gifts that nature gave to the mortalles, there is nothing
more superfluous in man, and less necessary, then the beautye of the body.
For truly whether we be fair or foul, we are nothing the better beloved of
God, neither thereby the more hated of men. O blyndnes of ye world, O life
which never lives nor shall live, O death which never has end, I know not why
man through the accident of this beautye should or durst take upon him any
vain glory or presumption: since he knows that all the fairest, and most
parfitest of flesh, must be sacrificed to the worms in the grave. And know
also, that all the propernes of the members shall be forfeited to the hongry
worms which are in the earth. Let the great, scorn the little as much as they
will, the fair, mock the foul at their pleasure, the hole, disdain the
sick, the well made, envy the deformed, the white, hate the black, and the
Giantes, dyspise the dwarfes: yet in the end al shall have an end. Truly in
mine opinion, the trees bear not the more fruit, for that they are straight
only, nor for being high, neither for giving great shadow, nor for being
beautiful, nor yet for being great. By this comparison I mean, that though a
noble and stout man be proper of parson, and noble of lineage, shadowing of
favor, comlye in countenance, in renown very high, and in the common wealth
puissaunt, that therefore he is not the better in life.

For truly the common wealths are not altered by the simple laborers which
travail in the fields: but by the vicyous men, which take great ease in their
lives. Unless I be deceived, the swine and other beasts are fed under the
oaks with the acornes, and among the pricking briers and thorns the sweet
roses do grow, the sharp beeche gives us the sauoury chesnutts. I mean, that
the deformed and little creatures often times are most profitable in the common
wealth. For the little and sharp countenaunces, are signs of valiant and
stout hearts. Let us cease to speak of men which are fleshely, being eftsoon
rotten and gone, and let us talk of sumptuous buildinges which are of stone:
which if we should go to se what they were, we may know the greatness and the
height of them. Then we shall not know the manner of their beauty: and that which
seemed to be perpetual, in short space we see it end, and loase the renown,
in such sort that there is never memory of them after. Let us also leave the
ancient buildinges and come to the buildings now a days, and one shall see that
there is no man that makes a house, be it never so strong nor so fair, but
(living a little while) he shall see the beauty thereof decay. For there are a
great nombre of ancient men, which have seen both the tops of famous and
strong buyldings made, and also the foundation and ground thereof decayed. And
that this is true it appears manyfestly, for that if the top decay, or the
walls fall, or else if the timber be weke, or the joints open, or the windows
wax rotten, or the gates do break, the buildinges forth with do decay. What
shall we say of goodly haules, and galleries well appointed, the which within
short space, by coals or candels of children, or by torches of pages, or smoke
of chimneys, by cobwebbes of spyders, become as dry and foul, as before they
were fresh and fair. Then if that be true which I have said of these things I
would now gladly know, what hope man ca^ have of the co^tinuaunce of his
beauty, since we se the like destruction of corporal beauty, as of stones,
wood, brick, and clay. O unprofitable Princes, O children of vanity to folyshe
hardy, do you not remember that all your health it subject to sickness, as in
the pain of the stomach, in the heat of the liver, in the inflamacion of the
feet, in the distemperaunce of humors, the mocions of the air, in the
conjunctions of the Moon, in the Eclipse of the sun: I say do not you know
that you are subject to the tedyous summer, and intolerable winter? Of a
troth I cannot tell how you can be (among so many in perfections and
corruptions) so full of vain glory, by your beauty, seeing and knowinge that a
little fever does not only deface and mar the beauty, but also makes and
couloureth ye face al yelow, be it never so well favored. I have maruailed at
one thing, that is to wete, that all men are desirous to have all things about
their body clean, their gowns brushed, their coats net, the table
handsome, and the bed fine, and only they suffer their souls to be foul,
spotted, and filthi. I durst say, and in the faith of a christian affirm, that
it is a great lack of wisdom, and a superfluity of folly, for a man to have
his house clean, and to suffer his soul to be corrupted. I would know what
pre-eminence they have which are fair, above others to whom nature has denied
beautye. Peradventure the beauteful man has two souls, and the defourmed
creature has but one? peradventure the most fairest are the most healthful,
and the most deformed are the most sicklyest? Peradventure the most fairest are
the wysest, and the most defourmed the most innocents? peradventure the
fairest are most stout, and the defourmed most cowardes? peradventure the
fair are most fortunate, and the foul most vnluckyest? peradventure the fair
only are excepted from vice, and the foul depryued from virtue? peradventure
those which are fair, of right have perpetual life, and those which are
foul, are bound to replenyshe the grave? I say no certaynlye. Then if this be
true, why do the great mock the little, the fair the foul, the right the
crooked, and the white the black, since they know that the vain glory which
they have, and their beauty also, shall have an end to day or to morrow. A man
that is fair and well proportyoned, is therefore nothing the more virtuous: and
he that is deformed and evil shapen, is nothing therefore the more vicious: so
ye virtue depends not at all of the shape of ye body, neither yet vice
proceeds of the deformitye of the face. For daily we se the difformytie of the
body, to be beautyfied with virtues of the mind: and the virtues of the mind,
to be defaced with the vice of the body in his works. For truly he that in the
usage of his life has any botche or imperfectyon, is worse then he that has
four botches in his shoulders. Also I say, that though a man be great, yet it
is not true that therefore he is strong: so that it is not a general rule, that
the big body has always a valiant and courageous heart, nor the man which is
little of parson, should be of a vile and false heart. For we se by experyence,
the greatest men, the most cowards: and the least of personage, the most stout
and hardy of heart. The holy scripture speak of king David, that he was read
in his countenance, and not bygge of body, but of a mean stature, yet not
withstanding as he and the mighty Gyaunt Golias were in camp, David killed
Golias with a sling, and with his own sword cut of his head. We ought not
maruayle, that a little sheaperde should sley so valiant and mighty a Gyaunte.
For often times of a little spark comes a great light: and contrary wise by a
great torche a man can scarsely see to do any thing. This king David did
more, that he being little of body, and tender of years killed the Lions, and
recovered the lambs out of the Woulfes throtes, and besides this in one day in
a battle with his own hands, he slew to the number of 800 men. Though we
cannot find the like in our time, we may well ymagine, that of the 800. which
he slew, there were at least.300. of them as noble of lineage as he, as rich
in goods, as fair in countenance, and as high of stature: but none of these
had so much force and courage, since he escaped alive, and they remained in the
field dead. Though Julius Caesar was big enoughe of body, yet
notwithstanding he was evil proporcioned: For he had his head all bald, his
nose very sharp, one hand more shorter then the other. And albeit he was
young, he had his face ryuelled, his color somewhat yeallowe, and above all he
went somewhat crooked, and his girdel was half undone. For men of good wits
do not employ themselves to ye setting out of their bodies. Julius Caesar was so
unhandsome in his body, that after the battle of Pharsalique, a neighbor of
Rome said unto the great Orator Tullius. Tell me Tullius, why have thou
followed the parcialities of Pompeius since thou art so wise, know thou not
that Julius Caesar ought to be lord and monarche of all the world? Tullius then
answered. I tell the true my friend, that I seeing Julius Caesar in his youth so
evil and unseemly girded, judged never to have seen that that is seen of him,
and did never greatly regard him. But the old Silla knew him better. For he
saying Julius Caesar so uncomely, and so slouenly appareiled in his youth,
oftentimes said unto the Senate: beware of this young man so evil marked. For if
you do not watch well his procedings, it is he that shall hereafter destroy
the Roman people as Suetonius Tranquillus affirms in the book of Caeser.
Albeit that Julius Caeser was uncomely in his behavior, yet in naminge only
his name he was so feared through the world, as if bechaunce any king or
princes did talk of him at their table, as after supper, for fear they could
not sleep that night until the next day. As in Gallia Gotica where Julius
Caesar gave a battle, by chance a French knight took a Cesarian knight
prysonner, who being led prisonner by the frenchmen, said Chaos Caesar which
is to say: Let Caesar alone. Which the Gaulloys hearing the name of Caeser, let
the prisoner escape, and without any other occasion he fell besides his horse.
Now then let princes and great lords se, how little it avails the valiant
man to be fair or foul, since that Julius Caesar being so deformed, only with
naming his name caused all men for fear to change their countenance,
Hannibal the aduenturous Captain of Carthage is called monstrous, not only
for his deeds he did in the world: but also for the evil proporcion of his
body. For of his two eyes he lacked the right, and of the two feet he had the
left foot crooked, and above al he was little of body, and very fyerse and
cruel of countenance. The deeds and conquestes which Hannibal did among the
people of Rome, Titus Liuius declares at large: yet I will recite one thing
which an historiographer declares, and it is this. Frontine in the book of
the stoutnes of the Penians declares, that in xvii. years that Hannibal warred
with the Romans, he slew so great a number that if the men had been converted
into Kyne, and that the blood which was shed had been turned into wine, it had
been sufficient to have filled and satisfied his hole army, being 80. thousand
foot men, and 17 thousand horse men in his camp.

I demand now, how many were at that time faierer and more beautiful of
their bodies and countenance, then he was: whose beauty at this day is
forgotten, where as his valiauntnes shall endure for ever. For there was never
prince that left of him eternal memory, only for being beautiful of
countenance: but for enterprysinge great things with the sword in the hand.
The great Alexander was no fairer, nor better shapen the^ an other man. For the
chronicles declare of him, that he had a little throat, a great head, a black
face, his eyes somewhat troubled, the body little, and the members not well
proporcioned, and with all his deformity he destroyed Darius, king of the
Perses and Meedes, and he subdued all the tyrauntes: he made him self lord of
all the castles, and took many kings, and disherited and slew mighty Lords
of great estates, he searched all their riches, and pylled all their treasours,
and above all things, all the earth trembled before him, not having the
audacitie to speak one word against him.

Of a letter the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his Nephew, worthy to be
noted of all young gentlemen. Cap. xlii.
SExtus Cheronensis, in his second book of the life of Marcus Aurelius
declared, that this good Marcus Aurelius had a sister called Annia Milena, the
which had a son named Epesipus, who was not only nephewe, but also disciple
to Marcus Aurelius. And after he was created Emperor, he sent his nephewe into
Greece to study the Greek tongue, and to bannyshe him from the vices of Rome.
This young Epesipus was of a good and clear judgment, well made of his body,
and fair of countenance: and sith in his youth he esteemed his beauty more
then his learning, the Emperor his uncle wrote him a letter into Greece,
which said this.

Marcus Aurelius the Roman Emperor, first tribune of the people, and
Bishop, wysheth to thee Epesipus his nephew, and scholar, health and doctrine.
In the third Calendes of December, came thy cosyn Annius Verus, at whose
coming all our parentage rejoiced, and so much the more for that he brought
us news of Gretia. For truly when the heart has the absence of that he
loves, it is no one minute of an hour without suspicion. After that thy cosyn
Annius Verus had spoken in generally to all, bryngyng news from their friends
and children, we talked together, and he gave me a letter of thine, which is
contrary to that was written me out of Greece, because thou wrytest to me, that
I should send thee money to continue the in study, and they wrote unto me
from thence, that thou art more youthful and given to the pleasures of the
world, than becomes thee. Thou art my blood, thou art my Nephewe, thou
werte my scholar, and thou shalt be my son if thou art good. But God will
never that thou be my Nephew, nor that I call thee my son, during the time
that thou shall be young, fond, light and frail. For no good man should have
parentage with the vicious. I can not deny but that I loved thee from ye
bottom of my stomach, and so likewise thy vnthriftynes greaueth me with all my
heart. For when I read the letter of thy follyes, I let thee know that the
tears ran down my cheeks: but I will content my self. For the sage and
wise men, though (against their wylles) they hear of such things paste, yet
it pleases them to redress other things that may come hereafter.

I know well thou can not call it to mind, though perhaps thou haste it,
that when thy unlucky mother, and my sister Annia Milena died, she was then
young enough, for she was no more but.xviii. years of age, and thou had
not then four hours. For thou were borne in the morning, and she died at
nonetide: so that when the wicked child possessed life, the good mother tasted
death. I can tell that thou have lost such a mother, and I such a sister, that
I believe there was no better in Rome. For she was sage, honest, and fair, the
which things are seldom seen now a days. For so much as thy mother was
my sister, and that I had brought her up and married her, I loved her tenderly.
And when she died here at Rome, I read then Rethorike at Rhodes, because my
poverty was so extreme, that I had no other thing but that which by reading
Rethorike I did get. When news came unto me of the death of thy mother, and
my sister Annia Milena, al comfort laid on side, sorrow oppressed my heart in
such wise, that all my members trembled, the bones sheuered, mine eyes without
rest did lamente, the heavy sighs overcame me, at every minute my heart
vanished away, from the bottom of my heart I inwardly lamented, and bewailed
thy virtuous mother and my dear sister. Finally sorrow executing his privilege
on me, the joyful company grieved me, and only with the lovely care I quieted
my self. I know not, nor can not express unto the how, and in what sort I
took the death of my sister Annia Milena thy mother: for in sleaping I dreamed
of her, and dreaming I saw her, when I was awake she represented her self
before me, remembering then that she lived, I was sorry to remember her death.
Life was so grievous unto me, that I would have rejoiced to have been put in
the grave with her. For truly he feels assuredly the death of an other,
which always is sorowefull, and lamenting his own life. Remembering therefore
the great love which my sister Milena bare unto me in her life, and thinking
wherein I might requite the same after her death: I imagined that I could not
by any means do any thing more acceptable for her, then to bring thee up,
thou which art her child, and left an orphane so young. For of all
trauayles, to a woman this is chiefest: to leave behind her children to bring
up. My sister being dead, the first thing I did was, that I came to Rome, and
then sent thee to Capua to be brought up there, in the which place, hard at
my nose, they gave the suck two years. For thou know right well, that the
money which by reading Rethorike I gate, scarcely satisfied for thy daily
finding: but that in the night I read some extraordinary lecture, and with
that I paid for the milk, which thou suckedst on the dugge, so that thy
bringing up depended upon the labor of my life. After that thou were weyned and
brought from the teate, I sent the to Bietro, to a friend and kinsman of mine
named Lucius Valerius, with whom thou remainedst until five years were fully
accomplished, where I found both him and thee all things necessary. For he
was in great poverty, and a great babbler of his tongue, in such sort that he
troubled al men, and angered me much. For truly a man should as willingly give
money to cause him to be silente, which is talkatiue: as to give to a wise
man, to hear him speak. The five years accomplished, I sent thee to
Toringue, a city of Campagnia, to a master which taught children there,
called Emilius Torquates, of whom, to the end he should teach thee to read
and write three years: I took a son of his, whom he gave me to read to him
Greek four years, so that thou could not have any profit in thee, without
the increase of my great travail, and augmenting pain to my heart. After thou
were seven years old, that thou could read and write well: I sent thee
to study in the famous city of Tarenthe, where I kept thee four years,
paying to the masters a great sum of money. Because now a days through our
evil fortunes, there is none that will teach without great stipende. Without
lamenting I do not tell thee, that in the time of the Cincinos (which were
after the death of Quintus Cincinatus, until Cyna and Catullus) the
philosophers and masters of Rome did never receive one penny to teach sciences
to any that would learn them. For all the philosophers and masters were by
the sacred Senate paid, and none ceased to study for lack of money. For in
those days they which would apply them selves to virtue and sciences, were
by the common treasure maintained. As our fathers were well ordered in their
things: so they did not divide offices by order only, but also by order they
paid their money in such sort that they paid first with the common
treasure, the priests of the temples. Secondly the masters of schools and
studies. Thirdly the poor wydowes and orphans. Fourthly the strange
knights, which of their own free wylles voluntarely were made citezins of
Rome. Fifthly all the old soldiers, which had served. xxxvi. years
continually in the wars. For those which were retired home to their own
houses, were honorably found of the common wealth. The.xii. years paste I my
self was in Tarenthe, and carried thee to Rome, where I read unto thee
Rethorike, Logike, and Philosophy, and also the Mathematical sciences, keeping
thee in my house, in my company, at my table, and in my bed, and furthermore
I had thee in my heart, and in my mind. The which thing thou should
esteem more, then if I gave thee my house and all my goods. For the true
benefit is that only which is done without any respect of profit or
interest. I kept thee with me thus in this sort in Laurente, in Rhodes, in
Naples, and in Capua, until such time as the gods created me Emperor of Rome.
And then I determined to send thee to Greece, because thou should learn the
Greek tongue, and also to the end thou should accustom thy self to
work, that which true philosophy requires. For the true and virtuous
philosophers ought to conform their works to that they say, and publishe
their words with their deades. There is nothing more infamous, then to presume
to be sage, and to be desirous to be counted virtuous: principally for him that
speaks much, and works little. For the man of a pleasant tongue, and evil
life, is he which with impostumes undoes the common wealth. When I sent thee
to Greece, and withdrew thee from Rome, it was not to exyle thee out of my
company, so that thou having tasted of my poverty, should not rejoice at my
prosperity: but it was that considering thy youthful disposition and
lightness, I was afraid to undo thee in the palace, chiefly least thou would
have presumed to have been to bold and familiar, because thou werte my nephew.
For truly princes which take pleasure yt their children be familiar with the^,
they give occasion yt men shall not count the^ wise, and cause also the young
me^ to be esteemed for light I have told thee that I did for thee in Italy. I
will now let thee know what thou have done, and do in Greece, so that I will
show thee to be notorious, that is to know, that thou taking and esteming thy
self to be well disposed in thy youth, thou haste forsaken thy study, and
despised my counsayles, thou art accompanied with vain and light men, and
have viciously employed the money which I had sent thee to bie books. All the
which things to thee being hurtful, are to me no less dishonor and shame.
For it is a general rule, when the child is foolish and ill taught, the
blame and fault is laid on the masters neck, who has taught him, and
brought him up. It greueth me not for that I have brought thee up, neither for
that I have taught thee to read, and cause thee to study, neither likewise to
have kept thee in my house, to have set thee at my table, nor also to have
suffered thee to lie with me in bed, neither it greueth me to have consumed so
much money on thee: but with all my heart it greueth me, that thou haste not
given me occasion to do thee any good. For there is nothing that greueth a
noble prince more, then not to find parsons able of capacity, to do them any
good. They tell me that thou art well made of thy body, and fair of
countenance, and that thou presumest also in those things: wherefore to
enjoy the pleasurs of thy person, thou have forsaken philosophy, wherewith I
am not contented. For in the end the corporal beauty, early or late,
perishes in the grave: but virtue and science, makes men to be of immortal
memory. The gods never commanded it, neither the studies and universities of
Italy suffered it, to have the body fine and trim, the visage fair and
clear, and the heart full of philosophy: for the true philosopher, of all
other things estemeth lest the setting forth of the body. For that the
demonstrations and tokens of a true and perfect philosopher is to have his eyes
troubled, his eiebries burnte, and the head bauld, the bal of his eyes sonke
into his head, the face yellow, the body lean and feeble, the flesh dry, ye
feet vnhosed, the garment poor, the eating little, and the watching great.
Finally he ought to live as a Lacedemonian, and speak as a Grecian. The tokens
of a valiant and renowned captain, are his wounds and hurtes: and the sign
of a studious philosopher, is the despising of the world. For the wise man
ought to think him self as much dishonored, if they call him stout, and
sturdy: as a captain when they call him a cowarde and negligent. I like well
that the philosopher study the ancient antiquities of his forefathers, that
wrote the profounde things for the time to come, that he teach profitable and
holsom doctrines to those which are now alive, that he diligently enquire of
the mocion of the stars, that he consider what causes the alteration of the
elements. But I swear unto thee Epesipus, that never sage of Rome came to
those things, nor philosopher of Greece likewise, but in searching the quietness
of the soul, and despising the pleasurs of the body. Touching the body I am
like to beasts, but concerning the spirit I am partly like to the gods,
sith that following the things of the flesh I, am made less than my self,
and in following the motions of the spirit, I am made more then I am. For
truly sensuality makes us inferior to beasts, and reason makes us
superior unto men. The worldly malice and presumption naturally desires,
rather to mount then to descend: and to command, rather than to be
commanded. And since it is so, why do we by vices abase our selves to do
less then beasts, being possible for us by virtues, to do more then men?
Amongst all the members, which men can have, there is nothing more tender to
break, nor any thing more easy to corrupt, then is the handesomenes of the
body, whereof we are so proud. For in mine opinion, to esteem him self to be
handsome and propre of person, is no other thing, but to esteem our selves
that dreaming we shall be rich and mighty, and afterward awaking we find our
selves to be poor and miserable. And me thinks this thing to be true,
because I will declare, what it is to se a young man in his first age, the head
little, the here yeallowe, the browe long, the eyes grene, the chekes white,
the nose sharp, the lips colored, the bearde forked, the face lively, the
neck small, the body of good proportion, the arms little, the fingers long,
and to conclude, so well proportioned in his members, that men's eyes should
always desire to behold him, and the hearts always seek to love him. If this
young man so fair and well proportioned, remained long time in this beauty and
disposition, it were good to desire it, to procure it, to keep it, to praise
it, and to love it well: for in the end if we love the beauty in beasts and
buildinges, by greater reason we should desire it in our selves. But what shall
we say, that when we do not watch, this little flower which yesterday
florisshed on the tree, fair and whole, without suspicion to be lost, one
little hory frost suddenly wastes and consumes it, the vehement wind
overthrows it, the knife of envy cutteth it, the water of adversity undoes
it, and the heat of persecutions pineth it: and finally the worm of short
life gnaweth it, and the putrefaction of death decays and brings it down
to the ground. O man's life that art always cursed, I count fortune
cruel, and thee unhappy, since she will that thou tariest on her, which
dreaminge gives the pleasures, and wakinge woorketh the displeasures: which
gives into the hands travail to taste, and suffers thee not only to listen
after quiet: which will thou prove adversity, and agree not that thou have
prosperity but at her will: finally she gives thee life by ounces, and death
without measure. The wicked and vicious say, that it is a great pleasure to
live in ease: but I protest unto them, that there was never any mortal man had
so much pleasure in vices, but that he remained in great pain after that they
were bannished from him. For the heart, which of long time has been rooted in
vice, incontinently is subject to some great alteration. I would all would open
their eyes to see how we live deceived: for all the pleasures which delighte the
body, make us believe that they come to abide with us continually, but they
vanishe away with sorrow immediately. And on the contrary part, the
infirmities and sorrows that blind the soul say, that they come only to
lodge as gestes, and remain with us continually as householders. I marueyle of
thee Epesipus, why thou do not consider what shall become of the beauty of
thy body hereafter, sithe thou see presently the beauty of those departed
interred in the grave. By the dyuersitie of fruits, manne does know the
dyuersytie of trees in the Orcharde, that is to wete, the Oak by the acornes,
the Date tree by the dates, and the vines by the grapes: but when the root is
dry, the body cut, the fruit gathered, the leaf fallen, and when the tree is
laid on the fire and become ashes, I would now know if this ashes could be
known of what tree it was, or how a man might know the difference of the one
from the other? By this comparison I mean to say, that for somuche as the
life of this death, and the death of this life comes to seek us out, we are
all as trees in the orcharde, whereby some are known by the roots of their
predecessors, others by the leaves of their words, others by the branches of
their friends, some in the flowers of their beauty, and other some by the bark
of their foul skin. The one in their mercifulnes, the other in their
stoutnes, others in their hardines being aged, others in the hastines of their
youth, others in their barronnes by their poverty, others by their
fruitfulnes in riches, finally in one only thing we are all alike, that is to
wete that all universally go to the grave, not one remaining. I ask now when
death has done his office, executing all earthely men in the latter days,
what difference is there then between the fair and the foul, which lie both
in the narrow grave? certainly there is none, and if there be any difference,
it shall be in the making of the graves, which vain men invented. And I do not
repent me for calling them vain, since there is no vanity nor fondnes
comparable to this, for they are not contented to be vain in their lives, but
will also after their deaths eternise their vanities in sumptuous and stately
sepulchers. The coal of the Ceder (in my opinion) that is high and fair, is
nothing more whither when it is burnte, then the coal of the Oak which is
little and crooked. I mean, oftentimes the gods do permit, that the bones of a
poor Philosopher are more honored then the bones of princes. With death I
will threathen thee no longer, for sith thou art given to the vices of this
life, thou would not as yet that with a word it should destroy thee: but I
will tell thee one word more, though it grieve thee to hear it, which is,
that the Gods created thee to die, men begot thee to die, women bare thee to
die, and thou camste into the world for to die: and to conclude I say, some
are borne to day, on condition they die to morrow, and give their places to
others. When the great and fruitful trees begin to budde forth by the roots,
it signifies that time draws on for them, to cut the dry and wythered
branches. I mean that to see children borne in the house is no other, but to
cite the grandfathers and fathers to the grave. If a man would ask me what
death is, I would say a miserable lake wherein all worldly men are taken. For
those that most safely think to pass it over, remain therein most subtly
deceived. I have always read of the auncientes past, and have seen of the
young men present, and I suppose that the self same will be to come
hereafter. That when life most swetest seems to any man, then suddenly death
enters in at their doors. O immortal gods, I can not tell if I may call you
cruel, I know not if I may call you merciful, because you gave us flesh,
bones, honor, goods, friends, and also ye give us pleasure: finally ye give
to men all that they want, save only the cup of life, which to your selves
you did reserve. Since I may not that I would, I will that I may: but if it
were referred to my will, I would rather one only day of life, then all the
riches of Rome. For what avails it to toil and take pain to increase
honor, and worldly goods: since life daily diminishes. Returning therefore to
my first purpose, thou must know, that thou estemest thy self, and glorifiest
in thy personage and beauty: I would gladly know of the, and of others which
are young and fair, if you do not remember that once ye must come to be old
and rotten. For if you think you shall live but a little, then reason would
you should not esteem your beauties much: for by reason it is a strange
thing, that life should abate us, and folly train us. If you think to
become aged, ye ought to remember, and always to think, that the steel of
the knyfe, which does much service, at length decays and is lost for lack
of lokynge to. Truly the young man, is but a new knyfe, the which in process
of time cankerethe in the edge: for on one day he breaks the point of
understanding, another he loses the edge of cuttyng, and to morrow the rust of
diseases takes him, and afterward by adversity he is writhen, and by
infirmities he is diseased, by riches he is whetted, by poverty he is dulled
again: and finally, oftentimes it chaunseth that the more sharp he is
whetted, so much the more the life is put in hasarde. It is a true thing,
that the fete and hands are necessary to clyme to ye vanyties of youth: and
that afterward stumblynge a little, immediately rolling the head downewardes,
we discende into the misery of age. For (to our seamynge) yesterdaye we knew
one, that was young and beautiful: and with in short time after, we hear
that he is dead and rotten. When I consider many men, as well friends as
enemies, which were (not long a go) florisshyng in beautye and youth, and
presently I see them to be old and dry, sick and foul, truly I think that
as then I dreamed of them, or that they be not now as they were then. What
thing is more fearful, or more incredible, then to see a man become
miserable, in short space, that the fashion of his visage should change, the
beauty of the face should be lost, the beard wax white, the head bauld,
the cheeks and forheade full of wrynckelles, the teethe (as whit as Iuorye)
become black, the light feet by the gout to seem crepeled, and afterward
waxes heavy, the palsy weakeneth the strong arm, the fine smothe throat
with wrinckelles is pleated, and the body that was straight and vpryghte,
waxes weak and crooked. Above all that I have spoken, I say to ye Epesipus
(which presumest to be fair) that he which through his propernes in youth was
ye mirror of all, becomes to be such a one, yt he douteth whether he be the
self same now in his age, that he was in his youth. Do what thou will,
praise and gloryfye thy beauty as much as thou thinckest good, yet in the end
the beauty of men is none other: but as a veil to cover their eyes, a pair
of fetters for the fete, manacles for the hands, a lyme rod for the wings,
a these of time, an occasion of danger, a prouoker of trouble, a place of
lecherye, a sink of all evil. and fynallye it is an inuentour of debates, and
a scourge of the affectioned man. Since thou haste forsaken thy study, I am
not bound to send the any thing, chiefly wasting thy monye in childysh and
youthful toys: but notwithstanding all those things, I send the by Aulus
Vegenus two thousand crounes for thy apparaile, and truly thou shall be very
unthankful, if thou do not know the benefit done unto the. For a man ought
to give more thanks for that which is done of courtesy: then for that which is
offered of necessity. I cannot tell, what to let the understand in these
parts, but that thy sister Anania Salaria is married, who says she is
content. I pray God it be so, for with money men may be helped to marriages:
but it lies in the gods to content the parties. If thou will know of Toringa
thy cosen, thou shalt understand she is embarked in the fleet which went to
Spain, and in deed I never thought otherwise on her, after she had hene.3.
days hid in the way of Salaria. For maids that will betimes gather their
grapesi: t is a token that they will go on warfare with souldyars. Of Annius
Rufus thy friend and companion, I certify the that he is gone into ye I Will of
Helespont, and he goes by the authority of the senate, to understand the
government thereof: and albeit he be young, yet he is wise, and therefore I
suppose he will render a good account of his commission. For of these two
extremities, the aged that do decline, or the young that are wise: I had rather
hold my self to the wisdom of the young, then to the white berdes of the aged.
My wife Faustine saluteth the, and be thou assured that in thy affairs (at the
least to my seming) she is very favorable unto the, and daily she instauntely
requires me not to be angrye with the, saying: that sage men ought not to
esteem the lyghtenes of youth, and that there is no old man that is sage, but
he which in all things, was light and youthefull. I say no more to the in
this case, but if thou will be good, I cannot denaye that thou art not my
nepheue, my old scoler, and servant. For if in the I se amendment, I will
withdraw mine ire. For truly among the loving hearts, there is nothing that
plucketh up the evil will, unless it be the good life. At the request of my
wife Faustine I have written the this word, and I say no more, but that of her
part and mine thou commend us to all the university. The Gods have the in
their custodye, to whom it may please to give the amendment of life. Marcus
Aurelius the roman emperor, to the Annius Epesipus writes with his own
hand.

How princes and great Lords in old time were lovers of wise men. Chap. xliii.
ONe of the chiefest things that wanne reputacion and eternal memory to the
ancient princes and Gouerners, was that they sought wise men to be always
couersaunt about them, whose grave counsel their realms always observed,
and obeyed. It profits a king little, to lead with him a great number of
sages, to govern him and his realm: if his subjects are armed with malice
not to obey him. Let princes know, which esteem not the counsel of sages,
that their commandment of other shall not be regarded. For the law which by
will is made, and not of right ordained, deserves not to be obeyed. We which
turn and toss ye leaves of the ancient histories cannot denay, but that the
romans naturally were proud. Yet we must confess, that as they have been
stout in things touching wars: so they have showed them selves temperate, in
the affairs of the public weal. And truly herin Rome declared her wisdom
and might, for as by hardye and stout captains the enemies were destroyed in
war: so by sages and wise men the common wealth was governed and maintained
in peace. Often times with my self I muse whereupon all these discordes grew,
between lords and subjects, princes and vassalles: and my count being made, I
find that they have both reason. For the subjects complain of the little love
of their lord: and the lords complain of the great disobedience of their
subjects. For to say ye truth, disobedience is so much augmented, and the
desire of commandment is become so licencious, that it seems to the
subjects that the waighte of a fether is lead: and on the contrary it seems
to princes that for the flieng of a fly, they should draw their swords. All
this evil and damage comes not, but because the princes have not with them
wise men, which may counsel them: for there was never any good prince, that
credited evil counsel. There are two things in princes and prelates which
govern the soul, the one is the dignity of the office, and the other is the
nature of ye person. It may well be that on may be good in his person, and evil
in his government: and the contrary, he may be evil of his person, and good in
government. And therefore Tullius Cicero says, that there never was nor shall
be such a Julius Caesar in his person, nor so evil a governor as he was for
the common wealth. It is a great grace in a man to be good, but it is much more
that he be a good prince: and for the contrary, it is a great evil for a man to
be evil, but it is much worse for him to be an evil prince. For the evil man
is only evil to him self, but the evil prince indomageth al others: for the
more the poison is scatered through the body, in so much more danger he is of
his life. I mean, the more power a man has over the common wealth: so much
the more evil and damage he does if his life be evil. I marvel why princes
and great lords should be so curious to search the best medicines to cure
their bodies: and that they are so slack and slow in seking sage persons to
govern their common wealth. For without comparison, it is greater damage that
the common wealth be evil governed, then if the prince and governor thereof
should be sick in his person. Hitherto we have neither red nor seen that any
Prince have perrished for lack of phisike, but for lack of counsailours we
have seen and red of infinite kings and realms that have been destroyed, and
utterly undone.

The lack of a physician may cause danger in man's person: but the lack of a
wise man, may set discord amongst the people. For where there is any tumulte
amongst the people a ripe counsel of a wise man profits more: then a
hundredth purgacions of rubarbe. Isidorus in the forth book of his Etimologies
affirms, that the romans were four hundredth years without phisicions. For
Esculapius the son of Apollo was the last phisician in Greece. And in the
temple of the same Esculapius, they set by the image of Archabuto, a man very
notable in surgery. For the romans were so beneficious to virtuous parsones,
that to every on that exceaded other in any kind of virtue, they rewarded him
with money, they set up a statute of him for memory, or else they made him fre in
the common wealth. And then when the surgian Archabuto was become ancient, and
very rich, and when by occasion of great and dangerous wondes he did cut of
the arms and legs of certain Romans, they thought him a cruel an
unnatural man. Wherefore they drove him out of his house, and killed him with
stones in the field of Mars. And let no man marvel thereat, for oftentimes men
suffer less harm in enduring the pain, then to tarry for ye cruel remedies
the surgians apply unto it. Some men will say, that when Rome was without
surgians, the romans were disconfaited and half lost. To this I will
answer, yt they never had a more prosperous time* then in ye.400. yers when
they were without surgians. For then was Rome undone, when they received surgions,
for at ye tune they drove philosophers out of rome. I do not speak this as a
prejudice to any surgian, for me thinks that princes cannot be without some
among them. For as the flesh is feeble and delicate, so daily needs it
remedies to comfort it. The sage surgeons gives us none but good and
healthful counsels. For they do not persuade us to any other thing, but that
we be: sober and continent, in eating, drynking, sleapinge, travailing, and
workinge and that in all things we should be temperat. The end why I speak
these things is, to persuade princes, prelates, and great lords, that the
great diligence they have to seek surgeans, and the sum of money they wast to
mainteyne and content them, they should spend part of that to seek wise men to
counsel their persons. For if men knew what it were to keape a wise man,
to command in their house, they would give for on only wise man al their
goods. Ye ought to have pity and compassion upon those princes, and great
lords, which lose so many days in the month, and so many hours in the day,
in speaking of wars, buildinges, weapons, meats, beasts, of huntinges, and
medecines, and oftentimes of othermens doings, and of other vain things, not
necessary for man's life. And this communication they use with those that are
neither virtuous, nor wise: the which can neither wisely talk, nor yet
answer directly unto that which is asked. Oftentimes it chaunseth that a
prince at randon moves a matter, which they never saw written before, nor with
their ears they never hard ye like, neither in all their life time they had
knowledge thereof, and yet they will seem to give judgment of it, (or better to
say) obstinatlie to cotend, as if all the days of their life they had studied
it: which thing proceeds of great shame, and evil bringyng up. For the privy
counsel may speak before their princes, but be they never so priuye, with
license or without license it is not lawful for them to contend. Helius
Spartianus in the life of Alexander Seuerus says, that the emperor Seuerus
was demanded once by an ambassador of Graece, what thing was most painful
to him in Rome? whereunto the emperor answered. There is nothing greueth me
more, then when I am merry, that my servants should raise any strife or
debate: I am not displeased that matters should be debated, but this greueth me
when on will obstinately strive, that has no ground of that he speaks* For
the man which gives reason of that he speaks, cannot be called obstinate.
Theodosius the Emperor was once demanded what a prince ought to do to be
good, whereunto he au^swered, the virtuous prince when he goes abroad, ought to
have grave and wise men in his compagnie to discourse with all, when he is at
his meat to have wise men at his bourde disputing, and when he withdraws him
self a part to be reading with wise men: and finally at all vacant times, he
ought to be found with sage men counsaling. For the knight which enters into
battle without weapons, is as hardye as the prince which will govern the
common wealth, without the counsel of wise men. Lampridius in the book of
the Romayne gestes says, yt the emperor Marcus Aurelius nether at his meat,
at his going to bed, at his vprising, in his travail, openly, nor secretly,
suffered at any time that fools should sing or communicate with him, but only
wise and virtuous men, who^ always he most intierly loved. Of truth he had
reason, for there is nothing, be it in jest or in earnest, but is better lyked
of a wise man, then of a fool. If a prince be sad, cannot a wise man
peradventure by the saienge of the holy scripture counsel him better, then a
fool by folysh words? If a Prince be prosperous, shall it not be better (to
keep him in the same prosperity) to associate him self with a wise man, rather
then to put his trust in a fool and malicious person? If a prince be destitute
of money, cannot perchance a wise man find him better means to get it, the^ a
fool which does nothing but ask? If a prince will pass the time away, shall
not he be more comforted with a wise man, that rekeneth unto him the sauorye
histories done in times past, then harkening a fool speaking folishely, and
declaring things dishonestly, with the sayenges of the malicious of the time
present? That that I speak of surgians, the self same I speak of foles. For
I do not say that they keape them for their pastime, though truly we might
better say to loase their time, then to pass their time. For that may justly
be called time lost, which is spent without the service of God, and profit of
their neighbors. That which I most marvel at is, not so much for ye great
authority ye fools have in the palaces of princes and great lords, as for
the little succor and credit which wise men have among them. For it is a great
injury, ye fools should enter into ye palace of princes even unto their bed
side, and that one wise man may not nor dare not enter into the halle. So yt to
the on there is no door shut: and to the other there is no gate open. We which
are at this present, of right do commend those. yt were before us, for no other
cause, but that in times past, though the sages were few in number, and the
world was replenished with barbarous people: yet the sages of those barbarous
people were greatly esteemed, and had in reverence. And this custom endured
long time in Greece, that when a philosopher passed by a Greek, he rose and
spoke unto him, and he might not sit: for the contrary, al those which shall
live here after will reprove us which are at this present. Forasmuch as we
have so great a multitude of sages, and do not live amongst barbarous, but
amongst Christians: and it is a grefe to see, and shame to write, how little
wise me^ are esteemed. For at this day (through our offenses) not those which
have most science: but those which have most riches, in the common wealth do
command. I know not whether the divine wisdom has deprived the^, or that the
worldly malice has lost the taste of them. For now a days there is no sage,
that lives al alone to be wise, but it is necessary for him to travail how to
gain his living: for necessity enforces him, to violate the rules of true
philosophy. O world, world, I know not how to escape thy hands, nor how the
simple man and ideote defends him self out of thy snares, when the sage and
wise men (yea with all their wisdom) can scarsely set their foot sure on the
ground. For all that wise men of this world know, is little enough to defend them
from ye malicious. Readyng that which I read of time past, and seeing that which
I se of time present: I am in doubt which was greater, the care that virtuous
princes had in seeking out sages to counsel the^, or the great covetousness
that others have at this present, to discover mines and treasures. Speaking
therefore in this matter as I think, I desire that those which have the charge
of government (whether he be prince, prelate, or private parson I pass not)
that they once may have about them sage me^, that be wise in deed, and that
they would love them above all the treasour they had heaped. For in the end, of
good counsel there comes profit: and much treasour, is a token of great
danger. In the old time when virtuous Princes died, and that they left their
children for successors in their Realms, and besides that forasmuch as they
saw their children young, and evil instructed in the affairs of their realms,
they committed them to tutours, that should teach the^ good works and
doctrine: rather than they would give them surueyours, which should increase
and augment their cofers and rentes. For truly if the common wealth be defended
with great treasures, it is not governed with good counsayles. The princes
which are young, accustomely are given to vices: for in the one part youth
reigns, and on the other part honesty wants. And to such truly vices ar
very dangerous, specially if they want sages to counsel the^, to keape them
from evil company. For the courageous youth will not be brydeled, nor their
great liberty can be chastysed. Princes without doubt have more need of wise
men about them, to profit them in their counsels: then any of all their
other subjects. For since they are in the view of all, they have less license
to commyt vice than any of all. For if they do behold all, and that they have
authority to judge all, will they nill they, they are beholden and judged of
all. Princes ought to be circu^spect whom they trust with the government of
their realms, and to whom they commytte the leading of their armies: whom they
send as embassatours into strange countries, and whom they trust to receive
and keape their treasurs: but much more they ought to be circumspecte in
examinyng of those whom they choose to be their counsalours. For look what he
is that counsaileth the Prince at home in his palace: so likewise shall his
renown ^e in strange countries, and in his own common wealth. Why should
they not then willingly examine, and correct their own proper palace? Let
princes know, if they do not know, that of the honesty of their servants,
of the providence of their counsayles, of the sagenes of their persons, and
of the order of their house, depends the welfare of the common wealth. For it
is impossible that the branches of that tree, whose roots are dried up,
should be seen to bear grene leaves.

How the Emperor Theodosius provided wise men at the hour of his death, for
the edification of his.2. sons. Archadius and Honorius. xliiii. Chap.
Ignatius the Hystorian in the book that he made of the.2. Theodosij, of the.3.
Archadij, and of the.4. Honorii declares, that the first and great Theodosius
being fyftie years old, and having governed the Empire.11. yers, lyenge on his
death bed, called Archadius and Honorius, his.2. sons, and committed them to
Estilconus and Ruffinus to be instructed, and ordained them likewise for
gouerners of their estates, and signories. Before that the father dyed he had
now created his children Cesars, being then of the age of.17. years. Therefore
the father seeing them not as yet ripe, nor able to govern their Realms and
signories: he committed them unto masters and tutours. It is not always a
general rule, though one be of.25. years of age, that he has more discretion
to govern realms then another of.17. For daily we see, that we allow and
commend the.10. years of one, and reprove the.40. years of an other. There are
many princes tender of years, but ripe in counsels: and for the countrary
there are other princes old in years, and young in counsels. When ye good
Emperor Vespasian died, they determined to put his son Titus in the
government of ye empire, or some other aged Senator, because they said Titus
was to young. And as they were in controversy of the matter, the Senator
Rogerus Patroclus said unto the Senate. For my part I require rather a Prince
which is young, and sage: then I do a prince which is old and foolysh. Therefore
now as touching the children of Theodosius, one day Estilconus the tutour of
Archadius speaking to a greek philosopher, very sage, whose name was Epimundus,
said thus unto him. Thou and I long time have been acquainted together in the
palace of the emperor Theodose, my lord, who is dead and we are alive: thou
know it had been better that we.2. had died, and that he had lived. For
there be many to be servants of princes, but there are few to be good princes.
I feel no greater grief in this world, than to know many princes in one
realm. For the man which has seen many princes in his life: has seen many
novelties and alterations in the common wealth. Thou know well that when
Theodosius my master died, he spoke to me these words, the which were not
spoken without great sighs: and multiplienge of tears. O Estilconus I dye,
and am going into an other world, wherein I shall give a streighte account of
ye Realms and seignories which I had under my charge: And therefore when I
think of mine offenses, I am meruelously afraid. But when I remember ye mercy
of God, then I receive some conforte and hope. As it is but mete we should
trust in the greatness of his mercy: so likewise is it reason we should fear
the rigor of his justice. For truly in the christian law they are not suffered
to live (as we which are Princes that live in delights of this world) and
afterward without repentance to go streighte to Paradyse. Then when I think
of the great benefittes which I have received of God, and of the great offenses
which I have committed, and when I think of the long time I have lived, and of
the little which I have profited, and also that unprofitably I have spent my
time: On the one part I am loath to dye, for that I am afraid to come before
the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ: and on the other part, I would live no
longer, because I do not profit. The man of an evil life, why does he desire to
live any longer? My life is now finished, and the time is short to make
amends. And sith god demands naught else but a contrite heart, with all my
heart I do repent, and appeal to his justice, of mercy, from his Justice to
his mercy, because it may please him to receive me into his house, and to give
me perpetual glory, to the confusion of al my sins and offenses. And I
protest I dye in the holy catholic faith, and commend my soul to god, and my
body to the earth, and to you Estilconus and Ruffinus, my faithful servants,
I reco^mende my dear beloved children. For herby ye love of the children is
seen, in yt the father forgets the^ not at the hour of his death. In this
case of one only thing I do warn you, one only thing I require you, one only
thing I desire you, and one only thing I command you, and that is, that you
occupye not your minds in augmentinge the Realms and seignories of my
children: but only that you have due respect to give the^ good education and
virtuous servants. For it was only the wise men which I had about me, yt thus
long have maintained me in this great authority. It is a goodly thing for a
prince to have stout captains for ye wars: but without comparison it is
better to keape and have wise men in his palace. For in ye end, the victory of
ye battaille consists in the force of many: but ye government of the common
weal oftentimes is put under the advice of one alone. These so doleful and
pitiefull words, my lord and master Theodosius spoke unto me: now tell me
Epimundus what I should do at this present, to fulfill his commandment? For
at his heart he had nothing that troubled him so much, as to think whether his
children would undo, or increase the common wealth. Thou Epimundus, thou art
a Grecian, thou art a philosopher, thou have understanding, thou art an old
servant, thou art my faithful friend, therefore for all these things thou art
bound to give me good and healthful counsel. For many times I have heard
Theodosius my master say, that he is not accounted sage which has turned ye
leaves of many books: but he which knows, and can give good and healthful
counsels. Epimundus the philosopher answered to these words. Thou know
well Lord Estilconus, that the auncientes and great Philosophers, ought to be
brief in words, and very parfect in their works. For otherwise to speak
much, and work little, seems rather to be done like a tyrant: then like a
greek philosopher. The Emperor Theodosius was thy Lord, and my friend. I say
friend, because it is the liberty of a greek Philosopher, to acknowledge no
homage nor service to any superior. For he in his heart can have no true
science: yt to rebuke the viicous keeps his mouth shut. In one thing I content
my self in Theodose above al other princes, which were in the Roman empire,
and that is, that he knew and talked wisely of al his affairs, and also was
very dilligent to execute the same. For all the fault of Princes is, that they
are prompte and bold to talk of virtues: and in executing them, they are very
slack and fearful. For such Princes can not continue in the virtue, which
they do commend: nor yet resyste the vice, which they do dispraise. I grant
that Theodosius was an executour of justice, merciful, stout, sober,
valiant, true, loving, thankful, and virtuous: and finally in all things,
and at all times he was fortunate. For fortune oftentimes brings that to
Princes, which they will and desire: yea many times better then they look for.
Presuppose it to be true (as it is most true) that the time was always
prosperous to ye Emperor Theodosius: yet I doubt whether this prosperity will
continue in the succession of his children. For worldly prosperity is so
mutable, that with one only man, in a moment, she makes a thousand shrewde
turns: and so much the more it is hard to continue steadfast in the second
heir. Of slow and dull horses, come oftentimes courageous and fyerse coltes:
and even so of virtuous fathers, come children evil brought up. For the wicked
children inherit the worste of the father, which is riches: and are
dysenherited of the best, which are virtues. That which I perceive in this
matter, as well of the father which is dead, as of the children which are
alive, is that Theodose was virtuous in deed, and the children are capable to
follow both good and evil, and therefore it is requisite that you now go
about it. For the prince which is young, is in great peril, when in his
youth he begins not to follow the steps of virtue. To speak particulerly
of Archadius, and Honorius, I let the know Estilconus, that it is a thing
superfluous to talk of it, for I should loase my time: because the things of
Princes are very delicate, and though we have license to praise their virtues,
yet we are bound to dissemble their faults.

As a sage father Theodose desire yt to give his children good doctrine, and
always to accompany them: But I as a friend do counsel ye, that thou keep them
from evil. For in the end al is evil, to accompany with the evil, and forsake
the good: but the worse evil pursues us, rather by the presence of the evil,
than by the absence of the good. It may well be, that one being alone, and
without the company of the good, may yet notwithstanding be good: but for one
that is accompanied with evil men, to be good, of this I greatly doubt. For ye
same day: that a man accompanies him self with the vicious: the self same
day he is bound to be subject to vice. O Estilconus, since thou so much
desire to accomplish the commandment of thy lord and master Theodose, if
thou can not cause that Archadius and Honorius (which are young princes) do
accompany with the good: yet at the least withdraw them from the company of the
evil. For in the courts of princes vicious men are none other, but solicitours
in this world to attempt others to be vicious. How many, and what solicitours
have we seen (thou and I in Rome) the which forgetting the affairs of their
Lords, did solicit for them selves, vices and pleasurs. I will not tell what
servants of princes have been in times past: but what they were, and what
they are, every man may easily see. I will tell the only, not of those which
ought to be counselors of princes: but also of those, which ought not to
live in their courts. For the counselors and officers of princes ought to be
so just: that sheares can not find what to cut away in their lives, nor that
there neadeth any nedle or thread to amend their fame. If thou Estilconus haste
hard what I have said: mark now what I will say, and keape it in memory, for
peradventure it may profit the one day.

In the courts of princes, proud men ought to have no familiarity nor
enterteinement. For it is unseemly that those which are not gentle in words,
should command: and those that have not their hearts ready to obey, should be
familier with the prince. In the courts of princes, there ought not to be of
counsel, and much less familiar, envious men: for if envy reign amongeste
Princes and counsailours, there shall always be discentions in the common
wealth. In the courts of princes hasty men ought not to have familiarity: for
oftentimes it chances, that the impacie^ce of the counselors, causes the
people to be evil content with their princes. In the courts of princes there
ought not to be familiar, nor of counsel, gready nor covetous men: for the
Princes give great occasion to the people to be hated, because their servants
have always their hands open to receive bribes. In the courts of princes
there ought not to be familiar fleshelye men: for the vice of the flesh has in
it so little profit, that he yt is wholly overcome there with, is or ought to be
to ye prince always suspected. In ye palace of a king there ought not to be
drunkerdes, nor gluttons: for whereas the familiers ought principaly to serve
their princes with good counsel, in mine opinion a man being full and
surcharged with exces is more like to bealche and break wind after his
surfette: then able to give any profitable counsel in the common wealth. In
the palace of princes ought not to be resient nor familiar blasphemers: for the
man which is a servant, and openly dare blaspeme his creator: will not spare
in secret to speak evil of his Lord.

In the palace of princes ought not to be of counsel, nor familiar, ye
negligent and delicat persons: For there is nothing (next unto ye divine
providence) that healpeth princes more to be puissaunt, and mighty, then when
their servants are faithful, and diligent. In the palace of princes defamed
men ought not to have familiarity: for the prince can not excuse him self to
be thought culpable when they do rebuke him, if in his house he mainteyne
servants, which openly are defamed. In the palace of princes they ought not
to suffer Ideotes and fools: for the re^ames are not loast for that the
princes are young, uncircumspect, and vicious: but for that their counsaylours
are simple and malicious. Woe, woe, be to the land, where the lord is vicious,
the subject sedicious, the servant covetous, and the counsailour simple and
malicious. For tha^ the common wealth perishes, when ignorance and malice
reigns in the Prince and governor of the same. These words passed between
the noble knight Estilconus, and the wise Philosopher Epimundus, upon the
bringing up of those.2. princes Archadius, and Honorius. And because that
princes and prelates might see (which now have the charge to govern people)
how much the auncientes did desire to have sage men about them:
notwithstanding that I have spoken, I will show you here some notable and
ancient examples.

How Cresus king of Lydia was a great friend and lover of Sages. Of a letter
the same Cresus wrote to the Philosopher Anacharsis. And of an other letter of
the Philosophers answer again to the King. Chap. xlv.
IN the year of the creation of the world, 4355. and in the third age,
Sardanapalus being king of the Assirians, Ozias king of the Hebrews, and
Elchias being high bishop of the holy temple, at that time when Rea the mother
of Romulus lived, in the second year of the first Olimpiade, the great and
renowned realm of Lydes, had beginning: as Pliny in the fyfte book of the
natural history says. Lidia is in Asia Minor, and first was called Meonia,
and afterward was called Lidia, and now is called Morea. This Realm of Lydes
had many worthy cities, that is to wete, Ephese, Colose, Aclasomena, and
Phore^. The first king of Lydes was Ardisius, a man of great courage, and a
Greek borne, and reigned.36. year. The second was Aliaces, who reigned 14.
yers. The third was Meleus, and he reigned.12. years. The fourth was Candale,
and reigned.4. years. The fifte was Ginginus, and reigned.5. years. The syxte
was Cerdus, and reigned.6. years. The.vii. was Sadiates, and reigned.15.
years. The.viij. was Aliates, and he reigned.49. years and the.ix. was
Cresus, and reigned.15. years. and of this king Cresus, Xenophon declares
that he was more valiaunte in feats of war: then comely of personage. For
though he was lame of one foot, bleamished of one eye, lackyng one ear, and
of body not much bygger than a dwarf: yet for all this he was a just manne,
very constant, stout, merciful, courageous, and above all he was a great
enemy to the ignorant, and a special friend to the sage. Of this King
Cresus, Seneca speaks in his book of clemency and says, that the sages
were so entierly beloved of him, that the greeks (which had the fountain
of eloquence) did not call him a lover, but entitled him the love of sages. For
never no lover did so much to attain to the love of his lady, as he did to
draw to him, and to his countreye, sage men. This king Cresus therefore
being lord of many Barbarous nations (the which loved better to drink the
blood of the innocent: then to learn the science of the wise) like an
excellent Prince determined for the comfort of his person, and remedy of his
common wealth, to search out the greaetst sages that were in Greece. At that
time flourished the famous and renowned philosopher Anacharsis, who though he
was borne and brought up among the Scithies: yet he was always resident
notwithstanding in Athens. For the university of Athens did not despise those
that were Barbarians: but those that were vicious. The king Cresus sent an
embassatour in great authority with riches, to the Philosopher Anacharsis, to
persuade and desire him, and with those gifts and presents to present him, to
the end it might please him to come and see his person, and to set an order
in his common wealth. Cresus not contented to send him gifts which the
imbassatour carried, but for to let him understand why he did so, wrote him a
letter with his own hand as hereafter follows.

The letter of king Cresus, to Ancharsis the Philosopher.
CResus king of Lydes, wysheth to the Anacharsis great Philosopher, which
remainest in Athens, health to thy person, and increase of virtue. Thou shalt
see how well I love the, in that I never saw the, nor knew the, to write unto
the a letter. For the things which with the eyes have never been seen:
seldom times with the heart are truly beloved. Thou do esteem little (as
truth is) these my small gifts, and presents which I send the: yet I pray
the greatly esteem the will and heart wherewith I do visit the. For noble
hearts receive more thankefully that which a man desires to give them: then
that which they do give them in deed. I desire to correct this my Realm, and
to see amendment in the common wealth. I desire some good order for my person,
and to take order touching the government of my palace. I desire to
communicate with a sage some things of my life, and none of these things can
be done without thy presence. For there was never any good thing made, but by
the mean of wisdom. I am lame, I am crooked, I am balde, I am a counterfeyte,
I am black, and also I am broken, finally amongst all other men I am a
monster. But all these imperfections are nothing to those that remain, that is
to wete, I am so unfortunate, that I have not a Philosopher with me. For in the
world there is no greater shame: than not to have a wise man about him to be
conuersaunt withal. I count my self to be dead, though to the simple fools I
seem to be alive. And the cause of my death is, because I have not with me some
wise person. For truly he is only alive amongst the living: who is accompanied
with the sages. I desire the greatly to come, and by the immortal gods I
conjure the that thou make no excuse: and if thou will not at my desire, do it
for that thou art bound. For many men oftentimes condescend to do that which
they would not: more for virtues sake, then to satisfye ye demand of any
other. Thou shall take that which my embassatour shall give the, and believe that
which he shall tell in my behalf, and by this my letter I do promise the, that
when thou shall ariue here, I will make ye treasourer of my coffers, only
cou^sailour of mine affairs, secretary of my cou^sail, father of my children,
refourmer of my realm, master of my person, and governor of my commonwealth:
finally, Anacharsis shall be Cresus, because Cresus may be Anacharsis. I say no
more, but the gods have the in their custody, to whom I pray that they may
hasten thy coming. The imbassatour departed to go to Athens, bearyng with
him this letter, and many jewels and bags of gold: and by chance Anacharsis
was reading in thuniuersity, at the arriual of the imbassatoure to Athens. Who
openly said and did his message to Anacharsis, presenting unto him the gifts
and the letter. Of which thing all those of the university marueiled, for ye
barbarous princes were not accustomed to seek philosophers, to govern their
common wealth: but to put them to death, and take from them their lives. After
the great philosopher Anacharsis had hard the embassage, seen ye gifts, and
received ye letter, without alteryng his countenance, or elacion of his
person, impedimente in his tongue, or desire of the riches: immediately before
all the philosophers, said these words, which hear after are written.

The letter of the Philosopher Anacharsis to the king Cresus.
ANacharsis the least of the philosophers, wishes to the Cresus, most mighty
and puissaunt king of Lides, the health which thou wisshest him, and the
increase of virtue which thou sendest him. They have told us many things here
in these parties, as well of thy realm, as of thy person, and there in those
parties they say many things, as well of our university, as of my self. For
the heart takes great pleasour, to know the conditions and lives of all
those in the world. It is well done to desire and procure to know all the lives
of the evil, to amend our own. It is well done to procure and know the lives
of the good for to follow them: but what shall we do, since now a days the
evil do not desire to know the lives of the evil, but for to cover them and
keep them secret, and do not desire to know the lives of the good for to
follow them. I let the know (king Cresus) that the philophers of Greece felt
not so much pain to be virtuous, as they felt in defendyng the^ from the
vicious. For if a man once behold virtue, immediately she suffers to be taken:
but the evil for any good that a man can do unto them, never suffers them
selves to be vanquished. I believe well that the tirannye of the Realm is not
so great as they talk of here, neither ought thou likewise to believe that I
am so virtuous, as they report me to be there. For in mine opinion those
which declare news of strange countries, are as the poor which were their
garments al to patched and peced, whereof the pieces that were sown on of new,
are in more quantity of clothe: then the old which before they had, when they
were first made. Beware (king Cresus) and be not as the barbarous princes are,
which use good words, and evil deeds. For they go about with fair words, to
cover the infamy of their cruel deeds. Meruell not though we philosophers,
readers in schools, desire not to live with you Princes, governors of Realms.
For evil Princes for none other intent seek the company of wise men, but
only because they would through them excuse their faults. For doing as
thou do (of will, and not of right) you will that the vulger people think
you do it by the counsel of a wise man. I let the understand (King Cresus)
that the Prince which desires to govern his people well, ought not to be
content to have one only sage in his palace. For it is not mete that the
government of many, do consiste in the advice of one alone. Thy imbassadour
has said by word, and the self same thy letter testifies, that thou art
certified that I am counted for sage throughout all Greece, and that this
presupposed, I would come to thee to govern thy common wealth. And for the
contrary thou doing thus (as thou do) condemnest me to be an Idiote, for
thou thynkyng that I would take thy gold is nothing else, but for to rail
upon me as a fool. The chief point wherein true philosophy is known, is
when he dispyseth the things of the world: for there never agrees together
the liberty of the soul, and the care of goods in this life. O king Cresus,
I let thee understand, that he which knows most the course of the elemente
is not called sage: but it is he which least knows the vices of this
world. For the true Philosopher profits more by not knowing the evil, then
by learning the good. I let thee understand I am three score and seven years
old, and yet never before this time there reigned Ire in me, but when thy
embassage was presented to me, and that I saw laid at my feet such treasure
and riches. For upon this deed I gather, that either wisdom lacks in
thee, or that great covetousness abounds in me. I do send thee thy gold
again which thou sendest me, and thy ambassador shall declare (as witness of
syghte) how greatly it has sclaundered all Greece. For it was never seen nor
heard of, that in any wise they should suffer gold to enter into the
university of Athens. For it should not only be a dishonor to the
philosophers of Greece to have riches: but also it would turn them to great
infamy to desire them. O king Cresus, if thou know it not, it is but reason
thou know it, that in the schools of Greece we learn not to command, but to
obey: not to speak, but to be silent: not to resist, but to humble our selves:
not to get much, but to content us with little: not to revenge offenses, but to
pardon injuries: not to take from others, but to give our own: not to be
honored, but to travail to be virtuous: finally we learn to despise that
which other men love: and to love that which other men despise, which is
poverty. Thou thoughtest that I would accept thy gold, or else yt I would not.
If thou thoughtest I would have taken it, then thou had had reason not to
have receive me afterward into thy palace: for it is a great infamy, that the
covetous man should be acceptable to a prince. If thou thoughtest that I would
none of it, thou were not wise to take the pains to send it: for princes
ought never to take upon them things: wherein (as they think) the subjects
should lose their honesty in receiving them. See king Cresus, and behold that
by diligence it little avails to search for the physician, and afterward to
do nothing of that which by him is ordained. I mean that it shall not profit,
but rather it shabe harm, that I come into thy common wealth, and that
afterward thou will not do that which I shall ordeine therein, for great
dangers ensue to alter the humors with siropes: unless they take afterward
a purgation to purge away the same. For to redress thy barbarous realm, and
to satisfy thy good desire, I am determined to condiscende unto thy request,
and to accomplish thy commandment, upon condition, that thou shall ensure me
of these things following. For the labourer ought not to sow his sede, before
the ground be plowed and tilled.

The first, thou shall forsake the evil custom which ye barbarous kings do
use, that is to wete, to heap up treasures, and not to spend them. For every
prince, which is covetous of treasures, is scarsely of capacity to receive
good counsel.

The second, thou shall not only banishe out of thy place, but also out of thy
court all flatterers: for the prince that is a friend of flatterers: of
necessity must be an enemy of the truth.

The third, thou shall end the wars which thou (at this present) do
maintain against the people of Corinthe: for every prince that loves forayne
wars, must needs hate the peace of his common wealth.

The fourth, thou shall bannishe from thy house all those Iugglers, comediantes
and minstrels: for the prince which occupies him self to hear vain and
trifling things, in time of necessity shall not apply him self to those
which be of weight and importance.

Fifthly, thou shall provide that all loiterers and vacaboundes be expulsed from
thy person, and bannished thy palace: for idleness and negligence are cruel
enemies of wisdom.

Sixthly, thou shall banish from thy court and palace, al liers and sedicious
men: for when liers are suffered in the palace of princes, it is a sign that
the king and the realm falls into utter destruction.

The seventh, thou shall promise that in all the days of thy life thou shall
not press me to receive any thing of thee: for the day that thou shall corrupt
me with gifts, it is necessary that I corrupt thee with evil counsels. For
there is no counsel that is good, but that which proceeds from the man that is
not covetous.

If on these conditions the king Cresus desires the philosopher Anacharsis, yt
philosopher Anacharsis desires the king Cresus: and if not, I had rather be a
disciple of sage philosophers, then a king of the barbarous people. Vale felix
rex.

Since this letter does declare it, it is nedeles for my pen to write it, that
is to wete, what was the humanity, and goodness of king Cresus, to write unto a
poor philosopher: and how great the courage of a philosopher was to despise
the gold, and to say (as he did) in this behalf. Therefore let princes note
here, that such ought the sages to be they should chose, and let Sages note
hear also upon what conditions they ought to enter into the palace of
princes. For this is such a bargayne, that it seldom times chaunseth, but
that one of the parties are deceived.

Of the wisdom and sentences of Phalaris the tyrant, and how he put an
Artisan to death for inuentinge new torments. Cap. xlvi.
IN the last year of the Latins, and in the first year of the Romans,
Ezechias being king of the Jews, and Azarias great Bishop of the holy
temple, Abacuck Prophet in Iewry, and Merodach being king in Babylon, and when
the Lacedaemonians buylte Bizaunce (which now is Constantinople) Phalaris the
famous tyrant was then lyuinge. Of this Phalaris Ouide says, that he was
deformed in his face, spoore blind of his eyes, and exceading covetous of
riches, and never observed any thing that he promised. He was unthankful to
his friends, and cruel to his ennemies: finally he was such a one, that the
tyrannies which severally were scattered in others, in him alone were
altogethers assembled. Amongst all the iniquities that he invented, and
amongst all the tyrannies that he committed, he had one virtue very great,
which was, that even as he was only head of all tyrannies: so was he chief
lover and friend of al philosophers and sage men. And in all those six and
thirty years which he governed the realm by tyranny, they never found that
any man touched his bearde, nor that any man satte at the table with him, spoke
unto him, or slepte in his bed, nor that any man saw in his countenance any
mirthe, unless it were some philosopher or sage man, with whom, and to whom
he liberally put his body in trust. And they said that this Phalaris said
oftentimes. The prince that absenteth him self from sage men, and accompanies
with fools: I say unto him, though he be a prince of his common wealth, he is
a cruel tyrant of his person. For it is a greater pain to live among fools,
then to die amongst sages. Pulio in the sixte book De gestis Romanorum
says, that a worthy and excellent painter presented a table to Octauian the
Emperor, wherein were drawn all the virtuous princes, and for their
chefetaine, Octauian the Emperor was drawn: at the foot of this table were
all the tyranous Princes painted, of the which Phalaris was chief and
captain. This table vewed by Octauian the Emperor, he commended the work,
but he disalowed the intention thereof, saying: me thinks it not mete that I
being alive, should be set chief and princicipall of all the virtuous men
that are dead. For during the time of this wicked life, we are all subject to
the vices of weak and feeble flesh. Also it seameth unto me an unjust thing,
that they should put Phalaris for principal, and captain of all the
tyrauntes: since he was a scourge and enemy, to fools and ignorant men: and
so earnest a lover and friend of sages, and wise philosophers. The fame of this
cruel tyraunte Phalaris being known, and his extreme cruelties he used,
spread through all Greece.

A neighbor and artificer of Athens called Perillus (a man very excellent in
metalles, and a great worker in works of fountains) came to Phalaris the
tyrant, saying that he would make such a kind of torment, that his heart
should remain revenged, and the offender well punished. The matter was, that
this workman made a bull of brass, wherein there was a gate by the which
they put the offender, and in putting the fire under the bull, it roared, and
cried, in manner as it had been alive: which thing was not only a horrible and
cruel tormente, to the miserable creature that endured it, but also it was
terryble to him or those that saw it. Let us not marvel neither at the one,
nor at the other: for truly the pitefull heart (which is not fleshed in
cruelty) has as much pity to see an other man suffer, as of the sorrow and
tormente which he him self feels. Phalaris therefore seeing the invention of
this tormente (whereof the inuentour hoped great reward) provided, that the
inuentoure of the same should be put within the bull, and that the cruelty of
the tormente should be experimented in none, save only on the inuentour.
Truly in this case Phalaris showed him self not a cruel tyrau^t, but rather a
merciful Prince, and a sage Philosopher: for nothing can be more just, then
that the invention of the malice be executed, on the frail flesh of the
inuentoure. Now because Phalaris was a great friend of sages, the philosophers
of Greece came oftentimes to see him, which were very gently received of him.
Though to say the truth they profited more with his goods then he did with
their phylosophie. This tyraunte Phalaris was not only a friend of sages: but
also he was very well learned, and depelye seen in moral philosophy. The
which thing appears well in the epistles, which he wrote with his own
hand. I can not tell wherein he showed him self greater, either in the
sentences and doctrines which he wrote with his pen: or in the slaughter and
cruelties which he did with his sword. O how many companions had Phalaris
the tyrant, in this case in times pass: and that (as I would) there were
none also at this time present, which in their pleasant words did not
resemble the Emperor Nero. I never read other thing of those that are gone,
neither have I seen otherwise of those that are present, but many they are
that blase virtues, and infinite which run after vices. For of truth we are
very light of tongue, and to feeble of flesh. The Epistles which this
Phalaris wrote are known to all men, I mean of those which know Greek, or
laten: and for those that know them not, I was wylling to draw these that are
present, and to put them in our vulgar tongue for two causes. The one to the
end princes might see how good a thing it is to be sage, and how tyrauntes
were praised for being Sages, and giving good counsayles. The other, to the
end the people might see how easy it is to speak well, and how hard it
is to work well. For there is nothing better cheap in the world, then
counsel. The sentences therefore of the Epistles of Phalaris are these which
follow, in such sort as I could most briefly gather them, to reduce them in
good and profitable style to write them.

The particular love which princes show to one more then an other, breadeth
oftentimes much envy in their Realms. For the one being loved, and the other
hated, of this comes hatred, and of hatred comes evil thoughts, of evil
thoughts proceadeth malice, and of malice comes evil words, the which
break out into worse deeds: Finally when a prince shows not to equalles his
favor indifferently, he sets fire in his common wealth. Princes ought to
forbid, and Sages ought not to consent, that rebels and quarellers should
trouble those which are quiet and peace makers: for when the people rise,
immediately covetousness is awaked. When covetousness grows, justice falls,
force and violence rules, snatchynge reigns, lechery is at liberty, the
evil have power, and the good are oppressed: finally all do rejoice one to
live to the prejudice of an other, and every man to seek his own private
commodity. Many vain men do raise dissentions and quarelles amongst people,
thinking that in troubled water, they should augmente their estates, who in
short space do not only loose the hope of that they sought: but also are put
out of that they possessed. For it is not only reasonable, but also most
just, that those by experience feel that, which their blind malice will not
suffer them to know.

It is much good for the people that the governors be not unfortunate* but
that of their nature they were happy. For to lucky Princes, fortune gives many
things even as they demand, yea and gives them better then they look for.
The noble and valiant princes, when they see them selves with other princes,
or that they are present in great acts, ought to show the freenes of their
heart, the greatness of their realm, the pre-eminence of their person, the
love of their common wealth, and above all the discipline of their court, and
the gravity of their counsel and palace. For the sage and curious men
should not behold the prince in the apparayle, which he wears: but the men
which he has to counsel him. The sage men, and those that be not covetous,
if they do employe their forces to heap up treasures, ought to remember in
their hearts how to employ themselves to spend their money well. Sith fortune
is maistres in all things, and that to her they do impute both good and evil
works, he alone may be called a princely man, who for no contrariety of
fortune is overcome. For truly that man is of a stout courage, whose heart is
not vanquished by the force of fortune. Though we praise one for valiant with
the sword, we will not therefore praise him for excellent with the pen.
Although he be excellent with his pen, he is not therefore excellent with his
tongue. Though he have a good tongue, he is not therefore well learned. And
though he be learned, he has not therefore good renown. And though he has
good renown, he is not therefore of a good life. For we are bound to receive
the doctrines of many which write: but we are not bound to follow the lives
which they do lead. There is no worse office amongst men, then to take the
charge to punyshe the vices of an other, and therefore men ought to fly from
it, as from the pestylence: for in correctinge vices, hatred is more sure to
the correctour, then amendment of life is to the offender.

He has and possesses much that has good friends: For many aid their
friends, when they would have helped them more if they could. For the true
love is not weried to love, nor cease not to profit. Though sage men have
lost much, they ought not therefore to despair, but that they shall come to
it again in time. For in the end, time does not cease to do his accustomed
alterations, nor perfect friends cease not to do that which they ought. The
proud and disdainefull man (for the most part) always falls into some
evil chance, therefore it is a commendable medecin some times to be
persecuted: for adversity makes a wise man live more safely, and to walk in
less danger. For so much as we do excuse him which commits the fault,
there is neither the offender, nor the offense but deserves pain. For such a
one that commits the fault through sudden anger, did evil: and if he did
commit it by deliberation, he did much worse. To desire to do all things
by reason is good, and likewise to lay them all in order is good, but it is
very hard: For temperate men have such respect in compassing their doings,
and by weight so cast all the inconveniences, that scarcely they ever determyne
to go about it. To the man which has government two things are
dangerous, that is to wete, to sone or to late: But of those two, the worste
is to sone. For if by determining late, a man loses that which he might have
gotten: by determining to sone, that is lost which is now gained, and that
which a man might have gained.

To men which are to hasty, chance daily many euilles and dangers, as says
the proverb. The hasty man never wants woe. For the man being impatient,
and having his understanding high, afterward come quarrels and brawlynges,
displeasures, varieties, and also vanities, which loses their goods, and
puts their persons in danger. Sith all naturally desire to be happy, he
alone amongst all others may be called happy, of whom they may truly say:
he gave good doctrine to live, and left good example to die. These and many
other sentences Phalaris the tyrant wrote in his letters, whereof Cicero
profited much in his works, and Seneca also in his epistles and many other
writers besides: For this tyrant was very brief in words, and compendious in
sentences. This Phalaris being in his city of Agrigente, a Philosopher of
Greece wrote him a tauntinge letter, chargynge him with tyranny, to which he
answered with this letter followyng.

The letter of Phalaris the tyrant to Popharco the Philosopher.
PHalaris Agrigentine, wyssheth unto thee Popharco the Philosopher, health and
consolation through the comfortable Gods. I received thy letter here in
Agrigentine, and though it sauoured somewhat Satirlike, I was not agreued
therewith: for of philosophers and sages (as thou art) we should not be greaued
with the sharp words you tell us, but to consider the inte^tion whereupon you
speak them. Quarellers and malicious persons, will have the words by weight
and measure, but the virtuous and pacient me^, do not regard but the
intentions. For if we should go about to examine every word they speak unto
us: we should give our selves to much pain, and we should always set in the
common wealth debate. I am a tyrant, and as yet am in tyranny: but I swear
unto the immortal gods, whether the word were good, or bad, I never altered
it. For if a good man tell it me, I take it for my pastime. Thou wrytest unto
me that all Greece is offended with me there: but I let them understand that
all Agrigentine is all edified with thee here. And thereof thou maiste praise
me. For if the tyrauntes were not so much dispraised, the philosophers should
not be so well loved. Thou art counted for good, and art good: and I am counted
for evil, and am evil. But in mine opinion thou should not be proud for
the one, neither I should dispeire for the other. For the day of the life is
long, and therein fortune does many things, and it may well be, that from a
tyrant I shall be a philosopher: and thou from a philosopher shall be a tyrant.
Se my friend, that the long time makes oftentimes the earth to be turned to
silver: and the silver and gold becomes nothing worth. I mean, that there
never was a tyrau^t in any realm, but that first he had been brought up in the
studies of Greece. I will not deny, that all the renowned tyrauntes have not
been nourished in Scicile: but also thou shall not deny me, that they were not
borne in Greece. Therefore see and behold to whom the fault is: from the mother
which bare them, or from the nurse which gave the^ suck. I do not say yt it
shall be, but I say that it may well be, that if I were there in Greece, I should
be a better philosopher than thou: and if thou were here in Agrigentine, thou
would be a worser tyrant tha^ I. I would thou should think, that thou
might be better in Greece where thou art: and that I might be worse in
Agrigentine where I am.

For thou do not so much good as thou might do: and I do not so much
evil as I may do. The conning man Perillus came into these parts and has made
a Bull, wherein he has put a kind of torment, the most fear fullest in the
world: and truly I caused, that that which his malice had invented, should be
of none other than of himself experimented. For there is no iuster law, that
when any workman have invented engines, to make other men dye: then to put them
to the torments by them invented, to know the experience in them selves. I
beseech the heartily to come and se me, and be thou assured thou shall make me
good. For it is a good sign for the sick, when he acknowledges his sickness
to the Physician, I say no more to the, but that once again I return to
solicit the, that thou faylest not to come to se me. For in the end, if I do
not profit of the, I am sure thou shall profit by me: and if thou winnest, I
cannot lose.

How Philippe king of Macedonia, Alexander the great, the king Ptolomeus, the
king Antigonus, the king Archelaus, and P^rrus king of the Epirotes, were all
great lovers and friends of the sages. Cap. xlvii.
IF Quintus Curtius deceive me not, the great Alexander, son to king Philyppe
of Macedome, did not deserve to be called great, for that he was accompanied
with thousands of men of war: but he wanne the renown of great, for that he
had more philosophers on his counsel then all other princes had. This great
prince never took upon him wars, but that first the order of executyng the
same should before his presence be examyned of the sages, and wise
philosophers. And truly he had reason. For in affairs, where good counsel
have proceeded, they may always look for a good end. These Historiographers
which wrote of great Alexander (as well the Grecians as the Latins) know not
whether the fiersnes wherewith he stroke his enemies was greater, or the
humanity wherewith he embraced his counsel. Though the sage philosophers
which accompanied the great Alexander were many in nombre: yet notwithstanding
amongst all those, Aristotle, Anaxarcus, and Onosichrates were his most
familiars, And herein Alexander showed himself very wise. For wise princes
ought to take the counsel of many, but they ought to determine and conclude
upon the opinion of few. The great Alexander did not content himself, to
have sages with him, neither to send only to desire those which were not
his: but oftentimes himself in person would goo see them, vysite them,
and counsel with them. Saying that the Princes which are the servants of
sages, come to be made masters and Lords over all.

In the time of Alexander Magnus, Diogenes the philosopher lived, who neither
for entreatye, nor yet for any promises made, would come to see Alexander the
great. Wherefore the great Alexander went to se him, and when he had desired him
to go with him, and acompany him, Diogenes answered.

O Alexander, since thou will win honor in keapinge of men in thy
company: it is not reason that I should loose it, to forsake my study: For in
following the, I shall not follow my self: and being thine, I shall cease to be
mine.

Thou art come to have the name of the great ALEXANDER, for conqueringe the
world, and I have attained to come to renown of a good Philosopher in flyeng
the world. And if thou do ymagine that thou have gotten, and won: I think
that I have not erred, nor lost, And since thou will be no less in aucthoritye
then a king, do not think that I will lose the estimacion of a philosopher. For
in the world there is no greater loss unto a man, then when he loses his
proper liberty. When he had spoken these words, Alexander said unto them
that were about him with a loud voice. By the immortal gods I swear, and as
god Mars rule my hands in battle, if I were not Alexander the great, I
would be Diogenes the Philosopher. And he said further, in mine opinion there
is no other felycitie upon the earth, then to be Alexander king, who
commands al, or to be Diogenes to command Alexander, who commands all.
As king Alexander was more familyar with some philosophers, then with others:
so he esteemed some books more then others. And they say he read oftentimes in
the Iliades of Homere, which is a book where the storye of the destruction of
Troy is: and that when he slept, he laid under his head upon a bolster his
sword, and also his book. When the great king Alexander was borne, his father
King of Macedonie did two notable things. The one was, that he sent many and
very rich gifts into the I Will of Delphos, where the Oracle of Apollo was, to
the end to present them with him, and to pray him, that it would please him
to preserve his son. The other thing that he did was, that immediately he
wrote a letter to the great Philosopher Aristotel, where in he said these words.

The letter of king Philippe to Aristotle the philosopher.
PHilippe king of Macedonie, wishes health and peace, to the Philosopher
Aristotel, which reads in the university of Greece. I let the understand,
that Olimpias my wife is brought to bed of a goodly man child, whereof both
she and I, and all Macedonie do rejoice. For kings and realms ought to have
great joy, when there is borne any son successor of the natural prince of
the province. I render thanks unto the immortal gods, and have sent many
great gifts to the Temples, and it was not so much for that I have a son, as
for that they have given him unto me, in ye time of so great and excellent
philosopher. I hope that thou will bring him up, and teach him in such sort,
that by heritage he shall be Lord of my patrimonye of Macedonie, and by desert he
shall be lord of all Asia: so that they should call him my son, and the his
father. Vale foelix, iterumque vale. Ptolomeus father in law, who was the
viii. king of the Egiptians, did greatly love the sages as well of Caldea, as
of Greece, and this thing was esteemed for a great virtue in king Ptolome. For
there was as much envy between the Philosophers of Greece, and the sages of
Egypt: as between the captains of Rome, and the captains of Carthage. This
Ptolome was very wise, and did desire greatly to be accompained with
philosophers: and after this he learned the letters of the Latynes, Caldes, and
Hebrews, For the which cause, though the kings named Ptolomei were.11. in
nombre, and all warrelyke men: yet they put this for the chief, and captain
of all, not for the battayles which he wanne, but for the sentences which he
learned. This king Ptolomeus had for his famyliar, a philosopher called
Estilpho Megarense, who was so entierlye beloved of this prince that (laying
aside the gentleness and benifites which he showed him) he did not only eat
with the king at his table: but oftentimes the king made him drink of his
own cup. And as the favors which princes show to their servants, are but
as a watch to prove the malycious: it chaunsed, that when this king gave the
philosopher to drink that which remained in his cup, an Egiptian knight
moved with envy, said unto king Ptolome. I think Lord how that thou art never
satisfied with drinking, to leave that which remains in the cup, for the
philosopher to drink after the. To whom the king answered. Thou say well,
that the philosopher Estilpho is never filled with yt which I do give him. For
that which remains in my cup, does not profit him so much to drink: as
the phylosophye which remains in him should profit the, if thou would
take it. The king Antigonus was one of the most renowned servants, that
king Alexander the great ever had, who after his death enherited a great part
of his empire. For how much happy the king Alexander was in his life, so much
he was unhappy at the time of his death: because he had no children which
might enherite his goods, and that he had such servants as spoiled him of
his renown. This king Antigonus was an unthrift, and excessive in all vices:
But for all that he loved greatly the Philosophers, which thing remained unto
him from king Alexander, whose palace was a scoole of all the good
Philosophers of the world. Of this ensample they may se what great profit
ensues, of bringing up of them that be young, for there is none that ever was
so wicked or enclyned unto evil: but that in long contynuannce may profit
somewhat in his youth. This king Antigonus loved ii. philosophers greatly, the
which flourished in that time, that is to wete Amenedius, and Abio, of which ii.
Abio was well learned, and very poor. For in that time no philosopher durst
openly read philosophy, if he were worth any thing in temporal goods. As
Laertius says, and as Pulio declares it better, in the book of the rulers
and noble men of the Greeks. The schools of the vniuersytie were so correct,
that the Philosopher which knew most, had least goods: so that they did not
glorify of any thing else: but to have pouertye, and to know much of
philosophy. The case was such, that the philosopher Abio was sick, and with
that sickness he was so vexed, that they might almost see the bones of his weak
body. The king Antigonus sent to visit him by his own son, by whom he sent
him much money to he help him with all. For he lived in extreme poverty, as
it behooved the professors of Philosophy. Abio was sore sick, being aged, and
crooked, and though he had made himself so leave with sickness: yet
notwithstanding he burned always upon the week of good life. I mean that he
had no less courage to despise those gifts: then the king Antigonus had
nobles to send them. This Philosopher not contented to have despised these
gifts in such sort, said unto the son of Antigonus, who brought them. Tell
king Antigonus, that I give him great thanks, for the good enterteinment he
gave me always in my life, and for the gifts he sends me now at my death.

For one friend can do no more to an other, thanne to offer him his parsonne,
and to depart with his proper goods. And tell the king thy father, that I
maruayle what he should mean, that I now being four score years of age,
and have walked al my life time naked in this world, should now be laden with
vestures and money, since I must pass so straight a goulfe in the sea, to go
out of this world. The Egiptians have a custom to lighten the burden of their
camels, when they pass the deserts of Arabia which is much better then to
ouercharge them. I mean, that he only passes without travail the dangers of
the life, which bannisheth from him the thought of temperal goods of this
world. Thirdly thou shall say to the king thy father, that from henceforth when
any man will dye, he do not succor nor healpe him with money, gold, nor
riches, but with good and ripe counsel. For gold will make him leave his life
with sorrow, and good counsail-will move him to take his death with patience.
The fifth king of the Macedonians was called Archelaus, who they say to be ye
grandfather of king Philip, father of the great Alexander. This king bosteth
himself to descend from Menelaus, king of the Grecians, and principal
captain which was at the destruction of Troy, This king Archelaus was a great
friend to the sages and amongst others there was a Poet with him called
Euripides, who at that time had no less glory in his kind of Poetry: then
Archelaus in his kingdom being king of Macedonia. For now a days, we esteem
more the sages for the books which they wrote: then we do exalt kings for the
realms which they ruled, or the battayles which they overcome. The familiarity
which Euripides had with the king Archelaus was so straight, and his credit
with Archelaus was so great, that in the Realm of Macedonie nothing was done,
but first it was examined by the hands of this philosopher. And as the simple
and ignorant would not naturally be subject to the sage: it chaunsed that one
night Euripides was talkyng a long time with the king, declaring unto him the
ancient hystoryes, and when the poor Poet would depart to go home to his
house, his enemies espied him, and let hungrye dogs fly upon him: the which
did not only tear him in pieces, but eat him every morsel. So that the
intraylles of the dogs, were the woeful grave of the miserable poet, The
king Archilaus being certifyed of this woeful case, immedyatly (as soon as they
told him) was so chafed, that almost he was bereft of his senses. And here at
merueile not at al. For gentle hearts do alter greatly, when they are
aduertysed of any sudden myshappe. As the love which the king had to Euripides
in his life was much, so likewise the sorrow which he felt at his death was
very great. For he shed many tears from his eyes, he cut the hears of his
head, he rounded his beard, he changed the apparayle which he wear, and above
all, he made as solemn a funeral to Euripides, as if they had buried Ulysses.
And not contented wythal these things he was never merry, until such time he had
done cruel execucio^ of the malefactors, For truly the injury or death which
is done unto him whom we love: is no other but as a bath and token of our own
good wills. After justice was executed of those homycides, and that some of
the bones (all gnawen of the dogs) were buried, a Grecian knight said unto
king Archelaus. I let the know excellent king, that all Macedonia is offended
with the, because that for so small a loss thou haste showed so great sorrow.
To whom king Archelaus answered. Among sages it is a thing sufficientlye
tried, that noble hearts ought not to show theymselues sad, for mishappes
and sudden chances: For the king being sad his realm can not (and though
it might, it ought not) show it self merry. I have heard my father say once,
that princes should never shed tears, unless it were for one of these
causes.

1 The first, the Prince should bewail the loss and danger of his common
wealth: for the good Prince ought to pardon the iniuryes done to his parson:
but to revenge the least act done to the common wealth, he ought to hasarde
himself.

2 The second, the good prince ought to lamente if any man have touched his
honor in any wise: for the Prince which wepeth not drops of blood for the
things touching his honor, deserves to be buried quycke in his grave.

3 The third, the good Prince ought to bewail those which can little, and
suffer much: For the Prince which bewayleth not the calamities of the poor,
in vain and without profit lives on the earth.

4 The fourth, the good Prince ought to bewail the glory and prosperity wherein
the Tiraunts are: For that prince which with tyranny of the evil is not
displeased, with the hearts of the good is unworthy to be beloved.

5 The fifth, the good Prince ought to bewail the death of wise men: For to a
Prince there can come no greater loss, then when a wise man dies in his
common wealth.

These were the words, which the king Archelaus answered the Grecian knight,
who reproved him because he had wept for the death of Euripides the
philosopher. The ancient Historiographers can say no more, of the estimacyon
which the Philosophers and wise men had, as well the Greeks as the Latynes:
but I will tell you one thing worthy of noting. It is well known through all
the world, that Scipio the Ethnicke, was one of the worthyeste that ever was in
Rome: for by his name, and by his occasion, Rome got such a memory as shall
evermore endure. And this was not only for that he conquered Affrycke, but for
the great worthynes of his person. Men ought not to esteem a little these two
gifts in one man, that is to wete, to be happy, and adventures: For many of
the auncientes in times past wanne glory by their swords, and after lost it by
their evil lives. The Romans historographers say, that the first yt wrote in
heroical meeter in the Latin tongue, was Ennius the poet, the works of whom
was so esteemed of Scipio the Ethnicke, that when this aduenturous and so lucky
Roman dyed, he commanded in his will and testament, that they should hang
the image of this Ennius the Poet over his grave. By that the great Scipio did
at his death, we may well conjecture how great a friend he was of sages in his
life: since he had rather for his honor, set the statue of Ennius on his grave:
tha^ the banner wherewith he wanne and conquered Affricke. In the time of Pirrus
(which was king of the Epirotes, and great enemy of the Romans) flourished a
philosopher named Cinas, borne in Thessalie, who (as they say) was the disciple
of Demosthenes. The historiographers at that time did so much esteem this
Cinas, that they said he was the master and measure of man's eloquence. For he
was very pleasant in words, and profound in se^tences. This Cinas served for
3. offices in the palace of king Pyrrus.

1 First he made pastime at his table in that he did declare: for he had a good
grace in things of laughter.

2 Secondarily he wrote the valiant deeds of his history: for in his style he
had great eloquence, and to write the truth he was a witness of sight.

3 Thirdly he went for embassadoure in affairs of great importance: for he
was naturally subtyle and witty, and in dispatching business he was very
fortunate. He used so many means in his business, and had so great persuasion
in his words, that he never took upon him to speak of things of war: but
either he set a long truce, or else he made a perpetual peace. The king Pyrrus
said to this Cynas. O Cinas for three things I thank the immortal gods.

1 The first, for that they created me a king, and not a servant: for the
greatest good that mortal men have, is to have lyberty to command many, and
not to be bound to obey any.

2 The second, I thank the immortal gods for that they naturaly made me stout
of heart: for the man which with every tryfle is abashed, it were better for him
to leave his life.

3 The third, I give the immortal gods thanks for that in the government of my
common wealth, and for the great affairs and business of my real me (as well in
wars, as in other things) they gave me such a man (as thou art) in my
company: For by thy gentle speech, I have conquered and obtained many Cities,
which by my cruel sword I could never win nor attain. These were the words
which Pyrrus said to his friend Cinas the Poet. Let every Prince know now, how
great lovers of wise men those were in times past: and as upon a sudden I
have recyted these few examples, so with small study I could have heaped
infynite Historyes.

FINIS. The end of the first Book.
The Second book of the Dial of princes, wherein the Authoure treats,
how Princes and great Lords, should behave them selves toward their
wives. And how they ought to noryshe, and bring up their Children
Of what excellencye marriage is, and whereas common people marie of free will,
Princes and noble men ought to marye of necessity. Cap. i.
Among all the frendships and companyes of this life, there is none so
natural, as that between the husband and the wife living in one house: for
all other compagnies are caused by free will only, but this proceeds both by
will and necessity. There is at this day no Lion so fierce, no Serpent so
venomous, no Viper so infectiue, no Aspicke so mortal, neither any beast so
tirrible, but at the least both male and female do once in the year mete and
conioyne: and though that in brute beasts there lacks reason, yet
notwithstanding they have a natural instinction to assemble themselves for
the conseruacion of their kind. In this case men deserve no less reproach
then beasts merit praise: for after that the females by generation are big,
they never agree that the males should accompany with them. According to the
diuersitye of nations, so among themselves they differ the one from the other,
in laws, languages, ceremonies, and customs: but in the end all agree in one
thing, for that they enforce themselves to celebrate marriage. As the
scriptures teaches us, Since the world was created, there has nothing been
more ancient, then the sacrament of marriage: for that day that man was
formed, the self same day he celebrated marriage with a woman in the terestrial
paradise. The ancient historiographers (as well Greeks as latins) wrote many
great things in the praise of marriage: but they could not say nor write so
much, as continual experience does show us. Therefore leaving the superfluous,
and taking the most necessary, we say that five commodyties follow the sage
man, who has taken the yoke of matrimonye.

The first is, the memory which remains to the children as successors and
heirs of their fathers. For as the philosopher Pithagoras says, when a father
passes out of this present life, and leaves behind him a child being his
heir, they cannot say unto him that he dies, but that he waxes young in his
child, since the child does inherit the flesh, the goods, and the memory
of the father. Among the auncientes it was a common proverb, that the taste
of all tastes is bread, the savor of savors is salt, and the greatest love of
al loves is from the fathers to the children. And though perchance we see the
fathers show some rigor to their children, we ought not therefore to say that
they hate them, and despise them: for the tender love of the father to the
son is such, that he cannot endure him to do any thing amysse, or worthy of
rebuke. Not only men of reason and brute beasts, but also the hedge and
gardeine trees, to their possibylitye procure to continewe their kind: and it
is plainly seen, in that before the fruits and herbs were formed to be eaten,
the seades and kirnelles were made to be kept. Men naturally desire honor in
their life, and memory after their death. Therefore I say, that they come to
honor by high, and noble, and heroical fac^es, but the memory is left by the
good and legittimate children: for the children which are borne in adultery,
are begotten in sin, and with great care are nourished.

The second benefit of marriage is, that they avoid adultery, and it is no
small matter to avoid this vice. For the adulterers are not only taken in the
christian relygion for offenders: but also amongst the gentyles they are
counted infamous.

The sage Solon in the laws yt he gave to the Athenians, commanded upon
straighte precepts that they should mary, to avoid adulterye, upon pain that
the child that should be borne in adulterye, should be made the common slave of
the city. The Romans (as men foreseinge all things) ordained in the tables of
their laws, that the children which were borne in adultery, should not be
heirs of the goods of their fathers. When ye oratoure Eschines was bannished
out of Athens, as he came by the Rhodes, he took no such pains in any one
thing as he did in perswadyng the Rhodians to mary and not to live in adultery:
for among those barbarous, matrimonye was not common, but only among them
which were officers of the common wealth. Cicero in a famylyer epistle says,
that the great Romayne Marcus Porcio being governor in the common wealth,
never agred that an uncle of his should be master of the Roman cheualry,
unless he were married: which office was promised him by the senate. His name
was Rufus, a stout and valiant man in war: this notwithstanding Marcus
Porcio said, that that praise which Rufus deserved for being valiant and
hardy: he lost again for living in adultery. And that he would never grant
his voice, nor be in place where they committed any charge in the wars, to a
man that had not a lawful wife. I say therefore, that if the gentyles and
infidels esteemed marriage so much, and dyspised the deeds of yt adulterers so
greatly: much more Christians should be in this case ware and circumspect. For
the gentiles feared nothing but only infamy: but the christians ought to fear
both infamy and also pain. Since that of necessity man's sede must increase and
that we se men suffer them selves to be overcome with the flesh: it wear
much better they should maintain a househoulde, and live uprightly with a
wife: then to wast their goods, and burden their conscience with a concubyne.
For it is often times seen, that that which a gentleman consumes abroad upon
an harlotte with shame, would keape his wife and children at home with
honesty.

The third commodytie of marriage is, the laudable and loving company, the which
is, or ought to be between them that are married. The ancient Philosophers
defining what man was, said, that he was a creature, the which by nature was
sociable, communycable, and risyble, whereof it follows, that the man being
solitarye and close in his conditions, can not be in his stomach but enuyous.
We that are men love the good inclinacion, and do also commend the same in
beasts: for all that the sedicious man and the restye horse eat, we think it
evil spent. A sad man, a sole man, a man shut in, and solytary, what profit
can he do to the people? for if every man should be locked up in his house, the
common wealth should forthwith perish. My intencion is to speak against the
vacabondes, which without taking upon them any craft or faculty, pass the age
of forty, or fifty years, and would not, nor will not marie yet, because they
would be vicious all the days of their life. It is a great shame and
conscience to many men, that never determine with them selves to take upon them
any estate, neither to be married, chaste, secular, or ecclesiastiall: but as the
cork upon the water they swyme, whether their sensualytie leads them. One
of the most lawdable and holy compagnyes which is in this life, is ye compagny
of the man and the woman, inespeciallye if the woman be virtuous: for the noble
and virtuous wife, withdraws all the sorrows from the heart of her husband, and
accomplisheth his desires, whereby he lives at rest. When the wife is virtuous,
and the husband wise, we ought to believe that between them two is the true
love: for the one not being suspect with the other, and having children in the
myddest, it is impossible but that they should live in concord. For all that I
have red and seen I would say, that if the man and the wife do live quyetly
together, a man may not only call them good married folks, but also holy
persons: for to speak the truth, the yoke of matrimony is so great, that it
cannot be accomplished without much merit. The contrary ought and may be said
of those which are evil married, whom we will not call a compaigny of saints,
but rather a house of deuylles. For the wife that has an evil husband, may
say she has a devil in her house: and the husband that has an evil wife, let
him make account that he has hell it self in his house. For the evil wives are
worse then the infernal furyes. Because in hell there are none tormented but ye
evil only: but the evil woman torme^teth, both the good, and the evil.
Concluding therefore this matter, I say also and affirm, that betwixt the
busband and the wife which are well married, is the true and very love: and they
only, and no others, may be called perfect and perpetual friends. The other
parents and friends, if they do love and praise us in our presence, they hate
us and despise us in our absence. If they give us fair words, they bear us
evil hearts: finally they love us in our prosperitye, and forsake us in our
adversity: but it is not so amongst the noble and virtuous married persons.
For they love both within and without the house, in prosperity, and in
adversity, in poverty, and in riches, in absence, and in presence, seeing them
selves merry, and perceiving them selves sad, and if they do it not, truly they
ought to do it: for when the husband is troubled in his foot, the wife ought
to be grieved at her heart.

The fourth commodity of marriage is, that the men and women married have more
aucthority and gravity then the others. The laws which were made in old time
in the favor of marriage, were many and diverse. For Chapharoneus, in the laws
yt he gave to the Egiptians, commanded and ordained upon grievous pains, that
the man that was not married, should not have any office of government in the
common wealth. And he said further, that he that has not learned to govern his
house, can evil govern a common wealth. According to the laws yt he gave to
the Athenians, he persuaded al those of ye common wealth to marie themselves
voluntarily: but to the heddes and captains, which govern the affairs of
war, he commanded to marye of necessity, saying that to men which are
lecherous, God seldom gives victories Licurgus the renowned governor and
geuer of the laws of the Lacedaemonians, commanded, that al captains of the
armies, and the priests of the Temples should be married: saying that the
sacrifyces of married men were more acceptable to the gods, then those of any
other. As Plynie says, in an epistle that he sent to Falconius his friend,
rebuking him for that he was not married, where he declares that the Romans
in old time had a law, that the dictatoure, and the Praetor, the Censour, and
the Questor, and all the knights should of necessity be married: for the man
that has not a wife and children legittymate in his house, cannot have nor
hold great aucthority in the common wealth. Plutarche, in the book that he
made of the praise of marriage says, that the priests of the Romans did not
agree to them that were unmarried, to come and sytte down in the Temples: so
that the young maidens prayed without at the church door, and the young men
prayed on their knees in the temple, only the married men were permitted to
sit or stand. Plynie in an epistle that he wrote to Fabatus his father in
law says, that the Emperor Augustus had a custom, that he never suffered any
young man in his presence to sit, nor permitted any man married to tell his
tale on foot. Plutarche in the book that he made in the praise of women
says, that since the realm of Corinthe was peopled more with Bachelours, then
with married men: they ordained amongst them, that the man or woman that had
not been married and also that had not kept children and house, (if they lived
after a certain age) after their death should not be buried.

The aucthoure following his purpose, declares that by means of marriage, many
mortal enemies have been made good and parfite friends. Cap. iii.
BY the sundry examples that we have declared, and by all that which remains
to declare, a man may know well enoughe of what excellency matrimony is, not
only for the charge of conscience, but also for the things touching honor:
for to say the truth, the men that in the common wealth are married, give small
occasion to be sclaundered, and have more cause to be honored. We cannot denay,
but that matrimony is troublesome and chargeable to them yt be married for two
causes. The one is in bringing up their children, and the other in suffering
the importunityes of their mothers. Yet in fi^e we cannot deny, but that the
good and virtuous wife is she that sets a stay in the house, and keeps her
husband in estimacion in the common wealth: for in the public affairs, they
give more faith and credit unto those that are charged with children, then unto
others that are laden with years.

The fifth commodity that ensues matrimony, is the peace and reconciliacions
that are made between the enemies, by means of marriage. Me^ in this age are so
covetous, so importune, and malicious, that there are very few but have
enemies, whereby grows contencion and debate: for by our weakness, we fall
daily into a thousand occasions of enimities: and scarcely we can find one to
bring us again into friendship, Considering what men desire, what things they
procure, and whereunto they aspire. I marvel not that they have so few
friends: but I much muse that they have no more enemies. For in things of
weight, they mark not who have been their friends, they consider not they are
their neighbors, neither they regard that they are christians: but their
conscience laid a part, and honesty set a side, every man seeks for himself,
and his own affairs, though it be to the prejudice of all his neighbors.
What friendship can there be amongst proud men, since the one will go before, and
the other disdayneth to come behind? What friendship can there be amongst
enuyous men* since the one purchasseth, and the other possesses? what love can
there be between two covetous men, since the one dare not spend, and the other
is never satisfied to hourd, and heap up. For all that we can read, se, go,
and travail, and for all that we may do, we shall never se nor here tell of men
that have lacked enemies: for either they be vycious, or virtuous. If they be
evil and vycious, they are always hated of the good: and if they be good and
virtuous, they are continually persecuted of the evil. Many of the ancient
philosophers spent a great part of their time, and lost much of their goods,
to search for remedies and means to reconcile them that were at debate, and
contencion, and to make them by gentleness good friends and lovers. Some said
that it was good and profitable, to forget the enimities for a time: for many
things are pardoned in time, which by reason could never take end. Others said
that for to appease the enemies, it was good to offer money, because money
does not only break the feminate and tender hearts, but also the hard and
craggy rocks. Others said that the best remedy was, to set good men to be
mediators between them, in especially if they were sage and wise men: for the
honest faces and stout hearts are ashamed when they are proferred money, and
the good do humble them selves by entreaty. These means well considered, and
the remydies well sought out to make friends, there are none so ready, and so
true as marriage: for the marriage done sacramentally is of such and so great
excellency, that between some it causes perfect friendship, and between others
it appeaseth great injuries. During the time yt Julius Caesar kept him self as
father in law to the great Pompeius, and that Pompeius held himself his son
in law, there was never evil will nor quarrels between the^: but after that
Pompeius was deuorced from the house of Caesar, hatred, envy, and enimities
engendered between them: in such sort yt they contended in such and so cruel
wars, that Pompeius against his will lost his head, and also Julius Caesar
shortened his life. When those that dwelled in Rome ravished and robbed the
daughters of ye Sabines, if after they had not changed their counsel, and of
thieves to become husbands, without doubt the Romans had been all destroyed:
for the Sabines had made an oath to adventure both their goods and their
lives, for to reueng the injuries done unto them, their daughters, and wives:
but by the means of marriage, they were conferred in great amity and love. For
the Romans receued in marriage the daughters of the Sabines whom before they
had ravished. Greater enimity there cannot be, then that of god toward men,
through the sin of Adam: notwithstanding there never was, nor never shall be
greater friendship then that, which was made by the godly marriage: and for
greater aucthority to confirm marriage, the son of god would that his mother
should be married, and afterward he himself was present at a marriage, where he
turned the water into wine, though now a days the evil married men do turn the
wine into water. He does not speak here of religious persons, nor men of the
Church, neither of those which are closed in devout places: for those (fleing
the occasions of the world, and chosing the ways less dangerous) have
offered their souls to god, and with their bodies have done him acceptable
sacrifices: For there is difference between the relygion of Christ, and the
sinful Sinagoge of the Jews: for they offered kyddes and muttons, but here
are not offered but tears and sighs. Leauyng therefore all those secrets
apart, which men ought to leave to God: I say and affirm, that it is a holy
and commendable counsel, to use his profit with the Sacrament of marriage: the
which though it be taken of al voluntaryly, yet Princes and great lords ought
to take it necessarily. For the prince that has no wife nor children shall have
in his realm, much grudgyng and displeasure. Plutarche in the book he made of
marriage says, that amongst the Lidiens there was a law well observed and kept,
that of necessity their kings and governors should be married: and they had
such respect to this thing, and were so circumspect in this matter, that if a
prince dyed and left his heir an infant, they would not suffer him to govern
the realm until he were married. And they greatly lamented the day of the
departing of their Queen out of this life: for with her death, the gouermente
ceased, the royal aucthorytie remained void, and the common wealth with out
government, so long time as the king deferred to take another wife: and so they
were some times, without king, or government. For princes are, or ought to be,
the mirror and example of al, to live honest, and temperate, the which cannot
welbe done unless they be married, or that they se themselves to be conquerers
of the flesh, and being so they are satisfied: but if they be not married and
the flesh does assault them, then they live immedyatly conquered. Wherefore of
necessity they must go by their neighbors houses, or else by some other
dishonest places scattered abroad, to the reproach and dishonor of them and
their kindredes: and oftentimes to the great peril and danger of their
parsonnes.

Of sundry and diverse laws which the auncientes had in contractinge
matrimony, not only in the choice of women, but also in the manner of
celebrating marriage. Cap. iii.
IN all nations, and in all the Realms of the world, marriage has always been
accepted, and maruailously commended: for other wise the world had not ben
peopled, nor yet the number of men multyplyed.

The auncientes never disagreed one from another, in the approbation and
acception of marriage: but there was amongst them great difference, and strife,
upon the contractes, ceremonies, and vsages of the same. For they used as much
difference in contractinge matrimony, and chosinge their wives: as these
Epicures do desire, the variety of sundry delicate meats. The divine Plato
in his book he made of the common wealth, did council that al things should be
common, and that not only in brute beasts, in mouables, and heritages, but
also that women should be commen: for he said, that if these two words,
thine, and mine, were abolisshed and out of use, there should not be debates,
nor quarelles in this world. They call Plato divine, for many good things
which he spoke: but now they may call him worldly, for the council profane
which he gave. I can not tell what beast lines it may be called, nor what
greater rewdenes may be thought, that the apparel should be proper, and the
wives commen. The brute beast does not know that which came out of her
belly, longer then it sucketh of her breasts. And in this sort it would
chance to men, yea and worse to, if women were commen in the common wealth.
For though one should know the mother, which has borne him: he should not
know the father that has begotten him. The Tharentines (which were well
renowned amongst the auncientes, and not a little feared of the Romans) had
in their city of Tharente a law and custom, to marie them selves with a
legittimate wife, and to begette children: but besides her a man might yet
chose two others for his secret pleasures. Spartianus said that the Emperor
Hellus Verus, as thouching women, was very dissolute: and since his wife was
young and fair, and that she did complain of him because he led no honest
life with her, he spoke these words unto her. My wife, thou haste no cause to
complain of me, since I remain with thee until such time as thou art
quick with child: For the residue of the time, we husbands have license and
privilege to seek our pastimes with other women. For this name of a wife,
conteyneth in it honor: but for the residue, it is a grievous burden and
painful office. The like matter came to Ptolome^s king of Egypt, of whom the
queen his wife did greatly complain. Admit that all the Greeks have been
esteemed to be very wise, amongst all those the Athenians were esteemed of most
excellent virtue: for the sages that governed the common wealth, remained in
Athens with the philosophers which taught the sciences. The sages of Athens
ordained, that all the neighbors and inhabitauntes might keep two lawful
wives, and furthermore upon pain of grievous punishments did command, yt
none should presume, nor be so hardy to maintain any concubine: for they
said, when men haunte the company of light women, commonly they misuse their
lawful wives. As Plutarche says in his politiques, the cause why the Greeks
made this law was, considering that man could not, nor ought not to live
without the company of a woman: and therefore they would that man should mary with
two wives. For if the one were diseased and lay in, yet the other might serve
in bed, wait at the table, and do other busynes in the house. Those of
Athens had an other great respect and consideration to make this law, which
was this, that if it chanced the one to be barrayne, the other should bring
forth children in the common wealth: and in such case she that brought forth
children, should be esteemed for maistres: and the other that was barraine,
should be taken for a servant. When this law was made, Socrates was married
with Xantippa, and to accomplish the law, he took an other called Mitra,
which was the daughter of the philosopher Aristides: and sith those two women
had great quarrels, and debates together, and that thereby they slaundered
their neighbors, Socrates said unto them. My wives, you see right well that
my eyes are holowe, my legs are wythered, my hands are wryncled, my head is
balde, the body is little, and the hears are white: why do ye then that are so
fair, stand in contention and strife for me that am so defourmed? though
Socrates said these words (as it were in ieste) yet such words were
occasion, that the quarrelles and strifes between them ceased. The
Lacedaemonians (that in time of peace and war, were always contrary to the
Athenians) observed it for an inuiolate law, not that one man should mary with
two wives, but that one woman should mary with two husbands: and the reason
was, that when one husband should go to the wars, the other should tarry at
home. For they said, that a man in no wise should agree to leave his wife
alone in the common wealth. Pliny writing an Epistle to his friend Locratius,
and saint Hyerome writing to a friere called Rusticus says, that the
Athenians did use to marie the brethren with the sisters: but they did not
permit the Auntes to marie with their nephews, neither the uncles with their
neices. For they said, that brothers and sisters to marye togethers, was to
marye with their semblable: but for uncles to marye nieces, and auntes with
nephews, was as of fathers to daughters, and of mothers to sons. Melciades
which was a man of great renown amongst the Gretians, had a son called
Cymonius who was married to his sister called Pinicea, and being demanded of
one why he took his sister in marriage, he answered: my sister is fair, sage,
rich, and made to my appetite, and her father and mine did recommaund her unto
me, and since by the commandment of the Gods a man ought to accomplish the
behestes and requests of fathers: I have determined (since nature has given
her me for my sister) willingly to take her for my lawful wife. Diodorus
Siculus says, that before the Egiptians received any laws, every man had as
many wives as he would: and this was at the liberty of both parties, for as
much as if she would go, she went liberally, and forsook the man: and
likewise he left her, when she displeased him. For they said that it was
impossible for men and women to live long togethers, without much trouble,
contentions, and brawles. Diodorus Siculus said one thing, speaking of this
matter, that I never red in any book, nor heard of the auncientes paste,
which was that amongst the Egiptians there was no difference in children: for
they accounted them all legittimate, though they were children of slaves. For
they said, that the principal doer of the generation was the father, and not
the mother, and that therefore the children which were borne among them, took
only the flesh of the mother, but they did inherit the honor and dignity of
the part of the father. Julius Caesar in his commentaries says, that (in
great Britain, called now England) the Britons had an use, that one woman
was married unto five men, the which beastlines is not read to have been in any
nation of times paste: for if it be sclaunder for one man to have diverse wives,
why should it not also be a sclanderous and shameful thing, for one woman to
have many husbands. The noble and virtuous women ought to be married for two
causes. The first to the end God should give them children, and benediction,
to whom they may leave their goods, and their memory. The second, to thend
they should live every one in their own house, accompanied and honored with
their husbands. For otherwise, I say for a truth, that the woman that is not
contented and satisfied with her own propre husband, will not be contented
nor satisfied with all men in the world. Plutarche in his apotheames says,
that the Cymbres did use to mary with their propre and natural daughters: the
which custom was taken from them by the Consul Marius, after that he did
overcome them in Germany, and that of them he had triumphed at Rome. For the
child which was borne of such marriage, was son of the daughter of one sole
father, and was son and brother of one only mother, and they were also
cosins, nephews, and brother of one only father and brother. Truly such
custom proceeds rather of wild beasts, then of reasonable creatures: for
many or the more part of brute beasts (after the females have brought forth
males) within one year after they do accompany with their dammes which
brought them forth. Strabo in the situation of the world, and Seneca in an
Epistle say, that the Lydes and the Armenians had a custom, to send their
daughters to the Ryuers and havens of the sea to get their marriages, selling
their own bodies to strangers: so that those which would marie were first
forced to sell their virginity. The Romans (which in all their affairs and
busynesses were more sage and modeste, then other nations) used much
circumspection in all their marriages: For they kept it as an ancient law,
and use accustomed, that every Roman should marie with one woman, and no mo.
For even as to keep two wives among the Christians, is a great conscience; so
was it demed amongst the Romans much infamy.

Amongst the ancient and renowned orators of Rome, one was called Metellus
Numidicus, the which one day making his oration to the Senate, said these
words. Worthy Senators, I let you understand, that I have greatly studied
what the counselles should be, that I ought to give ye touching marriage: For
the counsel rash and sodeyne, oftentimes is not profitable. I do not
persuade you at all to mary, neither do say that ye shall not mary: but it is
true, that if ye can live without a woman, ye shall be free from many
troubles. But what shall we do, O ye Romans, since that nature has made us
such, that to keep women it is a great trouble: and to live without them, it is
more danger. I dare say (if in this case my opinion might be accepted) that
it should not be evil done to resist the lust, since it comes by fittes:
and not to take wives, which are continual troubles. These were the words,
which Metellus Numidicus spoke, the which were not very acceptable, nor
pleasant to the fathers being in the Senate: for they would not that he should
have spoken such words against marriage. For there is no estate in this life,
wherein fortune shows her force more: then in this state of matrimony. A man
may prove them in this sort, that if the fashions and vsages of the auncientes
were diverse, as concerning ordinance: truly there was no less contrariety
in their contractes, and ceremonies. Boccase the Florentine, in a book that he
made of the marriages of the auncientes, recites many and sondrie customs that
they used in making the marriages, whereof he tells some, not for to allow,
nor maintain them: but to reprove and condemn them. For the writers did never
write the vices of some, but only to make the virtues of others more clearly
to be known. The Cymbres had a custom that when they would marie (after the
marriage was now agreed upon) he that was made sure, should pare his nails,
and send them to his wife that should be: and she in like sort sent hers unto
him. And then when she of him, and he of her had received the nails the one of
the other, they took them selves married for ever: and did afterward live
together as man and wife. The Theutonians had a ceremony, that the man that
was sure, rounded the here of her to whom he was made sure, and she did the
like unto him: and when the one suffered the other to do so, immediately they
celebrated marriage. The Armenians had a law, that the brydegrome should
pinche the right ear of the bryde, and the bryde should likewise pinche the
left ear of the brydegrome: and then they took them selves married for ever.
The Elamites had a custom, that both parties which were made sure, pricked
one the others little finger until they bledde: the which blood they did suck
naturally, and this done they were married. The Numidians used, that the
brydegrome and the bryde should gather together a piece of earth, and with
their spet tell they tempered it, and therewith the one anointed the foreheade
of the other: so that the marriage between them, was to annoynte the one and
the other with a little claye. When those of Dace would be married, the
brydegrome and the bryde, each one by them selves, were brought in chariottes,
the one metinge the other: and when they came togethers, the brydegrome gave a
new name to the bryde, and she likewise to him, and from that time forewarde
they lived as in lawful matrimony. When those of Hungary would marye, the one
sent unto the other a familier god made of silver, whom they called Lares, and
when they had received the God of each other, the marriage was finished, and
they lived as man and wife. The Siconians had a custom and law, that when
they should mary, the one sent to the other a shoe: and that received of both,
they agreed to the marriage. The Tharentins had a custom, that when they did
marie, they set them selves at the table to eat, and the one did feade the
other: so that if by mishappe the one should chance to feade him self, that
marriage was not esteemed for constant, nor good. The Scithes had a custom, and
they kept it as a law, that when men and women should marie, as now they
touch the hands the one of the other: so did they them touch with their
feet, afterward they set together their knees, then they touched with their
hands, and then they set their buttockes together, and so their heads, and
in the end they embraced the one the other. All these ceremonies done, the
marriages were assured, and sufficiently confirmed: and so we might say of many
others, but to avoid tediousnes we will follow our matter.

How Princesses and great Ladies ought to love their husbands, and that love
ought not by coniurations, and enchauntementes to be procured: but by wisdom,
honesty, and virtue desired. Cap. iiii.
ALl men that desire to achieue and obtain any worthy thing in this life,
inuente and search many means to come thereunto: for men by good provision
and circumspection compass sondrie things, which otherwise they should
loose, unless they would by force take them. As in the marriages of our
christian religion, wherein we do not suffer, that the man and the wife be
parents, and nigh of blood: leaving a part that the one is a man, and the
other a woman, that the one is strong, and the other weak: often times it
chances, that there is between the man and the wife more contrariety in
conditions, then diversity in lineage. I would say therefore (for healthful
counsel, and necessary advice) to ye great dames, and princesses, and to al
other wives, since they must needs eat and drink with their husbands, that
they must sleep, treat, be conuersaunt, and talk, and finally live and die
with their husbands, that they should use much diligence to bear with their
conditions: for to say the trothe, the wife ought in all things to follow the
conditions of her husband, and the husband in some thing to bear with the
conditions of his wife. So that she by her patience ought to suffer the
imperf^ctions of him, and he likewise by his wisdom ought to dissemble the
importunities of her: and in such sort they ought to agree and love togethers,
that all those of the common wealth should rejoice at their behauiours. For
married men, which are quarellers and sedicious persons, the neighbors in
stead of weeping and wailing for the deprivation of their life, demand gifts
the one of the other for bringing news of their (...) ^^mit that the husband
be covetous, and unthrifty, that he be deformed in his body, that he be rude in
condition, base of lineage, rash in his speech, in adversities fearful, in
prosperities careless, in the end being (as he is) husband, we can not deny
but in the house he ought to be chief master. For the which it is also
necessary, that we give now unto the wives some healthful counsel, whereby
they may bear and suffer quietly such great troubles. For at this day there
is no husband so loving, nor so virtuous, in whom the wife shall not find
some evil conditions. First of al wives ought to endeavor them selves to love
their husbands unfeignedly, if they desire their husbands should love them
without dissimulation: for as we see by experience, marriage is seldom broken
through poverty, nor yet continued with riches. For the evil married folks
through debate, and strife, be separated in on week, where as by good and true
love they are preserved all the days of their life. To eat dry and unsavory
meats, they use to take salt for to amend it. I mean, that the burdens of
matrimony are many, and troublesome, the which all with love only may be
endured. For as Plato the divine philosopher says, one thing ought not to
be called more painful then an other, for the labor we thereunto employ: but
for the great or small love that thereunto we have. Though some sundry things
be troublesome and tedious, yet when with love it is begone, it is easily
followed, and ioyefully achieued: for that travail is nothing noisome, where
love is the mediator. I know right well and do confess that the counsel
which I give to women is sharp, that is: for an honest woman to love a
dissolute man, for a sage wife to love a foolish husband, for a virtuous
wife, to love a vicious husband. For as daily experience shows, there are
some men of so foolish conditions, and other women of so noble conversation,
that by reason apparent they ought to take them for mistresses, rather then
they should accept them for husbands. Although this, in some particular cases
is true, I say and affirm, that generally all women are bound to love their
husbands, since that willingly, and not by compulsion they were not enforced
to take them: for in like manner, if the marriage pleased not the woman, she
has not so much cause to complain of her husband for asking her: as she has
reason to complain of her own self that accepted him. For the misfortunes
that by our folly do chance, though we have cause to lamente them, we ought
also to have reason to dissemble them. Be the man never so wild and evil
brought up, it is impossible, if the wife love him, but he must needs love her
again. And though perchance he can not force his evil condition to love her,
yet at the least he shall have no occasion to hate her. The which ought not
to be little esteemed, for there are many wives not only of the Plebeians, but
also of the noble dames, that could be content to forgive their husbands all
the pleasure they should do them, and also all the love that they ought to
show: if they would refrain their tongues from speaking injurious words, and
keep their hands from dealinge loathsome stripes. We have many notable examples
in histories, of many noble and stout Ladies (as well Greeks as Romans)
which after they were married, had so great faithfulness, and bare such
loyalty to their husbands: that they not only followed them in their
travails, but also delivered them in their dangers. Plutarche in the book of
noble women declares, that the Lacedaemonians, keeping many nobles of the
Athenians prisoners (which at that time were their cruel and mortal enemies)
and being judged to die: their wives concluded to go to the prison where they
lay, and in the end they obtained of the Gayler thereof, that they might go
in, and talk with their husbands: for in deed the tears were many that
before them were shed, and the gifts were not few which unto them were
offered. The wives therefore entering into the prison did not only change
their apparel with their husbands, but also the liberty of their persons:
for they went out as women, and the women in their steades remained there as
men. And when they brought out these innocent wives from prison, to execute
justice, supposing they were men, the Lacedaemonians understanding the
faithfulness of the women, determined that they should not only be pardoned: but
also that they should be greatly rewarded, and honored, for the good examples
of other women to whom they were married. The ancient and great renowned
Panthea, when news was brought her that her husband was dead in the battle,
she her own self determined to go seek him out, with hope that as yet he was
not utterly dead: and fynding him dead, with the blood of him she washed all
her body, and likewise her face, stryking with a knife her self to the heart,
and embracing her husband she yielded up the ghost, and so togethers they were
carried to the grave. Porcia, the daughter of Marcus Porcia the great, when she
heard that her husband Brutus was taken and slain, she felt for that news so
great sorrow, that all her friends saying her take the matter so grievously,
hid from her all Irone where with she might kill her self: and did labor
to keep and preserve her from dangers, wherein she might fall and shorten her
life. For she was so excellent a Roman, and so necessary to the common
wealth, that if they had lamented the death of Brutus her husband, with tears
of their eyes: they ought to bewail the loss of his wife Porcia, with drops
of blood in their hearts. Porcia therefore feeling in her self a woeful and
afflicted heart, for the death of her entierly beloved husband, to declare that
that which she did was not fained, nor for to please the people, but to
satisfy her great and marvelous love: since she found neither sword nor
knife to kill her self, nor cord to hang her self, neither well to drown
her in, she went to the fire, and with as great pleasure did eat the hot
fiery coals, as an other would have eaten any delicate meats. We may say that
such kind of death was very strange and new, which the Roman found to
increase, augmente, and manifest her love: Yet we can not deny, but that she
wanne to the posterity of her name a perpetual memory. For as a noble dame
she would quench with coals of fire her burning heart, that enflamed was with
fiery brondes of love. As Diodorus Siculus says, it was a law and custom
amongst the Lidians, to mary them selves with many wives: and when by chance
their husbands died, the wives which they had met together, and fought in some
plain place. And the women which remained only alive, and of the conflict had
the victory, cast them selves into the grave of their husband: so that those
women then fought for to die, as men now fight for to live.

Of the revenge a woman of Greece took of him that had killed her husband, in
hope to have her in marriage. Cap. v.
PLutarche in the book that he made of the noble and worthy women, declares a
thing worthy of rehersall, and to be had in memory.

In the city of Galacia were two renowned citezens, whose names were, Sinatus
and Sinoris, which were by blood cosins, and in familiarity friends: and for
the love of a Greeks daughter, being very noble, beautiful, and exceading
gracious, they both striued to have her in marriage, and for to attain to their
desires, they both served her, they both followed her, they both loved her, and
for her both of them desired to die. For the dart of love, is as a stroke with
a clod of earth: the which being thrown amongst a company, does hurt the
one, and blind the others. And as the fatal destinees had ordained it. Sinatus
served this lady called Camma in such sort, that in the end he obtained her
in marriage for his lawful wife: which thing when Sinoris perceived, he was
ashamed of his doings, and was also wounded in his heart. For he lost not only
that, which of so long time he had sought, loved, and served: but also the hope
to attain to that, which chiefly in his life he desired. Sinatus therefore
seeing that his wife Camma was noble, meke, gracious, fair, and loving, and
that in all things she was comely and well taught: decreed to offer her to the
goddess Diana, to the end that she would preserve her from peril, and keape
her from infamy. Truly we cannot reprove the knight Sinatus for that he did,
nor we ought to note him for rash in his counsel: for he saw that his wife
was very fair, and therefore much desired. For with great difficulty that is
kept, which of many is desired. Though Camma was now married, and that she
was in the protection of the goddess Diana: yet notwithstanding her old friend
Sinoris died for her sake, and by all means possible he served her,
continually he importuned her, daily he followed her, and howerly he required
her. And all this he did, upon certain hope he had, that such diligent
service should suffice to make her change her sacred mind: and as she had
chosen Sinatus for her husband openly, so he thought she should take him for
her friend secretly. For many women are as men without taste through sickness,
the which eat more of that that is hurtful and forbidden: then of that which
is healthsome, and commanded. Not without a cause Camma was greatly renowned
throughout all Galatia for her beauty: and much more among the virtuous
esteamed for her honesty. The which evidently in this was seen, that after she
was married, Sinoris could never cause her to receive any jewel, or other
gift, nor that she would hear him speak any word, nor that she would show
her self in the wyndowe, either to him, or to any other, to the end to be
seen in the face. For it is not sufficient for Ladies to be pure good: but also
to give no occasion for men to judge (that if they durst) they would be evil.
As it is true in deed, that the heart which is entangled with love, dare
boldly adventure him self in many kind of dangers, to accomplish that
which he desired: so Sinoris seeing that with fair words he could not flatter
her, nor with any gifts win her, determined to kill Sinatus her husband,
upon hope that when she should be wydowe, he might easily obtain her in
matrimony. For he thought although Camma was not evil, it was not for that
she wanted desire to do it: but because she had no commodious place to
accomplish it. And to be short, Sinoris would neades execute and bring to
effect his deuellyshe and damnable intent: so that sone after he vylie slew
his said compaignion Sinatus. After whose death the noble lady Camma was of
Sinoris greatly desired, and by his parents much importuned, that she would
condiscende to take and mary him, and that she would forgive him the death of
her husband Sinatus, which then was buried. And as she was in all her doings
such a princely woman, she imagened with her self, that under the pretense of
marriage, she might have opportunity to accomplish her desiers: wherefore she
answered unto his parents, that she did accept their counsel, and said to
Sinoris that she did choose him for her husband, speaking these words more
for to comfort him, then with intent to pardon him. And as amongst those of
Galatia there was a custom, that the new married folks should eat togethers
in one dishe, and drink in one cup: the day that the marriage was
celebrated, Camma determined to prepare a cup with poison, and also a lute,
wherewith she began to play, and singe with her propre voice before the
goddess Diana in this manner.

TO thee Dian, whose endless reign does stretche
Above the bounds, of all the heavenly route
And eke whose aid, with royal hand to reche
Chief of all gods, is most proclaimed out.
I swear, and with unspotted faith protest
That though till now, I have reserud my breath
For no intent it was, but thus distressed
With waylefull end, to wreke Senatus death.
And if in mind, I had not thus decreed
Whereto should I, my pensife days have spent
With longer dewle? for that forepassed deed
Whose often record, new sorrows still has bent.
But oh since him, their kindled spite has slain
With tender love, whom I have waide so dear
Since he by fate, is rest from fortunes rain
For whose decay, I dredelesse perish here:
Since him by whom, my only life I ledd
Through wretched hands, the gaping earth now have
Ought I by wyshe, to live in any stedd
But closde with him, together in the grave?
O bright Dian, since senceles him I see
And makeles I, here to remain alone,
Since he is graude, where greedy worms now be
And I survive, surmounted with my fone,
Since he is pressed, with lumpes of wretched soil
And I thus chargd, with flame of frosen care:
Thou know Dian, how hard with restles toil
Of hoote abhorring mind, my life I spare.
For how can this, unquiet breast resarue
The fainting breath, that strives to draw his last
Since that even then, my dieng heart did starve
When my dead phere, in swalowyng earth was cast.
The first black day, my husband slept in grave
By cruel sword, my life I thought to spend
And since a thousand times, I sought to have
A stretching cord, my sorrows wrath to end.
And if till now, to wast my pining days,
I have deferde, by slaughter of my hand
It was but lo, a fitter cause to raise
Whereon his sharp revenge, might justly stand.
Now since I may in full suffising wise
Redeem his breath, (if waywarde will would let)
More deep offense, by not revenge might rise
Then Sinoris erst, by giltles blood did get.
Thee therefore mighty Jove, I justly crave
And eke thy daughter chaste, in thankful sort
That lo the offering, which of my self ye have
Ye will vouchesafe, into your heavenly forte.
Since Sinatus, with soon enflamed eyes
Amongst the Achaian routes, me chiefly ^ewed
And eke amidst, the prease of Greeks likewise
Chose for his phere, when swetely he had sewed.
Since at my will, the froth of wasting wealth
With gladsome mind, he trained was to spend
Since that his youth, which slippeth lo by stelth
To wait on me he, freely did commend.
Since he such heaps, of lingering harms did wast
Aye to content, my wanton youthly will
And that his breath, to fade did pass so fast
To glut their thrust, that thus his blood did spill.
Though great the duty be, which that I owe
Unto his graued ghost, and ^indred moulde
Yet lo me seames, my duty well I show
Perfourming that, my feeble power could.
For since for me, untwined was his threede
Of giltles life, that ought to purchase breath
Can reasons doom conclude, I ought to dreede
For his decay, to clyme the steps of death.
In wretched earth, my father graued lies
My dear mother, has run her raze of life
The pride of love, no more can dawnt mine eyes
My wasted goods, ar shronke by fortunes strife.
My honors sone, eclipsed is by fate
My young delight, is lo fordone by chance
My broken life, these passed happes so hate
As can my graued heart, no more advance.
And now remains, to duty with my phere
No more but refuse lo, my yrkesome life
With willing mind, followed eke with drere
Which I resign, as sits for a wife.
And thou Sinoris, which Iunos yoke do crave
To press my corpse, to feed thy liking lust
The route of Homers gods, the grant to have
In stead of royal feats, a throne of dust.
In change of costly robes, and rich araie
A simple winding sheet, they deigne the give
And eke instead, of honest wedlockes stay
They singe thy dirge, and not vouchsaue the live.
In place of himens hie vnfiled bed
They lay thee up, in closure of thy grave.
In steed with precious meats, for to be fed
They make the worms, for fitter pray thee have
In steed of song, and musikes tuned sown
They wait on thee, with loud lamenting voice
In change of joyful life, and hie renown
Thy cruel death, may sprede with wretched noise.
For you, great gods, that stalled be on hie
Should not be just, ne yet such titles clame
Unless this wretch, ye ruthles cause to die
That lives now, to sclaunder of your name.
And thou Dian, that haunted courts do shonne
Know, with what great delight, this life I leave
And when the race, of spending breath is done
Will perse the soil, that did my phere receive.
And if perchance, the paled ghostes despise
Such fatal fine, with grudge of thankeles mind
Yet at the least, the shamefast living eyes
Shall have a glass, rare wisely gifts to find
Wherein I will, that Lucres sect shall gase
But none that live, like Helens line in blase.
AND when the prayer was ended, that this fair and virtuous Camma made, she
drank, and gave to drink to Sinoris of this cup of poison, who thought to
drink no other but good wine and water: and the case was such, that he died
at noone days, and she likewise in the eueninge after. And truly her death of
all Greece, with as great sorrow was lamented: as her life of all men was
desired. Princesses and great Ladies, may most evidently perceive by the
examples herein contained, how honest and honorable it is for them to love,
and endeavor them selves to be beloved of their husbands: and that not only
in their life, but also after their death. For the wife to serve her husband
in his life, seameth often times to proceade of fear: but to love and honor him
in his grave, proceadeth of love. Princesses and great Ladies ought not to do
that, which many other women of the common people do, that is to wete, to seek
some drinks and inuente some shameful sorceries to be beloved of their
husbands: for albeit it is a great burden of conscience, and lack of shame in
like manner to use such superstitions, yet it should be a thing to unjust and
very slanderous, that for to be beloved of their husbands, they should
procure to be hated of God. Truly to love, to serve, and content God, it is
not hurtefull to the woman, for that she should be the better beloved of her
husband: but yet God has suffered, and does permit oftetymes, that the
women being feeble, deformed poor, and negligent, should be better beloved of
their husbands, then the diligent, fair, and rich. And this is not for the
services they do to their husbands, but for the good intention they have to
serve, and love God, which shows them this especial favor: for otherwise
God does not suffer, that he being with her displeased, she should live with
her husband contented. If women would take this council that I give them in
this case, I will teach them furthermore a notable enchauntement, to obtain
the love of their husbands, which is: that they be quiet, meke, pacient,
solitary, and honest, with which five herbs they may make a confection, the
which neither seen nor tasted of their husbands, shall not only cause them to
be beloved, but also honored. For women ought to know that for their beauty
they are desired: but for their virtue only they are beloved.

That Princesses and great Ladies ought to be obedient to their husbands, and
that it is a great shame to the husband, that his wife should command him.
Cap. vi.
MAny ancient historiographers travailed greatly, and consumed long time in
writing, to declare what authority the man ought to have over the woman, and
what servitude the woman owes to the man: and some for to auaunce the dignity
of the man, and others to excuse the frailty of the woman, alleged such vain
things, that it had been more honor for them not to have written at all, then
in such sort as they did. For it is not possible but the writers should err,
which write not as reason teaches, but rather as their fantasy leads.
Those that defend the frailty of the women said, that the woman has a body
as a man, she has a soul as a man, she has reason as a man, dies as a man,
and was as necessary for generation as man, she lives as a man, and therefore
they thought it not mete that she should be more subject to man, then man to
her: for it is not reason that that which nature has made free, should by any
laws of man be made bond. They said furthermore, that God created not the
creatours, but to augmente the generation of mankind, and that in this case
the woman was more necessary then the man: for the man engenders without pain
or travail, but the woman is delivered with peril and danger, and with pain
and travail norysheth up the child. Wherefore it seameth great unkindness and
cruelty, that the women (which are delivered with peril, and danger of
their lives, and bring up their children with labor, and toil of their
bodies) should be used of their husbands as sclaues. They said further, that
men are those that curse, that move seditions, that make wars, that
maintain enmytie, that wear weapons, that sheade man's blood, and commit
sondrie other mischiefs, which the women do not: but in stead of kylling
men, sheading blood, and other notorious euilles that men do, they imploye
them selves to increase men. And since it is so, then women, rather then men,
ought to have dominion, and command in the common wealth: for women
increase the common wealth, and men dyminishe it. For neither divine nor
humayne law commands, that the foolyshe man should be free, and govern:
and that the wise woman should be bond, and serve. Those of Achaia affirmed
this opinion, and groundeth them selves upon this reason, and observed it as a
custom: that the husbands should obey, and the wives command. And so they
did, as Plutarche says in the book of consolation: for the husband swept
and made clean the house, made the bed, washed the bucke, covered the
table, dressed the dynner, and went for water. And of the contrary part, his
wife governed the goods, answered the affairs, kept the money, and if she
were angrye, she gave him not only foul words: but also often times laid
her hands on him, to revenge her anger. And hereof came this ancient
proverb, the which of many is read, and of few understood: that is to
wete, Vita Achaiae, the life of an Achaian. When in Rome the husband suffered to
be ruled and commanded of his wife, the neighbors would say unto him in
manner of a reproach, Vita Achaiae: which is as much as if a man would say,
go, go, as thou art, since thou live after the law of Achaia, where men have
so little discretion, that they suffer them selves to be governed (be it well or
evil) of their wives, and that every woman commands her husband. Pliny in
an epistle that he wrote, reproved greatly his friend Fabatus, for that he
kept in his house a wife, the which in all his doings ruled and commanded
him: wherein he told him that he durst do nothing, without her commandment.
And to make the matter to seem more heinous, in the latter end of his epistle
he said these words, Me valde poenitet quod tu solus Rome polles vita
Achaiae: which is, it greueth me much that thou alone in Rome should lead
the life of one of Achaia. Julius Capitolinus says, that Anthonius Caracalla,
being in love with a fair Lady of Persia, and seeing that he could not enjoy
her nor obtain his desire, promised to marie her according to the law of
Achaia: and truly she showed her self more wise in her answer, the^ he did
in his demand, telling him that she would not, nor might not marye, for
because she had promised her self to the goddess Vesta, and that she had
rather be a servant of the gods, then a mistress of men. The Parthes had a
law contrary to them, and likewise those of Thrace, the which so little esteamed
women, that their husbands used them none otherwise then like servants.

And in this case men had so great liberty, or to say better, lightness: that
after a woman had borne and brought forth twelve children, the children
remained in the house, and the husbands sold their wives to them that would
give most, or else they changed them for others that were more young.

And the children agreed to the selling of their own mother, to the intent that
their father might refresh himself with another that was more young: and the
old and baren woman, should either be buried quick, or else serve as a slave.
Dionisius Halicarnaseus says, that the Lides had a law, and the Numidians in
like manner, that the woman should command things without the house, and the
man should provide for those that were within. But according to my poor
judgment, I cannot tell how this law was kept, nor how they could fulfill it,
for by reason the wife should not go out of the house but very little, and
therefore me thinks that they ought not to command any thing abroad, nor the
husband should enter into another man's house, for to command there. Ligurgus
in the laws that he gave to the Lacedaemonians says, that the husbands should
provide abroad, see al things necessary for the house, and that the wives
should keape and dipose them within: so that this good philosopher divided the
travail between the man and the woman, but yet notwithstanding he reserved the
rule and aucthority to the man For to say the truth, it is a monsterous thing
that the wife should command the husband in his house. Under our Christian
relygion there is neither divine, nor human laws, but will prefer man above
all other things: and though some philosophers would dispute to the contrary,
and that many men would have followed them, yet me thinks that a man should
not praise nor commend them for their opinyons. For there can be nothing more
vain nor light, then by man's law to give that aucthority to woman, which by
nature is denied her.

We se by experience that women of nature are al weak, frail, fearful, and
tender: and finally in matters of weight not very wise. Then if matters of
government require not only science and experience, but also strength and
courage to enterprise doubtful things, wisdom for to know them, force to
execute them, dyligence for to follow them, pacyence to suffer them, means to
endure them, and above all great strength and hope to compass them: why then
will they take from man the gouernemente, in whom all these things abound,
and give it to the woman, in whom all these these thyngea do want? The end
why I speak these things before, is to require, to counsel, to admonish,
and to persuade Princesses, and great Ladies, that they think it spoken (if
they will be happy in marriage) to thend they should be obedient to their
husbands: for speaking the truth, in that house where the wife commands the
husband, we may call her a masculyne woman, and him a feminine man. Many women
are deceived, in thinking that in commanding their husbands they live more
honorably and be better esteamed: but truly it is not so, for all those that
see, and perceive it, accompteth the woman for vain, and the men in like manner
for folyshe. I know, and can tell right well, that there are some husbands so
excessive in spending, and so wanton in living, that it were not only good that
their wives should rule them, but also chastise them, but yet in the end I
say, that notwithstanding all this is better and more tolerable that all the
goods be lost, then between them any malice, hate or dissencion should ^yse.
If a woman's children dye, she may bring forth others, if she loose her goods,
she may get them again, if her servants goes from her, she may find others,
if she se her self sad, God may comfort her, if she be sick, she may be
healed, but if she be at debate with her husband, I cannot tell what she shall
do: for the wife that forsakes the friendship of her husband, gives to all men
occasion to speak of her follye. Since women naturally are all gelouse, and
that of gelousye proceeds suspicion, I counsel them, if they will not that
their husbands commit a fault, that they do not anger nor chafe them: for if
in gage she have his heart, no other woman shall have his body, because from that
which he would not absteyne for consience, he will refrain for shame. Often
times ye husbands come home chafed, troubled, wrathful, angry, and vexed: and
then women ought to take heed that they overthwart them not, for if they do it
cannot be otherwise, but that they shall have either evil words with his
tongue, or else suffer sore blows with his fistes. Truly it is not mete,
neither in any case profitable, that Princesses and great dames should
ouerthwarte their husbands with froward words, nor that they should use to
strive against them, but rather that the wife in all cases should be obedient,
and loving to her husband: for it may happen and daily it does chance, that
they begin to argew in jest, and afterward they end in earnest. The woman which
is sage, wise, and virtuous, ought to wey with her self, that either her
husband has occasion so to taunt her, or else peradventure he does it of a will.
I say that in this case if he have occasion, she ought to suffer and endure
him: if he does it of will, she ought to dissemble with him. For otherwise, it
might so take her in the head, that she would burden him with many evil words:
so that he beginning then the debate should remain excused, and she being
without fault at the beginning, might in the end be condemned.

There is nothing wherein a woman shows her wisdom more, then to endure a
rash husband. A woman in nothing shows her sage^es more, then to dissemble
with a foolysh husband. Her honesty in nothing can be showed more, then in
suffering a wanton husband. She can show her worthiness in nothing so much, as
in bearing with an unworthy husband. I mean, though she understood that her
husband has little, that he knows little, and that he were worth little: yet
she should make men believe that he has much, that he knows enough, and can
do much. For all the honor which she shall give so to her husband, shall wholly
again redounde on her self. It is an evil thing (me thinks) that women
should be so bold to speak against their husbands: for they can not say evil
of them, but that they must witness dishonor of them selves. For if her
husband be a dronkard, they will say that she is a dronkardes wife, and if he
be a fool, that she is the wife of a fool, and what more: when the husband
shall come to amend, and to moderate himself, the woman in the end shall be
blamed. For if she burden him with evil words, he acquyteth her with sharp
stripes. But if she touches his honor, it may chance he takes away her
life. If perhaps the husband should command the wife any unjust thing, I
would be of opinion that she should obey him, but not resist him: and after
that his raging furye were past, and his choler qualyfied, then she might say
unto him, that he was very rash to command, and she very wise to obey. For
if she be quick of tongue, to answer to every word that he shall speak,
without doubt they will not live one day in concord. Reading therefore that which
I have read, hearing that which I have heard, and having seen also that I have
seen, I would counsel women that they should not presume to command their
husbands: and I would admonyshe husbands that they would not suffer their
wives to rule them. For in doing the contrary, it is none otherwise, the^ to
eat with the feet and travail with the hands, to go with the fingers, and
to feed them selves with their tooes. My mind is not here to speak against
the woman, nor against the Princesses and great Ladies, which of their
patrimonye and heritage possess many Towns, and Cities: for to such I will not
take away the services, which are due unto them by their subjects, but I do
persuade them to the obedyence which they ought to have to their husbands. It
is no merueyle though that women of mean estate have some times quarrelled
with their husbands: for they have small riches to lose, and less honor to
adventure, then the Princesses and great Dames have, the which since they do
adventure to command many, why will they not humble themselves to obey one?
speaking with due reverence, It is for abundance of follye, and want of
wisdom, that a woman should have presumption to govern a whole Realm, and
that she has not grace to obey one husband. Seneca in a Tragedye says, that
in the time of the war of Mithridates, it chanced in Rome that the Consulles
sent to the old knights, ad commanded that they should al be in a redines to
go with Silla the Consul into the wars. And it happened that when they came
into ones house in Rome to publishe the edicte, to warn him to be redye they
found not the husband but the wife, who made answer and said: that her husband
ought not nor could not go to the wars, and though he would he should not,
neither would she give him license. For he was an old and auncyente knight,
and therefore he ought to be exempted from the wars.

With this answer, those that herd it were greatly abashed, and the whole
senate no less offended: wherefore they commanded that ye husband should be
banyshed Rome, and the wife to be carried to the prison Mamortine, not for that
he excused himself for going to the wars: but because she commanded her
husband, and because he suffered himself to be commanded of her. The Senate
did this to that end, that from that time forwards no woman should presume or
contend with her husband: and that no husband should give his wife any
occasion to be so bold with him.

That women, and especially Princesses and great Ladies should be very
circumspect in going abroad out of their houses, and that through the resort
of them that comes to their houses, they be not evil spoken of. Chap. vii.
Among all the councelles that may or ought to be given to Princesses and great
Ladies, this is the first: that they do what they can to have rest in their
houses, and that they go not as strayes to the mansions of other men. For if
such Ladies are good, they get much reputacion: and if perchance they be evil,
they take from men all occasion. Whether the husband be present or absent, it
is a most necessary and honest thing that the wife be for the most part in the
house: For by this means the household shall be well governed, and from the heart
of the husband shall be withdrawn al kind of suspicions. Since the office of
the husband is to gather goods and riches, and the office of a wi^e to keep
and preserve them: the hour that she goes out of the house, she ought to
think that her maidens will stray abroad, the children will run out to play,
the varlettes and servant will be out of order, the neighbors will take
occasions to speak evil, and that which is worst of al: some will steal the
goods out of the house, and the others will speak evil of the renown of the
wife. Oh, god gives a goodly gift and grace to that man which has such and so
good a wife, that of her own nature loves to keep her self within the house.
And truly I say that such one does excuse many griefs, and saves much money.
For she spends not the goods in apparel, nor gives occasion to men to judge
evil of her person. The greatest debate that is between man and wife, is for
that he desires to get and keep his goods to bring up his children, and to
maintain his family: and on the other part that she desires to spend all
upon apparel. For women in this case are so curious in louinge of themselves,
that they would abstain from meats that should mainteyne their life, only to
bye a new gown to set out their pride. Women naturally do love to keape, and
will not spend any thing, except it be in apparel: For every hour (that is in
the day and the night) they desire to have a new gown to change. My entencyon
is not to speak of apparel only, but to persuade Princesses and great Ladies,
that they would keep themselves in their houses: and in so doing, they should
excuse these superfluous wastes and expenses. For her neighbor seeing her
better apparelled then she is, looks upon her husband as she were a Lion. It
chances oftentimes (I would to god I had no cause to speak it) that if by
chance there comes any great or solemn feast or marriage, she will never
look louyngly on his face, before he has given her a new gown to her back:
and when the poor gentleman has no money to pay, of necessity he must run
in credit. And when the vanytie of the woman is past, then the time of payment
draws nere and they come to arest all his goods: so that they have cause to
lament one hole year, for that which they have spent in one hour.

Women seldom contend for that one is fairer, more nobler of lynage, better
married, or more virtuous then an other: but only for that an other goes
better apparailed then she. For touching apparel, there is no woman ca^ endure
that an other meaner woman should make comparison with her, nor that in like
manner her equal should excel her. Lycurgus in the laws that he gave to the
Lacedaemonians, commanded that their wives should not go out of their houses,
but at diverse solemn feasts in the year. For he said, that the women ought
to be making their prayers in the Temples to the gods, or else in their houses
bringing up their children. For it is not honest, nor commendable, that the
wife should pass her time abroad, trotting from street to street as common
women. I say that the Princesses and great Ladies are much more bound to keep
them selves at home in their houses, then other women of meaner degree: and
without a cause I speak it not, for thereby they shall get them more reputacion.
For there is no virtue whereby the woman wins more reputacion in the common
wealth, then always to be seen resident in her house. I say also that a wife
ought the most part of her time to keape her house, because she has less
occasion then other have to go abroad. For if the poor wife (the Plebian) go
out of her house, she goes for no other cause but for to seek meat: but if
the rich and noble woman goes out of her house, it is for nothing but to take
her pleasure. Let not princesses marvel, nor let not great ladies wonder, if
they dispose their feet to trotte, and occupye their eyes to behold, though
their enemies and neighbors with cankered hearts does judge them, and with
evil tongues defame them: for the fond deeds that women do, makes men to be
rash of judgment. I like it well that the husbands should love their wives,
that they should comfort them, and make much of them, and that they should put
their trust in them: but I do discommend that the women should go gadding
abroad in visitacion, from house to house, and that their husbands dare not
gain say them. For admyt that they be good in their persons: yet in this
doing they give occasion for men to esteem them vain and light. Seneca says
in an epistel, that the great Roman Cato the censor ordained, yt no woman
should go out of her house being alone, and if perhaps it were in the night,
she should not go alone without company, and that the company should not be such
as she would chose, but such as her husband or parent would assign: so that
with the same countenance we behold now a comen woman, with the self same
looks then we beheld her yt went often out of her house, Noble ladies (which
love their honor) ought greatly to consider and way the great inco^ueniences
that may ensue by often gadding abroad: for they spend much to apparel them,
they lose much time in trimming them, they keep gentlewomen to wait upon them,
they will strive with their husbands to go, and whiles she is out of the doors,
the house shall be evil kept, and all the enemies and friends thereby have matter
whereupon to talk: finally I say, that the woman yt goes out of her house,
does not wey the loss of her honor so much, as she does the pleasure she
takes abroad. Presuming (as I presume) to write with gravity, I say, that I
am ashamed to speak it, yet for all that I will not refrain to write of the
walks of these dames yt visit and desire to be visited: amongst whom there is
moved oftentimes such vain communication, yt it causes their husbands to
become enemies: and on the other part they remember more the gossippinges
that they have to go, then their sins which they ought to lament.

Of the commodities and discommodities which follow Princesses and great Ladies
that go abroad to vysite or abide in the house Cap. viii.
LUcretia by the consent of all, was counted the cheafest of all other Matrones
of Rome, and not for that that she was more fair, more wise, of greater
parentage, or more noble. But because she did withdraw her self from company,
and abode solitary. For she was such a one, that in the heroical virtues there
could be nothing more desired: nor in women's weakness there was nothing in her
to be amended. The historye of the chaste Lucretia, is evident in Titus Liuius,
that when the husbands of diverse Romans came home from the wars to their
houses, they found their wives in such sort, that some were gasing out of the
windows, others devising vainly at their doors, others in the field
wandering, others in their gardeynes banqueting, others in the market byeng,
and others in the mids of the streates, here and there gaddyng: but the
famous Lucretia was found in her house alone, weuing in silk, so that she
flyeng company for that she would not be seen, made her self in her honor and
renown better to be known. I will give an other counsel to Princesses and
great Ladies, the which I am willing to give, so I wish they would be as
desirous to receive, that is to wete: if they will be esteemed and counted for
honest women, that they must keep them selves from evil company. For though
the stinking carreine does no harm, because we eat it not: yet the vnsauorye
sent thereof annoyeth us by smelling. The honor of women is so delicate a
thing, that if we give them license to go abroad to vysite women: we must also
give them leave to be visited of men. For that one Dame should visit an other,
it seems much charity: but that men should vysite women, I cannot but think
it much dishonestye. In the presence of their husbands and nere kynnesfolkes,
they may be visited and talked withal, and this is to be understood, of
approved and honest persons: not withstanding I say if the husband be not at
home, I would it should be compted sacrilege, if any man pass the thresshold of
the door to visit the wife. Plutarche says in the book of the praises of
women, that the wives of the Numydians, when their husbands were gone out of
their houses, kept their gates shut, and locked them selves in their houses:
and they had a law, that what so ever he were that knocked at the door being
shut, without calling, he should have his right hand cut of. Cicero in the
book of his laws says, that amongst the Romans there was an ancient law,
and much used: that if perchance any woman did owe any monye to any man, and
that the husband being the detter were out of his house, the creditour should
not ask his wife the debt, because that under the couller of recovering the
goods, he should not dishonor her in her fame. I would say therefore, that if
the creditour was not permitted in Rome to recover his good? for that the wife
was not of her husband accompanied: much less they would give license to
visit a woman alone. For it were more reason that the creditour should enter
for to recover his goods: then thou should enter only for thy pastime. The
divine Plato in the books of the common wealth says, and by profound reasons
persuades the wives of Greece, that they have no secret friends, but that every
one keep this saying in memory for a principal: that the woman ought not to
have any other friend but her husband. For women ought not to have license to
make friends: nor conditions to make enemies. Princesses and great Dames
ought to consider, that every one of them gives their bodies, their goods,
and their liberty to their husbands. Then since it is so I say, that with the
liberty, she ought also to give him her will. For it little avails the man
and the wife that their goods be common, if their wills be private: For to
the end that god be served, and the people edified, both ought in one house to
abide, at one table togethers to eat, in one bed to sleep, and besides this,
they both ought one thing to love. For if the man and the wife in love do
differ, in their lives they shall never be quiet. I admonysh, desire, and
counsel all women, if they will be well married, that they think it good that
their husband will, that they praise all that he prayseth, that they prove all that he proves, that they content them selves with that wherewith their
husbands are contented, and above al, that they love no more then their
husbands shall love: for otherwise it might be that the wife should set her
eyes upon one, and the husband engage his heart to an other. Plutarche in the
book of his pollytikes says, that a woman after she is married, has nothing
propre: for the day that she contracteth mamariage, she makes her husband the
only Lord of her goods, her liberty, and of her person. So that if the wife
wills any other thing, then that which the husband wills, if she would love
any other thing then that that her husband loves, we will not call her a true
lover, but an open thief: for theaues do not so much harm to rob the husband
of his money, as the wife does in withdrawing from him her heart. If the woman
will live in peace with her husband, she ought to mark whereunto he is enclyned,
for so much as if he be merry, she ought to rejoice, and if he be sad, she
must temper her self, if he be covetous, she should keep, if he be prodigal,
she should spend, if he be impatient, she should dyssemble, and if he be
suspected, she must beware. For the woman which is wise and sage, if she can
not as she would, she ought to will what she may. Well, whether the husband be
evil inclined, or in his conditions evil manered, I swear, that he cannot
suffer that his wife should have any other lovers: For though the man be of a
mean stock, he had rather always that his wife should love him alone, then
the best of the nobility in the town, One thing I cannot dissemble, because I
se that god is therewith offended. Which is, that many Ladies make their excuses
through sickness, because they would not past once in the weke come to here
service and yet we se them busye daily trotting about to vysite their friends,
and the worst of al is, that in the morning for cold they will not rise to go to
the churches, and yet afterward in the heat of the day they go a gaddyng
from house to house, whereas they are often times until night.

I would that the Ladies would consider with them selves, before they should
go out of their houses on visitacion, to what end they go abroad: and if
perchance they go abroad to be looked on, let them know for a sewerty, that
there be few that will praise their beautye, but there be many that will
dyscommend their gaddyng. And wherefore do these Dames assembel together, for
some grave matters I warrant you, shall I tell you, it is either to banquet with
some dainty dishes, to talk of their petigres, to deuyse of their husbands, to
see who has the best gown, to note who is evil attired, to flatter the fair,
to laugh to scorn the foul, to mourmure of their neighbors, and that which
is worst of al, that they them selves which speak evil of them that are
absent, do gnaw the one the other with envy. Seldom times it chances that
the Dames chide not with their husbands, after that in this sort they have been
together: for somuche as the one notes the evil apparel, the other babblyng,
they note the one to be a fool and the other to be simple, so that it seems
not that they are mete to vysite the one the other: but to look, and accuse the
one the other. It is a straung thing for the sage woman to think that she
should take pleasure abroad, since she has her husband at home to whom she may
talk: and has her children to learn, her daughters to teach, her family to
order, and her goods to govern: she has her house to keep, and her parents
whom she ought to please: then since she has within her house such pastime,
why do they accept company of strange men? That married women should have
private friends, and love to be vysited: it follows oftentimes that god is
offended, the husband iniuried, and the people slaundered: and the woman that
is married, takes little profit and it hinders the marriage of her that is to
mary. For in such a case though some desire her for her riches: yet mo will
forsake her for her evil fame.

That women great with child, inspecially the Princesses and great Ladies ought
to be very circumspect, for the danger of the creatures wherein is showed many
misfortunes happened to women with child in the old time for suffering them to
have their wills. Cap. ix.
ONe of the most necessary things for him that takes in hand any great journey,
over any dangerous countries, is at yt the beginning he ought to learn the
way which he ought to go: for it is a thing no less troublesome then
perilous, that when he should come to rest, of necessity he should be enforced
to travel. No man can denay but that man's life is a long and tedious journey,
the which begins at our birth, and ends at our death: for in the end to
have a long or short life is none other, but to come sooner or later to the
grave. The chiefest folly of al (in mine opinion) is this, that some in their
own opinions think they have counsel enough for others, and to all others it
seems that they want for them selves. For of right he may be called a fool,
that condemns all other as fools: and auaunceth himself to be wise. Every
man ought to let his neighbor live in peace, and though he do esteame himself
to be wise, yet he ought not to think his neighbor a fool: for there is none
so wise, but that he may occupy it all. For we never saw any man so wise of
himself, but that he neaded the counsel of an other. And if this want be in
those that be very old, truly it is much more in them that be young: whose
flesh is not dry, but grene, the blood not cold, but hot, no deadly heat,
but very lively, the bestial mocions not mortifyed, but quickened, and hereof
ensues, that young men love their own aduyce and opynion, and dyspise the
counsel of all other.

When the trees are tender, they bind them togethers because they grow right,
they brydel the horse when as yet they are but coltes, to ye end they may be
easy hereafter to the brydel. They take the hawks in the neast, to make them
more famyliar: and when the beasts are little, they take them to teach them. I
mean, that a man ought to instruct his children, to the end they may know to
live well here after. I admonish, and tell the mothers that have daughters, that
there is no remedy to reform the evil inclinacion of our children, but to teach
them, and to bring them up well in their youth: for there is no wound but is
dangerous, if in time the plaster be not laid thereunto. Returnyng now to our
purpose, since that in all things there is order and measure, we will declare
presently how the male child ought to be taught: and first of al we will treat,
how a man ought to provide when the infant is begotten, and when as yet it is
alive in the mothers womb, to the entente Princesses and great Ladies should
live very circumspectlye, when they know they are conceived with child. I
should be excused to speak of this matter, since it is not my profession, and
that as yet I was never married, but by that I have red of some, and by that I
have hard of others, I will and dare be so bold to say one word. For the sage
often times gives a better account, of that he has red: then the simple does of
that he has proved.

This thing seameth to be true, between the physician and the pacient: for where
the pacient suffers the evil, he often times demands the physicion what his
sickness is, and where it holds him, and what it is called, and what remedy
there is for his disease: so the physician knows more by his science, then the
pacient by his exsperience, A man ought not to denay, that the women and in
especially great ladies know not by experience, how they are altered when they
are quycke, and the great pains they suffer when they are delivered: we could
not denay but that there is great danger in the one, and great peril in the
other, but they shall not know from whence al comes and from whence al
proceeds, and what remedy is necessary. For there are many which complayneth
of robberyes, but they know not what the theaues are that have robbed them,
First according to my judgment and opinyon, that which the woman quick with
child ought to do, is that they go softly and quietly, and that they eschew
running, either in coming or going: for though she little esteem the health of
her person, yet she ought greatly to regard the life of the creature. The more
precious the licour is, and the more weaker the vessel is which conteyneth it:
so much the more they ought to fear the danger, least the licoure shed, and
the vessel break. I mean, that the complexion of women (being with child) is
very delicate, and that the soul of the creature is precious, and therefore it
ought with great diligence to be preserved: for all the treasure of the Indes is
not equal in valewe, to that which the woman bears in her bowelles. When a
man pla^teth a vineyard forthwith he makes a ditch, or some fence about it, to
the end that beasts should not croppe it while it is young: nor that trauailers
should gather the grapes when they are ripe. And if the labourer does this thing
for to get a litel wine only, the which for the soul and body is not always
profitable: how much more circumspection ought the woman to have to preserve
her child, since she shall render an account to the creator of her creature,
unto the church of a christyan, and unto her husband of a child. In my opinyon,
where the account at the hour of death is so straight, it is requisite that in
ye time of her life she be circumspect: for god knows every thing so well in
our life, that there is none that can begile him in rendering his account at
his death. There is no wighte can suffer, nor heart dyssemble, to see a man have
his desire that is to say, to have his wife great with child, and ready to bring
forth good fruit, and afterward to se the woeful mother, through some sodeine
accident peryshe, and the innocent babe not to be borne. When the woman is
healthful, and big with child, she is worthy of great reproach, if either by
runnyng, leaping, or dancing, any mischaunce hap unto her. And truly the
husband has great cause to lament this case: for without doubt the gardener
fealeth great grefe in his heart, when in the prime time the tree is laden with
blosomes, and yet by reason of some sharp and bitter froste it never bears
fruit. It is not only evil that women should run and leap when they are
big, and great with child, but it is also dishonest, and specially for great
Ladies: for always women that be common dauncers, are esteamed as light
housewiues. The wives in general, princesses and great ladies in particular,
ought to go temperately, and to be modest in their mouinges: for the modeste
gate argues discretnes in the person. Al women naturally desire to be
honored, and reverenced: and touching that I let them know, that there is
nothing which in a common wealth is more honor for a woman, then to be wise and
ware in speaking, moderate and quiet in going. For it is impossible but that ye
woman which is light in her going and malycious in her talking, should be
despised and abhorred. In the year of the foundation of Rome.466. the romans
sent Curious Dentatus to make war against king Pirrus, who kept ye city of
Tharent, and did much harm to the people in Rome: for the Romans had a great
courage to conquer strange realms, and therefore they could have no patience
to suffer any stranger to invade theirs. This Curious Dentatus was he which in
the end overcame king Pirrus, and was the first that brought the Oliphantes to
Rome in his tryumphe, wherefore the fiercenes of those beasts astonyed the
Roman people much: for they weyed little the sight of the kings laden with
irons, but to se the Oliphants (as they did) they wondered much. Curious
Dentatus had one only sister the which he intierly loved.

They were seven children, two of the which dyed in the wars, and other three
by pestilence: so that there were none left him, but that sister, wherefore he
loved her with all his heart. For the death of vnthriftye children, is but as a
watch for children unprovided of favors. This sister of Curious Dentatus was
married to a Roman consul, and was conceived and gone.7 months with child:
and the day that her brother triumphed (for joy of her brothers honor) she
leaped and daunced so much, that in the same place she was delivered, and so
vnluckely, that the mother took her death, and the child never lived, whereupon,
the feast of the triumph ceased, and the father of the infant for sorrow lost
his speech. For the heart which suddenly feleth grefe, incontinently loses
understanding. Tibullus the Grecian, in the third book De casibus triumphi.
declares the history in good style, how, and in what sort it chanced. Nine
years after that the kings of Rome wear bannyshed from the rape that Tarquine
did to the chaste Lucretia, the Roman created a dignytie which they called
DICTATVRA, and the Dictatoure that had this office, was above al other lord
and chief: for the Romans perceived that the common wealth could not be
governed, but by one head alone. And because the Dictatour had so great
aucthority, as the Emperor has at this present, and to thend they should not
become tirauntes: they provided that the office of the Dictatoursship should
last no longer then vi. months in the year, the which past and expired they
chose another. Truly it was a good order that that office dured but vi.
months. For often times princes thinkinge to have perpetual aucthority, become
necligent in using justice. The first dictatour in Rome was Largius Mamillus,
who was sent against the Volces, the which at that time were the greatest
enemies to the Romans: for Rome was founded in such a sign, that always it
was beloved of few, and abhorred of many. As Titus Liuius says, this Largius
Mamillus vanquished the Volces, and triumphed over them, and in the end of the
war distroyed their mighty city called Curiola, and also distroyed and
ouerthrewe many places and fortresses in that province: for the cruel hearts do
not only distroy the persons, but also take vengeance of the stones. The
hurtes which Largius Mamillus did in the country of the Volces were marvelous,
and the men which he slew were many, and the treasories he robbed were
infinite, and the captives which he had in his triumph were a great number,
amongst whom inespecial he brought captive a noble man's daughter, a beautiful
gentlewoman, the which he kept in his house for the recreacion of his person:
for the aunciente Romans gave to the people all the treasours to maintain the
war, and they took to them selves all the vycious things to keep in their
houses. The case was, yt this damsel being with child, Largius Mamillus,
brought her to solace herself in his orchard, where were sundry young fruits,
and as then not ripe to eat, whereof with so great affection she did eat, that
forthwith she was delivered in the same place of a creature: so that on the one
part she was delivered: and on the other part the child died.

This thing chaunsed in the gardens of Vulcan, two days after the triumph
of Largius Mamillus, a ruful and lamentable case to declare, forasmuch as both
the child that was borne, the mother that was delivered, and also the father
that begat it, the self same day dyed, and were buried all in one grave: and
this thing was not without great waylyng, and lamenting throughout al Rome. For
if with tears their lives might have been restored: without doubt none of them
should have been buried. The first son of Rome which rebelled against rome was
Tarquin the proud. The second that wythstode Rome (being as yet in Lucania) was
Quintus Marcius. The third yt went against Rome was the cruel Silla. The
domages which these three, did to their mother Rome, were such and so great that
the three several wars of Affricke were nothing to be compared, to those three
evil children: for those enemies could scarcely se the walls of Rome, but
these unnatural children had almost not left one stone upon another. A man
ought not greatly to esteem those buildings that these tirauntes threw to the
ground, nor the buildings that they distroyed, neither the men yt they slew,
nor the women yt they forced, ne yet the orphans which they made: but above al
things we ought to lament for that, that they brought into Rome. For the common
wealth is not distroyed for lack of riches, and sumpteous buildings: but
because vices abound, and virtuous want. Of these three Romans, he whose name
was Quintus Marcius, had been consul thrice, once Dictatour, and four times
Censor, and in the end he was with much shame banished from Rome, wherewith to
reueng this injury he came with a great power and army against Rome: for the
proud heart, wounded with injury, is never quiet in his life time until he se
his enemies destroyed, or that on them he has taken vengeance. Quintus Marcius
being very nigh to the gates of Rome, was most instantlye required that he would
not distroy his mother Rome: but he took no regard, nor would condescend to any
request, until such time that his mother issewed with a niece of his, whom he
loved entierly. At whose intercession and tears he left his anger, and raised
his siege from Rome: for many are overcome sooner with tears, then with
importunate and reasonable requests. The ladies of Rome used much to have
their hears long and yellowe, and to wear their wastes high: and straight.
And as the Niece of Quintus Marcius was great and big with child, the day
that the peace was made between Quintus Marcius, and Rome, lacinge her self to
hard in her attire, to seem more proper and comely, she long before her time
was delivered of a creature: and the case was so woeful and unfortunate, that
the creature delivered dyed: the mother lost her life, and the mother losyng
her life, sodainlye her graundmother fell dead to the ground, through which
occasion all the joy and mirth was turned into sorrow and sadness. For it is
commenly seen, when the world is in the greatest joy, then fortune suddenly
turns it into sorrow. The aucthors hereof are Tibulus and Porphirius both
Grecians.

The aucthour follows and declares other inconveniences and unlucky chances
which have happened to women with child. Chap. x.
THe wars of Tarent being ended, immedyatly begone the wars of Carthage,
of which so long and tedious wars, the possession of the Isles of Maiorica,
and Minorica were occasion, for so much as the one would take it, and the other
defend it. This war endured well nyghe the space of 40. years, for often times
the wastes and domages which are done in the wars are greater: then the
profit, for which they contend. The first captain in this war of the
Romans was Gaius Duellus, and the first of the Carthaginiens was Hammon, the
which with their ships fought on the sea of Sicili, the which was very cruel:
for there they feared both the fury of the sea, and also the cruelty of the
pike, the which two things put man's life in great danger. Of this cruel
battle the Roman captain remained victorious, forasmuch as he drowned 14
ships, and took other 30. he slew. 3. thousand men, and brought 3. thousand
Carthaginiens prisoners: and this was the first victory that ye Romans had by
sea. And that that the Romans most reioysed at was, that by sea also they
remained conquerers. The captain Gaius Duellus departing from Sicili came to
Rome, where he had a sister no less virtuous, then rych and beautiful, in
whose house he lodged, where he made a costly supper to all the senators of
Rome, and to all the captains which came with him from the wars: for the
vicious men knew not wherein to show their love to their friends, but by
inuiting them to costly bankettes. The sister of the captain Gaius Duellus,
for joy of his coming, and for the pleasure of the banquet and feast which
was made in her house, did eat more then she was accustomed, and also more
then it behooved one in her case, so that in the presence of al she began to
annoy the bidden gestes: for she not only vomited out the meat of her
stomach, but also the blood of her veins, and therwithal most vnluckely
brought forth her fruit, which she had in her intrailes, wherewith immediately
after the soul departed from the body, and so died. Truly this case was no
less lamentable, then the others, for so much as Gaius lost his sister, the
husband lost his wife and his child, and the wife and the child lost their
lives: and for that that Rome lost so noble and excellent a Roman, and above al
for that it so chanced in such a time of so great joy and pleasure. For there
can come no vnluckier news, then in the time of much mirth to hear tell of any
great mischaunce. Of this matter mention is made in Blundus in the book of the
declination of the Empire. The second war of Afrike which was between Rome
and Carthage, was the. 540. years after the foundation of Rome, wherein were
captains Paulus Emilius, and Publius Varro: the which two consulles fought the
great and famous battle of Cannas in the province of Apulia, I say famous,
because Rome never lost such nobility and Roman youth, as she lost in that
day. Of these two cou^sulles, Paulus Emilius in the battle was slain, and
Publius Varro overcome, and the courageous Hannibal remained conqueror of the
field, wherein died.xxx. senators, and 300. officers of the senate, and
above.xl. thousand fotemen, and three thousand horsemen, finally the end of all the Romain people had been that day, if Hannibal had had the wit to have
followed so noble a victory, as he had the courage to give so cruel a battle. A
little before that Publius Varro departed to go to the wars, he was married to
a fair and young Romain called Sophia, and with in seven months she was
quick: and as news was brought her that Paulus Emilius was dead, and her
husband overcome, she died suddenly, the creature remaining alive in her body.
This case above al was very pitiful, in that that after he him self was
vanquished, and that he had seen his compaignion the consul Emilius slain,
with so great a number of the Roman people, fortune would that with his own
eyes he should behold the intrailes of his wife cut to take out the child, and
likewise to se the earth opened, to bury his wife. Titus Liuius says, that
Publius Varro remained so sorrowful in his heart, to see him self overcome of
his enemies, and to see his wife so suddenly and so vnluckely strike^ with
death, that all the time that his life endured, he neither comed his beard,
slept in bed, nor dined at the table: and hereat we ought not to marvel, for
a man in his heart may so be wounded in one hour, that he shall never rejoice
all the days of his life. If we put no doubts in Titus Liuius, the Romans
had long and tedious wars against the Samnites, which endured for the space
of.lxiii. years continually, until such time as the consul Ancus Rutillus
(which was a virtuous man) did set a good appointment of peace between the
Samnites and the Romans: for ye noble and stout hearts ought always by virtue
to bring their enemies to peace. These wars therefore being so cruel, and
obstinate Titus Venurius, and Spurius Posthumous (which were Romain captains)
were ouercom by Pontius ye valiant captain of ye Samnites: who after ye victory
did a thing never seen nor hard of before. That is to wete, yt al ye Romain
prisoners whom he took, he put about their necks a yoke, wherein were written
these words. In spighte of Rome, the Romans shall be subject to the yoke of
the Sanites. Wherewith in deed the Romans were greatly iniuried, wherefore they
sought stoutly to be reue^ged of the Samnites: for the hearts that are haughty,
and proud, cannot suffer that others have their minds lofty and high. The
Romans therefore created to be captain of the war, one named Lucius
Papirius, who had co^missio^ to go against the Samnites. This Lucius was more
fortunate in his doings, then comely of his person, for he was deformed of his
face, notwithstanding he did so good service in the war, and fortune favored
him so well, that he did not only overcome and vanquishe, but also destroyed
them: and though the injury which the Samnites did to the Romans was great,
yet truly the injury which the Romans did to the Samnites was much greater.
For fortune is so variable, that those which yesterday we saw in most
prosperity, to day we see in greatest adversity. This Lucius Papirius
therefore did not only vanquishe the Samnites, kept them prisoners, and made
yokes for their necks: but also bound them with cords together, in such
sort, that they made them plough the ground, drawing two and two a plough.
And yet not herewith contented, but with gaddes they pricked and tormented
them. If the Samnites had had pity of the Romans being overcome, the Romans
likewise would have taken compassion of them when they were conquerers. And
therefore the prosperous have as much need of good council, as the miserable
have need of remedy. For the man which is not merciful in his prosperity,
ought not to marvel though he find no friends in his necessity. This Lucius
Papirius had a daughter married to a senator of Rome, who was called Torquatus,
and she was called Ypolita. And about the time that she should have been
delivered, she went forth to receive her father, the which she ought not to
have done: for the throng of the people in receiving him being great, and she
her self being great with child, by a heavy chance, as she would have passed
in at a narrow gate, she was so priest in the throng, that she changed her
life for death, and her father turned his mirth and joy, into sorrow and sadness.
For he took the death of his daughter very heauely, and so much the more
because it was so sodeine. I say he took it heavily, since he was so stout a
man, and so sage withal, that al Rome thought much that any such sudden
chance should have dismayed so wise a man, that of his wisdom he could take
no profit: but hereat let no man marvel, for there are many that has hearts
to shed the blood of their enemies, and yet can not withhold the tears of
their eyes. Annius Seuerus in the third book De infelice fortuna says, that
the day that this woeful mishap chanced to Lucius Papirius, he lift up his eyes
to the heavens, and weping said. O fortune, deceiuoure of all mortal men, thou
made me to conquer in war, to the intent thou would overcome me in peace.
My mind was to declare unto you all these ancient histories, to the end all
may know, how tender and delicate women with child are, and how diligent
their husbands ought to be to preserve them: since there is nothing so tender
to be kept, nor any glass so easy to be broken. For there is much glass, that
though it fall to the ground, yet it does not break: but a woman with child,
only for treading her foot a wry, we see with danger to be delivered.

That women great with child, and especially princesses and great ladies,
ought to be gently used of their husbands. Cap. xi.
IF we understand the chapter before, we shall find that women with child have
been in great dangers, some through leaping, some by dancing, other by
eatinge, others by banquetinge, others through gaddinge, other by straight
lacing, and all this proceadeth through their own follies, that seeks to be
destroyers of their own bodies. Truly herein princesses and great ladies are
worthy of great rebuke, when through their own follies they are not safely
delivered of their creatures. And I would gladly they took example, not only of
reasonable men, but also of brute beasts: for there is no beast so brute in
the wild mountains, but escheweth that which to his life and death will be
hurtful. The Bears, ye Lioness, and the wolles, never issue our of their
caves and dens so long as they be big, and this they do to avoid the
danger of the hunters, because at that time they would not be coursed. Then
since these things are done by brute beasts (whose yonglinges are always
hurtful to men) to the intent yt their gredy whealpes might safely be brought
forth, to devour our innocent cattle: how much more then ought the woman to be
careful for her fruit, which is the increase of Christian congregation? If
women brought not forth, and children were not borne, though there be earth,
yet there should be none to people it: for god created al things to serve the
creature, and created the creatures to serve their creator. Let women with
child take example by the chessenuttes and walnuttes, how and in what sort
they defend their fruit after that of their blosomes they are deprived: for
the chessenut tree defends his fruit with a rough and hard husk, and the
walnut keeps her fruit with a thick shale in like manner, so that the water
can not wette them, nor the wind shake them. Now since that the trees which
have but a vegetative lief, and the beasts a sensitive lief, take such head
to them selves when they feel them ready to bring forth their fruit: much
more women with child ought to take heed to them selves, since they have
reason and understanding, least through their negligence the creature should
perish. Let every man judge how little he loses, when he loses nuts and
chessenuts: and for the contrary let every man judge what the church loses,
when the woman with child do not bring forth their fruit, into the light of
baptism. For our mother the holy church bewayleth not for that the vines are
frosen: but for the souls which are lost. To the end that the man may see
the fruitful blessing which he desires, and that the woman with child may
see her self well delivered: the husband ought to beware that he enforces her
not much to labor, and the woman likewise ought to be circumspect that she
take not to much idleness. For in women with child this is a general rule,
that to much traueile causes them before their time to deliver: and to much
idleness puts them in danger. The man is cruel that will have his wife
travail and take as much pains when she is big, as he would have her at an
other time when she is not with child: for ye man which is clothed, can not
run so swift, as he that is naked. Aristotle in ye sixth book de Animalibus
says, when the Lioness is big with whelpe, the Lion does not only hunt for
her him self: but also both night and day he wandreth continually about to
watch her. I mean, that princesses and great Ladies when they be with child,
should be of their husbands both tended and served: for the man can not do the
woman so great a pleasure before her lieng down, as she does to him when she
brings forth a son. Considering the danger that the woman abides in her
deliverance, and beholding the pains that ye husband takes in her service:
without comparison that is greater which she suffers, then that which he
endures. For when the woman delivers, she does more then her power: and the
husband though he serves her well, does less then his duty. The gentle and
loving husband ought not one moment to forsake his wife, specially when he
sees she is great: for in the law of a good husband it is written, that he
should set his eyes to behold her, his hands to serve her, he should spend
his goods to cherishe her, and should give his heart to content her. Let not
men think it pains to serve their wives when they are with child: for their
labor consists in their strength, but the travel of their wives is in
their intrailes. And that which is most pitiful is, that when the sorrowful
women will discharge their burden on the earth, they often times bring them
selves unto the grave. The mean women of the Plebeians ought no less to be
reproved, for that when they are with child, they would be exempted from all
business of the house: the which neither they them selves ought to desire, nor
yet their husbands to suffer. For idleness is not only an occasion not to
deserve heaven: but also it is a cause whereby women often times have ill
success in their travail. For considering both the deintie Lady with
child, that has her pleasure, and does little, and on the other side the poor
man's wife which moderatly labors: you shall see that the great Ladies for
all their pleasures abides more danger, then the other does with all her
labor. The husband ought to keape his wife from taking to much pains, for
so ought he to do: and the wife likewise ought to flee to much pleasure, for
it behooves her. For the mean travail is no other, but occasion of a safe
delivery. The women with child also ought to take heed to them selves, and in
especially noble and great ladies, that they be not to gredy nor hasty in
eating. For the woman being with child ought to be sobre: and the woman which
is a great eater, with great pains shall live chaste. Women with child often
times do disordre them selves in eating licorous meats, and under the color
of feedinge them selves and their infant, they take to excessiuely: which is
not only unwholesome for the child, but also dishonor for their mothers. For
truly by the great excess of the mother (being with child) comes many
diseases to the infant when it lives. The husbands also ought neither to
displease nor grieve their wives, specially when they see them great with child:
for of truth often times she delivers with more danger, by reason of the
offenses that me^ do unto them: then by the abondaunce of meats which they do
eat. Though the woman when she is with child, in some things does offend her
husband, yet he like a wise man ought to forbear her, having respect to the
child wherewith she is great and not to the injury that she has committed: for
in thend, the mother can not be so great an offender, but that the child is
much more innocent. For the proof of this, it neadeth not books to read, but
only our eyes to see: how the brute beasts for the most part (when the
females are big) do not touch them, nor yet the females suffer the^ to be
touched. I mean, that the noble and high estates ought to absent them selves
from their wives carnally, being great with child: and he that in this case
shall show him self most temperate, shall of all men be deamed most virtuous.
I do not speak this to thend it should bind a man, or that it were an offense
then to use the company of his wife: but unto men that are virtuous I give it
as a counsel. For some things ought to be done of necessity, and others ought
to be eschewed for honesty. Diodorus Siculus says, that in the realm of
Mauritania there were so few men, and so many women, that every man had five
wives, where there was a law amongst them, that no man should mary under three
wives: furthermore they had a wonderful and folishe custom, that when any
husband died, one of these women should cast her self quick in to the grave
and be buried with him. And if that within a month she did it not, or that she
died not, by justice she was then openly put to death: saying that it is more
honesty to be in company with her husband in the grave, then it is to be alone
in her house. In the Isles of Baliares the contrary is seen, for there increase
so many men, and so few women, that for one woman there was seven men: and so
they had a custom, specially amongst the poor, that one woman should be
married with five men. For the rich men sent to seek for women in other
strange Realms, wherefore then merchants came heuie laden with women, as now
they do with marchaundise to sell. Upon which occasion there was a custom in
those Isles, that (for as much as there were so few women) when any woman
with child drew nere the seven months, they were separated from their
husbands, and shut and locked up in the Temples, where they gave them such
things as were necessary for them of the commen treasure. For the auncientes
had their goods in such veneration, that they would not permit any person
to eat that which he brought: but of that which unto the gods of the
Temple was offered. At that time the Barbarous kept their wives locked in the
church, because the gods having them in their Temples, should be more
merciful unto them in their delivery, and also to cause them to avoid the
dangers at that time: and besides that, because they took it for a great
vilany, that the women during that time should remain with their husbands.
The famous and renowned philosopher Pulio, in the fifth book De moribus
antiquorum said, that in the Realm of Paunonia (which now is Hongarie) the
women that were great with child were so highly esteemed, that when any went
out of her house, al those which met with her, were bound to return back
with her, and in such sort as we at this present do reverence the holy
Comunion, so did these Barbarous then the women with child. The women of
Carthage being with child (when Carthage was Carthage) had as great privileges,
as now our sanctuaries have for ye safeguard of misdoers: for in times past, al
such offe^dours as could enter into the house where a woman lay in child bed,
should have been free from correction of justice. As Fronto says, in his book
of the veneration of ye gods, the Galloys Transalpins, did not only honor and
reverence ye women with child, but also with much care and diligence watched
her delivery: for it little avails the ship to have passed safe the
dangerous seas, if at the shore she be cast away. The case was in this sort,
that all the ancient gentiles honored some gods in their temples, and kept
other in their houses, the which were called Lares, and Penates: and when any
woman began to labor, each neighbor brought his familiar god unto her to
present her with all, because they thought that the more gods there were, of so
much more power they were to keep her from perils. Speaking like a christian,
truly those gods were of small value, since they could not help the woman
safely to be delivered, that was in travail.

What the Philosopher Pisto was, and of the rules he gave concerning women with
child. Cap. xii.
IN the time of Octauian the Emperor, was a philosopher called Pisto, which
was of the sect of Pithagoras, and when Rome flourished, he was very familiar
with the Emperor Octauian, and well-beloved of all the people, which ought not
to be a little esteemed: for he which of the prince is most favored, commonly of
the people is most hated. This Emperor Octauian was a prince very desirous of
all virtuous things, so that when he dyned with his captains, he spoke of
war, when he supped with the sages, he reasoned of sciences, and he that
uttered any dishonest or idle word in his presence, he always afterward took
him as his enemy. This Pisto was very grave in weighty affairs, very
pleasant in slentes and iestes, and often times he was demanded many questions
of the Emperor, whereof the answers of some (according to the demaundes and
questions) here follows.

The Emperor said to Pisto, of all these that lives, whom take thou to be
most fool? to whom the Philosopher answered. In my opinion I take him to be
most fool, of whose word there comes no profit: for truly he is not so
very a fool that slingeth stones into the wind, as he that utters vain
words.

Tell me Pisto, whom ought we of right to desire to speak, and whom of right
to command to be silent? he answered. It is good when speech does profit,
and good to keep silence, when speech is hurtful: for the one desiring to
maintain the good, and the other to defend the evil, wars begin
throughout all the world.

Tell me Pisto, from what thing ought the fathers most to keep their children?
he said. In my opinion parents ought in nothing to watch so much, as to keep
them from being vicious: for the father ought rather to have his son die
well, then to live evil.

Tell me Pisto, what shall man do if he be brought to this extremity? that if
he speak truth, he condempneth him self: and if he make a lie, he saves him
self. The virtuous man (said he) ought rather to chose to be overcome by
truth, then to overcome by lies: for it is impossible that a man which is a
lier, should continue long in prosperity.

Tell me Pisto, what shall man do to obtain rest? he answered. As I think
the man can not have rest, unless he forsake worldly affairs: for the men
that are occupied with weighty affairs, can not be without great cares are
always accompanied of great troubles.

Tell me Pisto, wherein a man shows him self to be most wise? he answered.
There is no greater proof to know a wise man, then if he be pacie^t to suffer
the ignorant: for in suffering an injury, the heart is more helped by
wisdom, then by knowledge.

Tell me Pisto, what is that thing that the virtuous man may lawfullye desire?
he answered. All that that is good (so that it be not to the prejudice of any
other) may honestly be desired: but in my opinion that only ought to be
desired, which openly without shame may be demanded.

Tell me Pisto, what shall men do with their wives when they are great with
child, to cause that the child in safety may be delivered? he answered. In
the world there is nothing more perylous, then to have the charge of a woman
with child. For if the husband serve her, he has pain and travail: and if
perchance he do not content her, she is in danger.

In this case, the wives of Rome and their husbands also ought to be very
diligent, and to the things following more careful: the which I show them more
for counsel, then for commandment. For good counsel ought to have as much
authority in the virtuous, as the commandment has in the vicious. Thou
Octauian, as thou art a merciful and a pitiful Emperor, and that kepest thy
Nece Cossucia great with child, I know thou desire that she had presentely
good and luckye delivery, and that she were delivered of her pain: all the
which thou shalt see, if thou do mark these things that I will show the
here following.

First, the woman ought to beware of dancing, leapinge, and running: for
leaping oftentimes makes man to loose his speech, and women with child to
loose their life, wherefore it is not reason that the folly of the mother should
be permitted to put in hazard the life of the child.

The secound, the woman being with child ought to beware that she be not so
hardye to enter into gardeyns, where there is much fruit, and that for eating to
many she be not ill delivered: for it is no reason that the likerousnes of the
mother, be punished with the death of the child.

The third, the woman with child ought to beware of over hard lacing herself
about the middle: for many Roman Dames for to seem propre, do wear their
gowns so streighte, that it is an occasion to kill their creatures: which is a
heinous matter, that the young babe should loose his life, because his mother
should seem pretye.

The fourth, the women with child ought to beware of eating in a great banquet:
for oftetimes there comes a sudden deliverance, only through eating without
measure, and it is not mete that for tastinge a thing of litell value, the
mother and the child should both loose their lives.

The fifte, the woman being with child ought to beware that she gives no ear
to any sudden news: For she is in more danger for hearing a thing that
greueth her, then for suffering long sickness that paineth her: and it were
unjust that for knowing of a trifeling matter, the mother that is to be
delivered, and the child that is to be borne, should both in one moment perish.

The sixte, the woman with child ought to beware that she go not by any means
to any feasts, where there shall be any great assembly of people: for often times
the woman with child, seeing her to be to much thrust and preast, being not able
to say I am here, may immediately dye in the place, and it is not reason, but an
unjust thing, that the woman for the desire to see the children of others,
should make of her own orphans.

The seventh, the husband ought to beware that she being with child, be not
denayed any honest thing that she do mind: for in granting her it can not
cost him much, but in denieng her he may loose much, and it should not be
just, that since in her bringing forth she honoreth and increases the commen
wealth of Rome, that Rome should condescend that any woman with child should
receive any hurt or dishonor.

These be the aunswers that Pisto made to the Emperor Octauian, the which he
gave as rules to women with child, which being so kept, I do assure you that
the great Ladies should deliver them selves from many perilles, and the
husbands also should escape from many sorrows. Concluding therefore that which
above is spoken I say, that princesses and great ladies, when they are with
child, ought to be more ware and circumspect then other mean women: for where
man hops to have most profit, there ought he most to be careful. The
auctour of this is Pulio in his third book De moribus antiquorum and sextus.
Cheronensis in his.5. book de legibus domesticis

Of three counselles which Lucius Seneca gave unto a secretary his friend, who
served the Emperor Nero: and how the Emperor Mark Aureille disposed all the
hours of the day. Chap. xiii.
THe Emperor Nero had a Secretary called Emilius Varro, the which being in
Rome builded a sumptuous house joining unto the gate of Salaria, whereunto he
invited one day Lucius Seneca to a banquet, to the end the house might be more
fortunate: for the Romans had a Prophecye, that according to the good or ill
luck of him that first entered into a new house, so should it continually be
luckye, or unlucky. Lucius Seneca granted to the request of his friend Emilius
Varro: and when they had well eaten, they went both to see this new building,
showing unto Lucius Seneca all things, at the last the Secretary said thus
unto Seneca. Those between both are for gestes, those haulles are for
merchants and suetors, these secrettes are for women, those chambers are for
knights, those galleries which are covered are to avoid the son, this
lowest part here is for horses, the Cellers are for the buttry: in the end he
showed him the whole house, for ye furnishing whereof there lacked not one
iotte. After the Secretarye Emilius Varro had showed him all his house, he
looked when his gest Seneca would greatly praise and commend it, but he as
though he knew nothing, said unto Emilius Varro as he went out of the doors,
whose house is this? whereunto Emillius answered, how now Seneca can not thou
tell? I have employed all my goods in buildyng this house, and have led the all
about to see it, and I have told the that it is mine, and yet do thou ask
me again whose it is? Lucius Seneca answered. Thou haste showed us the house
for strangers, the house for slaves, the house for women, the house for
horses, and in all this house thou have not showed me one litel part for thy
self, but yt an other man does enter into it: for if thou have any interest
therein, they have the best thereof, which is the possession. I account the a
wise man, I do account the a man of understanding, and also I know that withal
thy heart thou art my friend: and since I have been bydden to day by the it is
but reason, that for to reward that which thou have done to me, I do some
service unto the, which shall be to give unto the some good counsel. For
strangers use to pay for the feast with money, and vain men with telling
lies, bablers by counting vain tales, children by flatteries: but virtuous men
ought to pay, bygening good counselles. This house has cost yt much pain,
great griefs, and much money, and if it cost yt so much, it is but reason that
thou enjoy ye same. Take therefore these my three counselles, and it may be thou
will find thy self better contented with those, then with ye money of
strangers: for many have wherwithal to build a house, but they have not
understanding to govern the same.

The first counsel is, though that thou love thy friend very well, or thy
wife as well, yet that thou never discover all the secrettes of thy heart,
neither to thy friend, nor to thy wife: But that thou always reserve some
particular unto thy self. For Plato says, to whom a man commits his
secrettes, to him also he gives his liberty.

The second counsel is, that neither in private business, nor in public
affairs thou occupye thy self so much, but at the least thou do reserve.3.
hours in the day for thine own rest.

The third council is, that thou have in thy house some secret place, whereof
thou alone shall have the key: and therein thou shalt have books, where thou
may study of thy affairs, and also talk with thy friends. Finallye, this
place shall be a secretory of thy counselles, and a rest for thy trauelles. These
were the words that Lucius Seneca spoke to his friend Emilius Varro, which
words were such as he him self was, that is to wete, of a sage and excellent
personnage: and though the banquet was rich, yet the paymente of Lucius
Seneca was much more worth. For the mind feleth more taste in the good and ripe
counsel: then the body does in sauory and delicate meats. I have told you
this example of Lucius Seneca, for to tell an other that happened to the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius with his wise Faustine. And to the end that the order
of the matter be not turned without breaking our Historye, first we will
declare here the order which this Emperor observed in his life. For the
commen wealth shall never be well governed, but where the prince governs well
his life.

Princes of necessity ought to be well ordered in their life, because they may
profit the affairs of the Empire, with the perticulers of their house, and be
cause they should use the perticulers of their house, to the recreacion of
their person: and all these things ought to be divided according to time.
For a good prince ought to lack no time to do that thing well which he has
to do: nor he ought to have any time vacant to employe him self to vice. The
worldly call that time good, the which is, or was prosperous unto the^: they
call that time eull, which is, or has been contrary and unfortunate unto the^,
The Creator will never that this sentence be approved by my pen: but I call
that time good, which is employed in virtues, and that time evil, that is lost
in vices. For the times are always as one, but men do turn from vice to
virtue, from virtue to vice. The good Emperor Marcus Aurelius did deuid the
time, by time: so that though he had time for him self, he had time likewise
to dispatche his own and others affairs: for the man yt is willing, in a
small time dispatcheth much busynes: and the man which is necligent, in a long
time does little. This was the order that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius took in
spendyng his time. He slepte.7. hours in the night, and one hour reasted him
self in the day. In dyning and suppynge he consumed only.2. hours: and it
was not for that he took great pleasure to be long in eatinge, but because the
philosophers which disputed before his presence, were occasion to prolonge the
time. For in.17. years they neauer saw him at meat, but one or other read
unto him some book, or else the philosophers reasoned before him philophye.
As he had many realms and provinces, so he appointed one hour for the
affairs of Asia, for Affryke one hour, and for Europe another hour, and for
the conversation of his wife, children, and family, he appointed other.2.
hours of time: he had another hour for extraordinary affairs, as to here the
complaints of the grieved, the quarrelles of the poor, the complaints of the
widows, and the robberies done to the orphans. For the merciful prince
gives no less ear unto the poor, which for want can do little: then to the
rich, which for abundance can do much. He occupied all the residew of the day
and night to read books, write works, to make meter, and in studyng of other
antiquities, to practyse with the sage, and to dyspute with the philosophers:
and finally he took no taste of any thing so much, as he did to talk of
science: Unless the cruel wars did let him, or such like affairs troubled
him: ordynarily in winter he went to bed at.9. of the clock, and awaked at.4.
and because he would not be idle, he had always a book under his beds head, and
the residue of ye day he bestowed in readyng. The romans had an ancient
custom to bear fire before them, that is to wete, a torche light in the
day, and a lamp burning in the night in their chambers, so that wakyng they
burned wax, and fleapyng they hourned oil. And the cause why the Romans
ordained that the oil should be made of olyue, and the wax made of bees
(which was used to be borne before the princes) was to the end they should
remember, that they ought to be as gentell and loving, as the oil of Olyue is
sweet: and as profitable to the common wealth, as the Bees are. He did rise
at.6. of the clock, and made him self ready openly, and with a gentle
countenance he asked them that were about him, wherein they had spente all the
night, and declared unto them then what he had dreamed, what he had thought,
and what he had red: when he was ready, he washed his face with odiferous
waters, and loved very well sweet sauoures. For he had so quycke a sent, that
he was much offended when he passed by any stinking place. In the morning he
used to eat.2. morsels of a lectuary made of Sticades. and drank.3.
sponefulls of maluesey, or else two drops of Aqua Vite, because he had a cold
stomach, for that he gave him self so much to study in times past. We se it
by experience, that the great students are persecuted more with sycknes, then
any others: for in the swetenes of the science, they know not how their life
consumes. If it were in the summer season, he went in the morning to recreate
him self to the river of Tiber, and walked there a foot for.2. hours, and in
this place they talked with him that had business: and truly it was a great
policy, for where as the Prince does not sit, the sewtour always abridgeth
his talk, And when the day began to wax hot, he went to ye hight capitol where
all the Senate tarried for him, and from thence he went to ye Coliseo, where the
imbassadours of the provinces were, and there remained a great part of ye day:
afterward he went to ye chapel of the vestal virgins, and there he hard
every nation by it self, according to the order which was prescribed. He did
eat but one meal in the day, and it was very late, but he did eat well: not
of many and diverse sorts of meats, but of few and good. For the abundance
of diverse and strange meats breadeth sundry dysseases. They saw him once a
weke go thoroughe Rome, and if he went any more it was a wonder: at the
which time he was always without company, both of his own, and also of
strangers, to thentente all poor men might talk with him of their business,
or complain of his officers: for it is impossible to reform the common
wealth, if he which ought to remedy it, be not informed of the iniuryes done
in ye same? He was so gentle in conversation, so pleasant in words, so noble
amongst the great, so equal with the least, so reasonable in that he did
ask, so persyte in that he did work, so patie^t in injuries, so thankful of
benefittes, so good to the good, and so severe to the evil: that all loved him
for being good, and all the evil feared him for being just? A man ought not
little to esteem the love that the people bare to this so good a Prince, and
noble Emperor, for so much as the Romans have been thus: that for the felicitye
of their estate, they offered to their gods greater sacryfyce, then they did in
any other provinces. And Sextus Cheronensis says, that the Romans offered
more sacrifyces to ye gods, because they should lengthen ye life of the
Emperor, then they did offer for the profit of the common wealth. Truly
their reason was good, for the Prince that leads a good life, is the heart of
the common wealth. But I do not marvel that the Emperor was so well
wylled, and beloved of the Romayn empire, for he had never porter to his
chamber, but the.2. hours which he remained with his wife Faustine. All this
being past, the good Emperor went into his house into the secretest place he
had (according to the council of Lucius Seneca) they key whereof he alone had
in his custodye, and never trusted any man therewith, until the hour of his
death: and then he gave it to an old ancient man called Pompeianus, saying
unto him these words. Thou know right well Pompeianus, yt thou being base, I
exalted the to honor. Thou being poor. I gave the riches. Thou being
persecuted, I drew the to my pallas. I being absente, committed my hole
honor to thy trust, thou being old, I married the with my daughter, and do
presently give the this key. Behold that in giving the it, I give the my heart
and life. For I will thou know, that death greueth me not so much, nor the
loss of my wife and children, as that I cannot carye my books into the grave.
If the Gods had given me the choice, I had rather chose to be in the grave
inuyroned with books: then to live accompanied with fools: for if the dead
do read. I take them to be alive: but if the living do not read, I take them
to be dead.

Under this key which I give ye, remains many Greek. Hebrew, latin, and
Roman books, and above all under this key remains al my pains, swet, and
trauayles, al my watchinges, and labors, where also thou shalt find books by
me compyled: so that though the worms of the earth do eat my body: yet men
shall find my heart hole amongst these books.

Once again I do require the, and say that thou ought not a little to
esteame the key which I give the: for wise men at the hour of their death,
always recommed that which they best love, to them which in their lives they
have most loved. I do confess, that in my study thou shalt find many
things with mine own hand written and well ordered: and also I confess that
thou shalt find many things by me left vnpersit. In this case I think that
though thou could not write them, yet thou shall work the^ well
notwithstanding: and by these means thou shalt get reward of the Gods for
workyng them. Consider Pompeian, that I have been thy lord, I have been thy
father in law, I have been thy father, I have been thy advocate, and above all,
that I have been thy special friend, which is most of all: for a man ought to
esteem more a faithful friend, then all the parents of the world. Therefore in
the faith of that frendshyp I require, that thou keep this in memory, that even
as I have recommended to others my wife, my children, my goods, and riches: So
I do leave unto the in singular recommendacion my honor: For princes leave of
them selves no greater memory, then by the good learning that they have
written. I have been.18. years emperor of rome, and it is.lx. and.iii. years
that I have remained in this woeful life, during which time I have overcome
many battailles, I have slain many pirattes, I have exalted many good, I have
punished many evil, I have won many realms, and I have distroyed many
tirauntes. But what shall I do, woeful man yt I am, sith all my compagnions
which were witnesses with me of al these worthy feats, shall be my compagnions
in the grave with the gredy worms? A thousand years hence, when those that
are now alive shall then be dead: what is he that shall say, I saw Marcus
Aurelius triumph over the Parthians, I saw him make the buildings in Auentino,
I saw him well-beloved of the people, I saw him father of the orphans, I saw him
the scourg of tirau^tes: truly if al these things had not ben declared by my
books, or of my friends, the dead would never have risen again to have
declared them. What is it for to se a prince (from the time he is borne, until
the time he come to dye) to se the poverty he passes, the perilles he
endures, the evil that he suffers, the shame that he dyssembleth, the
frendeshyp that he fayneth, the tears which he sheaddeth, yt sighs that he
fetchith. the promises that he makes, and does not endure for any other cause
the mysteries of this life: but only to leave a memory of him after his
death? There is no prince in the world that desires not to keape a good
house, to keape a good table, to aparrel him self rychely, and to pay those
that serve him in his house: but by this vain honor, they suffer ye water to
pass thorough their lips not drinking thereof. As one that has proved it, it
is reason that I be beloved in this case, and that is: that the intent of
princes to conquer strange Realms, and to permit their own to suffer
wrongs is for no other thing, but because that the commendacions which they
speak of the princes past, they should likewise talk the same of them that be
to come. Concluding therefore my mind, and declaring my intencion, I say that
the Prince that is noble, and desires to leave of him self some fame, let him
consider and se what it is that those can write of him, which writ his history:
for it profits litel that he atchieue great affayers by the sword, if there
be no writer to set them fourth with the pen, and afterward to exalte
them with the tongue.

These words thus spoken by ye noble Emperor Marcus Aurelius, he gave the key
of his study to the honorable old man Pompeianus, that took all the
wrytinges, and put them in the high Capitol, where the Romans honored them, as
the christians the holy Scriptures: all these writings besides many others
peryshed in rome, when by the Barbarous it was dystroyed. For the Goths,
(utterly to extinguishe the name of rome) distroyed not only the walls
thereof, but also the books that were therein: and truly in this case the
Goothes showed more crueltye to the Romans, then if they had slain the
children of their bodies, or bet down the walls of their Cities. For without
doubt the lyuelye letter is a moresewerer wytnes of renown, that always
speaks: then either the lyme, sand, or stone, wherewith fortresses are builded.

Of the importunate suete of the Empress Faustine, to the Emperor Mark
Aureille Concerning the key of his closet. Chap. xiiii.
We Have declared, how the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had his study in the
secretest place of all the palace, and how that he him self did keep the key.
It is to be understand, that he would never let his wife, his children, nor
any other of his familier friends come into it, for he said: I had rather
suffer that they should take from me my treasoures, then that any man should
turn the leaves of my books. It chanced, that on a day the Empress
Faustine being great with child, importuned the Emperor much by all the
means she could, that he would be so favorable unto her, as to give her the
key of his study, and it is no marvel: for naturallye women despise that
which is given them, and lust forth at that is denayed them, Faustine instantly
besoughte him, not once, but many times, not only with fayer words, but with
aboundaunt tears, alleagynge unto him these reasons. I have required the
sondrye times, that thou would give me the key of thy chamber, and thou
haste by iestinge made frustrate my request, the which thou (my Lord) ought
not to have done, considering that I am with child: for oftetimes it
chances, that that wherefore the husband rejoices this day, tomorow he
does lamente. Thou ought to remember that I am that Faustine the renowned,
the which in thy eyes am the fairest, and of thy tongue have been most
commended, of thy parson I was best beloved, and of thy heart I am most
desired: then since it is true, that thou have me so depely in heart, why then
doubtest thou to show me the writtinges of thy study? Thou do communicate
with me the secrets of the empire, and thou hydest from me the books of thy
study. Thou have given me thy tender heart of flesh, and now thou deniest me
thy hard key of iron: now I must neades think that thy love was feigned, that
thy words were doble, and that thy thoughts were others then they seamed. For
if they had been otherwise, it had been impossible thou should have denaied me
the key that I do ask the: for where love is unfeigned, though the request be
merilye asked, yet it is wyllyngly granted. It is a commen custom, that you
men use to deceive us simple women, you present us great gifts, you give many
fair words, you make us faier promyses, you say you will do marueiles, but
in the end you do nothing but deceive us: for we are persecuted more of you,
then of any others. When men in such wise importune the women if the women
had power to denaye and withstand, we should in short space bring ye
under the yoke, and lead you by the noses: but when we suffer our selves to
be overcome, then you begin to forsake us, and despise us. Let me therefore
(my Lord) see thy chamber, consider I am with child, and that I dye unless I
see it. If thou do not to do me pleasure, yet do it at the least because I
may no more importune the. For if I come in danger thoroughe this my longing I
shall but lose my life but thou shalt loose the child that should be borne,
and the mother also that ought to bear it. I know not why thou should put
thy noble heart into such a dangerous fortune, whereby both thou and I at one
time should peryshe: I in dyeng so young, and thou in losyng so loving a wife.

By the immortal gods I do beseech the, and by the mother Berecinthia I
conjure the, that thou give me the key, or that thou let me enter into the
study: and stycke not with me thy wife in this my small request, but change
thy opinion: for all that which without consideracion is ordained, by
importunate sewte may be revoked. We see daily that men by reading in books
love their children, but I neauer saw heart of man fall in such sort, that by
readyng and lokyng in books he should despise his children: for in the end
books are by the words of others made: but children are with their own
proper blood begotten. Before that any thing of wysedom is begone, they always
regard the inconuenyences that may follow. Therefore if thou will not give me
this key, and that thou art determined to be stoberne still in thy will, thou
shall lose thy Faustine, thou shalt lose so loving a wife, thou shalt lose
the creature werwith she is big, thou shalt lose the authority of thy
palace, thou shalt give occasion to all Rome to speak of the wickedness, and
this grefe shall neauer depart from thy heart: for the heart shall never be
comforted, that knows that he only is the occasion of his own grief. If
the Gods do suffer it by their secreate judgments, and if my woeful
myshappes deserve it, and if thou (my Lord) desire it for no other cause, but
even to do after thy will, for denayeng me this key, I should dye: I would
wyllingly dye. But of that I think thou will repent: for it chances
oftetymes to wysemen, that when remedy is gone, ye repentance comes
sodeinlye. And then it is to late (as they say) to shut the stable door,
when the stead is stolen.

I marueill much at the my Lord, why thou should show thy self so froward
in this case, since thou know that all the time we have been togethers, thy
will and mine has always been one, if thou will not give me thy key, for that I
am thy well-beloved Faustine, if thou will not let me have it, sinse I am thy
dear beloved wife, if thou will not give it me, for that I am great with
child. I beseech the give it me in virtue of the ancient law. For thou
know it is an inuiolate law among the Romans, that a man cannot denay his
wife with child her desiers. I have seen sundry times with mine eyes, many
women sew their husbands at the law in this behalf: and thou Lord
commaundest that a man should not break the pryuileges of women.

Then if this thing be true (as it is true in dead) why will thou that the
laws of strange children should be kept, and that they should be broken to
thine own children? Speaking according to the reverence that I owe unto the,
though thou would, I will not, though thou do it, I will not agree
thereunto, and though thou do command it, in this case I will not obey the.
For if the husband do not accept the just request of his wife, the wife is
not bound to obey the unjust commandment of her husband. You husbands
desire that your wives should serve you, you desire that your wives should obey
you in all, and ye will condiscende to nothing that they desyer. Ye men say,
that we women have no certeintie in our love, but in dead you have no love at
all. For by this it appears, that you love is fained, in that it no longer
continues then your desires are satisfied. You say furdermore, that the women
are suspytious, and that is true in you al, men may see, and not in us: for
none other cause there are so many evil married in Rome, but because their
husbands have of them such iuell opinions. There is a great dyfference
between the suspicion of the woman, and the ielousye of the man: for if a man
will understand the suspicion of the woman, it is no other thing, but to
show to her husband that she loves him with all her heart. For the
innocente women know no others, desire no others but their husbands only, and
they would that their husbands should know none others, nor search for any
others, nor love any others, nor will any others, but them only: for the
heart that is bente to love one only, would not that into that house should
enter any other.

But you men know so many means, and use so many subtelties, that you
praise your selves for to offend them, you vaunt your selves to deceive
them, and that it is true, a man can in nothing so much show his noblenes,
as to sustain and favor a Cortisan.

The husbands pleases their wives speaking unto them some merye words, and
immediately their backs being turned, to another they give both their bodies
and their good. I swear unto the (my Lord) that if women had the liberty and
aucthoritye over men, as men have over women: they should find more malice,
dysceiptfulnes, and craft, by them committed in one day, then they should
find in the women all the days of their life. You men say that women are
evil speakers, it is true in deed that your tongues are none other, but the
stynges of serpents: for ye do condemn the good men, and defame the Roman
women. And think not (if you speak evil of other women) to excuse your own:
for the man that by his tongue dyshonereth strange women, does not so much
iuel, as he does by defamyng his own wife by suspytion. For the husband that
suspectith his wife, gives all men license to account her for naught. Sithe
we women go little out of the house, we travail not far, and sith we see
few things, though we would we cannot be evil tonged: but you men hear
much, you see much, you know much, you wander abroad much, and continually
you murmr. All the evil that we selye women can do, is to listen to our
friends when they are vexed, to chide our servants when they are necligent,
to envy our neighbors if they be faier, and to curse those that does us
iniurye: finallye though we speak evil, we cannot murmr, but at those
that dwells in the same streate where we dwell. But you men defame your
wives by suspicion, you dyshonoure your neighbors in your words, you speak
against strangers with crueltye, you neither keape faith nor promise to
your wives, you show your selves extreme against your enemies, you
murmoure both at those that be present, and also at them that be absente:
finally on the one part you are so doble, and on the other part you are so
unthankful, that to those whom you desire, you make fair promyses, and those
whose bodies you have enjoyed, you littel esteame. I confess that the woman is
not so good as she ought to be, and that it is necessary that she should be
kept in the house, and so she shall lead a good life, and being of good life,
she shall have good renown, and having good renown, she shall be well willed:
but if perchance any of those do want in her, yet for all that she ought not
to be rejected of her husband. For the frailenes that men find in women is
but litell: but the evils that women taste in men is veraye great. I have talked
longer then I thought, and have said more boldly then I ought, but pardon me
(my lord) for mine intention was not to vex the, but to persuade the. For in
the end he is a fool that takes that for injury, which passes between the
man and the wife in secreat. I stick always to my first point, and if it
neade, once again I require the that thou will give me the key of thy study:
and if thou do otherwise (as thou may) thou shall do such a thing, as thou
ought not to do. I am not angry so much for yt thou do, as for the
occasion thou geuest me.

Therefore to avoid the peril of my delivery, and to take from me all
susspition, I pray the (my lord) deliver me the key of thy study: for
otherwise I cannot be persuaded in my heart, but that you have a woman locked
in your study. For men that in their youth have been unconstant, though the
apparel that they have be not worn: yet notwitstandynge they desire to have
new. Therefore once again to preserve me from peril in my delivery, and to
lyghten my heart of this thought, it shall be well done that you let me enter into
your study.

The answer of the Emperor to Faustine concerning her demand of the key of
the studdie. Chap. xv.
THe Emperor hearing the words of Faustine, and seeing that she spoke them so
ernestly, that she bathed her woeful words with bitter tears determined also
to answer her as ernestlye, and said unto her these words. Wife Faustine,
thou have told me all that thou would, and I have heard al thy complaint.
Therefore I desire the now to have as much patience to here my answer: as I have
had pain to hear thy demand. And prepare thy ears to here my words: as I
have listened mine to hear thy folly. For in like matter, when the tongue does
apply it self to speak any word, the ears ought immediately to prepare them
to hear it, for to make answer. For this is most sure, that he that speaks
what he would, shall here what he would not. Before I tell the what thou art,
and what thou ought to be, I will first tell what I am, and what I ought to
be: For I will thou understand Faustine, that I am so evil, that yt the which
mine enemies does report of me, is but a trifle in respect of that which my
familiers, and friends would say if they knew me. To the end the prince be
good, he ought not to be covetous of tributes, neither proud in
commandments, nor unthankful of services, nor to be forgetful of the
temples: he ought not to be deaffe to here griefs, complaints, and quarells,
nor cruel to orphans, nor yet neclige^t in affairs. And the man that shall
want these vices, shall be both beloved of men, and favored of the gods. I
confess first of all yt I have been covetous: For in deed those which with
troubles annoy princes lest, and with money serve them most: are of all other
men beloved best.

Secondarily, I confess that I am proud: For there is no prince at this day
in the world so brought under, but when fortune is most lowest, he has his
heart very haughty.

Thirdly, I confess that I am unthankful: for amongst us that are princes,
the services that they do unto us are great, and the rewards that we give
unto them are litell.

Forthly, I do confess that I am an evil founder of temples: or amo^ngest us
princes we do not sacrifice unto the gods very often, unless it be when we see
our selves to be inuironned with enemies.

Fifthly, I confess that I am necligent to hear the plaintes of the oppressed:
for flatterers have toward their princes more easy audience by their
flattery, then the poor, pleadyng to declare their complaints by truth.

Sixthly, I confess that I am careless for the orphans: for in the courts
and palaces of princes the rich and mighty are most familiar, but the
miserable and poor orphans are scarcely heard.

Seventhly, I confess that I am necligent in dispatching poor men's causes:
for princes often times, not prouidyng in time for their affairs, many and
great perilles ensues to their Realms.

Mark here Faustyne, how I have told ye what (according to reason) I ought to
be, and what according to the sensuality I am: and marvel not though I
confess mine error. For the man that acknowlegeth his fault, gives hope of
amendment. Let us now come to talk of the, and by that I have spoken of me,
thou may judge of thy self: For we men are so evil co^ditioned, yt we
behold ye uttermost the offenses of an other, but we will not hear the faults
of our selves. It is a true thing, my wife Faustine, yt when a woman is merry,
she always speaks more with her ^ong, then she knows in her heart: For
women light of tongue, speak many things in company, the which they do lament
after when they are alone. All the contrary comes to woeful men, for they do
not speak the half of their grefes: because their heavy and woeful hearts
commands their eyes to weep, and their tongs to be silent. Vain and foolish
men, by vain and foolish words do publishe their vain and light pleasurs:
and the wise men, by wise words do disse^ble their greauous sorrows. For
though they feel the troubles of this life, they dissemble them as men.
Amongst the sages he is most wisest, that presumes to know least: and
amongst the simple he is most ignorant, that thinks to know most. For if
there be found one that knows much: yet always there is found an other yt
knows more. This is one difference whereby yt wise men are known from those
that be simple, that is to wete, that the wise man to one that asks him a
question au^swereth slouly and gravely, and the simple man, though he be not
asked, answers quick and lightly. For in yt house where nobleness and
wisdom ar, they give riches without measure, but they give words by ounces. I
have told the all this Faustine, because thy words have wounded me in such
sort, thy tears in such wise have compelled me, and thy vain Judgments
have weryed me so much, that I can not say what I would, nor I think thou
can perceive what I say. Those which wrote of marriage, wrote many things: but
they wrote not so many troubles in all their books, as one woman causes her
husband to feel in on day.

The auncientes spoke well when they reasoned of marriages: For at all times
when they talked of marriage, at the beginning they put these words, Onus
Matrimonij. That is to say, thc yoke of marriage. For truly if the man be not
well married, all the troubles that may happen unto him in all the time of his
life, are but small in respect to be matched one day with an evil wife.

Do thou think Faustine, that it is a small trouble for the husband to
suffer the brawlinges of his wife? to endure her vain words? to bear with
her fond words? to give her what she requires? to seek that she desires?
and to dissemble with all their vanities? truly it is so vnpacie^t a trouble,
that I would not desire any greater reuengement of my enemy, then to see him
married with a brawling wife.

If the husband be proud, you do humble him: For there is no proud man,
what so ever he be, but a fyerce woman will make him stoop.

If the husband be foolyshe, you restore him his senses again: For there is
no greater wisdom in the world, then to know how to endure a brawling woman.
If the husband be wild, you make him tame: For the time is so much that you
occupy in brawling, that he can have no time to speak. If the husband be
slow, you make him run: for he desires so much your contentation in heart,
that the woeful man can not eat in quiet, nor sleep in rest. If the husband
be a great talker, in short space you make him do^me: For the floutes and
mockes that you give him at every word, are so many in nombre, that he has
none other remedy but to refrain his tongue. If the husband be suspicious, you
make him change his mind: For the tryfelles that you ask at every hour are
such, and so many, and you therewith so self willed, that he dare not tell what
he sees in his own house.

If the husband be a wanderer abroad, you make him forthwith to be abider at
home: for you look so ill to the house and goods, that he finds no other
remedy but to be always at home. If the husband be vicious, you restrain him
immediately: for you burden his heart with so many thoughts, that his body
has no delighte to use any pleasurs. Finally I say that if the husband be
peacible, within short space you make him unquiet: for your pains are such,
so many, and so continual, that there is no heart can wholye dissemble them,
nor tongue that utterly can keep them secret. Naturally women have in all things
the sprite of contradiction, for so much as if the husbands will speak, they
will hold their peace. If he go forth, they will tarry at home. If he will
laughe, they will weape. If he will take pleasure, they will vex him. If he be
sorrowful, they will be merye. If he desire peace, they would have war. If he
would eat, they will fast. If he would fast, they would eat. If he would
sleep, they will watch: and if thou will watch, they will sleep. Finally I
say, that they are of so evil a condition, that they love all that we despise:
and despise all that we love. In mine opinion, the men that are wise, and will
obtain that which they desire of their wives: let them not demand of them
that which they would obtain, if they will come to their desire. For to them
which are diseased, the letting of blood is most profitable, when the vain in
the contrary side is opened. It is no other thing to be let blood in the
contrary side, but to ask of the woman with his mouth, the contrary of that
which he desires with his heart: for otherwise, neither by fair words of
his mouth, nor by the bitter tears of his eyes, he shall ever obtain that
which his heart desires. I confess Faustine it is a pleasant sport to
behold the young Babes, and thou canste not denaye me, but it is a cruel
torment to endure the importunities of their mothers. Children now and then
ministre unto us occasions of pleasures: but you that are their mothers never
do any thing, but that which turns us to trouble. It is much pleasure to
the husband when he comes home to find the house clean swepte, to find
the table covered, and to find the meat ready dressed: this is to be
understood, if all other things be well. But what shall we say when he
sees the contrary? and that he finds his children weaping, his neighbors
offended, his servants troubled, and above all, when he finds his wife
brauling. Truly it is better to the woeful husband, to go his way fasting:
then to tarry and eat at home with brauling. I durst take upon me to cause,
that al married men would be content to forbear all the pleasures of the
children, with condition that they might be fre from ye annoiaunce of the
mothers: for in the end, the pleasures of the children ends quickly with
laughter, but the griefs of ye mothers endures al their life with sorrow. I
have seen one thing in Rome, wherein I was never deceived, which is, that though
men commitie great offenses in this world, yet God always deferreth the
punishmente thereof until another: But if for any woman's pleasure we commit
any fault, God permits, that by the same women, in this world we shall
suffer the pain. There is no crueller enemy to man, nor more troublesome to
live with all, then the woman is that he keeps in his house: for if he suffer
her once to have her own will, then let him be assured never after to bring
her unto obedience. The young men of Rome follow the Ladies of Capua, but they
may well repent them: for there was never man that haunted of any long time
the company of women, but in the end to their procurement, either by death, or
with infamy he was defaced. For the Gods esteem the honor above all things,
and as they suffer the wickedness of the evil men: so we see the sharp
punishementes that they ordeine for them. I am well assured Faustine of one
thing, and I do not speak it by hear say, but because continually I have
proved it, and it is: that the husband which condiscendeth to all that the wife
desires, causes his wife to do nothing of that her husband commands. For
there is nothing that keeps a woman more under obedience to her husband: then
when often times he denies with sharp words her unlawful request. In my
opinion it is much cruelty of the barbarous, to keep (as they do) their wives
like sclaues: but it is much more folly of the Romans, to keep them (as they
do) like Ladies. The flesh ought not to be so lean that it be in eating
dry, nor yet so fat that there be no lean: but it would participate both of
the fat and of the lean, to the intent it might give the more nourishement. I
mean, that the man of understanding ought not to keep his wife so short, that
she should seem to be his servant: nor yet to give her so much liberty, that
she becomes his mistress. For the husband that suffers his wife to
command more then she ought, is the cause why he him self afterward is not
esteemed as he should be. Behold Faustine, you women are in all things so
extreme, that for a little favor you wax proud: and for a little displeasure
you become great enemies. There is no woman that willingly can suffer to have
any superior, nor yet scarcely can endure to have any equal: for we see that
you love not the highest, nor desire to be loved of the lowest. For where as
the lovers be not equal, there their love can not be perfect. I know well
Faustine that thou do not understand me, therefore harken what I do tell
thee, more then thou think, and more then thou would. O what and how
many women have I seen in Rome, the which though they had two thousand pound of
rent in their houses, yet they had three thousand follies in their heads: and
the worste of all is, that oftetimes her husband dies, and she loses her
rent, yet for all that ceasseth not her folly. Now listen Faustine, and I
will tell thee more. All women will speak, and they will that others be
silent. All will command, and will not that they be commanded. All will have
liberty, and they will that al be captives to them. Al will govern, and will not
be governed. Finally they al in this one thing agree, and that is that they
will cherishe them that they love, and revenge them of those that they hate.
Of that which before is said it may be gathered, that they make fools and
sclaues of the young and vain men which follow them: and persecute the wise
men, as enemies that fly them. For in the end where as they love us most,
their love may be measured: but where as they hate us least, their hate
exceadeth reason. In the Annals of Pompeius I remember I have read, and do
note one thing worthy of knowledge, that when Pompeius the great passed first
into Asia, as by chance he came by the mountains of Rypheos, he found in
those places a Barbarous nation, that lived in the sharp mountains as wild
beasts: and do not marvel that I do call them beastly, that live in those
mountains. For as the sheep and cowes that feade on the fine grass, have
their wolle soft and fine: so the men which are brought up in the sharp and
wild mountains, use themselves after a rude behavior. These Barbarous had
therefore a law among them, that every neighbor had in those mountains two
caves: for the sharpnes of the hills permitted not that they should have any
houses. Therefore in one cave, the husbands, the sons, and the servants
were: and in the other, his wife, his daughters, and his handemaydes abode:
they did eat togethers twice in the week, they slept togethers other twyse in
the week, and al ye residue of the time, they were separate the one from the
other. The great Pompeius asked them what the cause was why they lived so,
sith it was so that in all the world there was never seen nor read such
extreme law, nor so strange a custom. The history says in that place, that
an ancient man answered him, saying behold Pompeius, that the gods have
given short life unto us that be present, in respect of that which he gave to
our fathers that are past: and since we live but forty or fifty years at the
uttermost, we desire to enjoy those days in peace: for the life is so short,
and our trouble so long, that we have small time to rejoice in peace after we
return from the wars. It is true, that amongst you Romans, which enjoy
pleasure and richesse, life seameth to short: but unto us that have toil with
poverty, life seems to long: For through out all the year we never keape
such solemn feasts, as when one passes out of his life. Consider Pompeius,
that if men lived many years, there should be time to laugh and weep, to be
good and to be evil, to be poor and to be rich, to be merry and sad, to
live in peace and war: but why will men seek contention in their life, since
it is so short? In keeping with us (as you do) our own wives, in living we
should die, for the nights should pass in hearing their co^plaintes, and the
days in suffering their brawlinges: but keeping them as we do, we see not
their heavy countenance, we hear not the cryeng of our children, we hear not
their grievous complaints, nor listen unto their sorowefull words, neither we
are troubled with their importunate suits, and yet the children are nouryshed
in peace, and the father follows the war: so that they are well, and we are
better. This was the answer that this old man gave, at the request of the
great Pompeius. Truly Faustine I say, that though we call the Messagetes
Barbarous, in this case they know more then the Latynes. For he that is free
from a brawling woman, has escaped no small pestilence. I ask thee now
Faustine, since those barbarous could not agree, nor would not have their
wives with them in those sharp mountains, how shall we other agree, and
please you that live in these pleasures in Rome? One thing I will tell thee
Faustine, and I beseech the Gods that thou may understand it, which is. If
the beastly motions of the fleashe did not force men to will, and also to
desire women, I doubt whether there should be any woman in the world beloved
or suffered. For though nature gives them gifts worthy to be beloved: yet
they through their small discretion cause them selves to be hated. If the Gods
had made this love voluntary, as they made it natural, so that we might have
loved as we would and left again at our pleasure: that man ought worthily to
have been punyshed, which for the love of any woman would put his life in
danger. The gods have kept this great secret unto them selves, and the mysery
that they gave unto men is very great: since that unto so weak flesh, he gave
so strong a heart, the which does procure that which does us harm, and
follows that which we ought to abhor. This is an other secret, that all
men know when they offend, but I see no man that seeks amendment: for I
hear all complain of the flesh, and yet I see all like Bochers follow the
flesh: and when it can do least good, then it is most gredy. I envy not the
Gods living, nor the men that be dead, save only for two things, which be
these. First I envy the Gods, because they live without fear of the malicious.
Secondarely I envy the dead, for that they live without need of women. For
women are so corrupt, that they corrupt all: and they be such mortal
plagues, that both flesh and heart by them are brought to end. O Faustine,
the love of the flesh is so natural to the flesh, that when from you the
body flies in sport, we then leave our hearts engaged to you in earnest. And
though reason as reason puts desire to flight: yet the flesh, as flesh,
yeldeth it self as prisoner.

The Emperor following his matter admonishes men of the great dangers which
ensue unto them by excessive haunting the company of women. And recites
certain rules for married men, which (if they observe) may cause them to live
in peace with their wives. Cap. xvi.
I Remember that in my youth, as I was of flesh, I trembled for fear of the
flesh, with mind never to return again, and I do confess that often times
I reuolued in my heart, many holy and chaste meditations: but yet
notwithstanding I gave my body immediately to sondrie filthy vices. It is a
natural thing, that when man has commits any vice, forthwith he repents
him of his deed: and so again after his new repentance, he turns to his
old vices. For during the time that we live in the house of this frail
flesh, Sensuality bears so great a rule, that she will not suffer reason to
enter in at the gate. There is no man in Rome, (if a man does ask him) but
will marvel to declare with his tongue the thoughts that he has had in his
heart, in especially to be chaste, to be true, to be pacient, and to be
virtuous: and peradventure ye talk with those that somewhat communicate with
them, and let a man inquire of his neighbors, they shall find that he is a
deceiuer, a lier, and a blasphemour. Finally, they deceive men by their fair
words, and offended the gods by their evil works. It profits little to blase
virtues with words, if the hand be negligent to work them in deed: for a man
is not called just, only desiring to be good in name, but for to labor to be
virtuous in works. The traiterous world in no one thing beguileth worldlings
so much, as by feading them with vain hope, saying that they shall have time
enough to be virtuous: so that these blind men, when they are once depely
rooted in vices, and whiles they hope for this light of amendment, then
suddenly assaulteth the^ the dreadful dart of death. Oh how many have promised
unto men, and vowed unto the gods, and determined with them selves, that before
so many days they would begin to be virtuous: whom in short space after we
have seen to engage the^ selves to the hu^gry worms of the earth. The gods will
that we be virtuous: and for the contrary the world and the flesh wills that
we be vicious. Me thinks that it is better to obey the gods, then to do that
the world and the flesh desires: for the praise of virtue is honor, and the
pain of vice is infamy. If thou do consider Faustine, thou shall see that
the gods are on the one part, which procures us to virtues: and on the other
part is the world, and the flesh, which inticeth us unto vices. My opinion is
we should say unto the gods, that we desire to be virtuous, and that we should
say to the world and the flesh, that from henceforth we will give our selves no
more to be vicious. We ought in such case to satisfy ye gods with works, and
to enterteine the world, and the flesh with words: that we employ so much time
in leading a good life, that we have no time vacant to speak an idle word. I
let the wete Faustine, that all that I have told thee, I have spoken it against
my self: for always from my youth I had a good mind, and yet for all that I
have been overthrown with vices. Oh how many times in my youth I knew women, I
accompanied with women, I talked with women, and believed women, yt which in the
end have deceived me, misused me, and defamed me. At ye last I withdrew my
self and forsook the^, but I do confess, yt if reason kept me from their
houses.x. days, sensuality kept me with the^.x. wekes. Oh cruel gods, oh wicked
world, oh frail flesh, tell me what it means, that reason leads me
voluntarely to virtues, and that sensuality against my will draws me unto
vices? Do you not think Faustine, yt I consider what a great good it is for
to be good, and what an evil it is to be evil? But what shall I do, woeful
man, since at this day there is not so cruel a scourge of my honor, nor so
great an enemy of my renown, as mine own flesh is,, the which against me
does make such cruel wars. Wherefore I beseech the immortal gods, sith my
being here is against my will, that they do defend me in this so cruel
war. The frail flesh is somewhat to blame, but much more is the foolish
and light woman in fault. For if men were certain that women were chaste,
shamefaste, and solitary, they would not dispose their hearts, their bodies,
nor bend their bows to shoot at their buttes: they would not consume their
time to follow them, loose their goods to serve them, neither would they
suffer so many shames to sclaunder them. For where the heart has no hope to
obtain, there he will give over his suit. But what shall we do now Faustine (I
pray thee tell me) since thou know better then I, that the shame of the
Roman women is now gone, and the women of Italy are so dissolute: that
though men do not regard them, yet they do entyse them. If men fly, they
call them: If men go back, they approach: If men are sad, they make them
merry: If men are silente, they force them to speak: and finally men begin
the love in sport, and they temper it in such sort, that they turn it all
into earnest. I let thee wete Faustine, that the means whereby nature works
in man is very strange: but the shame which the Gods put in women is more
marvelous. And if it be true, (as it is true in deed) that the men do loose
the stynge of the flesh, and that the women do not loose the shame of the
visage: I think it is impossible that there should be a chaste or virtuous
woman in Rome. For there is no common wealth more undone, then that where the
women have lost their shame. O women, what reason have they which fly form
you, which are weary of you, which forsake you, which forget you, which make
them selves strangers, and furthermore which are dead and buried. For the
hungry worms gnawe in the grave only the frail and slymie fleashe of the
dead: but you women destroy the goods, honor, and life of the living. Oh if
the noble hearts knew what evil does follow them, for dallieng with women: I
swear unto them, that they would not serve them continually as they do serve
them: but also they would have no lust nor desire to behold them. What will thou I say any more to thee Faustine, but that some escape out of your hands
for effeminate and sclaundered, others hurt by your tongues, others persecuted
with your works, other deceived with your countenaunces, others despised
through your hatred, others desperate through your inconstancy, others
condemned by your light judgments, others troubled through your unkindness,
finally those that escape best, are of your hearts abhorred, and through your
folly destroyed. Then since the man knows that he must pass all those
dangers, I can not tell what fool he is, that will either love or serve you.
For the brute beast that once has felt the sharp teethe of the dog, will
unwillingly ever after come nere unto the stake. Oh unto what perils does he
offer him self, which continually does haunte the company of women. For as
much as if he love them not, they despise him, and take him for a fool. If he
does love them, they account him for light. If he forsake the^ they esteem him
for no body. If he follow them, he is accounted lost.

If he serve them, they do not regard him. If he do not serve them, they
despise him If he will have them, they will not. If he will not, they persecute
him. If he do advance him self forth, they call him importunate. If he fly,
they say he is a cowarde. If he speak, they say he is a bragger. If he hold
his peace, they say he is a dissarde. If he laughe, they say he is a fool.
If he laughe not, they say he is solemn. If he gives them any thing, they
say it is little worth: and he that gives them nothing, he is a pinchpurse.
Finally he that haunteth them, is by them sclaundered: and he that does not
frequent them, is esteamed less then a man. These things so seen, so hard,
and so known, what shall the poor and miserable man do, inespecially if he
be a man of understanding? For though he would absent him self from women, the
flesh does not give him license: and though he would follow women, wisdom will
not condiscende. Some men think in all their thoughts, that by services and
pleasures they may content women. But I let them know, if they know it not,
that the woman is never contented though man does what he can as maid, and
that he do all that he ought to do as a husband: though he takes pains for her
sake above his force, and though with the swet of his brows he releaueth her
neade: though every hour he puts him self in danger, ye in the end she
will give him no thanks: but will say that he loves an other, and that he does
but that to please and satisfy her. It is a long time since I desired to tell
thee this Faustine, but I have deferred it until this present hour, hoping
thou would not give occasion to tell it thee. For among wise men those words
ought chiefly to be esteamed, which fittely to the purpose are declared. I
remember that it is six years since Anthonius Pius (thy father) chose me to be
his son in law, and that thou chosest me for thy husband, and I thee for my
wife: all the which things were done, my woeful adventures permitting it, and
Adrian my lord commanding it. The good Anthonius Pius gave his only daughter
in marriage unto me, and gave me likewise his noble Empire with great treasures:
he gave me also the garde^s of Vulcanali to pass the time therein. But I think
that on both sides we were deceived. He in chosing me for his son in law,
and I in taking thee for my wife. O Faustine, thy father and my father in law
was called Anthonius Pius, because to al he was merciful, save only to me to
whom he was most cruel: for with a little flesh he gave me many bones. And I
confess the truth unto thee, that now I have no more teethe to byte, nor
heat in my stomach to digeaste: and the worste of all is, that many times I
have thought to rage on my self. I will tell thee one word, though it does
displease thee, which is, that for thy beauty thou art desired of many: and
for thy evil conditions thou art despised of all. For the fair women are like
unto the golden pylles: the which in sight are very pleasant, and in
eatinge very noisome. Thou know well Faustine and I also, that we saw on a
day Drusio, and Braxille his wife, which were our neighbors, and as they were
brauling togethers, I spoke unto Drusio such words: what means this lord
Drusio? that being now the feast of Berecinthia, and being as we are
adioyninge to her house, and present before so honorable assembly, and
furthermore thy wife being so fair as she is, how is it possible there
should be any strife between you? Men which are married to deformed
persons, to the end that they might kill them quicly, should always fall out
with their wives: but those that are married to fayer women, they ought always
to live togethers in joy and pleasure, to the end they may live long. For when
a fair woman dies, though she have lived a hundredth years, yer she dies to
sone: and though a deformed woman lives a small time, yet not withstandyng she
dies to late Drusio as a man being vexed, lifting up his eyes into the
heavens, fetchinge a grievous sighe from the bottom of his heart said these
words. The mother Berecinthia pardon me, and her holy house also, and all the
company besides forgive me, for by the immortal Gods I swear unto the, that I
had rather have been married with a Moore of Calde that is so foul, then being
married as I am, with a Roman being very faier: for she is not so fair and
white as my life is woeful and black. Thou know well Faustine that when
Drusio spoke these words, I did wype the tears from his eyes, and I gave him
a word in his ear that he should proceed no further in this matter: for such
women ought to be chastened in secret, and afterward to be honored openly O
thou art unfortunate Faustine: and the Gods have evil divided with the giving
the bewtye and riches to undo thy self: and denayeng thee the best, which is
wisdom and good conditions to keep thy honor, Oh what evil luck comes
unto a man, when God sends him a fayer daughter, unless furthermore the gods
do permyt that she be sage, and honest: for the woman which is young, folyshe,
and faier, distroyeth the common wealth, and defameth al her parentage. I say
unto the again Faustine, that the Gods were very cruel against thee, since
they swallowe the up by the goulfes, where all the evil perishes: and took from
the all the sails and owers, whereby the good do escape. I remained xxxviii.
years unmarried, and these vi. years only which I have been married, me thinks
I have passed vi. hundredth years of my life: for nothing can be called a
tormente, but the evil that man does suffer that is evil married. I will ensuer
the of one thing Faustine, that if I had known before, which now I know, and
that I had felt that which now I feel, though the gods had commanded me and
the emperor Adrian my Lord desired me, I had not changed my poverty for thy
riches, neither my rest for thy Empire: but since it is fallen to thine and
mine evil fortune, I am contented to speak little, and to suffer much. I have
so much dissembled with the Faustine, that I can no more: but I confess unto
the, that no husband does suffer his wife so much, but that he is bound to
suffer her more, considering that he is a man and that she is a woman. For the
man which willingly goes into ye briers, must think before to endure ye
pricks. The woman is to bold that does contend with her husband: but the
husband is more fool which openly quarrelleth with his wife. For if she be good,
he ought to favor her to the end she may be better: if she be unhappy, he
ought to suffer her to thend she be not worse. Truly when the woman thinks
that her husband takes her for evil, it is a great occasion to make her to be
worse: for women are so ambitious, that those which commonly are evil, will make
us believe yt they are better then others. Believe me Faustine, that if the fear
of the gods, the infamy of the person, and the speech of men do not refrain ye
woman, all the chastisements of ye world will not make her refrain from vice:
for all things suffers chastisemente and correction, the woman only except,
the which must be won by entreaty. The heart of the man is very noble, and
that of the woman very delycate: because for a little good he will give a great
reward, and for a great offense he will give no punishment. Before the wise man
marieth, let him beware what he does: and when he shall determine to take the
company of a woman, he ought to be like unto him that enters into the war,
that determines with himself to suffer all that may happen, be it good or
evil. I do not call that life a war without a cause, which the evil married
man leads in his house: for women do more hurt with their tongues, then the
enemies do with their swords. It is a great simplycitie for a wise man to make
account, or esteem the simplycitie of his wife at every time: for if they would
mark, and take heed to that which their wife does, or says, I let them know
that they shall never come to an end. O Faustine, if the Roman woman would
always one thing, that they would procure one thing, that they would be
resolved in one thing, though it were to our great charges we would have
pleasure to condescend unto their desires: but what shall we do, sinse yt which
now pleases you, a while after dipleaseth you, yt which you ask for in the
morning, ye will not have at none, that which you enjoy at none days, do
trouble you in the night, that which in the night you love, ye care not for in
the morninge, that which yesterday ye greatly esteemed, to day ye as much
despise. If ye desired to see a thing the last year, this year ye will not
hear talk of it, that which before made you to rejoice, does now make you to
be sad, that which ye were wont and ought to lament, at the self same thing a
man sees you laughe. Finally ye women are as children, which are appeased with
an aple, and casts the gold to the earth not wayeng it. I have diverse times
thought with my self, if I could say or write any good rule, in keeping the
which, I might teach men to be quiet in their house. And by my count I find
(having experimented it also with the Faustine) that it is impossible to give a
rule to married men: and if a man could give them, they should scarcely profit
therewith, sinse their wives live without rule. But notwithstanding that, I will
declare some rules how the married folks should keep themselves in their houses:
and how they shall (if they list) avoid strifes and debates between them. For
the husbands and the wives having wars together, it is impossible there
should be peace in the common wealth. And though this present writynge has
not profited me, vnluckey and unfortunate man: yet it may profit others which
have good wives. For often times the medycen which profits not for the tender
eyes, suffiseth to heal the hard heales. I know well Faustine, that for that I
have said, and for that I will say unto the, thou and others such like shall
greatly envy me. Ye will mark the words that I speak, more then the
intencion that I mean: but I protest before the Gods, that in this case my end
is for none other intent, but to advertise the good, whereof there are a great
many: and to punyshe the evil, which are many more. And though perchance
neither the one nor the other will believe, that my intencion in speaking these
things was good: yet therefore I will not cease to know the good from the evil,
and to choose the evil from the good. For in my fantasy the good wife is as the
feasaunt, whose feathers we little esteame, and regard much the body: but the
evil woman is as the Marterne, whose skin we greatly esteem, and utterly
despise the flesh. I will therefore declare the rules whereby the husbands may
live in peace with their own proper wives.

The Rules are these.
THe first, the husband must neades have patience and suffer his wife when she
is displeased: for in Libia there is no serpent so spiteful as an evil woman
when she is vexed.

The second, the husband ought to provide for his wife (according to his
abylitie) all that is necessary for her, as well for her person, as for her
house: for often times it chances, that women seking things necessary, find
things superfluous, and not very honest.

The third, the husband ought to provide that his wife do keep good company:
for women often times are more troubled, with the words that their evil
neighbors speak against them, then for any occasion that their husbands give
them.

The fourth, that the husband ought to use a mean, that his wife be not to
much a subject, nor that she stray to much abrod: for the woman that gaddeth
much in the streates, both loaseth her good name, and spends his goods.

The fifth, the husband ought to take heed that he strives not so with his
wife, that she be brought past shame: for the woman that toward her husband
is shameless, has no respect what dishonestye she commits.

The sixth, the husband ought to let his wife understand that he does trust her:
for the woman is of such condition, that that which a wise man would not she
should do: she will do sonest, and that wherein she should take pains, she will
do nothing.

The seventh, the husband ought to be circumspect that he do not holy trust his
wife with the goods and treasours of the house, nor yet utterly distrust her:
for if the wife have the charge of the goods of the house, truly she will
augment little, and if the husband do suspect her, she will steal much.

The.8. the husband ought to look upon his wife merrily, and at other times
again sadly: for women are of such condition, that when their husbands
shows them a merye countenance they love them, and when they show them
selves demure, the fear them.

The 9. the husband ought (if he be wise) in this to take good aduysement, that
his wife quarrel not with his neighbors, for we have often times seen in Rome,
that for the quarrel of his wife against his neighbor, the husband has lost
his life, she has lost her goods, and a slander has risen throughout the
common wealth.

The 10. the husband ought to be so pacient, yt if he saw his wife commit any
fault, in no wise he should correct her openly, but in secret: for the husband
that corrects his wife before witness, does as he which spitteth into the
element, and the spittel falls again into his eyes.

The 11. the husband ought to have much temperaunce, lest he lay hands on his
wife to punish her: for truly the wife that with sharp words does not amend,
with all the chastysementes of the world will never be good.

The 12. if the husband will be in quiet with his wife, he ought to praise her
before his neighbors and strangers: for amongst all other things women have
this propertye, that of all they would be praised, and of none corrected.

The.13. the husband ought to beware to praise any other then his own wife,
she being present: for women are of this condition, that the same day the
husband commends any other woman, the same day his wife will cast him out of
her heart, thinkinge that he loves another and dyspyseth her.

The.14. the husband ought to make his wife believe that she is faier, though
in deed she be foul: for there is between them no greater strife, then to
think that her husband forsakes her for being foul.

The 15. the husband ought to put his wife in remembrance of the infamye, that
they speak of them that be evil in the city: for women are glorious, and
because they would be loath that men should talk such thing by them, as they
talk of others, peradventure they will refrain from those vices that others
commit.

The 16. the husband ought to take heed that his wife accept no new friends:
for through acceptyng of new friends, there grow commenly between them great
discention.

The 17. the husband ought to take head that his wife believe, that he loves
not them whom she hates: for women are of such a condition, that if the
husbands loves al them that they hate, immediatlye they will hate all those
which they love.

The 18. the husband ought sometime in matters, which are not prejudicial unto
him, confess him self to be overcome: for women desire rather to be counted
the best in reasoning (though it be of no value) then to have otherwise a
greater jewel given them.

In this sort Faustine I will say no more to the, but wish that thou should
se what I se, and feel what I feel: and above al, that my dissimulacion should
suffice to amend thy life.

The Emperor answers more particularlye concerning the Key of his study.
Cap. xvii.
NOw Faustine, since I have the old venym from my heart expelled, I will answer
to thy present demand: for unto demaundes and aunswers that passes between
the sages, ye tongue ought never to speak word, but that first he ask the
heart license. And it is a general rule amongst the phisicians, that the
medicens do not profit the sick, unless they first take away the opilacions
of the stomach. I mean by this, that no man can speak to his friend (as he
ought) unless before he shows what thing greueth him: for it is better to
repaier the roufes of the houses that be old, then to go about to build them
new.

Thou requirest me Faustine that I give thee the Keye of my study, and thou
do threaten me that if I give it not unto the, that thou shall forthwith be
delivered. I marvel not at that thou say, neither I am abashed of that
thou demaundest, nor yet of that that thou would do: for you women are very
extreme in your desires, very suspicious in your demaundes, very obstinate in
your wills, and as impatient in your sufferinges. I say not without a cause
that women are extreme in their desires: for the^e are things whereof women
are so desirous, that it is wonder though never living creature saw them, nor
hard speak of them. I have not said without a cause that women are suspicious
in their demands: for the Roman women are of such a condition, that as soon
as a woman desires any thing, she forthwith commands the tongue to ask it,
the feet to seek it, the eyes to se it, the hands to feel it, and likewise the
heart to love it. I say not without a cause that women are obstinate in their
wills: for if a Roman woman bears any malice to any man, she will not
forbear to accuse him for any slander, nor fail to pursue him for any
poverty, nor fear to kill him for any Justice. I say not without a cause that
women are impatient to suffer: for many are of such condition (I say not al)
that if a man give not spedely that which they desire, they change their
coullour, their eyes look read, their tongues run quycke, their voices are
sharp, they frete with them selves, they trouble their neighbors abroad, and
are so out of order that no man dare speak unto them within. You have this
good trade among ye women that under coullour of being with child, you will that
we husbands grant ye al your desires. When the sacred senate, in the time of
the valiant Camillus, made a law in the favor of the Roman Matrones with
child, the women at that time longed not so much as they do at this present:
but I can not tell what this presently means, that al ye are anointed with
that that is good, and that ye are all desirous of that that is evil. I will tell
the (Faustine) the occasion why this law was made in Rome, and thereby thou
shall se if thou deseruest to enjoy the priuyledge thereof or no: For the laws
are but as yokes under the which the evil does labor, and they are wings
wherewith the good does fly. The case thereof was such, that Camillus the
valiant captain went forth to the wars, he made a solemn vow to the
mother Berecinthia, that if the gods gave him the vyctorie, he would offer unto
her an Image of silver: and after Camillus wanne the victory, and that he would
have accomplished his vow to ye mother Berecinthia: another he had any riches,
nor Rome had any silver. For at that time, Rome was rich of virtues, and poor
of money. And know thou Faustine, that our ancient fathers were devout toward
the gods, and curious in repairing the temples, the which they esteemed to be
great deuocions: and they were in such sort observed of their vows, that
neither for sloth, nor poverty, they would obmitte their promises toward
their gods. And in these things they were so precise, that they granted to no
man any triumph, unless he did swear that he had unto the gods made a vow,
and afterward also proved how he performed it.

At that time flourished in Rome many virtuous Romans, and many greek
philosophers, many hardye Captains, and many sumptuous buildinges: and above
all things, Rome was vnpeopeled of malyces, and adorned with virtuous Ladies.
The Historiographers made (and not without a cause) great account of these
virtuous matrones: For the commonne wealth has as much neade of virtuous
women, as the wars have of valyaunte Captains. They being therefore (as
they wear) so virtuous and noble Matrones (without the motion of any woman)
determined all to go into the high Capitol, and there to offer al their
Ieuelles and treasours that they had, their cheynes, their ringes, their
garments, their bracelettes, their girdels, their buttons, and hangers of
gold, of silver, and precious stones of all sorts with all their tablettes.
The Annals of this time say, that after the Roman women had laid so great
a multitude of riches, at the feet of the sacret senate, in the name of them
all one of them spoke, whose name was called Lucina, and said in this sort.
Fathers co^script, esteem not much these our Iewelles, which we give you to
make ye image of the mother Berecinthia: but esteem much this, that we
willynglye put in ieopardye our husbands, and children, to win you the
vyctory. And if in this case you accept our poor service, have no respect to
the little which we do offer: but to the great which (if we were able) we would
give. Truly ye Romans, though the treasure which their wives offered was
great: Yet notwithstanding they did more esteem the good will wherewith they gave
it, then they did the gifts them selves. For there was so much in deed, that
sufficed both to make the image of the goddess Berecinthia, and also for a
long time to maintain the wars. Therefore from that day that those matrones
presented their Iewelles in the high Capitol, the senate forthwith in
remembrance of the gentleness, granted them these five things as a
priuyledge: For at that time Rome never received service, or benefyt of any
person, but she rewarded it with double payment.

The first thing that the senate granted the Roman women was, that in the
day of their burial, the Orators might openly make oracions in the praise of
their lives: For in old time men used neither to exalt them when they were
dead, nor yet to accompany them to their graves.

The second thing that was granted them was, that they might sit in the
temples: for in the old time when the Romans did offer sacrifices to their
gods, the aged did always sit, the priests kneel, the married men did lean,
but the women, though they were of noble and high lineage, could neither be
suffered to talk, sit nor to lean.

The third thing that the senate granted the women of Rome was, that every one
of them might have.ii. rich gowns, and that they should not ask the Senate
leave to wear them: for in the old time if any women were apparelled, or did
bye any new gown without askinge license of the Senate, she should
immedyatlye loose her Gown, and because her husband did condiscende unto the
same, he was bannyshed the common wealth.

The fourth thing which they granted them was, that they should drink wine
when they were sick: for there was in Rome a custom inuyolable, that though
their life was in hazard, they durst not drink wine but water. For when Rome
was well corrected, a woman that druncke wine was as much slaundered among the
people: as if she had committed adulterye toward her husband.

The fifth thing granted by the senate unto the women was, that a man might not
denay a Roman being with child, any honest and lawful thing that she
demanded. I cannot tell why the auncientes of Rome esteamed more women with
child, then others that had no children.

Al these five things were justly granted to the Matrones, and noble Roman
Ladies. And I can tell the Faustine, that they were of the Senate most willingly
granted. For it is reason that women which in virtues do excel, should with
all means be honored. I will tell the Faustine the especial cause that moved
the Romans to grant unto you Matrones this last pryuyledge: that is to
wete, that a man cannot denay them any thing being with child. Thou ought
to know, that the others (as well Greeks as Latynes) did never give laws, nor
institutions unto their people, without great occasions: For the great
multitude of laws are commonly evil kept, and on the other part are cause of
sondrye troubles. We cannot denaye but that the auncientes did well avoid the
great number of institucions: For it is better for a man to live as reason
commands him, then as the law constrayneth him. The case therefore was, that
in the year of the foundation of Rome.364. Fuluius Torquatus then being Consul,
in the war against the Volces, the knights of Mauritania brought to Rome
an huge monster with one eye, called Monoculus: which he had found in the
deserts of Egypt. At that time the wife of Torquatus called Macrina, should
have been delivered of child: for the Consul did leave her great. This Macrina
amongst al was so honest, yt they spent as much time in Rome to praise her for
her virtues: as they did set forth her husband for his victories. They read in
the Annalles of that time that the first time that this Consul Torquatus went
into Asia, he was eleven years out of his country, and it is found for a
truth, that in all the time that Torquatus was absente, his wife was never seen
look out at the window, which was not a thing smally esteemed: for though it
was a custom in Rome to keep the door shut, it was lawful notwithstanding to
speak to women at the windows. Though men at that time were not so bold, and
the women were so honest: yet Macrina, wife to Torquatus, lived so close and
solitary to her self, that in all these 11. years there was never man that saw
her go through Rome, nor that ever saw her door open, neither that she
consented at any time (from the time that she was viii. years of age) that any
man should enter into her house: and more over, there was never man saw her face
wholly uncovered. This Roman Lady did this, to leave of her a memory: and to
give example of her virtue. She had also iii. children, whereof the eldest was
but v. years old: and so when they were viii. years of age, immediatlye she
sent them out of her house toward their parents, lest under the coullour to
vysite the children, others should come to visit her. O Faustine, how many
have I hard that have lamented this excellent Roman: and what will they think
that shall follow her life, Who could presently restraigne a Roman woman from
going to the window.11. years, since things now a days are so dissolute,
that they do not only desire to se them, but also run in the streates to
babble of them? Who should cause now a days a Roman woman, that in the 11.
years she should not open her doors, since it is so, that when the husband
commanded her to shut one door, she will make the hole house to ringe of her
voice? He that now would command his wife to tarry at home, and let her of her
vagaries into the town, shall perceive that there is no Basilie nor Viper that
carries such poison in her tail, as she will spitt with her tongue. Who could
make a Roman women to be 11. years continually without showing her face to
any man: since it is so that they spend the most part of their time in loking
in a glass, setting their ruffes, brushing their clothes, and painting their
faces? who would cause a Roman woman to keep her self, xi years from being
vysited of her neighbors, and friends, since it is true that now women think
them greatest enemies, which vysite them most seldom? Retournyng therefore to
the monstre, as they led this monstre before the door of Torquatus house, she
being great with child, and her husband in the war: by chance a maid of
his told her how that this monstre passed by, wherefore so great a desire took
her to see the monstre that for to keep that she had begone, sodeinly for this
desire she dyed. Truly I tell the Faustine, that this monstre had passed many
times by the streat where she dwelt, and she would never notwithstanding go to
the window: and much less go out of her door to see it. The death of this
Roman of many was lamented: for it was a long time that Rome had never heard
of so honest and virtuous a Roman wherefore at the peticion of all the Romayne
people, and by the commandment of all the sacred senate, they set on he^ tomb
these verses.

The worthy Macrine, rests here in grave
Whom wise Torquatus, lodged in Iunos bed
Who reked not, a happy life to have
So that for aye, her honest fame was spredde.
BEhold therefore Faustine, in my opinyon, the law was not made to remedy the
death of this noble Romayne, since she was already dead: but to the end that you
Princesses should take example of her life, and that through al Rome there
should be a memory of her death. It is reason, since the law was ordained for
those women which are honest, that it should be observed in none, but upon
those that are virtuous: let the women with child mark the words of the law,
which command them to ask things honest. Wherefore I let the know Faustine,
that in the seventh table of our laws are written these words. We will that
where there is corruption of manners, the man shall not be bound to observe their
liberties.

That princesses and noble women ought not to be ashamed to give their children
suck with their own breasts. Cap. xviii.
AL noble men, that are of hault courages, watch continually to bring that to
effect which they covet, and to keep that which they have: For by strength one
comes to honor, and by wisdom, honor, and life, are both preserved. By
these words I mean, that she that has borne.9. months (through travail)
the creature in her womb with so much pain and that afterward is delivered
with so great peril, and by the grace of god from so many dangers escaped,
me think it is not well that in this point (which for the norishment of the
babe is most expedient) the mothers should show them so negligent. For that
wants no folly, that by extreme labor is procured, and with much lightness
afterward despised. The things that women naturaly desire are infinite, among
the which, these are four cheafely.

The first thing that women desire, is to be very fair: For they had rather be
poor and fair, then to be rich and foul.

The second thing which they desire, is to se them selves married: for until
such time as the woman does see her self married, from the bottom of the heart
she always sigheth.

The third thing that women desire, is to se them selves great with child, and
herein they have reason. For until such time as the woman has had a child, it
seems that she takes him more for a lover then for a husband.

The fourth thing that they desire, is to se them selves delivered, and in this
case more then all the rest they have reason: For it is great pity to see in
the pryme time a young tree laden with blosomes: and afterward the fruit to be
destroyed through the abondaunce of caterpillars. Then since god suffers
that they are borne fair, that they se them selves married, that they be with
child, and that they are delivered: why be they so unkind, as to send them out
of their houses, to be nourished in other rude cotages? In my opinion the woman
that is virtuous, ought as soon as she is delivered, to lift up her eyes, and
with her heart to give god thanks for her fruit: For the woman that from her
delivery is escaped, ought to account her self as one newly borne. The woman
likewise seeing her self delivered of her creature, ought to give it suck with
her own breasts, for it is a monsterous thing, that she that has brought
forth the creature out of her own proper womb, should give it to be
nourished, of a strange dugge, In speaking more plainly (it is al one to me
whether she be a noble woman, or a woman of mean condition) I say and affirm,
that god has delivered her of al her travail, she her self ought with her
own pappes to nourish and give suck to their babes: for nature did not only
make women able to bear men, but also besides that provided milk in their
breasts, to nourishe their children. We have neither read until this present,
nor seen, that any beasts (wild or tame) after they had young, would commit
them to any other to be nourished. This which I have spoken is not so worthy of
noting, as that which I will speak. And it is, that many beasts newborn,
before they open their eyes to know their fathers, have now all ready taken
nourishment in the teates of their mothers: and more then that, to se some of
those little beasts have.x. little whealpes, the which without ye aid of any
others nourished them al with the substance of their own tears, and the
woman that has but one child disdaineth to give it suck. All that shall read
this writing shall find it true, and if they will, they may se as I have seen it
by experience: yt after the she Ape has had her yonglings, she always has
them in her arms so long as they suck, so yt oftentimes there is such strife
between the male, and the female, which of them shall have the yonglings in
their arms, that the beholders are enforced to part them with battes. Let us
leave the beasts that are in the fields, and talk of the birds that are in ye
neasts: the which do lay eggs to have young, yet have they no milk to bring
them up. What thing is so straung to se, as a small bird that has under her
wings v. or vi. little naked byrds, the which when she has hached, she has
neither milk to nourish them, nor corn to give them, they have neither wings
to fly, feathers to cover them, nor any other thing to defend them: yet in all
this weakness and poverty their mother forsakes them not, nor commits them
to any other but brings them up al her self. That which nature provided for
the swannes is no less marvelous, in especially when they nourishe their
young signettes in the water: Forasmuch as duringe the time that they can not
swim, the mothers always in the day are with their young signetts in their
neastes, and in the night the fathers carry them under their proper wings (to
refresh them) unto the water: It is therefore to be thought, since these
swannes so louyngly bear their yonglings under their wings, that they would
carry them in their arms if they were men, and also give them suck with their
own breasts if they were women Aristotle says in his fifth book De
animalibus, that the lions, the bears, the wolves, the Eagles, ye griffins,
and generally al beasts, never are, were, nor shall be seen so fierce nor so
cruel, as when they have yonglings, and this thing seems to be true: for at
that time, we se that many beasts might escape the hunters, yet to save their
yonglings they turn back and put their proper lives in danger. Plato says
in his book of laws, that the children are never so well-beloved of their
mothers, as when they are nourished with their proper breasts, and that their
fathers daunceth them of their knees. The which thing is true: for the first
love, in all things is the truest love. I was willing to show the bringing up of
brute beasts, to show the women with child, how pitiful parents they are in
nourishing their yonglings with their own breasts: and how cruel mothers women
are, in committing their children to strangers. It is a marvelous thing to
here the mothers say that they love their children, and on the contrary side to
se how they hate them. In this case, I cannot tell whether they love more,
either the child, or the money: for I se that they covet greatly to hourd up
riches into their cheastes, and likewise they desire as much to cast out their
children out of their houses. There are diverse reasons whereby the mothers
ought to be moved to norishe their children (which they bare in their wombes)
with their own propre breasts.

The first reason is, that the mother ought to have respect how ye young babe
was borne alone, how little he was, how poor, dilicate, naked, tender, and
without understanding: and since that the mother brought it forth so weak, and
feable, it is neither mete nor convenient that in time of such necessity she
should forsake it, and commit it into the hands of a straung nourse. Let women
pardon me, whether they be ladies, brought up in pleasures, or other of meaner
estate, accustomed with trauelles, I force not: but I say, that those which
forsake their children in such extremeties, are not pitiful mothers but cruel
enemies. If it be cruelty not to cloth him that is naked, who is more naked
then the child newborn? if it be cruelty not to comfort the sad, who is more
sad, desolate, and sorrowful, then the child which is borne weping? if it be
ungentleness not to succoure the poor nedy, who is more neady, or more poor
then the innocent child newly borne, that knows not as yet neither to go, nor
to speak? If it be cruelty to do evil to the innocent that cannot speak,
who is more innocent then the infant, that can not complain of that which is
done unto him? The mother that casts out of her house the children borne of
her own body, how can we believe that she will receive in any other of
strangers? when the infant is now great, when he is strong, when he can
speak, when he can goo, when he can profitte him self, and get his meat,
the mother makes much of him, and leads him about with her, but is little
thank unto her: For then the mother has more neade of the child to be served,
then the child has of the mother to be cherished: If the children were borne
of the nails, of the fingers, of the fete, or of the hands, it were a small
matter though their mothers sent them forth to noryshe: but I cannot tell what
heart can endure to suffer this, since the child is borne of their propre
intrayles, that they do commit it (to be brought up) into the hands of a
stranger. Is there paraduenture at this day in the world any Lady, that has
so great confidence in any of her friends, parents, or neighbors, that she
durst trust any of them with the key of her cofer, wherein her Iewelles, money,
and riches lies? truly I think none. O unkind mothers, my pen had almost
called you cruel stepmothers, since you lay up in your heart the cursed mou^ke
of the ground, and send out of your houses that which sprang of your blood.
And if women should say unto me yt they are weak, feable, and tender, and that
now they have found a good nourse, to this I answer: that ye nourse has small
love to ye child which she nourishes, when she sees the ungentleness of the
mother yt bare it. For truly she alone does norishe ye child with love, that
heretofore has borne it with pain.

The second reason is, that it is a thing very just that women should nourishe
their children, to the end they may be like unto their conditions: For
otherwise they are no children, but are enemies: for the child that does not
reverence his mother that bare him, can not enjoy a prosperous life, Since the
intention of the parents in bringing up their children is for none other
purpose, but to be served of them when they are old: they shall understand,
that for this purpose there is nothing more necessary, then the milk of the
proper mother: for where the child sucketh the milk of a stranger, it is
unlikely that it should have the conditions of the mother. If a kidde suck a
sheep, they shall perceive it shall have the wolle more fair, and the nature
more gentle, then if he had sucked a Goat, which has ye wolle more hard, and
of nature is more wild: wherein ye proverb is verefied, not from whence thou
come, but whereof thou feedest. It avails a man much to have a good
inclinacion: but it helps him much more from his infancye to be well taught.
For in the end we profit more, with the customs wherewith we live, then we do
by nature from whence we came.

The third reason is, that women ought to nourish their own children, because
they should be hole mothers, and not imperfect: for the woman is counted but
half a mother that bears it, and likewise half a mother that nourishes it:
but she is the hole mother, that both bears it, and nourishes it. After the
duty considered unto the father that has created us, and unto the son that
has redeamed us, me thinks next we owe ye greatest duty unto ye mother, that
has borne us in her body: and much more it is that we should bear unto her,
if she had nourished us with her own breasts. For when the good child shall
behold his mother, he ought more to love her because she nourished him with her
milk: then because she has borne him in her body.

The Aucthour still persuades women to give their own children suck. Cap. xix.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome five hundred and two, After the
obstinate and cruel war between Rome and Carthage, where the renowned
captains were Hannibal for the Carthagians and Scipio for the Romans: sone
after that war followed the war of Macedonie against king Philip, The
which when it was ended, that of Siria began against Antiochus king of Siria.
For in.630 years the Romans had always continual wars in Asia, in
Affricke, or in Europe. The noble Romans sent the consul Cornelius Scipio
(brother to the great Scipio ye Affrican) for captain of that war. And after
many battayles, fortune showed her force in a City called Sepila, the which is
in Asia the great, where king Antiochus was overcome, and all his realm
discomfited: for trees that have their roots plucked up, must needs within
short time lose their fruits. After that king Antiochus was overcome and his
land spoiled, Cornelius Scipio came unto Rome triumphinge, for the victory yt
he had of Asia: so that as his brother (for the victory that he had of
Africa) was called Affricane, so he was called Scipio the Asian, because he
vanquished Asia. The captains of Rome loved honor so much, that they would no
other reward, nor recompense of their travail, but yt they should give them
the renown of the realm which they had overcome. Truly they had reason, for
the noble hearts ought little to esteem the increase of their riches, and ought
greatly to esteem the perpetuite of their good name. As Sextus Cheronensis
says in his third book De ambigua iusticia, that Cornelius Scipio had a long
time the government of the people, forasmuch as he was consul, censour, and
Dictatour of Rome: for he was not only hardy and courageous, but also he was
sage and wise, which thing ought greatly to be esteamed in a man. For
Aristotle does not determine it, which of these two is most excellent: either
stoutnes to fight in ye wars, or policye to rule in peace. Scipio therefore
being Dictatour (which was an office then as the Emperor is now) it chanced
that the x. captains which had been with him in the wars, violently fought
to have entered into the Monastery of the virgins vestalles: wherefore the
Dictatour commanded their heads to be cut of. For the Romans punished more
cruelly those, that only required the virgins vestalls: then those that forced
the married matrones. Cornelius Scipio was besought of many in Rome, yt he would
moderate and change his so cruel sentence. And he which most in this case did
importune him, was his brother Scipio the Affrican whose prayer was not
accepted: how be it in the end they said the captains, were pardoned, by the
request of a sister of the said Dictatour Scipio ye Affrican. And because he
blamed his brother Scipio, that he had done more for the daughter of his
nourse: then for the son of his proper mother, he answered. I let the wete
brother, that I take her more for my mother that brought me up, and did not
bear me: then she which has borne me, and in my infancye has forsaken me.
And since I have had her for my true mother, it is but reasonne that I have
this for my dear and well-beloved sister. These were the words which passed
between these two brethren. I have diligently red in holy, and profane
wrytinges, that many tirauntes have caused their own mothers to be killed
which bare them: but I could never find that they have done any discurtesye or
disobedience, to the nourses which gave them milk. For the cruel tirauntes
do thirste after the blood of others: but they fear them whose milk they
suck,

The fourth reasonne that byndethe womenne to nourishe their children is, to
keep them in more obedience: for if the fathers live long time, they must of
force come into the hands of their children. And let not old fathers make
their accounts, saying that during the time that they shall have the
government of the house, their children shall be kept in obedience: for in so
doing they might abuse them selves. For young men in their youth, feel not the
trauayles of this life: nor know not as yet, what it means to make provision
for householde. For to the stomach that is full, and cloyed with eating, al
meats seameth both unsavory and noisome. It may well be, that since the
children are not nourished in the house, that they know not their servants,
that they love not their parents, that they come not nere their brethren, nor
talk with their sisters, that they are ignorant of their fathers, and do
disobey their mothers: wherefore since little fear does abound, and good will
fail, one day they commit some mischeauous offense, whereby they do loose
their life worthily, and the fathers loose the riches, and likewise their
honor deservedly, to the intent that the fathers always keape their proper
children under obedience, there is no better mean then to bring them up in
their own houses, the mother to give them suck, and the father to teach
them: for when the mother desires any thing of her child, she should not
show him the belly from whence he came, but the dugges which he did suck. For
all that which is asked us by the milk that we did suck, truly there is no
heart so hard that can denay her. The historiographers say that Antipater among
all the Gretians, was the most renowned tyrant: and among the Romans Nero.
And these two wicked princes were not great tyrauntes because they had committed
many tyrannies: but because they did commit one, which was most grievous of
all others. For they do not call a man a glutton, or cormoraunt, because he
eats every hour, but because he deuoureth more at one paste, then others do
in one day. The case was, that Antipater in Greece, and Nero in Rome,
determined to kill their own mothers. And the historiographers say, that when
Nero commanded his mother to be killed, she sent to ask of him why he would
put her to death: where unto he answered, that he was cloyed to behold the
arms wherein he was nourished, and therefore he caused her to be killed, to see
the intrailes out of the which he came. This case was so horrible, that it
seemed to many not to speak it: but concluding I say, as unjustly as the
mothers lost the mortal life: so justly did the children get for them
immortal imfamy. Nothing can be more wicked and detestable to the children,
then to kill their mothers which did bear them with pain, and did nourish them
with love: but notwithstanding all this, we do not read that ever they did kill,
dishonor, nor yet disobey their nourses, which gave them milk. Iunius
Rusticus, in the fifte book of the brynging up of children says, that ye two
Gracchi (renowned and famous Romans) had a third brother being a bastard, who
showed him self as valiant and hardy in the wars of Asia: as the other two
did in the wars of Africa. The which as he came one day to rome to visit his
house, he found therein his mother which bare him, and the nourse which gave him
suck. To yt which nourse he gave a girdle of gold, and to his own mother he
gave a jewel of silver. Of ye which things ye mother being ashamed, co^sidring
what her son had done, she asked him why he had given ye norse ye gold, which
did but only give him suck and that he had not given the gyrdle of gold to
her, as well as the Jewel of silver, since she had borne him, and brought him
into the world. Whereunto he answered in this manner, marvel not thereat mother
why I do this thing, for thou did bear me but nine months in thy womb,
and she has given me suck and nourished me these three years with her own
propre pappes: and when thou did cast me from thee out of thy sight, she
received me and nourished me in her propre arms.

Fifthly, women ought to enforce them selves to nourishe their children, to the
end they may keep them the better, and that in their cradels they be not
changed for others. Aristotle says, that the Cocowe comes to the neaste of
another bird when she has laid her eggs, and sucketh them, and lays in
the same place her own eggs: so that the other bird thinking that they are
her own, hatchieth and nourishes them up as her own, until such time as
they are able to fly. Then the Cocow kills, and eats the sily bird that
has nourished her, through the which occasion the males of those birds, are
at so great contention (that they have been so deceived) that the one of them
kills the other the which they might let, if every bird did nourishe her
own. In the same time that Philip reigned in Macedonia, (which was the father
of the great Alexander) Arthebanus was king of the Epirotes, who in his age
had a child borne, the which was stolen out of the cradell, and an other put
in his stead. The nourse which did nourishe it, through covetousness of money
consented to that treason: for the heart that is with covetousness overcome,
will not fear to commit any treason. It chanced not long after that king
Arthebanus died, and left (as he thought) his own son for his heir: but
within few days after the nourse her self, which had consented unto the
robbery, discovered the theft, and said that she could tell where the lawful
child of the good king Arthebanus was, and that that child which now was
heir, was but the son of a mean knight: but in deed it had been better for
those of the miserable realm, that the woman had never discovered the secret.
For it chances oftetimes that a man makes such haste of his horse, that he
hurts his leg, and through that occasion afterward falls and breaks
his neck. But what shall we say to the Plebeical women, of base and mean
estate (I do not mean the noble, gentle, and virtuous ladies) whereof they
are many, that though in great secret their chiefest friend tells them any
thing, yet before they drink they will utter it to another. Thus when the
treason was discovered, cruel wars between these two princes began: so that
in the end, in a great battle they were both slain, the one in defending,
and the other in assaulting. At that time Olimpias reigned, who was the fair
and worthy wife of Philip, and mother of Alexander. She had a brother named
Alexander, who was both politic, and hardy, and hearing the Epirotes were in
controversy, and that two kings were slain in the field, he placed him
self in the Realm, more of will, then of right. And let no man marvel, that
this king occupied the Realm: for in the old time, all the tyrannous princes
thought that all that which they could obtain without resistaunce: did unto
them belong by justice. This king Alexander was he, which came into Italy in
the favor of the Tarentines, when they rebelled against the Romans: who
afterward was slain in battle at Capua, where his body was unburied. And
truly it was a just sentence, that the tyrant which bereueth many of their
lives, should him self taste some shameful death. I have declared this
history to this end, that princesses and great ladies should see, that if the
wife of king Arthebanus had nourished his son, they could not have robbed it
in the cradell, nor these two princes had not been slain in battle, nor the
common wealth had not been destroyed, nor Alexander had not entered into the
land of another, nor had not come to conquer the country of Italy, nor the
dead corpse had not wanted his grave: for oftetimes it chances, for not
quenching a little coal of fire, a whole forest and house is burned. The divine
Plato among the Greeks, and Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians, commanded and
ordained in all their laws, that all the Plebeical women, and those of mean
estate, should nourishe al their children, and that those which were princesses
and great ladies, should at the least nourishe their eldest and first begotten.
Plutarche in the book of the reign of princes says, that the sixth king of
the Lacedaemonians was Thomistes, the which when he died left two children, of
which the second inherited the realm, because the Queen her self had brought
it up: and the first did not inherit, because a strange nource had given it
suck, and brought it up. And hereof remained a custom in the most part of
the realms of Asia, that the child which was not nourysshed with the pappes
of his mother, should inherit none of his mothers goods. There was never,
nor never shall be a mother that had such a son as the mother of God, which
had Jesus Christ: nor there was never, nor never shall be a son, which had
such a mother in the world. But the infant would never suck other milk,
because he would not be bound to call any other mother, nor the mother did
give him to nourish to any other mother, because that no other woman should
call him son. I do not marvel at al, that princesses and great ladies do
give their children forth to nourishe: but that which most I marvel at is,
that she which has conceived and brought forth a child, is a shamed to give
it suck and to nourishe it. I suppose that the ladies do think, that they
deserve to conceive them in their wombes, and that they sin in nourishing
them in their arms. I can not tell how to write, and much less how to utter
that which I would say: which is, that women are now a days come into such
folly: that they think and esteem it a state, to have in their arms some
little dogs: and they are ashamed to nourish and give the children suck with
their own breasts. O cruel mothers, I cannot think that your hearts can be so
stony, to endure to see and keape fantastical birds in the cages, unhappy
Monkeis in the wyndowes, fisting spaniels between your arms, and so neglect
and despise the sweet babes, casting them out of your houses where they were
borne, and to put them into a strange place where they are unknown? It is a
thing which cannot be in nature, neither that honesty can endure, conscience
permit, nor yet consonant either to divine or human laws, that those which
God has made mothers of children, should make them selves nourses of dogs.
Iunius Rusticus in the third book of the sayings of the auncientes says, that
Marcus Porcio whose life and doctrine, was a lantern and example to all the
Romain people, as a man much offended, said on a day to the senate. O fathers
conscripte, O cursed Rome, I can not tell what now I should say, sith I
have seen in Rome such monsterous things (that is to wete) to see women carry
Parrottes on their fistes, and to see women to nourishe dogs, giving them
milk from their own breasts. They replied in the senate and said. Tell us
Marcus Porcio what would thou we should do which live now, to resemble
our fathers which are dead? Marcus Portio answered them. The woman that
presumes to be a Roman Matrone, ought to be found weauing in her house, and
out of that to be found in the temple praying to God: and the noble and stout
Roman, ought to be found in his house reding books, and out of his house,
fighting in the plain field for the honor of his country. And suer these
were words worthy of such a man: Annius Minutius was a noble Roman, and
captain of great Pompeius, who was a great friend to Julius Caesar after the
battle of Farsaliae: for he was an ancient, and on that could give good
council, wherefore he never escaped, but that he was chosen in Rome for
Senator, Consul, or Censor every year, for Julius Caesar was so merciful to
them that he pardoned, that those which had been his most enemies in the
wars, were of him in peace best beloved. This Annius Minutius then being
chosen Censor within Rome (which was an office having charge of justice) by
chance as he went to visit the wife of an other friend of his, the which
lay in child bed, (because she had great abundance of milk) he found
that a little pretty bitche did suck her, upon the which occasion they say he
said these words to the Senate: fathers conscripte, a present mischief is
now at hand according to the token I have seen this day (that is to wete) I
have seen a Roman woman deny her own children her milk, and gave to suck
to a filthy bitche. And truly Annius had reason to esteem this case as a
wonder: for the true and sweet loves are not but between the fathers and
children, and where the mother embraces the brute beast, and forsakes her
natural child which she has brought forth, it cannot be otherwise, but
there either wisdom wants, or folly abounds: for the fool loves that he
ought to despise, and despises that which he ought to love. Yet though the
mothers will not give their children suck, they ought to do it for the
danger which may come to the health of their persons: for as the women
which bring forth children, do live more healthful then those which bear none:
so these which do nourish them, have more health, then those which do not
nourishe them. For although the brynging up of children be troublesome to
women, it is profitable for their health. I am ashamed to tell it, but it is
more shame for ladies to do it, to see what plasters they put to their breasts
to dry up their milk: and hereof comes the just judgment of God, that in
that place often times where they seek to stop their milk, in the self same
place, they them selves procure their sudden death. I ask now, if women do
not enjoy their children being young, what pleasure hope they to have of them
when they are old. What a great comfort is it for the parents to see the
young babe, when he will laughe, how he twincleth his little eyes: when he
will weape, how he will hang the pretty lip: when he would speak, how he
will make signs with his little fyngers: when he will go, how he casts
forward his feet: and above all, when he begins to babble, how he doubled
in his words. What thing is more pleasant to the father then to see them,
and to the mother to agree to it, when the children do suck, they pluck
forth the breasts with the one hand, and with the other they pluck their
here, and further they beat their feet together, and with their wanton eyes,
they cast on their parents a thousand loving looks? what is it to see them
when they are vexed and angry, how they will not be taken of the fathers, how
they stryke their mother: they cast away things of gold, and immediately they
are appeased with a little apple or russhe? what a thing is it to see the
innocents how they answer when a man asks them, what follies they speak,
when they speak to them, how they play with the dogs and run after the
cattes, how they dress them in wallowing in the dust, how they make houses of
earth in the streates, how they weape after the birds when they see them fly
away? All the which things are not to the eyes of the fathers and mothers, but
as Nitingales to sing, and as bread and meat to eat. The mothers peradventure
will say that they will not bring up their children, because when they are
young they are troublesome, but that after they should be nourished and
brought up, they would be glad. To this I answer them, that the mothers shall
not denay me, but that some of these things must neades meat in their
children: that when they be old, they shall be either proud, envious, covetous,
or negligent: that they shall be lecherous, or else thieves, that they shall be
blasphemours, or else glottons, that they shall be rebels, or fools, and
disobedient unto their fathers. I believe that at this day there are many
mothers in the world, which did hope to be honored, and served with the
children which they had brought up: and afterward perceiving their manners,
would willinglye forgo the pleasures which they hoped for, so that they might
also be delivered from the troubles, which through their evil demeanours are
like to ensue. For that time which the parents hoped to pass with their
children in pleasures, they consume (seeing their unthrifty life) in sorrowful
sighs. I council, admonish, and humbly require princesses, and great ladies,
to nourishe and enjoy their children when they are young and tender: for after
that they are great, a man shall bring them news every day of diverse sorts,
and manners they use, for as much as the one shall say that her son is in
prison, and another shall say that he is sore wounded, another that he is hid,
others that he has played his cloak, others that he is sclaundered with a
common harlot, another that he steals his goods from him, another that his
enemies do seek him, another that he accompanies with unthrifts, and finally
they are so sturdy, unhappy, and so far from that which is good: that
oftentimes the fathers would rejoice to see them die, rather then to see the^
live so evil a life. Me thinks that the knot of love between the mother and
the child is so great, that not only she ought not to suffer them to be
nourished out of the house one whole year: but also she ought not to suffer
the^ to be out of her presence one only day. For in seeing him, she sees yt
which is borne of her intrails she sees that which she has with so great
pains delivered, she sees him who ought to inherit all her goods, she sees
him in who the memory of their ancestors remains: and she sees him, who
after her death ought to have the charge of her affairs and business.
Concludynge therefore that which above is spoken, I say that which the
great Plutarche said, from whom I have drawn the most part of this
chapter: that the mother (to be a good mother) ought to have and keep her
child in her arms to nourishe him, and afterward when he shall be great, she
ought to have him in her heart to help him. For we see oftentimes great evils
ensewe, to the mother, and to the child, because she did not bring him up her
self: and to put him to nouryshe to a strange breaste, there comes neither
honor, nor profit.

That princesses and great Ladies ought to be very circumspecte in chosinge
their nources. Of seven properties which a good nource should have. Chap. xx.
THose which ordained laws for the people to live were these. Promotheus
which gave laws to the Egiptians, Solon Solmon to the Greeks, Moses to the
Jews, Licurgus to the Lacedaemonians, and Numa Pompilius to the Romans: for
before these princes came, their people were not governed by written laws, but
by good ancient customs. The intention of those excellent princes was, not to
give laws to their predecessors, for they were now dead: neither they gave
them only for those which lived in their time being wicked, but also for those
which were to come, whom they did presuppose would not be good. For the more
the world increases in years, so much the more it is laden with vices. By
this that I have spoken I mean, that if the princesses and great ladies, every
one of them would nourishe their own child, I neade not to give them
counsel. But since I suppose that the women which shall be delivered hereafter,
will be as proud, and vain glorious, as those which were in times past: we
will not let to declare here some laws and aduises how the lady ought to
behave her self with her nource, and how the nource ought to content her
self with the creature. For it is but just, that if the mother be cruel, and
hardy to forsake the creature: that she be sage, pitiefull, and advised, to
choose her nource. If a man find great treasoure, and afterward care not how
to keep it, but does commit it into the hands of suspected persons: truly we
would call him a fool. For that which naturally is beloved, is always of al
best kept. The woman ought more wisely keep the treasure of her own body,
then the treasure of all the earth if she had it. And the mother which does the
contrary, and that commits her child to the custody of a strange nource,
not to her whom she thinks best, but whom she finds best cheap: we will
not call her a foolish beast, (for the name is to vnseamely) but we will call
her a sotte, which is somewhat more honester. One of the things that does make
us most believe that the end of the world is at hand: is to see the little
love which the mother does bear to the child being young, and to see the want
of love which the child has to his mother being aged. That which the child
does to the father and the mother, is the just judgment of God, that even as
the father would not nourishe the child in his house, being young: so
likewise that the son should not suffer the father in his house, he being
old. Retourning therefore to the matter, that since the woman does determine
to dry and shut up the fountains of milk, which nature has given her, she
ought to be very diligent to search out a good nource: the which ought not only
to content her self to have her milk whole, but also that she be good of life.
For otherwise, the child shall not have so much profit by the milk which he
sucketh: as the nource shall do it harm, if she be a woman of an evil life. I
do advise princesses and great dames, that they watch diligently to know what
their nources are, before they commytte their children to them: for if such
nources be evil, and slaundered, they are as serpents which do byte the mother
with their mouth, and do stinge the child with her tail. In my opinion it were
less evil, the mother should suffer that her child should perish in
delivering it: then for to keep in her house an evil woman. For the sorrow of
the death of the child, is forgotten and brought to naught in time: but the
slander of her house, shall endure as long as she lives. Sextus Cheronensis
says, that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius commanded his son to be brought
up of a woman, the which was more fair then virtuous. And when the good
Emperor was advertised thereof, he did not only send her from his palace, but
also he banished and exyled her from Rome: swering that if she had not
nouryshed his sone with her pappes, he would have commanded her to have been
torn in pieces with beasts. For the woman of an evil renown, may justly be
condemned and put to death. Princesses and great ladies ought not greatly to
pass, whether the nources be fair or foul: for if the milk be sweet, whyt,
and tender, it littel skilleth though the face of ye nource be whit, or black.
Sextus Cheronensis says, in the book of the nourture of children, that even
as the black earth is more fertile then is the white earth: so likewise yt
woman which is brown in countenance, has always the most substaunciall
milk. Paulus Diaconus in his greatest history says, that the Emperor
Adocerus did mary him self with the daughter of an other emperor his
predecessor called Zeno, and the Empress was called Arielna. The which in
bringing forth a Son, had a woman of Hungarye marvelous fair to nourishe
it, and the case succeeded in such sort that the nource for being fair, had by
yt emperor.iii. children the one after the other: and his woeful wife never
had any but the first alone. A man ought to believe yt the empress Arielna did
not only repent her self, for taking into her house so fair a nource: but
also was sorry that ever she had any at all, sith the rybald thereby was
mystresse in the house, and she remained without husband all her life. I do not
say it, for that there are not many foul women vicious, nor yet because there
are not many fair women virtuous: but that princesses and great ladies
(according to the qualities of their husbands) ought to be profitable and
tender nources, to bring up their children. For in this case there are some men
of so weak co^plection, that in seeing a litell clean water, immediately they
dye to drink thereof. Let therefore this be the first counsel in chousing
nources, that the nource before she enter into ye house be examined, if she be
honest, and virtuous. For it is a tryfell whether ye nource be fair or foul:
but that she be of a good life, and of an honest behavior.

Secondarily, it is necessary that the nource which nourishes ye child, be not
only good in ye behavior of her life: but also it is necessary yt she be hole,
as touching ye bodily health. For it is a rule infallible, that of ye milk
which we do suck in our infancy, depends all ye corporal health of our life
A child given to the nource to nourish* is as a tree removed from one place to
an other. And if it be so (as in dead it is) it behooves in all points, that if
ye earth where in it shall be new put were no better, that at the lest it be not
worse: for this should be a great cruelty, that the mother being hole, strong,
and well disposed, should give her child to a lean woman to nource, which is
feable, sore, and diseased. Princesses and great la^es do chose lean wom^n,
weak, and sick, for to nourishe their infantes. And in that they do fail, it
is not for that they would err: but it is because that such feable and weak
nources (by a vain desire they have to be nources in a gentilma^s house) on
the one part they say they will litel money, and on the other part they do
make great suits. What a thing is it when a princess or a noble woman is
delivered of a child, to se the deuyses of other women among them selves, who
shall be the nource, and how those the which never nourished their own
children, do preserve ye milk to nouryshe the children of others. To procure
this thing for women* me thinks it proceadeth of abundance of folly: and to
condescend to their requests, me thinks it is for want of wisdom. They
look not always to the manners and ability of the nource, how apt she is
to nource their child, but how diligent she is in procuring to have it to
nourishe. They care not greatly whether they be good or no: for if the first
be not good, they will take the second, and if the second pleases them not,
they will have the third, and so vpwardes until they have found a good
nource. But I let you to wete (you princesses and great ladies) that it is more
danger for the children to change diverse mylkes: then unto the old men, to
eat diverse meats. We see daily by experience, that without comparison there
dies more children of noble women, then children of women of the meaner
estate. And we will not say, that it is for that they do flatter their children
more, nor for that the wives of laborers do eat fine meats: but that it
chau^ceth often times, that the children of a poor woman: does neither eat, nor
drink: but of one kind of meat, or milk in.ii. years, and the child of a
Lady shall chaung and alter.iii. nources in.ii. months. If princesses and
great ladies were circumspect in chousing their nources, and that they did look
whether they were hole without diseases, and honest in their manners, and would
not regard so much the importunity of their suits: the mothers should excuse
them selves from many sorrows, and the children likewise should be delivered
from many diseases. One of the most renowned princes in times past, was Titus
the son of Vaspasyan, and brother of Domitian. Lampridius says, that this
good Emperor Titus (the most part of his life) was subject to grievous
diseases and infirmities of his perso^ne, and the cause was, for that when he
was young he was given to a syck nourse to be nourished, so that this good
Emperor sucking her dugge but a while, was constrained to pass all his life
in pain.

Thirdely, Princesses and great Ladies ought to know, and understand the
complexion of their children, to the end yt according to the same they might
seek pitiful nources, that is to wete, if ye child were cholorycke,
flegmaticke, sanguine, or melancolye: For look what humor the child is of, of
the same quality the milk of the nource should be. If unto an old corrupted
man they ministre medecines, conformable to his diseases for to cure him: why
then should not the mother seek a wholesome nource to the tender babe, agreeable
to his complexion, to nourish him: And if thou say it is just, that the
flesh old and corrupted be sustained: I tell the likewise that it is much more
necessary, that the children should be curiously and well nourished, to
multiplye the world. For in the end we do not say, it is time that the young
leave the bread for the aged: but contrary it is time that ye old leave the
bread for the young. Aristotle in the book De secretis secretorum, and Iunius
Rusticus, in ye.x. book de gestis Persarum say, that the unfortunate king Darius
(who was overcome by Alexander the great) had a daughter of a merueilous
beauty. And they say that the nource which gave suck to this daughter all
the time that she did nourishe it, did neither eat nor drink any thing but
poison: and at the end of.iii, years, when the child was weyned, and plucked
from the dugge, she did eat nothing but Colubers, and other venomous worms. I
have heard say many times that the Emperors had a custom, to nourish their
heirs, and children with poisons when they were young: to the intent yt they
should not be hurt by poison, afterward when they were old. And this error
comes of those which presume much, and know litel. And therefore I say, that I
have heard say, without saying I have read it. For some declare histories, more
for that they have heard say of others: then for that they have read them
selves. The truth in this case is, that as we use at this present, to were
Cheynes of gold about our necks, or Jewels on our fingers, so did ye Gentiles in
times past a ring on their fingers, or some Jewel in their bosom replenished
with poison. And because ye Panims did neither fear hell, nor hope for heaven,
they had that custom, for if at any times in battle they should find them
selves in distress, they had rather end their lives with poison, then to
receive any injury of their enemies. Then if it were true that those Princes
had been nourished with ye poison, they would not have carried it about the^ to
have ended their lives. Further I say, that the princes of Persia did use when
they had any child borne, to give him milk to suck agreeable to ye complectio^
he had. Since this daughter of Darius was of melancholye humor, they
determined to bring her up with venim and poison, because all those which are
pure malancolye, do live with sorrow, and dye with pleasure. Ingnacius the
Venetian in the life of ye.v. emperors Palleolus (which were valiant emperors
in Constantinople) says, that the second of ye name called Palleolles ye
hardy, was after the.xl. years of his age so troubled with infirmities and
diseases, that always of the.xii. months of the year he was in his bed
sick ix. months: and being so sick as he was, the affairs and business of
the empire were but slenderly done and looked unto. For the prince can not have
so small a fever, but the people in the commen wealth must have it double. This
Emperor Palleolus had a wife, whose name was Huldouina, the which after she
had brought all the Physicians of Asia unto her husband, and that she had
ministered unto him all the medecins she could learn to healpe him, and in the
end seeing nothing avail: there came by chance an old woman, a Gretian borne,
who presumed to have great knowledge in herbs, and said unto the empress noble
Empress Huldouina, If thou will that the Emperor thy husband do live long,
see that thou chafe, anger, and vex him every week at the least twyse: for
he is of a pure malancoly humor, and therefore he that does him pleasure,
augmenteth his disease: and he that vexes him shall prolong his life. The
empress Huldouina followed the counsel of this Greek woman, which was occasion
that the emperor lived afterward sound and hole many years: so that of
the.ix. months which he was accustomed to be sick every year: in.xx. years
afterward he was not sick.iii. months. For where as this Greek woman
commanded the empress to anger her husband but twice in the week, she
accustomeablye angered him.iiii. times in the day.

Fourthly, the good mother ought to take heed, that the nource be very
temperate in eating, so that she should eat litell of diverse meats, and of
those few dishes she should not eat to much. To understand that thing ye must
know, that the white milk is no other then blod, which is soden, and that
which causes the good or evil blood, comes often times of no other thing,
but that either the person is temperate, or else a glutton in eating: and
therefore it is a thing both healthful and necessary, that the nource that
nourishes the child do eat good meats: for among men and women it is a
general rule, that in little eating, there is no danger: and of to much eating,
there is no profit. As all the Philosophers say, the wolf is one of the
beasts that deuoureth most, and is most gredyest, and therefore he is most
feared of all the sheppardes. But Aristotle in his third book de Animalibus
says, that when the wolf does once feel her self great with young, in all
her life after she never suffers her self to be couppled with the wolf
again: For otherwise, if the wolf should yearly bring forth.vii. or.viii.
whealpes (as commonly she does) and the sheep but one lamb, there would be in
short space more wolves then sheep. Besides all this the wolf has an other
property, which is, that though she be a beast most deuouryng and gredy: yet
when she has whealped, she eats very temperately, and it is to the end to
nouryshe here whealpes, and to have good milk. And besides that she does eat
but once in the day, the which the dog wolf does provide, both for the
byche, and her whealpes. Truly it is a monsterous thing to see, and noisome to
hear, and no less sclaunderous to speak, that a wolf which gives suck
to.viii. whealpes, eats but one only kind of meat: and a woman which
gives suck but to one child alone, will eat of eight sorts of meats. And
the cause hereof is, that the beast does not eat, but to sustain nature: and
the woman does not eat, but to satisfy her pleasure.

Princesses and great Ladies ought to watch narrowly, to know when, and how
much the nources do eat, which do nourish their children: For the child is
so tender, and the milk so delicate, that with eating of sondrye meats they
become corrupt, and with eating much they wax fat. If the children suck
those which are fat and gross, they are commonly sick: and if they suck
milk corrupted, they often times go to bed hole, and in the morning be found
dead. Isodore in his etimologies says, that men of the province of Thrace
were so cruel, that the one did eat the other, and they did not only this,
but also further to show more their immanitie, in the sculles of those that were
dead, they drank the blood of him that was lately alive. Though men were so
cruel to eat men's flesh, and to drynk the blood of the veins: yet the
women which nourished their children were so temperat, and moderat in eating,
tha^ ^hey did eat nothing but nettelles sodden and boiled in goats milk. And
^^ause the women of Thrace were so moderate in eatinge, the philosopher Solon
Solynon brought some to Athens: for the auncientes sought no less to have good
women in the commen wealth, then to have hardy and valiant captains in the
war.

The auctoure adds.iii. other conditions to a good nourse that gives suck:
that they drink no wine, that she be honest, and chiefly that she be well
conditioned. Chap. xxi.
THe Princesses and great ladies may know by this example, what difference
there is between the women of Thrace, which are fed with nettelles only, and
have brought forth such fierce men: and the women of our time, which through
their delicate and excessive eating, bring forth such weak and feable
children.

Fifthly, the Ladies ought to be very circumspecte, not only that nources eat
not much, and that they be not gready: but also that they be in drinking wine
temperat, the which in old time was not called wine, but ^enym. The reason
hereof is apparent and manifest enough, for if we do forbid the fat meats
which lies in the stomach: we should then much more forbid the moist wine,
which washes all the veins of the body. And further I say, that as the child
has no other nourishement but the milk only, and that the milk proceadeth of
blood, and that blood is nourished of the wine, and that wine is naturally
whot: from the first to the last. I say, the woman which drinks wine, and
gives the child suck, does as she that makes a great fire under the pan,
where there is but a little milk: so that ye pan burns, and the milk runs
over. I will not denaye, but that some times it may chance, that the child
shall be of a strong complexio^, and the nource of a feable and weak nature: and
the^ the child would more substanciall milk, when the women is not able to
give it him. In such a case (though with other things milk may be conferred)
I allow that the nource drink a litel wine: but it ought to be so litel, and so
well watered, that it should rather be to take away the vnsauorines of the
water, then for to taste of any savor of ye wine. I do not speak this without
a cause, for the nource being sick, and feable of her self, and her milk not
substancial, it often times moves her to eat more then necessity requires,
and to drink wine which is somewhat nutritive: so that they supposyng to give
the nource triacle, do give her poison to destroy her child. Those excellent
and ancient Romans, if they had been in our time, and that we had deserved
to have been in their time (though our time for being Christians is better)
they had saved us from this travail, for they were so temperat in eating
meats, and so abstinent in drynkyng wynes, that they did not only refrain the
drinkyng thereof, but also they would not abide to smell it. For it was a
greater shame unto a Romayne woman to drink wine, then to be deuorced from her
husband. Dionisius Alicarnaseus in his book of the laws of the Romans
said, that Romulus was the first founder of Rome, and that he occupied him
self more in buildyng houses, to amplify Rome: then in constituting laws,
for the government of the commen wealth. But amongst.xv. laws which he made,
the seventh thereof was, that no Roman woman on pain of death should be so
hardy to drink wine within the walls of Rome. The same Historian says, that
by the occasion of this law the custom was in Rome, that when any Romain Lady
would drink wine, or make any solemn feast, she must needs go out of Rome,
where every one had their gardens and dwelling place: because the smell also
of wine was prohibited and forhidden women within the circuit of Rome. If
Pliny do not deceive us in his.xxiiii. book of his natural history, It was
an ancient custom in Rome, that at each time that parents met, both men and
women, they did kiss the one the other in the face, in token of peace: and
this ceremony began first, for that they would smell whether the woman had
drunk any wine. And if perchance she sauored of wine, the Censor might have
banished her from Rome. And if her kinseman found her without Rome, he might
freely and without any danger of law put her to death: because within the
circuit and walls of Rome, no pryuat man by Justice could put any Roman to
death. As above is rehearsed, Romulus was he which ordained the pain for
dronkardes: and Ruptilius was he, which ordained the pain for adulterers. And
between Romulus and Ruptilius, there was.xxxii. years: so that they ordained
this straight law for dronckardes, a long time before they did the law for
adulterers. For if a woman be a dronckarde, or harlot, truly they are both
great faults, and I can not tell whether of them is worst: for being a harlot,
the woman loses her name, and for being a dronckard, she loses her fame, and
the husband his goods. Then if women for the honesty of their persons only
are bound to be temperat in eating and drincking: the woman which nourishes
and gives the child suck, ought to be much more corrected, and sober in this
case. For in her is concurrante not only the gravity of their persons: but
the health and life also of the creature, which she nourishes. Therefore it is
mete, that the nource be kept from wine, since the honor of the one, and the
life of the other is in peril.

Sixthly ye princesses and great Ladies ought to take heed, that their nources
be not gotten with child. And the reason hereof is, that in that time when the
woman is with child, her natural course is stopped, and that corruption is
mingled with the pure blood: so that she thinking to give the child milk to
nourish it, gives it poison to destroy it. And nothing can be more unjust,
then to put the child (which is already borne, and alive) in danger, for that
which is as yet unborn, and dead, it is a wonderful thing (for a man that
will curiously note and mark things) to see the brute beasts, yt all the time
they bring up their litell ones, they will not consent to accompany with the
males, nor the males will follow the females: and that that is most to be noted
yet is, to see what passith between birds: for the she sparrowe will not
suffer the male in any wise to towche or come nere her, till her little ones be
great and able to fly, and much less to sit upon any eggs to hatch them till
the other be fled and gone, Plurarche in ye.vii. of his regiment of princes
says, that Gneus Fuluius (Cousin germain of Pompeius) being consul in Rome,
fell in love with a young maiden of Capua being an orphane, whether he fled for
the plague. This maiden was called Sabina, and when she was great with child by
this consul, she brought forth a daughter whom they called fair Drusia: and
truly she was more commended for her beauty, the^ for her honesty. For
oftetimes it happens, yt the fair and dishonest women leave their children so
evil taught, yt of their mothers they inherit litel goods, and much
dishonor. This Sabina therefore being delivered (as it was the custom of Rome)
she did with her own breasts nourish her daughter Drusia: during yt which time
she was gotten with child, by one of the knights of this Consul, to whom (as
to his servant) he had given her to keep. Wherefore when the Consul was hereof
advertised, and that notwithstanding she gave her daughter suck: he commanded
yt the knight should be immediately beheded, and his lover Sabina forthwith to
be cast into a well. The day of execution came that both these parties should
suffer, wherefore the woeful Sabina sent to beseech the consul, yt it would
please him before her death to give her audience of one sole word yt she would
speak unto him, the which being come, in the presence of them all she said
unto him. O Gneus Fuluius, know thou I did not call the to the end thou should
grant me life, but because I would not dye before I had seen thy face: though
thou of thy self should remember, that as I am a frail woman, and fell into
sin with the in Capua: so I might fall now (as I have done) with another in
Rome. For we women are so frail in this case, during the time of this our
miserable life: yt none can keape her self sure, from ye assaults of the
weak fleash. The co^sul Gneus Fuluius to these words answered ye gods
immortal knows Sabina, what grefe it is to my woeful heart, yt I of thy
secret offense should be an open scourge. For greater honesty it is for men to
hyde your frailnes: then openly to punyshe your offenses. But what will thou I
should do in this case, considering the offense thou have committed? by the
immortal gods I swear unto the, and again I swear, that I had rather thou
should secreatly have procured ye death of some man: then yt openly in this
wise thou should have slaundered my house. For thou know ye true meaning of
the common proverb in rome. It is better to die in honor, then to live in
infamy. And think thou not (Sabina) that I do codemne the to die because thou
forgotest thy faieth unto my person, and that thou gave thy self to him
which kept the: for sinse thou werte not my wife, the liberty thou had
to come with me from Capua to Rome, ye self same thou had to go with
another from rome to Capua. It is an evil thing for vicious men, to reprove ye
vices of others, wherein they the^ selves are faulty. The cause why I co^dempne
the to die, is for the remembrance of the old law ye which commands, that
no nourse or woman geuyng suck, should on pain of death be begotten with
child, truly ye law is very just. For honest women do not suffer, that in
geuyng her child suck at her breast, she should hide another in her intrailes.
These words passed between Gneus Fuluius the consul, and the lady Sabina of
Capua. Howbeit as Plutarche says, in that place the consul had pity upon
her, and showed her favor, banishyng her upon condition, never to return to
Rome again. Cinna Catullus in the forth book of the.xxii. consulles says,
that Caius Fabricus was on of ye most notable consulles that ever was in rome,
and was sore afflicted with disseases in his life, only because he was
nouryshed.iiii. months with the milk of a nource being great with child: and
for fear of this, they locked the nource with ye child in the temple of the
vestal virgins, wherefore ye space of.iii. years they were kept. They demanded
ye consul, why he did not nourish his children in his house? he answered: the
children being nourished in the house, it might be an occasion that ye nource
should be begotten with child, and so she should distroye the children with her
corrupt milk, and further should give me occasion to do justice upon her
person: wherefore keaping them so shut up, we are occasion to preserve their
life, and also our children from peril. Diodorus Siculus in his library and
Sextus Cheronensis says, in the life of Marcus Aurelius, that in the Isles of
Baleares there was a custom, that the nources of young children (whether they
were their own, or others) should be severed from their husbands for the
space of.ii. years. And the woman which at that time (though it were by her
husband) were with child though they did not chastise her as an adultresse:
yet every man spoke evil of her as of an offender. During the time of these
ii. years, to the end the husband should take no other wife, they commanded
that he should take a concubine, or that he should bye a slave, whose company
he might use as his wife: for amongst these barbarous he was honored most,
who had.ii. wives, the one with child, and the other not. By these examples
above recyted, Princesses and great Ladies may see, what watch and care they
ought to take in chousyng their nources, that they be honest, sinse of the^
depends not only the health of their children: but also the good fame of
their houses.

The seventh condition is, that princesses and great Ladies ought to see their
nources have good conditions, so that they be not troblesome, proud, harlots,
liars, malicious, nor flatterers: for the viper has not so much poison, as
the woman which is evil conditioned. It litell avails a man to take wine
from a woman, to entreat her to eat litel, and to withdraw her from her
husband, if of her own nature she be hateful, and evil ma^^red: for it is
not so great danger unto the child: that the nource be a dronckard, or a
Glutton, as it is if she be harmefull, and malicious. If perchance the nource
(that nourishes the chyl^e) be evil conditioned: truly she is evil
troubeled, and the house wherein she dwells evil combred. For such one
does importune the lord, trobleth the lady, puts in hazard the child,
and above all is not contented with her self. Finallye fathers for geuynge to
much liberty to their nources, oftetimes are the cause of many practices which
they do: wherewith in the end, they are grieved with the death of their children
which follows. Amongst all these which I have red I say, that of the
ancient Roman princes, of so good a father as Drusius Ge manicus was, never
came so wicked a son as Caligula was, being the fourth Emperor of Rome: for
the historiographers were not satisfied to enryche and praise the excellencies
of his father, neither ceased they to blame and reprehende the infamyes of his
son. And they say, that his naughtines proceadeth not of the mother which
bare him: but of the nource which gave him suck. For oftimes it chances that
the tree is grene and good, when it is planted, and afterward it becomes
dry, and wythered, only for being carried into another place. Dion the greek in
the second book of Cesars says, that a cursed woman of Campania called
Pressilla, nouryshed and gave suck unto this wicked child. She had against al
nature of women her breasts as heary as the berdes of men, and besides that,
in runnyng a horse, handelyng her staff, shoting in the Crosbowe, few young
men in rome were to be compared unto her. It chanced on a time that as she was
geuyng suck to Caligula, for yt she was angry, she tore in pieces a young child,
and with the bludde there of anointed her breasts: and so she made Caligula
the young child, to suck together both blud and milk. The said Dion in his
book of the life of this Emperor Caligula says, that the women of Campania
(whereof the said Prescilla was) had this custom, that when they would give
their teat to the child first they did anoynte the nipple with the bludde of
a hedge hog, to the end their children might be more fyerce and cruel.

And so was this Caligula, for he was not contented to kill a man only, but
also he sucked the bludde that remained on his sword, and lyked it of with his
tongue. The excellent Poet Homer meaning to speak plainly of the crueltyes of
Pirrus said in his Odisse of him, such words: Pirrus was borne in Greece,
nourished in Archadye, and brought up with tigers milk, which is a cruel
beast. As if more plainelye he had said, Pirrus for being borne in Greece was
Sage, for that he was brought up in Archadie he was strong and couragyous, and
for to have sucked Tigars milk, he was very proud, and c^uell. Hereof may
be gathered, that the great Gretian Pirrus, for wantinge of good milk, was
overcome with evil conditions.

The self same historian Dion says in the life of Tiberius, that he was a
great dronckarde, And the cause hereof was, that the nource did not only
drink wine: but also she weined the child with soppes dypped in wine. And
without doubt the cursed woman had done less evil, if in the stead of milk
she had given the child poison, without teachinge it to drink wine: wherefore
afterward he lost his renown. For truly ye Romayne Empire had lost little if
Tiberius had died being a child: and it had won much, if he had neauer
known what drinkyng of wine had mente.

I have declared all that which before is mentioned, to thentente that
Princesses and great Ladies might be advertised, that sinse in not nouryshyng
their children, they show them selves crewel: yet at the least in prouidyng
for them good nourses, they should show them selves pitiful. For the children
oftetymes follow more the condition of the milk which they suck: then the
condition of their mothers which brought them forth, or of their fathers
which begot them. Therefore they ought to use much circumspectio^ herin: for in
them consists the fame of the wives, the honor of the husband, and the
wealth of the children.

Of the disputations before Alexander the great, concerning the time of the
suckyng of babes. Chap. xxii.
QVintus Curtius says, that after the great Alexander (which was the last
king of the Macedonians, and first Emperor of the greeks) had overcome king
Darius, and that he saw him self only lord of all Asia, he went to rest in
babylon: for among men of war there was a custom, that after they had been
long in the wars, every on should retire to his own house. King Philip
(which was father of king Alexander) always councelled his son, that he
should lead with him to the wars valiant captains, to conquer the world:
and that out of his realms and dominions he should take and chose the wysest
men, and best experimented to govern the empire. He had reason in such wise to
council his son, for by the council of Sages, that is kept and maintained:
which by the strength of valiant men is gotten and won. Alexander the great
therefore being in Babylon, after he had conquered all the country, since all
the city was vicious, and his army so long without wars, some of his own
men began to rob one another, others to play their own, some to force
women, and others to make banquettes and feasts, and when some were droncke,
others raised quarrels, striffes, and dyscentions: so that a man could not tell
whether was greater, the ruste in their armours, or the corruptions in their
customs. For the property of man's malice is, that when the gate is open to
idleness, infynite vices enter into the house.

Alexander the great seeing the dyssolution which was in his army, and the
loss which might ensewe hereof unto his great empire, commanded straightly
that they should make a show and just thoroughe Babylon, to the end that the
men of war should excersise their forces thereby. And as Aristotle sayethe,
in the book of the questions of Babylon, the turney was so much used amongst
them, that sometimes they carried away more dead and wounded men, then of a
bloody battle of the enemy. Speaking according to the law of the gentiles
(which looked not glory for their virtues, nor feared hell to dye) at the
torney the commendemant of Alexander was very just, for that doing as he did
to the army, he defaced the vice which did wast it, and for him self he got
perpetual memory, and also it was cause of much suretye in the common weal.

This good Prince not contented to excersise his army so, but ordained, that
daily in his presence the philosophers should dispute, and the question wherein
they should dyspute, Alexander him self would propounde* whereof followed, that
the great Alexander was made certain of that wherein he doubted: and so by his
wisdom all men exercysed their crafts and wits.

For in this time of idleness, the books were no less marred with dust, because
they were not opened: then the weapons were with rust, which were not occupied.
There is a book of Aristotle, entitled the questions of Babylon, where is
said, that Alexander propounded, the Philosophers disputed: the pryncipalles
of Persia replied, and Aristotle determined. And so continued in disputations
as long as Alexander did eat: for at the table of Alexander, one day the
captains reasoned of matters of war, and another day the Philosophers
dysputed of their philosophy. Blundus says in the book entitled, Italia
Illustrata, that among the Princes of Persia their was a custom, that none
could sit down at the table, unless he were a king that had overcome an other
king in battle, and none could speak at their table but a Philosopher. And
truly the custom was very notable, and worthy to be noted: for there is no
greater folly then for any manne to desire that a Prince should reward him,
unless he know that by his works he had deserved ye same. King Alexander,
did eat but one meal in the day, and therefore the first question that he
propounded unto them was. That the man which did not eat but once in the day,
at what hour it was best to eat, for the health of his person, and whether
it should be in the morning, none days, or night? This question was debated
among ye philosophers, whereof every one to defend his opinion, alleged many
foundacions. For no less care have the Sages in their minds, to issewe out of
them disputations victorious: then the valiant captains have in aduenturing
their persons, to vanquyshe their enemies. It was determined: as Aristotle
makes mention in his Probleames, that the man which eats but once in the
day, should eat a litell before night: for it avails greatly to the health
of the body, that when the digestion begins in the stomach, a man takes
his first steape.

The second question that Alexander propounded was, what age the child should
have, when he should be weyned from the dugge. And the occasion of this
question was, for that he had begoten a young daughter of a Queen of the
Amazones, the which at that time did such: and for to know whether it were
time or not to weyne her, there was great dysputations. For the child was now
great to suck, and weak to weyne, I have declared this history for no other
purpose, but to show how in Babylon this question was disputed, before king
Alexander, that is to wete, how many years the child ought to have before it
were weyned from the teate: for at that time, they are so ignorant, that they
cannot demand that that is good, nor complain of that which is naught. In
that case a man ought to know, as the times are variable, and the regions and
prouynce diverse: so likewise have they sondrye ways of bringing up, and
nouryshyng their children. For there is as much dyfference between the contryes
of one, from the contries of others, in dyeng, and buryeng the dead bodies, as
there has been varyeties in the world, by way of nouryshyng and bryngyng up
of children.

Of sondrye kinds of sorceries, charms and witchecraftes, which they in old
time used in giving their children suck, the which Christians ought to
eschew. Chap. xxiii.
IT is not much from our purpose, if I declare here some old examples of
those which are paste. Strabo in his book de situ Orbis says, that after the
Assirians, (which were the first that reigned in the world) the Siconians had
signorie, (which long time after were called Archades) which were great and
famous wrastlers, and scolemasters at the fence, from whom came the best and
first masters of fence, the which the Romans kept always for their plays:
for as Trogus Pompeius says, the romans found it by experience, that there
were no better men in weighty affairs, then those of Spain: nor no people
apter to plays and pastimes, then those of Archadia. As those Siconians were
ancient, so they were marueilously addicted to follyes, and superstitious in
their vsages and customs, for among other they honored for their god the
Moon. And during the time that she was seen, they gave their children suck,
imagenyng that if the Moon shyned upon the breasts of the mother, it would do
much good unto the child. The auctour hereof is Sinna Catullus, in the book De
educandis pueris. And as the same historian says the egiptians were great
enemies to the Siconians, so that all that which the one did allow, the others
did reprove, as it appears. For as much as the Siconians loved olives and
achornes, they were clothed with lynnen, and worshypped the Moon for their
god. The Egiptians for the contrary had no olyues, neither they nourished any
oaks, they did were no lynnen, they worshypped the son for their god, and
above all, as the Siconians did give their children suck whiles the Moon did
shine: so the egyptians gave their chyldred suck whiles the son did shine.

Among other folyes of the Caldians this was one, that they honored the fire
for their god, so that he that was not married, could not light fire in his
house: because they said the custodye of Gods should be committed to none,
but to married and ancient men. They had in marriages such order, that the day
when any children did marie, the priests came into his house to light new
fire: the which never ought to be put out, until the hour of his death. And
if perchance during the life of the husband, and of the wife, they should
find the fire ded and put out: the marriage between them was deed, and undone,
yea though they had been.xl. years togethers before in such sort. And of this
occasion came the proverb which of many is read, and of few understood:
that is to wete provoke me not so much that I throw water into the fire. The
Chaldeans used such words, when they would deuorce and separate the marriage:
for if the woman were ill contented with her husband, in castinge a little
water on the fire, immediatelye she might marye with another. And if the
husband in like manner did put our the fire, he might with another woman
contracte marriage. I have not been married as yet, but I suppose there are many
christians which wysheth to have at this present the liberty of the Caldes: for
I am well assured there are many men which would cast water on the fire, to
escape from their wives: also I swear, that their would be a number of women
which would not only put out the fire, but also the ashes, imbers, and coals,
to make the^ selves fre, and to be dyspatched of their husbands, and
inespecially from those which are ielous.

Therefore returnyng to our matter, the Chaldeans made before the fire, all
notable things in their law, as before their God. For they did eat before
the fire, they slepte before the fire. They did contracte before the fire, and
the mothers did never give the children suck, but before the fire. For the
milk (as they imagined) did profit the child when it sucked before the fire,
which was their god. The aucthour of this that is spoken, is Cynna Catullus.
The Mauritaines which at this present are called the realms of Maruechi, were
in times past warlyke men, of whom the Romans had great victories, and the
more valiant the men were in the wars: so much more superstitious their wives
were in sorceries, charms, and enchauntements. For the husband that is long
absent from his wife ought not to marvel though in her be found some faults.
Cicero in the book De natura deorum, and much more at large Bocas says,
that as many men and women, as were in that realm: so many Gods there were
among the people. For every one had one particular God to him self: so that
the God of the one, was not the God of the other. And this was to be understand
in the weke days: For in the holy and festival days they had other Gods, the
which altogethers they did honor. The manner that they had in chosyng Gods when
a woman was with child was this. She went to the sacrificer of the idol, and
told him that she was great with child, and besought him to give her a god for
her child. And the sacrificer gave her a little idol of stone, gold, silver,
or of wood, the which the mother hanged at the neck of the child. And as
often as the child did suck the dugge, so often the mother puts the idol
one his face. For otherwise she had not given him a drop of milk to suck,
unless first she had consecrated to the God the milk of her breast. That
which I have spoken is little in respect of that I will speak, which is, that
if perchance the child died before the time, or that any young man by some
perylous myshappe died before he was somewhat aged: the fathers and kinsmen of
the dead did assemble, and came to the Idol of him, and either stoned it,
honge it, drue it, brent it, or else they cast it into the deape well, saying,
that sith the Gods did kill man without reason: that they might lawfully kyl
them by justice. The same Bochas in the second book De natura Deorum says,
that the Allobroges had a custom, that those which were priests of the Gods
should from the womb of their mothers be chosen unto that dignity. And as soon
as the child was borne, before he tasted the milk of the breast, they carried
it into a priests house: for they had a custom, that the man which had tasted
the things of the world, merited not to serve the Gods in the temples. One of
the laws that the said priests had, was that not only they could not by
violence shed any blood, nor yet see it, neither touch it: so that immediately
as the priest should by chance touch man's blood, even so sone he lost his
priesthode. This law afterward was so narrowely looked unto, that the
priests of the Allobroges did not only not shed drink nor touch man's
blood when they were now men: but also when they were little infants (those
that should be priests) they gave them no milk of ye breaste at al. And this
was their reason. That to suck milk was no other, but to drink white blood:
for white milk is but sodden blood, and read blood is but raw milk. Pulio
in the book De educandis pueris says, that the auncientes had a certain
kind of reeds, that breaking it in sondre, there issued white milk,
wherewith they accustomed to nourishe their children: but let it be as it is,
that this law prohibit children their milk, which here after should be made
priests of the temples: me thinks it is a trick rather of superstitious
Sorcerers, then of religious priests. For there is neither divine nor human
law that will forbid, or prohibit any such thing, without the which
man's life can not endure. These were the manners and customs that the
auncientes had in the nouriture of their children.

And in deed I marvel not at that they did, for the Gentiles esteemed this
cursed Idol for as great a God: as we Christians do the true and living God.
I was willing to declare all these antiquities, to the end that princesses and
great ladies should have pleasure in reading them and knowing them: but not to
that end they should imitate and follow them in any kind of thing. For
according to the faith of our Christian religion, as sure as we be of the
offenses that those did unto God, through folowinge those superstitions: so
sure we are of the good services which we do unto God in forsakyng them. How
long time the mothers ought to give their children suck, and what age they
ought to weyne them, not for that which I have read, nor for that which I
have demanded in this case I am able to answer: but for as much as
Aristotle says, in the book above named, that the child at the most ought
to suck but two years, and at the least one year and an half. For if he
suck less, he is in danger to be sick, and if he suck more, he shall be
always tender. I will not omit that which Sextus Cheronensis says, in the
fourth book of his common wealth. And hereof Boccace also makes mention in
the third book De natura Deorum, that when Alexander the great passed into
India, amongst other renowned Philosophers, there was one with him called
Arethus, who (as by chance he was in Nissa an ancient city of India) there
came a man of that Country to show him such antiquities as were there.
Arethus the Philosopher beheld them as a sage and wise man. For the simple man
only beholds the doings, and how they seem: but the sage man enquireth and
demands of the causes, and from whence they came. Among other things he
showed this good Philosopher a great house, being in the end of the city, and
therein were many women, whereof every one of them had a chamber, and in every
chamber there was two beds, and adjoining to the one herbs were sown in
manner of nettels, and adjoining to the other there was a kind of twigges, as
of Rosemary, and in the mids of the house, there were many graves of small
children. The Philosopher Arethus asked why that house was so great, and the
Indian answered. This house is to nourish the children which are orphans,
when they be of their parents or friends abandoned. For it is a custom in
this city, that immediately when the father of one child dies, the city then
takes him for her son. And from that time forward he is called the child
of the city, which nourishes him: and not the child of the father, which
begotte him.

Arethus the Philosopher secondarely asked him, why there were so many women in
that house, without any man among them? whereunto the Indian answered: in this
country there is a custom, that the women are severed from their husbands,
all the time they give their children suck: For the will of our God is, that
the woman be not in company with her husband after she is with child, and
this not only until such time as she is delivered: but also until such time
as the child be weyned from the breaste.

The Philosopher Arethus thirdly demanded him, why every one had her chamber
severally? the Indian answered. Thou know that now naturally reigns so
much malice in the woman, that she always enuieth the felicity of an other.
And if they were altogethers, they would have amongst them such quarrelles
and debates, that they would corrupt the milk which they should give to the
child.

Fourthly the philosopher Arethus asked, why in every chamber there was a great
bed, and a little pallet, since there was but one woman, and one child?
whereunto the Indian answered. In this India they do not consent that the
nources should sleep togethers in one bed with the young child, whom they
nourishe: for when the women are heavy a sleep, not taking head to the child,
they many times ouerlay the poor infant, and so smother it alive.

Fifthly the philosopher asked why joining to the beds, there was nettels
which are without savor in eating, and dangerous in touching? The Indian
answered. I let thee know, that in this India (against all nature) the
children weep not whiles they are young, and therefore they have growing by
the beds nettelles to make them weape: for our philosophers tells us, that
if daily the child does weape two hours, it profits him not only for the
health of his body, but also for to prolonge his life.

Furthermore the philosopher for ye sixth asked, why there was so many twigs like
Rosemary by the bed side? whereunto the Indian answered. Know thou, that in
India there is an old plague, that we can not defend our selves from these
witcheis, the which by their sorceries, and with the only looks of their eyes
destroys many children: and they say, that all the children which shall be
perfumed with those herbs, can take no hurt through the looks of those
witcheis.

Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Dedalus, in the end whereof
he enueyeth against those women which cure children by sorceries, charms, and
enchauntementes. Cap. xxiiii.
PRincesses and great Ladies ought to take heed that their nources be not
witches, and that they do not suffer the babes (whiles they are yet young) to
take any charms or sorceries: for the medecin puts the life of the
creature in peril, and those sorceries do not only harm to the body of the
child, but also to the soul of her self which uses it. To praise more them
that are past, and to confound more the present, I will that those which
shall read this, do read a letter of Marcus Aurelius, which he sent to a
friend of his, in the end whereof it appears how great ennemies the
auncientes were to witches, charmers, and to al kind of sorcerers: for truly I
know not which was greater, either the temperaunce that they had in nourishing
their children being gentilles, or the foolyshe hardiness which we have
being Christians. Here follows therefore the letter in the end of the which,
he speaks against witches and evil women.

The letter of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
MArcus Aurelius the Roman Emperor, fellow with his brother Annius Verus,
in the same Empire, wysheth to thee Dedalus his especial friend, health to thy
person, and good fortune against all evil.

Since the day that thou did take shippinge at the haven of Ostia, I read
no letter of thine, neither have I seen as yet any man of thy house: yea and
more over they could not tell me, whether thou were alive or dead. Wherefore
thy friends did imagine that some mishappe befell to thee, and thy ship, or
else for the misliking of the country, thou should return again. Because
that men, which do sail (as thou) go always in danger to be drowned by
some tempest, and if they do escape, they do despair in the strange country
by solitarines: but when I saw Fronton thy servant, I was very joyful, and
much more when I understood thou were alive after thy great travail. Truly I
received great pleasure of that thou wrytest in thy letter, that thou art
contented with the country: for to me it is a strange thing, that a man being
nourished in the deliciousnes of Rome, should find him self contented in an
other strange Realm and nation. When Rome was Rome, and Italy was named great
Greece, thither came of all sorts of people and nations, to learn virtues and
noblenes, and others for to give them selves to vices and pleasures. Because
(if Titus Liuius deceive me not) Rome spent all her treasures in Asia, and Asia
employed all her vices and delicatenes in Rome. Thou wrytest to me in thy
letter of so many things, and Fronton thy servant has told me so many news
of that land, that by the immortal Gods I swear unto thee, I can not tell
what for to write unto thee, nor what to answer thy servant: For the more
the strange news do please the ears in hearing them, so much the more do
they seem to be incredible. The noble and stout personages, though they would
be esteamed and judged true in their saying, having seen many wounders with
their eyes: yet when they do count them, then they ought to be very moderate
in their tongues. For it is a shame to the honest man to declare a thing,
wherein may be any doubt, whether it be true or not. I will briefly aunsweare
all the things of thy lettre, and the answer shall be, not according to thy
desire: but according to that I perceive of thee, and the world.

And before I begin, I beseech thee, that if my pen shall err in wrytinge,
that thy heart pardonne me. For thy few years, as yet does not let thee
know the world: and my white hears, and hored bearde, does give me
authority to aduertyse thee of that which is to come, and to condemn thee of
that which is paste.

Thou say that in the Sea thou haste paste many dangers, and that for to
lighten the ship, thou did cast much of thy goods into the Sea. In
this case, me thinks thou ought greatly to thank the tempesteous waves,
which having power to drown thee, contented them selves with thy
marchaundyse. For they which sail the Seas ought not to regard the goods
they loose, but the life which they save.

Thou say, that in the Sea thou were greatly accompaignied with passingyers,
and that thou have tarried longer in thy viage then thou thoughtest, or did
desire. This I say unto thee, my friend Dedalus, that though the days were
many thou did stay: yet notwithstanding the griefs were more which thou
receiuedst. For it is impossible that those men which sail much, should not
be troubled with the mariners, and also in fear of tempests.

To that I answer thee, thee the more thou were laden with compaignions, the
less thy money weyed: for it is a general rule, that where the journey is
long, and the company great, there the purce of necessity must needs ware
thynne.

Thou say that through the moisture of the Sea, as soon as thou were landed,
thou did feel thy self taken with the gout.

To this I answer thee, that thou haste the gout in thy feet, or else in thy
hands: and if thou haste it in thy feet, it shall be an occasion that thou
shall keep thy house, and if thou haste it in thy hands, it shall be an occasion
that thou shall play no more at Tables (as thou were wont to do) and also
thou shall not waste (as thou haste done) thy own money. And if thou haste not
changed thy condition (which thou had) I am assured, that only for to
increase thy goods, thou will think thy gout welcome.

Thou say, in that country thou haste found many sovereign and expert
Physicians, for to remedy thy disseases.

To that I answer, as Plato says, that in the country where there is many
Physicians, there are many vices, and many vicious: For man by excessive
delicatenes comes to sickness, and by the mean travail he is healed. As long
as our ancient fathers were without Physicians in Rome, which was four
hundred years: so long and no more they showed them selves sober in eating
and drynkinge. For even as by temperaunce, health proceadeth: so of physic,
proceadeth glotony. Thou say, that the country is very fertile, and that
amongst other things there is much wood which we lack here in Rome. To
this I answer, that if thou haste much wood, thou have little bread: For it is
an ancient proverb, that where the fires are great, the barnes are few. And
if thou say, that thou art content with the wood of that country: I let
the know that I am not discontented with the bread of Italy. For in the end, a
man shall sooner find wood to heat the oven: then corn to carry to the mill.
Truly it is a good thing to have wood for the Winter: but it is better to have
corn for the Winter, and Summer. For they call it no honger, when wood lacked
for the aged: but when bread wants for the young.

Thou say in that country there are many waters, and that the water is very
clear and cold: and further that the abundance thereof is such, that every
house has a fountain. To this I answer thee, that where the waters do
abound, there wants health continually. And I do not marvel thereat, for
the moiste and dankyshe places are always dangerous, unhealthful, and
noisome. If this had been in the time of the golden world, when men knew not
what wine mente, but that all drank water: without comparison that country
had been better then this. For the more the dronkennes of wine is infamous: the
more sweter and profitable is that of the water.

Thou know well, that a Fountain which I have in my gardein (by the
streate Salaria) was occasion that at one time seven of my house died
togethers. And if I had not made a conduite to void the standing water: I
think it had made an end of me, and of all my family. Wherefore I pray thee
have respect unto the health of thy person, rather then to enjoy the
freshenes of the water. For my part I think him only happy, who has his
body healthful, and his heart at ease. Praise as much the land as they will,
enjoy thou the freshenes thereof as much as thou can, and fill thee with
the fresh and cold water, and write unto thy friends how plenty it is, in
the end I swear unto thee my friend Dedalus, that more money shall issue out
of Rome, to vie wine in Candia: then buttes of the cold water of that country
shall enter into Rome.

Thou say that in that country there is such abundance of fruits, that
thou think thou shall never be satisfied therewith. To that I aunsweare.
That thing which I best like, is a winter fruit: yet neither seeing it, nor
eating it, I can content my self. For the country where fruits abound in
winter, is never without fevers and sicknesses in Summer.

Octauian Augustus the famous Emperor of memory, saying that Rome in Summer
was very subject to diseases, commanded on grievous pains, that the fruits of
Salon should not enter into Rome to be sold. And this is a marvelous thing,
that Rome by this means did not only find her self hole: but also the
Physicians went out of Rome of their own wylles and affections. For it is a
great token that the people is healthful, when the Physicians are poor. Thou
say in that country there are many Iuglers and Players. To this I answer
thee. That their pastimes shall not be unto thee such, and so pleasant: as
the griefs and displeasures thou shall have, when they craftily shall pick
thy pourse. For Iuglers and players make plays and sport in ieste: but they
will be paid in good earnest.

Thou say in that country there is great abundance of vynes, and that the
wine is sauoury to smell, and very sweet and pleasant to taste: whereunto I
answer. That there shall not be so many vynes in the fields, as dronkardes
amongst the people: for as thou know, the day that I married Topina my
niece, my uncle Getellius had but only one vine tree, and yet with the wine
that came thereof, he made him self, his household, and al those that were at
the marriage drunk. That which I will say is not without weeping, (in the old
time) Mars was the God most honored and esteemed, being the God of battles:
but now Bachus, which is God of wine, is most honored, served, and exalted.

For the time that a Roman was wont to employ in the marshal camp, to handle
weapons: now they consume in playing, and drinking in the Tauernes. Titus
Liuius in his Annals says, that those of Gallia Transalpina, understanding
that the Italians had planted vines, came to conquer the country. So that if
they had never planted vynes in Italy, the French men had never destroyed
the country.

The ancient Romans (which were provided against all inconveniences)
considering that wine was the cause of their destruction, commanded to destroy
all the vynes of the Empire, through the which policy they were delivered from
all the French men: for when the wars were ended, there remained not one
French man in all Italy, when they knew that there were no more vynes
therein. Thou say that in that country there are many Gentlemen, and
honorable Senators, with whom thou talkest, and passest away the time. To
this I answer, that if it be true, there are many idle men, and also few
true talkers: for those men which have spente their youth in the wars, when
they are aged, do not employ the time but in hearing news, and telling lies.
Thou saidest that there are very fair women in that country, of gesture
semely, and of their persons comely. To this I answer. That if there be many
which be fair, there are as many which are dishonest: For if the woman with
her beauty, has not wisdom and honesty in her self, she puts her self
in peril, and her husband in much care. Thou say that in that country there
are women which are Sooth sayers, Sorcerers, and Enchauntours: the which do
boaste and vaunte them selves that they will heal infantes, and that they can
weyne them better then others. To this I answer. That I would judge it much
better, that children should never be healed, then that they should be healed
by the hands of so evil women. For the profitte that they do by their
experience openly, is nothing in respect of the danger wherein they put the
creatures by their sorceries secretly. Torquatus Laertius my uncle, had a
daughter of a marvelous beauty, the which (because he had none other child)
was heir of all his patrimony. The case therefore was such, that as the
daughter wept one day a little to much, the nource which gave her suck, to
appease and stylle her, thinking to give her sorceries to cast her in a
sleep, gave her poison to destroy her: so that when the tears of the
innocent babe ceased, then the cries of the woeful mother began.

Calligula, which was the son of the good Germanicus the great, (though
amongst the Cesars he was the fourth, and amongst the Tiraunts the first)
when in Rome they used to give little scroules written which they said to be of
such virtue, that they could heal al manner of agues and diseases of young
children, he commanded by the consent of the Senate, that the man or woman
which should make them, should dye immedyatly by justice: and that he which
would by them, and carry them to sell, or give them through Rome, should be
whipped, and banyshed for ever. Thy servant Fronton has told me news that thou
have a son borne, whereof I am very glad: and moreover he said, that a woman
of Sannia did norishe it, and gave it suck. The which (as by an evil chance)
has a spice of sorcerye. By the immortal gods I do conjure the, and for the
love I bear the I desire the, that immediately thou put her out of thy house,
and suffer not so wicked a woman to eat bread there one day: for every creature
which is nourished by sorceries and charms, shall either have his life short,
or else fortune shall be contrary unto him. I let the wete my friend Dedalus that
I have not marvel a little at many Romans, the which do permit, and also
procure that their children should be healed and cured, which charms and
sorceries. For my part I take it to be a thing to be certain, that the men
which by the will of god fall sick, shall never heal for any dyligence that man
can do. And where as children are sick by evil humors, or that they are not
very healthful, because the gods will take life from them: in this case, if
their disease proceade of an evil humor, let them ask physicions for natural
medecins. And if their disease come because the gods are provoked: then let
their fathers appease the gods with sacrifices. For in the end it is impossible
that the disseases of the heart should be healed, by the means of any medycins
of the body. Do not marvel my friend Dedalus, if I have spoken more in this
article then in others, that is to wete, to persuade the so much to keep thy
children from wytches: for otherwise the cursed women will do them more harm,
then the good milk shall profit them. I have been moved and provoked to write
thus much unto the, for the great love which I do bear the: and also calling
to mind that which thou (when we were in the sacred senate) often times toldest
me, which was, that thou did desire a son. And since now thou have thy
peticion, I would not thou should provoke ye gods wrath by sorceries: For
in the faith of a good man I do swear unto the, that when the fathers are in
favor with the gods, there neadeth no sorceries unto the children. I had
many other things to write unto the, some of the which I will communicate
with thy servant Fronton, rather then to send them by letters. And
marvel not at this, for letters are so perilous, that if the manne be
wise, he will write no more in a closse letter, then he would declare openly
in Rome, pardonne me, my friend Dedalus, though in deed I write not unto the
as thy appetyte would, nor yet as my will desirethe: For thou haste neade to
know many things, and I have not leave by letter to put thee in trust
therewith. I can not tell what I should writ to thee of me, but that
always the Gout does take me, and the worste of all is, that the more I
grow in years, the moore my health dym^yssheth: for it is an old course of
man's frailetye, that wheare we think to go most suerest, there have we
most let. The Popingaye which thou did send me, as son^ I received it, my
wife did sease it, and truly it is a merueylous thing to hear what things it
does speak: but in the end the women are of such power, that when they will,
they impose silence to the living, and cause that in the graves the dead men
speak. According to that I do love the, and according to that I owe the, and
as I have used, that which I do send the is very little. I say it, because that
presently I do send the but ii. horses of barbary.xii. sweardes of Alexandrye,
and to Fronton thy servant for a new years gift for his good news, I have
given him an office, which is worth to him. 20. thousand Sexterces of rent in
Cecyl. Faustine did bid me I should send thy wife Pertusa a cofer full of
odyferous oders of palestine, and another cofer full of her own apparel: the
which as I think thou will not little esteem, For naturally women are of their
own goods nigardes: but in wasting and spending of others very prodigal. The
almighty gods be with the, and preserve me from evil fortune. The which I
humbly beseech to grant, that unto the and me, and unto my wife Faustine, and
to thy wife Pertusa, that we all mete merely togethers in Rome: for the heart
never receives such joy, as when he sees him self with his desired friend.
Marcus of Mount Celio writes to the with his own hand.

How excellent a thing it is for a gentleman to have an eloquent tongue. Cap.
xxv.
ONe of the chefest things that the creator gave to man, was to know and be
able to speak: for otherwise (the soul reserved) ye brute beasts are of more
value, then do^me men. Aristotle in his Aeconomices, without comparison
prayseth more the Pithagoricall sort, then the Stoical: saying that the one is
more conform to reason, then the other is. Pithagoras commanded, that all men
which were domme, and without speech, should imediately, and without
contradiction be banished and expulsed from the people. The cause why this
philosopher had commanded such thing was, forsomuche as he said, that the
tongue is moved by the mocions of the soul, and that he which had no tongue
had no soul. And he which has no soul, is but a brute beast: and he that is
a beast, deserves to serve in the fields among brute beasts. It is a good
thing not to be domme as bruyte beasts are: and it is a greater thing to
speak as the reasonable men do: but it is much more worthy to speak well, as
the eloquent philosophers do. For otherwise if he which speaks does not wey
the sentences more then the words, often times the popingayes shall content them
more which are in the cage: then the men which do read in scooles. Josephus in
the book De bello Iudaico says, that king Herod, not only with his person
and goods, but also with all his friends and parents followed and gave aid to
Marcus Anthonius, and to his lover Cleopatra, howbeit in the end Octauian had
the vyctorie. For the man which for the love of a woman does enterprise
conquestes, it is impossible that either he loose not his life, or else that he
live not in infamy Herod seeing that Marcus Anthonius was dead, determined to
go toward the Emperor Octauian, at whose feet he laid his crown, and made
a notable oration, wherein he spoke so pleasant words, and so high
sentences, that the Emperor Octauian did not only pardon him for that he was
so cruel an enemy: but also he confirmed him again into his Realm, and took
him for his dear and special friend. For among the good men and noble hearts,
many evil works are amended by a few good words. If Blundus, in the book
entitled Roma triumphante, do not deceive me, Pirrus the great king of the
Epirotes, was stout and hardy, valiant in arms, liberal in benefits, pacient
in aduersityes and above al renowned to be very sweet in words, and sage in
his aunswers.

They said that this Pirrus was so eloquent, that the man with whom once he had
spoken remained so much his, that from that time foreward in his absence he
took his part, and declared his life and state in presence. The above named
Blundus said and Titus Liuius declares the same, that as the Romans were of
al things provided (seeing that king Pirrus was so eloquent) they provided in
the senate, that no Roman Ambassador should speak unto him, but by a third
person: for otherwise he would have persuaded them through his sweat words,
that they should have returned again to Rome as his procurers and
Soliciters. Albeit Marcus Tullius Cicero was Senator in the Senate, consul in
the Empire, rich amongst the rich, and hardy amongst men of war: yet truly
none of these qualyties caused him eternal memory, but only his excellent
eloquence. This Tullius was so esteemed in Rome for the eloquence of his tongue
only that often times they hard him talk in the Senate iii. hours togethers,
without any man speakinge one word. And let not this be little esteemed nor
lightly passed over: for worldly malice is of such condition, yt some man may
more easily speak 4. hours, then another man shall have patience to hear him
one minute, Anthonius Sabellicus declares, that in the time of Amilcares the
Affricans, a Philosopher named Afronio flourished in great Carthage, who being
of the years of 81. dyed in the first year of the wars of Punica. They
demanded this Philosopher, what it was yt he knew? he answered. He knew
nothing but to speak well. They demanded him again what he learned? he
answered. He did learn nothing but to speak well. Another time they
demanded him what he taught? he answered. He taught nothing but to speak
well. Me thinks yt this good philosopher in 80. years and one, said that he
learned nothing but to speak well, he knew nothing but to speak well, and that
he taught nothing but to speak well. And truly he had reason: for the thing
which most adorneth man's life, is the sweat pleasant tongue to speak well.
What is it to see ii. men in one council, the one talking to the other, the one
of them has an evil grace in propounding, and the other excellent in speaking.
Of such there are some, that in hearing them talk.iii. hours, we would
neither be trobled nor weryed: and of the contrary part there are others so
tedyous, and rude in their speech that as soon as men perceive they begin to
speak they avoid the place. And therefore in mine opinyon there is no greater
trouble then to harken one quarter of an hour a rude man to speak: and to
be contrary there is no greater pleasure, then to hear a dyscreate man
though it were a whole weke.

The deuyne Plato in the Book of Laws said, that there is nothing whereby a man is known more, then by the words he speaks: for of the words
which we hear him speak, we judge his intention either to be good or evil.
Laertius in the life of the Philosophers says, that a young child borne at
Athens, was brought unto Socrates the great philosopher: being in Athens, to
the end he should receive him into his company, and teach him in his scoole. The
young child was strange and shamefaste, and durst not speak before his
master: wherefore the philosopher Socrates said unto him, speak friend, if thou will that I know the. This sentence of Socrates was very profound: and I pray
him that shall read this writing, to pause a while thereat. For Socrates will not
that a man be known by the gesture he has, but by the good or evil words
which he speaks. Though eloquence and speaking well, to every man is a cause
of augmenting their honor, and no dimynissher of their goods: yet without
comparison it shines much more, and is most necessary in the palaces of
Princes and great Lords. For men which have common offices, ought of necessity
harken to his natural contrymen, and also to speak with strangers. Speking
therefore more plainly I say, that the Prince ought not to travail only to have
eloquence, for the honor of his person: but also it behooves him for the common
wealth.

For as the prince is but one, and is served of all: so it is impossible that
he have so much, as will satisfye and content them al. And therefore it is
necessary that he requyte some mith money: and that he content others with
good words. For the noble heart loves better a gentle word: then a reward or
gift, with the tongue of a rude man. Plato. Liuius, Herodotus, Vulpicius,
Eutropius, Diorus. Plynie, and many other innumerable ancient
historyographers, do not cease to praise the eloquence of greek princes, and
latynes, in their works. O how blessed were those times, when there were sage
princes, and discrete lords: truly they have reason to exalt them. For many
have obtained, and won the royal crounes and septures of the Empire, not so
much for ye great battles they have conquered, nor for the high blood and
generation from whence they are dyssended* as for the wisdom, and eloquence,
which they had. Marcus Aurelius was natural of Rome borne in mount Celio, he
was poor in patrimony, and of base lynage, little in favor, left and forsaken
of his parents, and besides all this, only for being virtuous in his life,
profound in doctrine, and of so high eloquence, the Emperor Anthonius (called
Pius) gave him his daughter Faustine for wife: who being reproved of many,
because he gave his daughter to so poor a philosopher, answered. I had rather
have a poor philosopher, then a rich fool.

Pulio in his seventh book of the Roman laws says, that in Rome there was a
law very well kept, and observed of the consulles, by a custom brought in, that
the Dictatours, Censors, and Emperors of Rome, entered into the Senate once in
the weke at the least, and in this place they, should give and render account,
in what state the common wealth remained. O, would to God that at this present
this law were so kept, and observed: for there is none who does minister so good
justice, as he which thinks to give account of his doings. They say that
Calligula (the fourth Emperor of Rome) was not only deformed, infamous, and
cruel in his life: but also was an Idiote in eloquence, and of an evil
vtteraunce in his communycacion. So that he among all the Roman princes, was
constrained to have others to speak for him in the Senate. This wickedman was
so unfortunate, that after his cruel and infamous death, they drew him
throughout Rome, and set upon his grave this Epitaphe.

Calligula lies here, in endless sleep
That stretchte his reign, upon the Empires head
Vnfytte for rule, that could such folly heap
And fytte for death, where virtue so was dead.
I Cannot tell why princes do praise them selves to be strong and hardy, to be
well disposed, to be runners, to just well, and do not esteame to be eloquent
sinse it is true that those gifts do profit them only for their life, but the
eloquence profits them, not only for to honor their life, but also to
augment their renown. For we do read, that by that many Princes did pacifye
great sedycions in the common wealth, and besides that they deserved immortal
memory. Suetonius Trancquillus in the first book of Cesars says, that the
aduenturous Julius Caesar (being as yet but 16. years of age) when there dyed
in Rome an aunt of his called Cornelia, at her burial he made an oracion, in
the which he (being so young) showed marvelous great eloquence: which was so
accepted that day in all people, that in the end, every man judged him to be a
valiant Roman captain. And as Appianus declares, they say that Silla spoke
these words. That which I perceive of this young man Caius Caesar is, that in
the boldness of his tongue, he declares how valiant he ought to be in his
person. Let therefore Princes and great Lords se, how much it may profit them,
to know to speak well and eloquently. For we se no other thing daily, but that
a man of base lynage, by his eloquence comes to be exalted: and the other
which of lynage is nobly borne, for want of speaking well, and being eloquent,
is the first that discendeth most vilest of al other. Thentencion whereupon I
wrate these things was for no other, but to admonish, persuade, and pray al
princes, and great lords, that whiles their children are young, they should put
them to wise and learned men, to the end they should teach them: not only how
they ought to live, but also how they ought to speak. For to persons of
estate it is a great infamy, to do, or to invent to do a thing, and afterward
not to know how to give a reason thereof, Polidorus in the third book of his
commentaries says, that when the Lacedaemonians were put to flight by the
Athenians in Rota Millina (it is called Millina, because the battle was in
the river of Milline) the Lacedaemonians sent a philosopher called Heuxinus, to
treat of peace with the Athenians: who made such an eloquent oracion to the
Senate of Athens, that he did not only obtain the peace which he desired for
his country, but for himself also he wanne perpetual renown. At the
philosophers return, the Athenians gave him a letter, which said in this sort.

Of a letter which the Athenians, sent to the Lacedaemonians. Cap. xxvi.
THe Senate, people, and Sages of Athens, wishes health to the persons, and
peace to the common wealth, of you of the senate and people of the
Lacedaemonians. We take the immortal gods to record, that in the last battle
we had no less dyspleasure to se ye overcome: then on the contrary we had
pleasure, to se us remain victorious. For in the end, the dangers and
inconveniences of the cruel wars are so great, that the evil and danger is
certain to them that are vanquished: and the profit is doubtful, to them that
have ouercommed. We would gladly, that yt which now ye will, ye would have
willed sooner: and that which now ye require and demand, that before ye had
required, and demanded. But what shall we do, sinse it was ordained to your and
our woeful destenies, that he should loose the battle, and that we of your
loss can take no profit. For it is a rule infallible, that all that which the
gods have ordained, no worldly wight can amend, nor human power resist. Ye
demand that war may cease and leave of, and that we take truise for.iii.
months, and that during this time, peace and concord may be concluded. To
this we make answer. That the senate of Athens has not accustomed to grant
peace, afterward for to return to war. For amongst us Athenians we have
an ancient law, that freely we do accept the cruel war, and liberallye we
do grant perpetual peace. In our scoles and universities we travail to have
Sages in time of peace, for to help us with their counsayles in the time of
war. And they do counsel us that we never take upon us truse, upon suspect
condition. And in dead they counsel us well. For the feigned and dyssembled
peace is much more perrillous: then is the manifest war. The philosopher
Heuxinus your ambassador, has spoken to us so highly, and eloquentlye in this
Senate, that it seemed to us very unjust, if we should deny him, and gain say
that he requires us. For it is much more honestye to grant him peace, which
by sweet and pleasant words does demand it: then him which by force and
sharp sword does requires it. Let the case therefore be, that the Senate,
people, and Sages of Athens have ordained, that war do cease with the
Lacedaemonians, and that al discordes, contencions, dissentions, and debates do
end, and that perpetual peace be granted unto them. And this thing is done to
the end all the world should know, that Athens is of such courage with the
hardy, and so very a friend to the Sages: that she knows how to punish the
folyshe captains, and suffers to be commanded and governed by sage
philosophers. Ye know right well, that al our war has not been, but only for
the possessions of cities, and lymites of the river Milina.

Wherefore by this letter we declare unto you, and by the immortal Gods we
swear, that we do renownce unto you al our right, on such condition, that you
do leave us Heuxinus your ambassador and philosopher. The great Athens
desires rather a philosopher for her schools: then a hole province of your
realms. And do not you other Lacedaemonians think, that that which we of
Athens do, is light or foolish, that is to wete, that we desire rather one man
to rule: then to have a whole prouynce whereby we may command many. For this
philosopher shall teach us to live well, and that land gave us occasion to dye
evil: and sith we now of your old enemies do become your true friends, we will
not only give you perpetual peace, but also counsel for to keape it, For the
medycine which preserves health, is of greater excellencye: then is the
purgacion which heals the disease. Let the counsel therefore be such, that
as ye will the young men do exercise them selves in weapons: that so ye do
watch and se that your children in time do learn good letters. For even as
the war by the cruel sword is followed: so likewise by pleasant words
peace is obtained. Think not ye Lacedaemonians, that without a cause we do
persuade you, that you put your children to learn, when as yet they are but
young and tender, and that ye do not suffer them to run to vices? For on the
one part wise men shall want to counsel, and on the other, fools shall abound
to make debate. We Athenians in like manner will not that ye Lacedaemonians do
think, that we be friends to bablers, For our father Socrates ordained, that
the first lesson which should be given to the scholar of the vnyuersity should
be, that by no means he should speak any word for the space of ii. years: for
it is impossible that any man should be wise in speaking, unless he have
patience to be sylente. We think, if you think it good, that the philosopher
Heuxinus shall remain in our Senate: and think you if we profit by his
presence, that ye may be assured ye others shall not receive any damage, by the
counsayles he shall give us. For in Athens it is an ancient law, that the
senate cannot take upon them wars, but that by the Philosophers first it must
be examined, whither it be just or not. We write none other thing, but that we
beseech the immortal Gods that they be with you, and that it please them to
contynewe us in this perpetual peace. For that only is perpetual, which by the
gods is confirmed.

That nurces which give suck to the children of Princes, ought to be discret,
and sage women. Chap. xxvii.
THE pilgrims which travail through unknown contries, and straung mountains
(with great desire to go forward, and not to err) do not only ask the way
which they have to go: but also do importune those whom they mete, to point
them the way with their finger. For it is a grievous thing, to travail
doubtfully in fear and suspicion. By this comparison I mean, that since I
have much persuaded, that the fathers do learn and teach their children to
speak well, it is but reason that they do seek them some good masters. For the
counsel has no authority, if he which gives it, seeks not spedely to
execute the same. It is much for a man to be of a good nature, or else to be of
an evil inclinacion, to be rude in understanding, or else to be lively in
spirit: and this not only for yt a man ought to do, but also for that he ought
to say, For it is no small thing, but a great good benefit when the man is of a
good nature, of a good understanding, and of a clear judgment. This
notwithstanding I say, that all the good and clear judgments, are not always
eloquent, nor all the eloquentest, of lively spirits, and understanding. We se
many men which of a small matter, can make much: and for the contrary we se many
men, which have great knowledge, and yet no means to utter it. So that nature
has given them high understanding, and through negligence of bringinge up it
is hid, Oftentimes I do marvel that the soul of the babe when it is borne,
for the one part is of no less excellencye: then the soul of the old man when
he dies. And on the other side I muse at the babe which has the members so
tender (wherewith the soul does work his operacyons) that they little seem to
participate with reasonable creatures.

For where the soul does not show her self mistres, it wants little but that
the man remains a beast.

It is a wonder to se the children, that as yet being.ii. years of age, they
lift their feet for to go, they hold themselves by the walls for faulyng,
they will open their eyes to know, and they form a defused voice to speak: so
that in that age, a creature is none otherwise, then a tree at the first spring.

For the tree.ii. months being past, bears leaves immediately: and the child
after ii. years begins to frame his words. This thing is spoken, for that
the Fathers which are wise, should begin to teach their children at that
age: For at that time the vynes bear grapes, and other trees their fruit.

For the perilles of this life are such, that if it were possible, the father
before he see his son borne, ought to admonish them how he should live. In
mine opinion, as they convey the water about to turn the mill: so from the
tender youth of the infant, they ought to show and teach him to be eloquent,
and affable. For truly the child learneth distinctly to pronounce his words,
when he does suck the milk of his nource. We cannot deny, but that the
children being but ii. or iii. years old, it is to sone to give them masters,
or correcters. For at that age a nourse to make them clean is more necessary:
then a master for to correct their speech. On the one part the children are
very tender for to learn to speak well: and on the other part it is
necessary, that when they are very young and little, they should be taught and
learned. I am of that opinion, that princesses and great Ladies should take
such nources to give their children suck: that they should be sound to give
them their milk, and sage for to teach them to speak. For in so young and
tender age they do not suffer, but that she which gives them suck, does
teach them to speak the first words. As Sextus Cheronensis in the Book of
the diuersityes of the Languages says. The Toscans were the first which
called the natural tongue of the country, the mother tongue (which is to say,
the tongue of our mother) to the end we should take it of the mother which
brings us forth: and of the nource which gives us suck. And in this case
we have less neade of the mother, then of the nourse. For the children before
they know their mothers, which brought them into the world, do call ye nourse
mother which gave them suck. Plutarche in the second book of the regiment of
princes says, that one of the greatest things the Romans had in their common
weal was, that of all the languages and manners which they spoke throughout the
hole earth, they had Collegies and Schools in Rome: so that were he never so
Barbarous that entered into Rome, immedyatly he found that understood him.

The Romans used that craft and subtlety, to the end that when Rome sent
Embassages into strange countries or that some strange countries came to
Rome, they would that the interpretours and brokers should be of their own
nation and not of a strange tongue or country.

And the Romans truly had reasonne, for the affairs of great importance,
are oftentimes craftily compassed by a strange tongue.

A man will marvel greatly to read, or hear this that I speak, which
is, that the women which nourishe the children of Princes be eloquente.

And truly he that at this does marvel, has seen little, and read less. For
I cannot tell which was greater, the glory that the auncientes had to enjoy so
excellent women: or the infamy of them that are present, to suffer dishonest
harlottes. I will not deny, when I drew near this matter, that my spirit wear
not in great perplexity. First to se in this my wrytinge, of what women my
pen should write, that is to wete, the dissolute vices of women which I have
seen: or else the prowesses and virtues of women whereof I have read. Finally, I
am determined to entreat of our grain, and corn, and to leave the rotten
straw on the earth, as without profit. For the tongue which is noble, ought to
publyshe the goodness of the good and honest women, to the end that al know it:
for the contrary the frailenes of the wicked ought to be dissembled, and kept
secret, to the end that no man follow it. Men which are sage and noble, treating
of women, are bound to serve them, to vysite them, to preserve them, and to
defend them: but in no wise they have license to sclaunder them. For the man
which speaks of the fraylenes of women, is like unto him that takes a sword
to kill a fly. Therefore touching the matter, Princesses and great Ladies ought
not to cease to teach their young children all that they can, sons or
daughters. And they ought not to deceive them selves, saying that forasmuch as
their daughters are women, they are unable to learn sciences. For it is not a
general rule, that al me^ children are of clean understanding: nor that all the
daughters are of rude spirit and wit. For if they and the others did learn
togethers, I think there would be as many wise women, as there are foolish
men. Though the world in times past did enjoy excellent women, there was never
any nation had such as the Greeks had. For though the Romans were glorious in
weapons: the Greeks were of immortal memory of letters. I will not denay that
in the common wealth of Rome, there has not been nourished, and taught many
women of great science: but that the difference of the one and the others was,
that the Grecian women were learned in Philosophy, and the Roman women in
Rethoricke and Poetry. And hereof came that in Athens they esteamed to know
how to teach well: and in Rome they vaunted how to speak well. Euphronius in
the third book of the Roman gestes says, that in ye third year of the
Consulshipe of Lelius Sylla, by chance a Greek Ambassador and an ambassador
of Rome, were at words in the Senate of the Rhodians, and the Greek Ambassador
said to the Roman Ambassador. It is true that amongst ye other Romans, ye
are aduenturous in arms: but for all that, ye are unable in scyences. For truly
the women of Greece know more in letters: then the men of Rome in weapons.

As soon as the Senate of Rome understood these words, immediatlye hereupon
grew the cruel wars between Rome and Carthage, about the posession of Scicil.

And no man ought hereat to marvel, for in the end we se more wars arise by
injurious words: then for to recover the good that is lost. The Romans and
the Grecians therefore being ready the one to defye the other, the Rhodians came
in the myddest, and kept them from such debate, and in the end appointed them
in this sort.

That is to wete, that as this iniurye should by weapons have been determined,
they ordained that by the disputacions of women it should be argued. And truly
the Romans were counsayled well, for it was greater shame to the Greeks to
be overcome with the tongues of women: then with the swords of men. The case
thereof was such, that by appointmente assembled at Rhodes ten Roman women,
and ten Greek women. All women very well learned, the which in their chayres
read certain lessons, every one after other, and afterward the one disputed
against the other, of sundry and diverse matters. And finally, there was between
them great difference, for the Greeks spoke very high things, not so
profounde, but with an excellent style. We ought not to marvel that such
gifts were in those women. For we daily se it by experience, that profound
science, and high eloquence, seldom meets in one personage. The Greeks were
very well pleased, to hear ye Roman women: and the Romans remained
astonished to hear ye Greeks. And upon this occasion ye Rhodians judged in this
sort, yt every one of them should be crowned with a crown of Laurel as
vanquisshers. And they judged, that in grave sentences the Grecians had the
best: and in eloquent speech the Romans had the victory. As the above named
Euphronius says, these disputacions being ended, the Roman women returned
to Rome: and the Greek women to Greece, where they were received with such
triumph and glory, as if they had won a battle. The senate of the
Rhodians for the memory of those women (in the place of the disputacions)
caused to be set up twenty mighty pyllers, in every one of the which were the
names of the women. Which was so sumptuous a building, that in Rhodes there
were none unto it, save only the great Collyseo. Those pillars stood until the
time of Heliogabalus Emperor, who was so evil that he invented new vices, and
destroyed the ancient memories. The writers which wrote in that time, declare
yet an other thing, wherein the women of Greece were differente from the women of
Rome. That is to wete, that the Greek women were found more fayrer, then the
Roman women: but the Romans had a better grace, and more rich in apparel,
then the Greeks. They said also that the Greeks were more hardy and stout, then
the Romans: but the Romans were more honest, pleasant, and gracious, then
the Greeks. And if this be true, I do counsel princesses and great Ladies,
that they have no more envy at the honesty of the Matrones of Rome: then at
the boldness of the ladies of Grecia. For women were not borne to sley men in
the war: but to spinne, sow, and live well like good housewiues in the house.

That women may be no less wise then men, and though they be not, it is not
through default of nature, but for want of good bringing up. Cap. xxviii.
CEasing to speak ingenerally, it is but reason we speak particulerly, and
that we reduce to memory some aunciente histories, of wise and discrete women,
as well Greeks as Romans: and for that these Ladies (seeing what others were in
times past) may know what their duty is at this present.

In mine opinion, the duty that the me^ of this present have to follow ye courage
that ye ancients had in fighting: the self same desire ought women of this
present to have, to follow the ancient women in devout living. For there is no
good thing in the world at this present day, but the like has been seen of
our ancients heretofore. When any sudden new and unaccustomed thing does
happen, men that never saw the like, use to say that there was never the like
in the world, yet in deed they say not true: For though the thing be unto them
new, it is through their ignorance and simplenes which neither have read it
by them selves, nor heard it of others. For this excellencye has the man that
is learned: that for what so ever he hears or says, he is nothing abashed
at. Since women now a days are so ignorant yt scarcely any of them can read
well, he that shall read this will marvel why I do persuade them to learn. But
the truth known what the ancients were, and what they did know: from this
time forward I believe they would greatly reprove the women of this present.
For the time which the ancient women spent in virtues and studies: these of
this present, consume in pleasures and vices. Boccace in the book of the praise
of women says, that Lucyus Sylla was a great compagnion of Marius the Consul,
in the time of the war of Iugurtha: and was no less a friend of Caius Caesar,
in the time of the first civil wars. My pen neadeth not to be ocupied, to
write any thing of the life of Sylla. For all ye historiographers do not only
reprove ye cruelties which he used to his enemies: but also condemn him for
the little faith he observed his friends. This Consul Sylla had three daughters,
the one of them was named Lelia Sabyna, the which of all the Sisters was lest
fair, but amongst all the Romans she was most sagest. For she red openly in
Rome in a chair, both Greek and Latin. After the wars of Mithridates,
Lucius Sylla came to Rome, where he beheaded three thousand Romans which came
to salute him: although before by his word he had assured them al. And in
dead, and also justly Lucius Sylla had been utterly undone for his fact, if
his daughter had not made to the Senate a wise oration: For often times it
chances that the wisdom of the good child, does remedy the follye of the
wicked-Father. The historians say, that this Lelya Sabyna had not only a great
grace in readyng: but also she had much excellency in writing. For she wrote
many letters and Orations with her own hand, which her Father Lucius Sylla
afterward learned by heart: and as he was in deed quycke of sprite, so he used
to recyte them to the Senate always for his purpose.

And let no man marvel hereat, for there are some of so gross understanding
that that which they write and study, they can scarsely utter: and others
again are of such lively wits, that of that only which they have heard, it
seameth marvelous to hear with what eloquence they will talk. Because Sylla
had such and so excellent a daughter in his house, he was esteamed for a sage
and wise Counselor throughout all the common wealth.

He was counted very absolute in executing, strong in mayntaynynge, and for
right eloquent in speakinge. Finally, of this came this auncyente, proverb
which says. Lucius Sylla governs his own countreye with the eloquence of
his Tongue: and is Lord of strange nations by the force of his sword.

What the great Plato has been, and what great authority he has had
amongst his country men and amongst the strangers it is apparent: for so
much as the Greeks do acknowledge him of al other Philosophers to be the
Prince: and likewise the Latynes by one consent call him divine.

And me thinks that in doing this, they do no philosopher injury: for as
Plato in his life time had great modesty, so truly in his writing he exceaded
man's capacity. And Historian called Hyzearchus, declares that Lasterna and
Ax^othea were two Greeks very well learned, and amongst the scollers of Plato
chiefly renowned. The one was of so parfect a memory, and the other of so
high an understanding, that Plato often times being in the chair (and these two
not ready) he would not begin to read. And being asked wherefore he read not
his lecture, he answered? I will not read, for that there wants here
understanding to conceive, and also memory to retain. Meaning that Lasterna
was absent, that Axiothe was not yet come. The wisdom of those two women
ought to be much, since Plato without them would not utter one word, unless
they were present in his schole. For Plato esteamed more the understanding and
memory of those two women alone: then he did the Philosophy of his other
Scollers together. Aristippus the philosopher was Scholar to Socrates, and of
the most renowned of Athens. He had a daughter called Aretha, the which was so
well learned in Greek and Latin letters, that the common renown said, the soul
of Socrates was entered into Aretha: and the cause that moved them to say this
was, because she read and declared the doctrine of Socrates in such wise, that
it seamed to most men she had rather write by hand, then learn by study.
Boccace in the second book of the praise of women says, that this Aretha was
so excellent a woman, yt she did not only learn for her self, but also to
teach others: and did not only teach in diverse Schools, but also she wrote
many and sundry books, one inespecially in the praise of Socrates, an other of
the manner of bringing up children, an other of the wars of Athens, an other
of the tyrannical force, an other of the common wealth of Socrates, an other of
the infelicities of women, an other of the Tyllage of the auncientes, an other
of the wonders of mount Olympus, an other of the vain care of the Sepulcre, an
other of the provision of the Antes, an other of the workmanshippe of the Bees
in honnye: and she wrote two others the one of the vanities of youth, and the
other of the miseries of age. This woman did read openly natural and moral
Phylosophye in the Schools of Athens, for the space of five and twenty years:
she made forty books, she had a hundred and ten philosophers to her
Scholars, she dyed being at the age of seventy and seven years, and the
Athenians after her death, engraued on her grave these words.

THe slised stones within their bowels keape
Wise Aretha, the great and only wight
That forces envy gentle tears to weape.
For Greeks decay, on whom the loss does light.
The eye of fame, the heart of virtues life
The head of Greece, lie here engraued, lo
more heavenly form then had that heavenly wife
Which vndermind the phrigies joys with woe.
Within the chest of her unspotted mind
Lay Thirmas troth, and eke her honest faith
Within her hand (as by the gods assinde)
Stood Aristippus, pen that virtue wayeth.
Within the dongeon of her body eke
Imprisonde was, wise Socrates his soul
That liude so well, and did so wisely speak
That follies breast, he could to wisdom toule.
Within her head so over heapt with wit
Lay Homers tongue, to stayne the poets art
Erst was the golden age not half so fit
For virtues Impes, as when her life did part.
As Marcus Varro says, the sects of the philosophers were more then.lxx. but
in the end they were reduced into seven, and in the end they were brought
into three sects chiefly. That is to wete, Stoicques, Peripaeticques, and
Pithagoricques. Of these pithagoricques, Pithagoras was the prince. Hyzearcus,
Annius Rusticus and Laertius, with Eusebius and Boccace, all affirm one
thing, whereunto I did not greatly give credit, which is: that this
philosopher Pithagoras had a sister, not only learned, but (if it be lawful
to speak it) excellently learned. And they say, that not she of Pithagoras,
but Pithagoras of her learned philosophy. And of truth it is a matter whereof
I was so greatly abashed, that I can not tell who could be master of such a
woman: since she had Pithagoras the great philosopher to her scholar. The name
of the woman was Theoclea, to whom Pithagoras her brother, wrote and sent a
letter, when he red philosophy at Rhodes, and she at Samothracia doing the
like. The Pistle was thus as follows.

Of a letter which Pithagoras sent to his sister Theoclea, he being in Rhodes,
and she in Samothracia, reading both philosophy. Cap. xxix.
PIthagoras thy brother, and disciple, to thee Theoclea his sister, health and
increase of wisdom wysheth. I have red the book which thou did send
me, of fortune and misfortune, from the beginning to the end: and now I know
that thou art no less grave in making, then gracious in teaching. The which
does not chance very often to us, which are men: and much less (as we have
seen) to you women. For the philosopher Aristippus was rude in speaking, and
profound in writing: and Amenides was brief in writing, and eloquent in
speaking. Thou have studied and written in such sort, that in the learning
that thou show, thou seamest to have read all the philosophers: and in the
antiquities that thou do declare, it seems that thou have seen all the time
past. Wherein thou being a woman show thy self more then a woman: because
the nature of women is, to cast their eyes only in that that is present, and
commonly to forget that that is past. They tell me that thou do occupye thy
self now in writing of our country. And truly in this case I can not say but
that you have matter enough to write on: For the wars and trauayles of our
times have been such, and so great, that I had rather read them in books,
then see them with my eyes. And if it be so, as I suppose it is, I beseech thee
heartily, and by the immortal Gods I conjure thee, that in writing the affairs
of thy country thou do use thy pen discreatly. I mean, that thou do not
in this case bleamyshe thy writing, by putting therein any flattery, or
lesinge. For oftetimes Historiographers, in blasinge more then troth the
gifts of their country: cause worthily to be suspected their writing. Thou
know very well, how that in the battle paste the Rhodians were overcome,
and that ours remained victorious. Me thinks thou should not in this case
greatly magnify, extolle, or exalt ours, because in the end they fought to
revenge their injury: neither thou ought to blame the Rhodians, for they did
not fight but in the aid of Rome. I speak this (my Sister) because for to
defend their own, women show them selves Lions: and for to defend the
things of an other man, men show them selves chickens. For in the end he
only may be counted strong, the which defends not his own house: but
which dies defending his, and another man's. I will not deny the natural love
of my country, nor I will not deny but that I love them that write, and
speak well thereof: but me thinks it is not reason, that they should
disprayse the goodness and truth of other countries, nor that they should so
highly comend the evil and vileness of their own. For there is not in the
world this day so barren a Realm, but may be commended for some thing
therein: nor there is so perfect a nation, but in some things may be
reproved. Thou can not deny me, but that amongst thy brethren I am the
eldest, and thou canste not deny but that amongst all thy disciples I am the
youngest: and since that for being thy disciple I ought to obey thee, thou like
wise for that I am thy eldest brother ought to believe me. By the fayeth of a
people I do council thee, my sister, that thou do travail much to be
profound in thy words, upright in thy life, and honest of thy person: and
besides all this, true in thy writing. For I let thee understand, that if the
body of the man without the soul is little regarded: I swear unto thee that
the mouth of a man, without truth, is much less esteamed.

The author follows his purpose, persuading princesses and other ladies to
endeavor them selves to be wise, as the women were in old time. Cap. xxx.
THis therefore was the letter, the which Pithagoras sent to his sister
Theoclea, whereby is showed the great humility of him, and the high eloquence
of her. Hiarcus the Greek, and Plutarche also in the book of the government
of princes say, that Pithagoras had not only a sister (which was called
Theoclea) of whom he learned so much philosophy, but also he had a daughter,
the wisdom and knowledge of whom surmounted her aunte, and was equal to her
father. I think it no less incredible which is spoken of the daughter, then
that which is spoken of the aunte, which is that those of Athenes did rejoice
more to hear her speak in her house, then for to hear Pithagoras read in
the schole. And it ought to be believed: for the saying of the grave authors on
the one part: and by that we daily see on the other part. For in the end, it
is more pleasure to hear a man tell merry tales, having grace and comlines in
his words: then to hear a grave man speak the truth, with a rude and rough
tongue. I have found in many wrytinges, what they have spoken of Pithagoras,
and his daughter: but none tells her name, save only in a pistle that
Phalaris the tyrant wrate, I found this word written, where he says.
Polichrata, that was the daughter of the philosopher Pithagoras, was young, and
exceading wise, more fair then rich and was so much honored for the purity
of her life, and so high esteemed for her pleasant tongue: that the word which
she spoke spinning upon her distaffe, was more esteemed: then the philosophy
that her father red in the schole. And he said more. It is so great a pity to
see, and hear that women at this present are in their life so dishonest, and
in their tongues so malicious: that I have greater pleasure in the good renown
of one that is dead, then in the infamy of all them which are alive. For a
good woman is more worth with her distaffe spinning, then a hundred euel
queens, with their royal scepters reigning. By the words which Phalaris
said in his letter, it seamed that this daughter of Pithagoras was called
Polichrate. Pithagoras therefore made many commentaries, as well of his own
country, as of strangers. In the end he died in Mesopotamia, where at the
hour of his death he spoke unto his daughter Polichrate, and said these
words. I see my daughter that the hour wherein I must end my life
approaches. The Gods gave it me, and now they will take it from me: nature gave
me birth, and now she gives me death: the earth gave me the body, and now it
retourneth to ashes. The woeful fatal destinies gave me a little goods, mingled
with many travails, so that (daughter) of all things which I enjoyed in this
world, I carry none with me: for having all as I had it, by the way of
borowyng: now at my death each man takes his own. I die joyfully not for
that I leave thee rich: but for that I leave thee learned. And in token of my
tender heart, I bequethe unto the al my books, wherein thou shall find the
treasure of my travails. And I tell thee that that I give thee, is the riches
gotten with mine own sweat: and not obtained to the prejudice of an other. For
the love I bear unto thee, daughter I pray thee, and by the immortal gods I
conjure thee, that thou be such, and so good, that although I die, yet at the
least thou may keep my memory: for thou know well what Ho^ere says,
speaking of Achilles, and Pirrus, that the good life of the child that is
alive, keapeth the renown of the father that is dead. These were the words
which this philosopher spoke unto his daughter lieng in his death bed. And
though perhaps he spoke not these words: yet at the least this was the
meaning. As ye great poet Mantuan says, king Euander was father of the giant
Pallas, and he was a great friend of king Eneas, he vaunted him self to
descend of the lineage of the Troyans: and therefore when king Eneas, and prince
Turnus, had great wars between them, which of them should have the princess
Lauinia in marriage, (the which at yt time was only heir of Italy) king Euander
aided Eneas, not only with goods: but also sending him his own son in
person. For the friends ought for their true friends, willingly to shed their
blood, and in their behalf without demau^ding, they ought also to spend their
goods. This king Euander had a wife so well learned, that that which the Greeks
said of her seems to be fables. That is to say (of her eloquence and wisdom)
for they say, that if that which this woman wrote of the wars of Troy, had
not been through envy cast into the fire: the name of Homere had at this day
remained obscure. The reason hereof is, because the woman was in the time of
the destruction of Troy, and wrate as a witness of sight.

These words passed between the Roman Calphurnius and the poet Cornificius.
I desire to declare the excellency of those few ancient women (as well Greeks,
as Latins, and Romans) to the intent that princesses, and great ladies may
know, that the ancient women were more esteamed for their sciences, then for
their beauties. Therefore the princesses and great Ladies ought to think that
if they be women, they were also in like manner: and if they be frail, the
others were also weak. If they be married, the other also had husbands: if
they have their wylles, the other had also what they wanted: if they be tender,
the others were not strong: Finally they ought not to excuse them selves,
saying that for to learn women are unmeet. For a woman has more ability to
learn sciences in the schools: then the Parate has to speak words in the
cage. In my opinion princesses and great ladies ought not to esteame themselves
more then an other, for that they have fairer hears then other, or for that
they are better appareled then an other: or that they have more riches then an
other. But they ought therefore to esteame them selves, not for that they can
do more then others. To say the truth, the fair and yelow hears, the rich
and brave apparel, the great treasures, the sumptuous palaces and strong
buildinges, these and other like pleasures are not guides and leaders to
virtues, but rather spies and scout watches for vices. O what a noble thing
were it, that the noble ladies would esteem them selves not for that they can
do: but for that that they know. For it is more commendation to know how to
teach two philosophers: then to have authority to command a hundred
knights. It is a shame to write it, but it is more pity to see it, that is to
wete, to read that we read of the wisdom and worthiness of the ancient
matrones paste, and to see as we do see the frailenes of these young ladies
present. For they coueted to have disciples both learned and experimented: and
these of this present desire nothing but to have servants not only ignorant,
but deceitful and wicked. And I do not marvel seeing that which I se, that at
this present in court she is of little value and lest esteemed among ladies,
which has fairest servants, and is lest enterteined of gentlemen. What shall
I say more in this matter but that they in times past strive who should write
better, and compile the best books: and these at this present do not strive,
but who shall have the richest and most sumptuous apparel. For the ladies think
it a iolier matter, to wear a gown of a new fachion: then the auncientes did
to read a lesson of philosophy. The ancient ladies strive which of them was
wisest: but these of our days contend who shall be fairest. For at this day ye
ladies would chose rather to have the face adorned with beauty, then the heart
endued with wisdom. The ancient ladies contented which should be better able
to teach others: but these ladies now a days contend how they may most
finely apparel them selves. For in these days they give more honor to a woman
richely appareled, then they give to an other with honesty beautified. Finally
with this word I do conclude, and let him mark that shall read it, that in
the old time women were such, that their virtues caused al men to keep
silence: and now their vices be such, that they compel al men to speak. I
will not by this my word any man should be so bold in generally to speak evil
of all the ladies: for in this case I swear, yt there are not at this day so
many good virtuous women in ye world: but that I have more envy at the life
they lead in secreat, then at all the sciences which the ancient women red in
public. Wherefore my pen does not show it self extreme, but to those which
only in sumptuous apparel and in vain words do consume their whole life:
and to those which in readyng a good book would not spend one only hour. To
prove my intencion of that I have spoken, the above written suffiseth. But to
the end princesses and great ladies may se (at the lest) how much better it
shall be for them to know litel, then to have and possess much, and to be able
to do more. I will remember the^ of that which a Roman woman wrate to her
children, whereby they shall perceive how eloquent a woman she was in her
sayings, and how true a mother in her counsel. For in the end of her letter
she persuades her children to the travails of the war, not for any other
cause, but to avoid the pleasures of Rome.

Of the worthiness of the lady Cornelia, and of a notable epistle she wrote to
her.ii. sons which served in the wars Tyberius, and Caius diswadyng them
from the pleasures of rome, and exorting them to endure the travails of war.
Chap. xxxi.
ANnius Rusticus in the book of the antiquities of the Romans says, that in
Rome there were.v. principal linages, that is to wete Fabritij, Torquatij,
Brutij, Fabij, and Cornelij, though there were in Rome other new linages,
whereof there were many excellent personages: yet always these which came of
the.v. linages, were kept, placed, and preferred to the first offices of the
common wealth. For Rome honored those that were present in such sort, that it
was without the prejudice of those that are gone. Amongst those.v. linages,
the romans always counted the Cornelij most fortunat, the which were so
hardy and courageous in fight, and so modest in life, that of their family
there was never found any cowardly man in the feld, nor any defamed woman in
the town. They say of this lineage of the Cornelij, among many other there
were.iiii. singular and notable women among the which the chief was the
mother of Gracchi whose name was Cornelia and lived with more honor for the
sciences she red in Rome, then for the conquestes that her children had in
Affricke. Before her children were brought into the empire, they talked of none
other thing but of their strength and hardines, throughout all the world: and
therefore a Roman one day asked this woman Cornelia, whereof she took most
vain glory, to se her self mistres of so many disciples, or mother of so
valiant children. The lady Cornelia answered. I do esteem the science more
which I have learned, then the Children which I have brought forth. For in
the end, the children keep in honor the life: but the disciples continue the
renown after the death.

And she said further. I am assured that the disciples daily will wax better
and better: and it may be that my Children will wax worse and worse. The
desires of young men are so variable, that they daily have new inventions. With
one accord all the writers do greatly commend this woman Cornelia,
inespecially for being wise and honest, and furthermore because she red
philosophy in Rome openly.

And therefore after her death they set up in Rome a Statue, over the gate
Salaria, whereupon there was graven this Epigrame.

This heap of earth. Cornelie does encloose
Of wretched Gracches, that lo the mother was
Twyse happy in the sckollers, that she choose
Unhappy thrice, in the ofspringe that she has.
AMong the latins, Cicero was the Prince of all the Roman rethorike, and the
chiefest with his pen inditing of Epystles: yet they say, that he did not only
se the writings of this Cornelia, but red them, and did not only read them,
but also with the sentences thereof profited him self. And hereof a man ought
not to marvel: for there is no man in the world so wise of him self, but may
further his doings with the advice of another, Cicero so highly exalted these
writings, that he said in his rethorike these or such other like words. If
the name of a woman had not bleamyshed Cornelia, truly she deserved to be head
of all philosophers. For I never saw so grave sentences proceed from so frail
flesh. Since Cicero spoke these words of Cornelia, it can not be, but that the
writings of such a woman in her time were very lively, and of great reputacion
yet notwithstanding there is no memory of her, but that an author for his
purpose declares an epistel of this manner. Sextus Cheronensis in his book of
the praise of women, recites the letter which she sent to her children. She
remaynyng in Rome, and they being at the wars in Affrike.

The letter of Cornelia to her.ii. sons Tiberius and Caius otherwise called
Gracchi.
COrnelia the Roman, that by thy fathers side am of the Cornelij, and one the
mother side of the Fabij: to you my.ii. sons. Gracchii, which are in that
wars of Affrik, such health to you do wish, as a mother to her children ought
to desire. Ye have understood right well my children, how my father died, I
being but.iii. years of age, and that this.xxii. years I have remained wydow,
and that this.xx. years I have red Rethorike in Rome. It is.vii. years sins I
saw ye, and.xii. years sins your brethren my children dyed in the great
plage. You know.viii. years ar past since I left my study and came to se you in
Cicilia, because you should not forsake the wars, to come se me in rome: for
to me could come no greater pain, the^ to se you absent from the service of
the commonwealth. I desire my children to show you how I have passed my life in
labor and trauaill, to the intent you should not desire to spend youres, in
rest and idleness. For if to me that am in rome there can want no trobles: be ye
assured that unto you which are in the wars shall want no perils. For in
wars renoune is never sold but by weight, or changed with loss of life. The
young Fabius, son of my aunt the aged Fabia, at the.iii. Cale^des of March
brought me a letter the which you sent: and truly it was more brief then I
would have wyshed it. For between so dear children, and so louinge a mother, it
is not suffered that the absence of your parsonnes should be so far, and the
letters which you write so brief. By those that go from hence thither, I
always do send you commendations: and of those that come from thence hither.
I do enquire of news Some say they have seen you, other tell me they have
spoken with you, so that with this my heart is somewhat quieted. For between them
that love greatly, it may be endured that ^he sight be seldom, so that the
health be certain. I am sole, I am a widow, I (...) aged, and now all my kindred
is dead: I have endured many travails in Rome, and the greatest of all is (my
children) of your absence. For the pain is greater to be void of assured
friends: the^ assault is dangerous of cruel enemies. Since you are young, and
not very rich, since you are hardy, and brought up in the travails of Afrike,
I do not doubt but that you do desire to come to Rome, to se and know that
now you are men, which you have seen when you were children. For men do not
love their country so much, for that it is good: as they do love it, for that
it is natural. Believe me children, there is no man living that has seen or
hard speak of Rome in times past: but has great grief, sorrow, and pity, to
se it at this present. For as their hearts are pitiefull, and their eyes
tender: so they can not behold that without great sorrow, which in times past
they have seen in great glory. O my children, you shall know that Rome is
greatly changed from that it was wont to be. To read that that we do read of
it in times past, and to se that which we se of it now present: we must needs
esteem that which the auncientes have written as a gest, or else believe it but
as a dream. There is no other thing now at Rome, but to see justice corrupted,
the commen weal oppressed, lies blown abroad, the truth kept under, the
satires silent, the flatterers open mouthed, the inflamed persons to be
Lords, and the pacient to be servants, and above al, and worse then all, to
se the evil live in rest and contented, and the good troubled and displeased.
Forsake, forsake (my children) that city, where the good have occasion to
weape, and the evil have liberty to laugh. I can not tell what to say in this
matter, as I would say. Truly ye common weal is at this day such and so woeful,
that each wise man (without comparison) would have greater pleasure to be in ye
wars of Affrik: then in the peace at Rome. For in the good war, a man sees
of whom he should take heed: but in ye evil peace, no man knows whom to
trust. Therefore my children, since you are natural of Rome. I will tell you
what Rome is at this present. I let you know, yt the vestall virgins are now
dissolute, the honor of the gods is forgotten, ye profit of the common weal
no man seeks, of ye exercise of chiualry there is no memory for the orphans
and widows there is no man yt does answer, to ministre justice they have no
regard, and the dissolute vices of ye youth ar without measure. Finally, Rome
that in times past was a receypt of all the good and virtuous: is now made a
den of al thieves and vicious. I fear me, I fear me, least our mother rome
in short time will have some sodein and great fall. And I say not without a
cause some great fall, for both men and Cities, that fall from the top of their
felicity, purchase greater infamy with those yt shall com after: the^ the glory
yt they have had of the^ that be past. Peradventure (my children) you desire to
se the walls and buildinges of Rome: for those things which children se first
in their youth, the same they love and keep always in memory until their age.
As the ancient buildinges of rome are destroyed, and the few that are now
builte: so would I you should loose your earnest affection to come to se the^.
For in deed, the noble hearts are ashamed to se that thing amiss, which they
ca^ not remedy. Do not think, my children, though Rome be made worse in
manners, that therefore it is diminished in buildinges. For I let you understand,
if you know it not, yt if a wall does decay, there is no man that does repair
it. If a house fall, there is no man that will raise it up again. If a street be
foul, there is no man that will make it clean. If the river carry away any
bridge, there is no man that will set it up again. If any antiquity decay,
there is no man that will amend it. If any wood be cut, there is no man that will
keep it. If the trees wax old, there is no man that will plant the^ a new. If
the pauement of the streates be broken, there is no man that will ley it again.
Finally there is nothing in Rome at this day so evil handled, as those things
which by ye common voices ar ordered. These things (my children) though I do
greatly lament (as it is reason) yet you ought little to esteem them al: but
this al only ought to be esteemed, and with drops of blood to be lamented.
That now in Rome, when ye buildinges in many places fall down, ye vices all
wholly together are raised up. O woeful mother Rome, since that in the, the more
the walls decay, the more the vices increase. Peradventure (my children) since
you are in those frountiers of Affrike, you desire to se your parents here in
Rome. And thereat I marvel not, for the love which our natural countreye do
give, ye straung country can not take away. All those which come from those
parties do bring us no other certain news, but of the multitude of those
which dye and are slain in Afrik, therefore since you send us such news from
thence, look not that we should send you any other then the like from hence.
For death has such authority, yt it kills the armed in the wars: and
sleyeth the quiet in peace. I let you know that Licia your sister is dead.
Drusio your uncle is dead. Torcquatus your neighbor is dead. His wife our
cousin and her.iii. daughters are dead. Fabius your great friend is dead.
Euander and his children ar dead. Bibulus which red for me in the chair the
last year is also dead. Finally there are so many and so good with all yt be
dead: that it is a great shame and pity to se (at this present,) so many evil
as do live Know ye my children, that all these and many others which ye left
alive full high in rome: are now become worms meat full low under the earth,
and death also does summon me unto the grave. If you (my children) did consider
what shall become of you herafter, truly you will think it better to
weape.1000. years with the dead: then to laugh one hour with those yt be
alive. Remembryng that I ba^e ye in great pain, and have nourished you in
great travel, and that ye came of my proper intrailles: I would have you as
children about me for ye confort and consolation of my pains. But in the end
beholding ye prowesses of those yt are paste, that binds their heirs, I am
content to suffer so long absence your persons, only to the end you may get
honor in chiualrye. For I had rather here tell you should live like knights
in Afrik: the^ to se you utterly lost here in Rome. My children, as you are in
ye wars of Afrike, so I doubt not but yt you desire to se ye pleasurs of
rome: for there is no man in this world so happy, but at his neighbors
prosperity had some envy, envy not ye vicious, nether desire to be among vices:
for truly vices ar of such a condition yt they bring not with the^ so much
pleasure when they com: as they leave sorrow behind the^ when they depart, for yt
true delight is not in ye pleasure which suddenly vanishes: but in ye truth
which evermore remains. I thank ye immortal gods for all these things, first
for yt they made me wise and not folish: for to a woman it is a small matter to
be called so frail, yt in deed she be not folish. The second I thank ye gods,
because in all times of my troubles, they have given me patience to endure the^:
for ye man only in this lif may be called unhappy, to whom ye gods in his
troubles has not given patience. The third, I thank the gods for that
those.lxv. years which I have lived, I never hitherto was defamed: for ye
woman by no reason can complain of her fortune, if in none of her troubles she
has lost her honor. The fourth, I thank the Gods that in this forty years
I have lived in Rome, and remained widow, there was never man nor woman ye
contended with me: for since we women profit little the common wealth, it is
but reason that she which with evil demeanoures has passed her life should
by justice receive her death. The fifth I give the gods tankes, that they gave
me children, the which are better contented to suffer the travails of Affrik:
the^ to enjoy the pleasurs of Rome. Do not count me (my children) for so
unloving a mother, that I would not have you always before my eyes: but
considering that many good men's children have been lost, only for being brought
up in the excessive pleasures of Rome, I do content my self with your absence.
For that man that desires perpetual renown, though he be not banished, he
ought to absent him self from his native country. My dear children, I most
earnestly desire you, that always you acco^panie your selves with the good,
with the most auncientes, and with those which are grave and most expert in
council, and with those that have most seen the world: and do not understand
most of the world, by those that have seen most countries. For the ripe council
proceadeth not from the man that has traueiled in many contreis: but from him
that has felt him self in many dangers. Since the nature of the country
(my children) does knock with the hammer at the gate of the heart of man, I
fear yt if you come and se your friends and parents, you shall always live in
care and pensifnes, and being pensife you shall always live evil contented, and
you shall not do yt which becomes Romain knights to do. And you not being
valiant knights, your enemies shall always rejoice over you, and your desires
shall never take effect: for of those men which are careful and heavy,
proceadeth always services unworthy. I desire you heartily, and by this present
letter I counsel you, yt you will not in any wise seek to come to rome: for as
I have said you shall know few of those that did know you, for either they are
dead or banished, poor or sick, aged or come to naught, sad or evil
contented: so that since you are not able to remedy their grefes, it is best
you should not come hither to se their troubles. For no man comes to Rome but
to weape with the living, and to sigh for the^ that be dead. Truly (my
children) I know not what pleasure is in Rome that should cause any good man to
come hither and to forsake Affrik: for if there you have enemies, here you
shall want friends. If you have the sword that perceth the body, we have that
tongue here that destroys the renown. If you be vexed with the thieves of
Affrike, we are wounded with the traitors, Flatterers, and liers of Italy. If
you lack rest, we have here to much trouble. Finallye seeing that that I do se
in Rome, and hearing that which I hear of Affrik: I commend your war, and
abhor our peace. If you do greatly esteem yt which I have said, esteem much
more that which I shall say, which is, that we always here that you are
conquerours of the Africkans, and you shall here always yt we are conquered by
vices. Therefore if I am a true mother, I had rather se you win a perpetual
memory among strangers: the^ to live with infamy at home in your country.
Peradventure with hope that you shall enherit some goods you will take occasion
to come to Rome. When this thing shall come to your minds, remember (my
children) that your father being alive had not much, and that unto your mother
being a widow many things wanted. And remember that your father bequethed you
nothing but weapons, and know that from me you shall enherite nothing but
books. For I had rather leave my children good doctrine whereby they may live:
them evil riches whereby they may perysh. I am not rich, nor I never travailed
to be rich, and the cause was that I saw many men's children undone, only
through the hope they had to enherite their pare^tes goods, and afterward went
a huntinge after vices. For they seldom times do any worthy feats, which in
their youth enherit great treasurs. This thing therefore being true (as it is in
dead) I do not say only that I would watch, and toil as many do to get riches
and treasurs: but also if I had treasour, before I would give them unto you, I
would (as the philosopher did) cast the^ into the fire. For I had rather have
my children pore and virtuous in Affrike: the^ rich and vicious in Rome. You
know very well my children that there was amongst the Tharentins a law well
observed, that the sons should not inherit any other thing of their fathers
but weapons to fight: and that the daughters should inherit the goods for to
mary them selves with all. Truly this law was very just, for the son that
has always respect to the enheritaunce: will not have to his father any great
confidence. For he ought to be called a valiant Roman knight that with his
life has won honor, and by the sword has gotten riches. Since you are in
straung realms, I pray you heartily that you be conuersaunt with the good (as
good brethren) remembering always that you were my children, and that I gave you
both, suck of mine own propre breasts. And the day that I shall here of
your disagrement, the same day shall be the end of my life. For the discord in
one city of parents does more harm: then a hole army of enemies. It is good
for you (my children) to live in love and concord togethers: but it is more
requisite to keep you with the Roman knights, The which with you, and you
with the^, if you do not love together in ye wars: you shall never have the
upper hand of your enemies. For in great armies, the discordes which rise
amongst the^ do more harm: then the enemies do against who^ they fight. I
think well (my children) that you would be very desirous to know of my estate
(that is to wete) whether I am in health, whether I am sick, whether I am
poor, whether I am pleased, or whether I am miscontented. In this case I know
not why you should desire to know it, since you ought to presuppose that
according to the troubles which I have passed, and the miseries yt with mine
eyes I have seen, I am filled with this world: for wise men after.50. years and
upward, ought rather to apply their minds how to receive death: the^ to seek
pleasurs to prolong life. When man's flesh is weak, it always desires to be
well kept even unto the grave. And as I am of flesh and bone: so I do feale the
troubles of the world, as al mortal men do. But for all this do not think that
to be pore or sick is the greatest misery, neither think yt to be hole and
rich is the chefest felicity: for there is none other felicity of the old
fathers, but for to se their children virtuous. In my opinion it is an honor
to yt country, that the fathers have such children, which will take profit with
their counsel: and contrary wise that the children have such fathers which can
give it them. For the child is happy that has a wise father, and more happy is
the father that has not a folish son. I do write often times unto you my
children, but there is a law that none be so hardy to write to men of war in
the field, except first they inrowle the letters in the senate. Therefore since
I write unto you more letters then they would, they do send less then I
desire. Though this law be painful to mothers which have children: yet we
must confess it is profitable for ye weal publik.

For if a man should write to one in the war, that his family is not well: he
would forsake the wars to remedy it. If a man write unto him that it is
prosperous, he has then a desire to enjoy it. Be not displeased (my children)
though all the letters I do send unto you come not to your hands: For all
that I do not cease to visit the temples for your own health, nor yet to
offer sacrifices to the Gods for your honor. For if we do please the gods, we
have not cause to fear our enemies. I say no more in this case, my children,
but that I beseech the immortal Gods, that if your lives may profit the
common wealth, then they shorten my days and le^gthen your years: but if your
lives should be to the damage of the common wealth, then those immortal gods I
desire that first I may understand the end of your days, before that the
worms should eat my flesh. For rather then by your evil life the glory of
our predecessors should be bleamished: it were much better both your lives were
ended. The grace of the Gods, the good renown amongst men, the good fortune
of the Romans, yt wisdom of the greeks the blessing of Scippio, and of al
other your predecessors be always with you my children.

Of the education and doctrine of children whiles they are young. Wherein the
auctour declares many notable histories. Chap. xxxii.
ALl mortal men which will travel, and see good fruit of their travel,
ought to do as the chief artificer did that painted the world: For ye man that
makes god the head of his works, it is impossible that he should err in the
same. That which we believe, and read by wrytinge, is that the eternal created
the world in short space by his might: but preserved it a long time by his
wisdom. Whereof a man may gather, that the time to do a thing is short: but
the care and thought to preserve it, is long. We see daily, that a valiant
captain assaulteth his enemies: but in the end it is god that gives the
victory, but let us ask the conqueror, what travel it has been unto him,
or wherein he has perceived most danger (that is to wete) either to obtain
the victory of his enemies, or else to preserve them selves amongst the envious
and malicious. I swear, and affirm, that such a knight will swear, that there
is no comparison between the one and the other: for by the bloody sweard in an
hour the victory is obtained: but to keep it with reputation, the sweet of all the life is required Laertius in the book of the life of the philophers
declares, and Plato also hereof makes mention, in the books of his common
wealth, that those of Thebes understanding that the Lacedaemonians had good
laws (for that which they were of the gods favored, and of men greatly
honored) determined to send (by common assent and agreement) a wise
philosopher, the best esteamed amongst them (whose name was Phetonius) to
whom they commanded, that he should ask the laws of the Lacedaemonians, and
that he should be very circumspecte and ware to see what their rules and
customs were.

Those of Thebes were then very noble, valliant, and honest: so that their
principal end was, to come to honor and renown, to erect buildinges, and to
make them selves of immortal memory for being virtuous. For in buildyng they
were very curious: and for virtues they had good Philosophers. The philosopher
Phetonius was more the^ a year in the realm of the Lacedaemonians, beholding
at sundry times all things therein: for simple men do not note things, but
only to satisfye the eyes: but the wise men beholds them, for to know and
understand their secrettes. After that the philosopher had well and plainly
seen and beheld all the things of the Lacedaemonians: he determined to return
home to Thebes, and being arrived, all the people came to see him and here him.
For the vanity of the common people is of such a quality, that it follows
new inventions: and despises ancient customs. All the people therefore
gathered togethers, the good philosopher Phetonius set up in the midst of the
market place a gybet, hoote yrons, a swerd, a whip, and fetters for the feet:
the which thing done, the Thebains were no less as they thought slaundered,
the^ abashed. To the which he spoke these words. You Thebains sent me to the
Lacedaemonians, to the intent I should learn their laws and customs, and in
deed I have been there more then a year, beholding al things very diligentely:
for we Philosophers are bound, not only to note that which is done, but also
to know why it is done know ye Thebains, that this in the answer of my
Imbassage.

That the Lacedaemonians hang upon this Gybet thieves, with this same sword they
behede traitors, with these hoote Irons they torment blasphemers, and liars,
with these rods they whippe vacabondes, and with these Irons do keape the
rebels, and the others are for players, and unthrifts. Finally I say that I do
not bring you the laws written, but I bring you the Instruments wherewith they
are observed.

The Thebains were abashed to se these things, and spoke unto him such words.
Consider Phetonius we have not sent the to the Lacedaemonians, to bring
instruments to take away life: but for the good laws to govern the common
wealth. The philosopher Phetonius replied again, and answered. Thebains, I let
you wete, that if ye know what we philosophers knew, you should see how far your
minds were from the truth: For the Lacedaemonians are not so virtuous, thoroughe
the laws which were made of them that be dead: as for the means they have
sought, to preserve them that be alive. For matters of Justice consiste more in
execution, then in commaundyng or ordeinynge. Laws are easily ordained, but
with difficulty executed: for there are a thousand to make them, but to put
them in execution there is not one. Full little is that which men know that are
present: in respect of that those knew which are past. But yet according to my
little knowledge, I proffer to give as good laws to you Thebains, as ever were
observed among ye Lacedemonia^s. For there is nothing more easy, then to know
the good: and nothing more commen, then to follow the evil. But what profits
it if one will ordeyne, and none understand it: If there be that does understand
the^, there is none that excuteth them. If there be that executes them, there
is none that observes the^. If there be one that observes them, there is a
thousand that reproves them. For without comparison, mo are they that murmr
and grudge at the good, then those which blame and despise the evil. You
Thebains are offended, because I have brought such Instruments but I let you
wete, if you will neither Gybet, nor sword to keep that which shall be ordained,
you shall have your books full of laws, and the common wealth full of vices.

Wherefore I swear unto you, that there are mo Thebains which follow the
deliciousnes of Denis the tyrant: then there are virtuous men that follow the
laws of Lycurgus. If you Thebains do desire greatly to know, with what Laws
the Lacedaemonians: do preserve their common wealth: I will tell you them all
by word, and if you will read them, I will show you them in writing. But it
shall be upon condition, that you shall swear all openly, that once a day you
shall employ your eyes to read them, and your parsonnes to observe them. For
the prince has greater honor, to se one only law to be observed in deed:
then to ordeyne a thousand by writing. You ought not to esteame much to be
virtuous in heart, nor to enquire of the virtue by the mouth, nor to seek it
by labor and trauaille of the feet: but that which you ought greatly to
esteame, is to know what a virtuous law means, and that known, immediately
to execute it, and afterward to keep it. For the chief virtue is not to do
one verteous work: but in swet and trauayl to continue in it. These therefore
were the words that this philosopher Phetonius said to the Thebains. The
which (as Plato says) esteemed more his words that he spoke: then they did
the laws which he brought. Truly in my opinion, those of Thebes are to be
praised and commended: and the philosopher for his words is worthy to be
honored. For the end of those was to search laws to live well, and the end
of the Philosophet was to seek good means for to keep them in virtue. And
therefore he thought it good to show the^, and put before their eyes the gibbet,
and the sword, with the other instruments and torments. For the evil do
refrain from vice more for fear of punyshement, then for any desire they have
of amendment. I was willing to bring in this History, to the end that all
curious and virtuous men may see and know, how litell the auncientes did esteem
the beginnynge, the mean, and the end of virtuous works, in respect of the
perseueraunce and preseruacion of them. Coming therefore to my matter, which my
pen does toss and seek: I ask now presentely, what it profits princes and
great ladies, that God do give them great estates, that they be fortunate in
marriages, that they be all reverenced and honored, that they have great
treasures for their inheritaunces, and above all that they se their wives great
with child, and that afterward in joy they se them delivered: that they se
their mothers giving their children suck, and finally they se them selves
happy in that they have found them good nources, helthful and honest. Truly all this avails little, if to their children (when they are young) they do not give
masters to enstruct the^ in virtues: and also if they do not recomend them to
good guides, to exercise the^ in feats of Chiualry. The fathers which by
syghes penetrat the heaven: by prayers importune the Living god only for to
have children, ought first to think why they will have children: for that
justly to any man may be denayed, which to an evil end is procured. In my
opinion, ye father ought to desire to have a child, for yt in his age he may
sustain his life in honor: and that after his does he may cause his fame to
live. And if a father desires not a son for this cause, at the least he ought
to desire him, to the end in his age he may honor his horye head: and that
after his death he may enheryte his goods, but we see few children do these
things to their fathers in their age: if the fathers have not taught them in
their youth. For the fruit does never grow in the harvest: unless the tree
did bear blosommes in the spryng. I see oftentimes many fathers complain of
their Children, saying that they are disobedient and proud unto them: and
they do not consydre that they them selves are the cause of all those euilles.
For to much abundance and liberty of youth is no other: but a prophecy and
manifest token of disobedience in age. I know not why princes and great lords
do toil, and oppress so much, and scratche to leave their children great
estates, and on the other side we see that in teaching them, they are and show
them selves to negligent: for princes and great lords ought to make account,
that all yt which they leave of their substance to a wicked heir is utterly
lost. The wise men, and those which in their consciences are upright, and of
their honors careful, ought to be very diligent to bring up their children,
and chiefly that they consider whether they be mete to inherit their estates.
And if perchance the fathers se that their children be more given to folly,
then to noblenes and wisdom: then should I be ashamed to se a father that is
wise, travail all the days of his life, to leave much substance to an evil
brought up child after his death. It is a grief to declare, and a monstrous
thing to se, ye cares which the fathers take to gather riches: and the
diligence that children have to spend them. And in this case I say, the son
is fortunate for that he does inherit, and the Father a fool for that he
does bequeth.

In my opinion Fathers ar bound to enstructe their Children well, for two
causes: the one for that they are nearest to them, and also because they ought
to be their heirs. For truly with great greyfe and sorrow I suppose he does
take his death: which leaves to a fool or an unthrift the toil of all his
life.

Hyzearcus the Greek hystorien in the book of his antiquities, and
Sabellyquus in his general history says, that a father and a son came to
complain to the famous philosopher and ancient Solon Solinon: the son
complained of the father, and the father of the son.

First the son informed the quarrel to ye Philosopher, saying these words. I
complain of my father, because he being rich has dysheryted me, and made me
poor, and in my stead has adopted another heir, the which thing my father
ought not, nor cannot do. For sense he gave me so frail flesh, it is reason
he give me his goods to maintain my feebleness. To these words answered the
father. I complain of my son, because he has not been as a gentle son,
but rather as a cruel enemy, for in all things since he was borne, he has
been disobedient to my will, wherefore I thought it good to dysheryte him before
my death. I would I we^e quite of all my substance, so that the gods had
quyte him of his life: for the earth is very cruel that swalloweth not the
child alive, which to his father is dysobedyent. In that he says I have
adopted another child for mine heir, I confess it is true: and for somuche as
he says that I have dysinheryted him, and abiected him from my heritage, he
being begotten of my own body, hereunto I answer.

That I have not disinheryted my son, but I have disinheryted his pleasure,
tothentent he shall not enjoy my travail: for there can be nothing more unjust,
then that the young and vicious son should take his pleasure, of the swette
and drops of the aged father. The son replied to his father, and said. I
confess I have offended my father, and also I confess that I have lived in
pleasures: yet if I may speak the truth, though I were disobedient and
evil, my father ought to bear the blame: and if for this cause he does
dysherite me, I think he does me great iniurye. For the father that enstructed
not his son in virtue in his youth: wrongfullye dysheryteth him, though he
be disobedient in his age. The father again replyeth, and says. It is true
my son, that I brought the up to wantonly in thy youth, but thou know well
that I have taught the sondrye times, and besides that I did correct the when
thou came to some discretion. And if in thy youth I did not instruct the in
learning, it was for that thou in thy tender age dydest want understanding:
but after that thou had age to understand, discrecion to receive, and
strength to exercise it: I began to punyshe the, to teach the, and to
instruct the. For where no understanding is in the child, there in vain they
teach doctrine. Sense thou art old (quoth the son) and I young, sense thou
art my father, and I thy son, for that thou have white here is of thy bearde,
and I none at all: it is but reason that thou be believed, and I condemned. For
in this world we se oftetimes, that the small aucthoryty of the parson, makes
him to lose his great justice. I grant the (my father) that when I was a
child, thou dydst cause me to learn to read: but thou will not deny, that
if I did commit any fault, thou would neauer agree I should be punyshed.
And hereof it came, that thou sufferyng me to do what I would in my youth,
have been dysobedient to the ever since in my age. And I say to the further,
that if in this case I have offended truly me thinks thou can not be
excused: for the fathers in the youth of their children, ought not only to
teach them to dispute of virtues, and what virtue is: but they ought to
enforce them to be virtuous in deed. For it is a good token when youth (before
they know vices) has been accustomed to practice virtues. Both parties thou
diligently hard, the good Philosopher Solon Solinon spoke these words I give
judgment that the father of this child be not buried after his death: and I
command that the son, because in his youth he has not obeyed his father
who is old, should be dysinheryted whiles the father lives from all his
substance, on such condition, that after his death, his sons should
inheryte the heritage, and so return to the heirs of the son and line of
the father. For it were unjust, that the innocence of the son should be
condemned, for the offense of the father. I do command also, that all the
goods be committed unto some faithful parson, to thend they may give the father
meat and drink during his life, and to make a grave for the son after his
death. I have not with out a cause given such judgment, the which
comprehends life and death: for the Gods will not, that for one pleasure the
punyshement be double, but that we chastyse and punyshe the one in the life,
taking from him his honor and goods: and that we punyshe others after there
death, taking from them memory and burial.

Truly the sentence which the Philosopher gave was grave, and would to God we
had him for a judge of this world presentlye: for I swear, that he should
find many children now a days for to disheryte, and mo fathers to punish.
For I cannot tell which is greater, the shame of the children to disobey their
fathers: or the negligence of the fathers in bringing up their children. Sextus
Cheronensis in the second book of the sainges of the Philosophers declares,
that a citezen of Athens said on day to Dyogenes the Philosopher these
words. Tell me Diogenes, what shall I do to be in the favor of the gods, and
not in the hatred of men? for often times among you Philosophers I have hard
say, that there is great difference between that that the Gods will, and that
which men love. Diogenes answered. Thou speak more then thoughtest to
speak, that the gods will one thing, and men another: for the gods are but as
a center of mercy, and men are but as a den of malice, if thou will inioye
rest in thy days, and keape thy life pure and clean: thou must observe these
three things.

The first, honor thy gods devoutly. For the man which does not serve and
honor the gods, in all his enterprises he shall be unfortunate.

The second, be very diligent to bring up thy children well. For the man has
no enemy so troublesome, as his own son, if he be not well brought up.

The third thing, be thankful to thy good benefactours and friends. For the
Oracle of Apollo says, that the man who is unthankful, of all the world
shall be abhorred. And I tell the further my friend, that of these three things
the most profitable (though it be more troblesome) is for a man to teach and
bring up his children well.

This therefore was the answer that the Philosopher Diogenes made to the
demand of the Cytezen. It is great pytie and grief, to see a young child how
the blood does stir him, to se how the flesh does provoke him to accomplish
his desire, to se sensualyte go before, and he himself to come behind, to se
the malicious world to watch him, to se how the devil does tempt him, to se
how vices bind him, and in all that which is spoken, to se how the father is
negligent as if he had no children: where as in deed the old man, by the few
virtues that he has had in his youth: may easily know the infirmites and
vices, wherewith his son is compassed. If the expert had never ben ignorant,
if the fathers had never ben children, if the virtuous had never ben vicious,
if the fine wits had never ben deceived, it were no marvel if the Fathers
were negligent in teaching their children. For the little experience excuses
men of great offenses: but since thou art a father, and that first thou were a
son, since thou art old, and have ben young, and besides all this, since that
pride has enflamed the, lechery has burned the, wrath has wounded the,
negligence has hindered the, covetousness has blinded the, and glotonie
surfeted the, tell me cruel father, since so many vices have reigned in ye:
why have thou not an eye to thy child, whom of thy own blood thou have
begotten? And if thou do it not because he is thy child, thou ought to
do it because he is thy nearest. For it is impossible that the child which with
many vices is assaulted, and not succored: but in the end he should be infamed
and to the dishonor of ye father most wickedly overcome. It is impossible to
keep flesh well favored, unless it be first salted. It is impossible that the
fish should live without water. It is impossible but that the Rose should
wyther, which is of the thorn ouergrowen. So like it is impossible that the
fathers should have any comfort of their children in their age, unless they
have instructed them in virtue in their youth. And to speak further in this
matter I say, that in the Christian catholic religion, where in deed there is
good doctrine, there always is supposed to be a good conscience. Amongst the
writers it is a thing well known, how Eschines, the philosopher was banished
from Athens, and with all his family came to dwell at Rhodes. The occasion was,
because that he and the philosopher Demosthenes were in great contention in the
common wealth. Wherefore the Athenians determined to banish the one, and to
keape the other with them. And truly they did well, for of the contentions and
debates of sages, wars most commonly arise amongst the people. This
philosopher Eschines being at Rhodes banished, amongst others made a solemn
oration, wherein he greatly reproves the Rhodians that they were so negligente
in brynging up their children, saying unto them these words. I let you
understand (Lords of Rhodes) that your predecessors advanced them selves to
discende, and to take their beginning of the Lides: the which above all other
nations were curious and diligent to bring up their children: and hereof came a
law that was among them, which said.

We ordeine and command, that if a father have many children, that the most
virtuous should enherite the goods, and riches: and if there were but one
virtuous, that he alone should inherit the whole. And if perchance the
children were vicious, that then al should be deprived from the heritage. For
the goods gotten with travail of virtuous fathers, ought not by reason to be
inherited with vicious children. These were the words that the philosopher
spoke to the Senate of the Rhodes: and because he said in that Oration many
other things which touch not our matter, I will in this place omit them.
For among excellent writers, the writing loses much authority, when the
author from his purpose digresseth into an other matter. To say the truth, I
do not maruayle that the children of princes and great lords be adulterers,
and belly gods: for that on the one part youth is the mother of Idleness, and
on the other, little experience is the cause of great offenses. And furthermore
the fathers being once dead, the children enherite their goods as quietly,
being laden with vices: as if in deed they were with all virtues endued. If the
young children did know for a certain, that the laws of the Lydes should be
observed (that is to wit) that they should not enherite, unless they be
virtuous: it is impossible but that they would lead a good life, and not in
this wise to run at large in the world. For they do abstain more from
doing evil, fearyng to lose that which they do possess: then for any love
to do that which they ought. I do not denaye, but according as the natures
of the fathers is diverse, so the inclinations of the children are variable. For
so much as some following their good inclination are good, and others not
resisting evil sensualities are evil. But yet in this matter I say, that it
lies much in the father that does bring them up, when as yet they are
young: so that the evil which nature gave, by good bryngyng up is refrayned.
For oftetymes the good custom, does overcome all evil inclination. Princes
and great lords that wylbe diligent in the instruction of their children,
ought to inform their masters and tutors that shall teach them, to what
vices and virtues their children are most inclined: and this ought to be, to
encourage them in that that is good, and contrary to reprove them in all that
is evil. For men are undone for no other cause when they be old: but for that
they had so much pleasures when they are young. Sextus Cheronensis in the
second book of the sayings of the auntientes says, that on a day a
citezen of Athens was byenge things in the market, and for the quality of his
person, the greatest part of them were superfluous and nothing necessary. And
in this case the poor are no less culpable then the rich: and the rich then
the poor. For that is so little, that to sustain man's life is necessary: that
he which has lest, has thereunto superfluous. Therefore at that time, when
Athens and her common wealth was the lantern of all Greece, there was in Athens
a law long used, and of great time accustomed: that nothing should be bought
before a philosopher had set the price. And truly the law was good, and would
to God the same law at this present were observed: for there is nothing that
destroys a common wealth more, then to permit some to sell as tyrauntes,
and others to buy as fools. When the Thebane was buying these things, a
philosopher was there present, who said unto him these words. Tell me I pray
thee, thou man of Thebes, wherefore do thou consume and waste thy money, in
that which is not necessary for thy house, nor profitable for thy person? the
Thebane answered him. I let the know, that I do buy all these things for a
son I have of the age of.xx. years, the which never did thing that seamed
unto me evil, nor I never denayed him any thing that he demanded. This
philosopher answered. O how happy were thou, if as thou art a father, thou
were a son, and that which the father says unto the son, the son would
say unto the father: but I am offended greatly with that thou have told me.
For until the child be.xxv. years old, he ought not to gaynesaye his
father: and the good father ought not to condescende unto the appetites of the
son. Now I call the cursed father, since thou art subject to the will of
thy son: and that thy son is not obedient to the will of his father, so that
thou alterest the order of nature. For so much as the father is son of his
son, and the son is father of his father. But in the end, I swear unto
thee by the immortal Gods, that when thou shall become old, thou shall weape
by thy self at that which with thy son thou did laughe when he was
young. Though the words of this philosopher were few: yet a wise man will
judge the sentences to be many. I conclude therefore, that princes and great
lords ought to reco^mende their children to their masters, to the end they may
teach them to change their appetites, and not to follow their own will: so
that they withdraw them from their own will, and cause them to learn the advice of an other. For the more a man gives a noble man son the bridle, the
more harder it is for them to receive good doctrine.

Princes ought to take heed that their children be not brought up in vain
pleasures and delights. For oftetimes they are so wicked, that the fathers
would not only have them with sharp discipline corrected: but also with bitter
tears buried. Chap. xxxiii.
BY experience we see, that in war (for the defense of men) rampires and
fortes are made according to the quality of the enemies, and those which sail
the dangerous seas, do chose great ships, which may break the waves of
the raging Sea: so that all wise men according to the quality of the danger,
do seek for the same in time some remedy. Oftetymes I muse with my self, and
think if I could find any estate, any age, any land, any nation, any
realm, or any world, wherein there has been any man that has passed this
life, without tasting, what adversity was: for if such a one were found, I
think it should be a monstrous thing throughout all the earth, and by reason
both the dead and living should envy him. In the end, after my count made, I
find that he which yesterdaye was rich, to day is poor: he that was hole,
I see him to day sick: he that yesterdaye laughed, to day I see him weep: he
that had his hearts ease, I see him now sore afflicted: he that was fortunate,
I see him unlucky: finally, him whom we knew alive in the town, now we see
buried in the grave. And to be buried is nothing else, but to be utterly
forgotten: for man's frendshyp is so frail, that when the corpse is covered with
earth, immediately the dead is forgotten. One thing me thinks to all men is
grievous, and to those of understanding no less payneful, which is, that the
miseries of this wicked world are not equally divided, but that oftetymes all
worldly calamities lies in the neck of one man alone. For we are so
unfortunate, that the world gives us pleasures in sight, and troubles in
proof. If a man should ask a sage man now a days, who has lived in mean
estate, and that he would be contented to tell him what he has paste, since
three years that he began to speak, until fifty years that he began to wax
old: what things think you he would tell us, that has chanced unto him?
truly al these that here follow The grefes of his children, the assaults of
his enemies, the importunities of his wife, the wantonness of his daughters,
sickness in his person, great loss of goods, general famine in the city, cruel
plagues in his country, extreme cold in winter, noisome heat in summer,
sorrowful deaths of his friends, and envious prosperities of his enemies:
finally he will say, that he passed such and so many things, that oftimes he
bewailed the woeful life, and desired the sweet death. If the miserable man
has passed such things outwardly, what would he say of those which he has
suffered inwardly? the which though some discrete men may know, yet truly
others dare not tell. For the travails which the body passes in fifty years,
may well be counted in a day: but that which the heart suffers in one day,
cannot be counted in a hundred years. A man cannot denay, but that we would
count him rash, which with a read would mete an other that has a sword: and
him for a fool, that would put of his shoes to walk upon the thorns. But
without comparison we ought to esteame him for the most fool, that with this
tender flesh thinks to prevail against so many evil fortunes: for without
doubt, the man that is of his body delicate, passes his life with much pain.
O how happy may that man be called, which never tasted what pleasure means.
For men which from their infancy have been brought up in pleasures, for want
of wisdom know not how to chose the good, and for lack of force cannot resist
the evil: which is ye cause, that noble men's children ofttimes commit sondrye
heinous offenses. For it is an infallible rule, that the more a man gives him
self to pleasures, the more he is entangled in vices. It is a thing worthy to
be noted, and woeful to see, how politic we be to augmente things of honor,
how bold we be to enterprise them, how fortunate to compass them, how diligent
to keep them, how circumspect to sustain them, and afterward what pity is it
to see, how unfortunate we are to lose all that, which so long time we have
searched for, kept, and possessed. And that which is most to be lamented in
this case is, that the goods and honor are not lost for want of diligence
and travail of the father: but for the abundance of pleasures, and vices of
the son. Finallye let the rich man know, that that which he has won in
labor and toil waking: his son (being evil brought up) shall consume in
pleasures sleaping. One of the greatest vanities that reigns at this day
among the children of vanity is, that the father can not show unto his son
the love which he bears him, but in suffering him to be brought up in the
pleasures and vanities of this life. Truly he that is such a one, ought not to
be called a pitiful father, but a cruel stepfather: for no man will deny me
this, but that where there is youth, liberty, pleasure, and money, there will
all the vices of this world be resident. Lycurgus the great king, geuer of
laws, and sage philosopher, ordained to the Lacedaemonians, that all the
children which were borne in cities, and good towns, should be sent to bring
up in villages till they were.xxv. years of age. As Liuius says that the
Lygures were, which in old time were confederate with those of Capua, and
great enemies to the people of Rome. They had a law amongst them, that none
should take wages in the wars, unless he had been brought up in the fields,
or that he had been a heard man in the mountains: so that through one of these
two ways, their flesh was hardened, their joints accustomed to suffer the
heat and the cold, and their bodies more mete to endure the trauayles of the
wars. In the year of the foundation of Rome, a hundred and forty, the
Romans made cruel wars with the Lygures, against whom was sent Gneus
Fabritius, of the which in the end he triumphed: and the day following this
triumph, he spoke unto the Senate these words. Worthy Senators I have been
these five years against the Ligures, and by the immortal gods I swear unto
you, that in all this time there passed not one weke, but we had either
battle, or some perilous skermiche. And that which a man ought most to
marvel at is, that I never perceived any fear or cowardlynes to be in those
barbarous people, whereby they were constrained to demand peace of the people
of Rome. These Lygures pursued with such fearcenes the wars, that oftetimes
they took away from us all hope to win the victory: for between armies, the
great might of the one, does put always the others in fear. And I will tell
you (fathers conscript) their brynging up, to the end the Roman youth should
take hereby example. When they are young, they are put to be shepeheardes
because they should accustom their flesh in the mountains to endure
travail: by the which custom they are so much masters of them selves (the
country being always full of snow and Ise in the winter, and also noisome
through the extreme heat in the So^mer that I swear by ye god Apollo, in all
this time of five years, of those we have not seen one prease to the fire in ye
winter, nor covet the shadow in ye summer. Do not ye think worthy Senators,
that I was willing to declare unto you these things in the Senate, for any
desire I have that you should esteame any thing the more my triumph: but I do
tell it you to this end, that you may have an eye, and take head to your men
of war, to the end they may always be occupied, and that you suffer them
not to be idle. For it is more perilous for the Roman armies, to be overcome
with vices: then to be disconfited with their enemies. And to talk of these
matters more at large, me thinks they should provide and command, that
rich men should not be so hardy to bring up their children to delicatly: for
in the end, it is impossible that the delicate person should win with his
hands, the honor of many victories. That which moved me to say so much as I
have said (worthy Senators) is to the end you may know, that the Ligures were
not overcome by the power of Rome: but because fortune was against them. And
since in nothing fortune shows her self so variable, as in the things of
war: me thinks that though the Ligures are now vanquished and overcome,
yet notwithstanding you ought to entertain them in love, and to take them for
your confederates. For it is not good council, to hazard that into the hands
of fortune, which a man may compass by friendship. The author of this which
is spoken, is called Iunius Pratus, in the book of the concord of Realms,
and he says in that place, that this captain Gneus Fabritius, was counted no
less sage for that he spoke: then esteamed valiaunte for that he did. In the
old time, those of the Isles Balleares (which now are called Maiorque, and
Minorque) though they were not counted wise: yet at the least in bringing up
their children, they showed them selves not negligent. Because they were
brought up in hardness in their youth, and could not endure all painful
exercises of the wars. Those of Carthage gave five prisoners of Rome, for one
sclaue of Maiorque. Diodorus Siculus says, in those Isles, the mother did not
give the children bread with their own hands: but they did put it on an high
pole, so that they might see the bread with their eyes, but they could not
reach it with their hands. Wherefore when they would eat, they should
first with hurling of stones, or slinges win it, or else fast. Though the
work were of children: yet the invention came of a high wit. And hereof it
came that the Balleares were esteamed for valiant me^, as well in wrestling,
as in slinges for to hurl: for they did hurl with a slinge to hit a white, as
the Lygures shoot now in a cross bow to hitte the prick. Those of great
Britayne, which now we call England, amongst all the Barbarous, were men
most barbarous: but you ought to know, that within the space of few years,
the Romans were vanquished of them many times. For time in all things
brings such change and alteration, that those which once we knew great
lords: within a while after we have seen them sclaues. Herodian in his hystory
of Seuerus Emperor of Rome says, that an Ambassador of Britayne being one
day in Rome (as by chance they gave him a froward answer in the Senate)
spoke stoutely before them all, and said these words. I am sorry you will not
accept peace, nor grant truce: the which thing shall be for the greater
justification of our wars. For afterward none can take, but that which
fortune shall give. For in the end the delicate flesh of Rome shall feel, if
ye bloody swords of Britayne will cut. The English history says, and it is
true, that though the country be very cold, and that the water freseth often:
yet the women had a custom to carry their children where the water was frosen,
and breaking the Ise with a stone, with the same Ise they used to rub the
body of the infant, to the end to harden their flesh, and to make them more
apt er to endure travails. And without doubt they had reason, for I wyshe no
greater penitence to delicate men, then in the winter to see them without fire:
and in the Summer to want fresh shadow. Since this was the custom of the
Britayns, it is but reason we credit Julius Caesar in that he says in his
comentaries, that is to wete, that he passed many dangers before he could
overcome them: for they with as little fear did hyde them selves, and dyued
under the cold water, as a very man would have rested him self in a pleasant
shadow. As Lucanus and Appianus Alexandrinus say, amongst other nations
which came to succor the great Pompei in Pharsalia, were the Messagetes, the
which (as they say) in their youth did suck no other, but the milk of Camels:
and eat bread of Acornes. These barbarous did these things to the end to
harden their bodies, to be able to endure trauail, and to have their legs
lighter for to ro^ne. In this case we can not call them barbarous, but we ought
to call them men of good understanding: for it is impossible for the man that
eats much, to run fast. Viriatus (a Spanyarde) was king of the Lusytaines,
and a great enemy of the Romans, who was so aduenterous in the war, and so
valiant in his person, that the Romans (by the experience of his deeds)
found him invincible. For in the space of.xiii. years they could never have any
victory of him: the which when they saw, they determined to poison him, and
did so in deed. At whose death they more reioysed, then if they had won the
signorie of all Lusitanie. For if Viriatus had not died, they had never brought
the Lusitaines under their subjection. Iunius Rusticus in his epitomie says,
that this Viriatus in his youth was a herd man, and kept cattle by the river
of Guadiana, and after that he waxed older, used to rob, and assault men by
the high ways. And after that he was.xl. years of age, he became king of the
Lusitaines, and not by force, but by election. For when the people saw them
selves enuirouned and assaulted on every side with enemies: they chose rather
stout, strong, and hardy men for their captains, then noble men for their
guydes. If the ancient hystoriographers deceive me not, when Viriatus was a
thief, he led with him always at the least a hundred thieves: the which were
shodde with leaden shoes, so that when they were enforced to run, they put of
their shoes. And thus although all the day they went with leaden shoes, yet
in the night they ran like swyfte buckes: for it is a general rule, that the
loser the joints are, the more swifter shall the legs be to run. In the
book of the iestes of the Lumbardes, Paulus Diaconus says, that in the old
time those of Capua had a law, that until the children were married, the
fathers should give them no bed to sleep on, nor permit them to sit at the
table to eat: but that they should eat their meats in their hands, and take
their rest on the ground. And truly it was a commendable law, for rest was
never invented for the young man which has no bearde: but for the aged,
being lame, impotent, and crooked. Quintus Cincinatus was second Dictator of
Rome, and in deed for his deserts was the first emperor of the earth. This
excellent man was brought up in so great travail, that his hands were found
full of knottes, the ploughe was in his arms, and the swette in his face when
he was sought to be Dictator of Rome. For the auncientes desired rather to be
ruled of them that knew not, but how to plow the ground: then of them that
delyted in nothing else, but to live in pleasurs among the people. Caligula
which was the fourth emperor of Rome (as they say) was brought up with such
cost and delicatnes in his youth, that they were in doubt in Rome, whether
Drusius Germanicus his father employed more for the Armies: then Calligula his
son spent in the cradel for his pleasurs. This rehearsed again, I would now
know of princes and great lords what part they would take (yt is to wete)
whether with Cincinatus, which by his stoutnes wanne so many strange countries:
or with Caligula, that in his fylthy lusts spared not his proper sister. In
mine opinyon, there needs no great deliberacion to answer this questyon (that
is to wete) the goodness of the one, and the wickedness of the other: for there
was no battle but Cincinatus did overcome, nor there was any vice but
Caligula did invent. Suetonius Tranquillus in the second book of Cesars says,
yt when the children of the Emperor Augustus Caesar entered into the high
capitol, where all the senate were assembled, the Senators rose out of their
places, and made a reverence to the children, the which when the Emperor
Augustus saw, he was much displeased, and called them back agane. And on a day
being demanded why he loved his children no better, he answered in this wise.
If my children will be good, they shall sit hereafter where I sit now: but if they
be evil, I will not their vices should be reverenced of the Senators. For the
authority and gravity of the good, ought not to be employed in ye service of
those that be wicked. The 26. Emperor of Rome was Alexander, the which (though
he was young) was as much esteamed for his virtues amongst the Romans: as
ever. Alexander the great was for his valiauntnes amongst the Greeks. We can
not say, that long experience caused him to come to the government of the
common wealth, for as Herodian says in his syxt book, the day that the
Senators proclaimed him emperor, he was so little that his own men bare him in
their arms. That fortunate Emperor had a mother called Mamea, the which
brought him up so well, and dilygently, that she kept always a great guard of
men to take heed, that no vicious man came unto him. And let not the diligence
of the mother to yt child be little esteemed: For princes often times of their own
nature are good, and by evil conversation only they are made evil. This worthy
woman keeping always such a faithful guard of her child, that no flatterers
should enter in to flatter him, nor malicious to tell him lies: bychaunce on a
day a Roman said unto her these words. I think it not mete (most excellent
princess) yt thou should be so dyligente about thy son, to forget the
affairs of the common wealth: for princes ought not to be kept so close, that
it is more easy to obtain a suit at the gods, then to speak one word with
the prince.

To this the Empress Mamea answered, and said. They which have charge to
govern those that do govern, without comparison ought to fear more the
vices of the king: then the enemies of the Realm. For the enemies are
destroyed in a battle, but vices remain during the life, and in the end,
enemies do not destroy but the possessions of the land, but the vycious prince
destroys the good manners of the common wealth. These words were spoken of
this worthy Roman. By the histories which I have declared, and by those
which I omit to recite, al verteous men may know, how much it profits them
to bring up their children in travails, or to bring them up in pleasures. But
now I ymagine, that those which shall read this, will praise that which is well
written: and also I trust they will not give their children so much their own
wills. For men that read much, and work little: are as belles the which do
sound to call others, and they them selves never enter into the church. If the
fathers did not esteame the service they do unto God, their own honor, nor
the profit of their own children: yet to preserve them from disseases, they
ought to bring them up in virtue, and withdraw them from vices. For truly the
children which have been brought up daintely, shall always be diseased and
sikely. What a thing is it to se ye son of a labourer, the cote without
points, the shyrte tottered and torn, their feet bare, their head without a
cappe, the body without a girdle, in summer without a hat, in winter without a
cloak, in the day ploughing, in the night driving his herd, eating bread of Rye
or Otes, lyeng on the earth, or else on the straw: and in this travail to se
this young man so holy and virtuous, that every man desires and wishes, that
he had such a son. The contrary comes of noble men's sons, the which we
se are nourished and brought up between two fine holland sheets, laid in a
costly cradel, made after the new fashion: they give the nourse what she will
desire, if perchance the child be sick, they change his nource, or else they
appoint him a diet. The father and the mother sleep neither night nor day, all
the house watches, they let him eat nothing but the broth of chyckins, they
keep him diligentely that he fall not down the stayres, the child asks
nothing but it is given him immediately. Finally they spend their time in
seruyng them: they waste their riches in geuyng them their delights, they
occupy their eyes but to behold them, and they imploye not their hearts, but to
love them. But I swear, yt those fathers (which on this wise do spend their
riches to pomper them) shall one day water their eyes to bewail them: What it
is to se the wast, that a vain man makes in bringinge up his child? specially
if he be a man sumwhat aged, and that at his desire has a child borne. He
spends so much goods in bringing his up wantonly, whiles he is young: that
often times he wants to mary him when he comes to age. And that which worst
of al is, that that which he spends and employeth he thinks it well
bestowed, and thinks that to much that he gives for gods sake.

Though the fathers are very large in spendinge, the mothers very curious, and
the norces full of pleasures, and the servants very dilygente and attentive:
yet it follows not that the children should be more hole then others. For the
more they are attented, the more they be disseased: the more they eat, the
more they are weak: the more they rejoice, the worse they prosper: the more
they wast and spend, so much less they profit. And all this is not without
the secret permission of God. For God will not that the cloutes of children be
of greater value, then the garments of the poor. God without a great mystery
took not in hand the custodye of the poor, and does not suffer that the
children of the rich men should prosper: For the good brings up his children
without the preiudyce of the rich, and to the profit of the common wealth: but
the rich brings up his children with the swet of the poor, and to the damage
of the common wealth. Therefore if this thing be true (as it is) it is but
reason that the wolf which deuoureth us do dye: and the sheep which clotheth
us do live. The fathers often times for tenderness will not teach nor bring up
their children in doctrine, saying that as yet he is to young, and that there
remains time enough for to be learned, and that they have leisure enough to
be taught: and further for the more excuse of their error they affirm, that
when the child in his youth is chastned, he ronneth in danger of his health.
But the evil respect which the fathers has to their children, God suffers
afterward that they come to be so slanderous to the common wealth, so
infamous to their parents, so disobedient to their fathers, so evil in their
conditions, so unadvised and light in their behavior, so vnmeate for
knowledge, so incorrigible for disciplyne, so inclined to lies, so enuyeng the
truth: that their fathers would not only have punished them with sharp
correction: but also they would rejoice to have them buried with bitter
tears. An other thing there is in this matter worthy to be noted, and much more
worthyer to be commended, that is, that the Fathers and mothers under the
couller that their children should be somewhat gracious, they learn them to
speak, to babble, and to be great mockers and scoffers, the which thing
afterward redoundeth to the great infamye and dishonor of the Father, to the
great peril of the son, and to the greatest grief and displeasure of the
mother. For the child which is brought up wantonly without doctrine in his
youth: of necessity must be a fool when he is old. If this which I have said
be evil, this which I will say is worse: that the Fathers, and mothers, the
governors, or nources, do teach them to speak dishonest things, the which are
not lawful, and therefore ought not to be suffered to be spoken in that tender
age: nor the gravity of the ancients ought not to lysten unto them. For there
are no men (unless they be shameless) that will permit their children to be
great bablers. Those which have ye charge to govern good men's children ought
to be very circumspect, yt they keep them in awe, fear and subjection, and
that they ought not to be contented, though the fathers say they are pleased.
For the disordinate love that the fathers have to them, is the cause that they
cannot se whether they be mockers or evil brought up. And if it chanced (as
ofttimes it does) yt the father should come to the master to cause him to
withdraw correction, in this case, if the master be a wise man, he ought no
less to reprove and admonish the father: then to correct the son. And if
this did not avail, I council him to forsake and leave his charge. For the man
of an honest nature, after he has taken any charge in hand, will either bring
it to pass, or else he will dye in the same. I will not denaye, but that it is
reason noble men's sons be more gently brought up, handled, and honored,
then the sons of the Plebeiens: for more delicately is the palm tree, which
brings forth dates, cherished: then the oak which brings forth Akornes,
wherewith the hogs are nourished. Let princes and great lords beware, that
the pleasures which they gave their children in their youth, be not so
excessyue, nor of so long continuance: that when they would withdraw them,
the world has not already festered them. For the children brought up with to
much delicateness, are disobedient to their fathers and mothers, or else they
are sick in their bodies, or worse then that, they are vicious in their
behauiours: so that their fathers should be better to burye them quycke, then
to bring them up vycious.

That princes and gre^te Lords ought to be careful in seking wise men to
bring up their children. Of.x. conditions that good Schole masters ought to
have. Cap. xxxiiii.
WHen he that is without end, gave beginning to the world, in this sort he
began. The Sunday he created heaven and earth, The Mondaye he created the
element, the Tuesday he created the Planettes, the Wednesday he created the
Son and the Moon, the Thursday he created the birds in the air, and the
fishes in the sea, the friday he created Adam and Eve his wife, and truly in
that he created, and how he created, he showed himself as God. For as soon as
the house was made, he fornished and peopled it with that that was necessary,
as he could well do. Omitting therefore the creator, and talking of creatures: we
se by experience, that a householder in planting a vineyarde, immediately makes
a hedge, to the end that the beasts do not hurt it, and eat it up. And when
it is well grown he hyreth some poor laborer to watch, that trauailers do not
gather nor eat the grapes thereof. The rich man that traffiqueth by sea, after
he has made a great ship, and bestowed vi. or vii. thousand ducates, if he
be wise, he will first provide a man that may govern her, before he will seek
marchaundise for to fraite her: for in perilous tempests the greatness of the
ship little avails, if the pilot thereof be not expert. The householder that
has many cowes and sheep, and likewise has fair feeldes, and pleasant
pastures for his cattle, does not only seek herdmen to keep the cattle, but
also dogs to fear the wolfes, and cabannes to lodge the herdmen. For the
cabanne of the shepherdes, and the baying of the dog, is but as a sauegard of
the sheep, from the raueninge of the wolf. The mighty and valiaunte princes
which in the frontiers of their enemies keep strong fortresses, seek always
stout and hardy captains to defend their walls: for otherwise it were better
the fort should be battered to the ground, then it should come into the power
of the enemies. By the comparisons above named, there is no discreat man but
does understand to what end my pen does write them: that is: to know to keep,
and prove, how that men which love their children well (adding this unto it)
have great neade of good masters and governors, to teach and bring them up.
For whiles ye palm tree is but little, a frost does easily destroy it. I mean
whiles ye child is young if he have no tutour: he is easily deceived with the
world. If the lord be wise, and of understanding, there is no fortress so
esteamed, neither ship so fair, nor herd so profitable, nor vine so fruitful,
but that he better estemeth to have a good son then al these things
together, or any other thing in the world. For the father ought to love his
children as his own proper: and al residue as gifts of fortune. If it be so
(as it is in dead) since that for to keape and watch the herd they seake a
good shepherde, if for the vine they seake a good labourer, if for to govern
the ship they seek a good master, and for to defend a fort they seek a good
captain: why then will not the wise fathers seek for good masters, to teach
and bring up their children? O princes and great lords, I have now told you,
and again do say, that if you travail one year to leave your children
goods: you ought to sweat 50 years to leave them well brought up. For it
avails little to carye much corn to the myl: if the myl be out of frame. I
mean that in vain riches and treasurs are gathered: when the child that shall
inherit them, has not wit to use them. It is no small matter to know how to
choose good governors. For the prince is sage, that fyndeth such a one: and
much more happy is he, that of him shall be taught. For in my opinyo^, it is no
small charg for one man to bring up a Prince that shall govern many. As Seneca
says, the wise man ought to confer al things with his friend, but first he
ought to know who he is that is his friend. I mean, that the wise father ought
for his children to seek one good master, and to him he should recommende them
al: but first he ought to know what he is. For that man is very simple which
will bye a horse, before he se and prove him, whether he be hole or lame. He
ought to have many and good conditions and qualyties, that should bring up the
children of princes and great lords: for by one way they nourishe the tender
trees in the orchard, and after another sort they plant the wild trees in the
mountains. Therefore the case shall be this, that we will declare here what
conditions, and behauiours the masters and governors of noble men's sons
ought to have, which may bring them to honor, and their disdoundeth to the
honor and praise of his master.

The first condition is, that he which ought to be tutor to noble men's sons,
should be no less then 40. years of age, and no more then 60 because the
master yt is young, is ashamed to comaund, and if he be aged he is not able to
correct.

The.2. it is necessary that tutors be very honest, and that not only in
pureness of conscience: but also in the outward appearance, and cleanes of life.
For it is impossible that the child be honest, if the master be dissolute,

The 3. it is necessary that tutors and governors of princes and great lords,
be true men, not only in their words: but also in their couenauntes. For to say
the truth, that mouth which is always full of lies, ought not by reason to be a
teacher of the truth.

The 4. condition, it is necessary yt the governors of princes and great
lords (of their own nature) be liberal: for often times the great covetousness
of masters, makes the hearts of princes to be gredy and covetous.

The 5. it is necessary that the masters and governors of princes, and great
lords, be moderate in words and very resolute in sentences: so that they ought
to teach the children to speak little, and to harken much. For it is the
chefest virtue in a prince, to hear with patience, and to speak with wisdom.

The 6. condition is, it is necessary that the masters and governors of
princes and great lords be wise men, and temperate: so that the grauitye of the
master, may restrain the lyghtnes of the Scholars, for there is no greater
plagues in Realms, then for princes to be young, and their masters to be light.

The 7. it is necessary that the masters and tutors of princes and great
lords, be well learned in divinity, and humanity, in such sort that that which
they teach the princes by word, they may show it by writing, to the end that
other princes may execute and put the same in ure: for men's hearts are sooner
moved by the examples of those which are past, then by the words of them that
are present.

The 8. condition, it is necessary that the masters and tutors of princes be
not given to the vice of the flesh: for as they are young, and naturallye given
to the flesh, so they have no strength to abide chaste, neither wisdom to be
ware of the snares. Therefore it is necessary that their masters be pure and
honest: for the Dyscyples shall never be chaste, if the master be vicyous.

The 9. it is necessary that the masters and tutors of Princes, and great
lords, have good conditions, because the children of noble men (being daintely
brought up) always learn evil conditions, the which their masters ought to
reform, more by good conversation, then by sharp correction. For oftentimes
it chances, that whereas the master is cruel, the scholar is not merciful.

The.10. it is necessary that the masters and tutors of princes, and great
lords, have not only seen and red many things: but also that they have proved
chaungeable fortune. For since noble men's sons (by the gift of god) have
great estates, they ought therefore to provide to speak to many, to answer
to many, and to entreat with many, and it is very profitable for them to be
conuersaunt with expert men, for in the end, the approved man in council has
pre-eminence. I was willing to bring in these rules in my writing, to the end
that fathers may keep them in their memory, when they do seek masters to teach
their children: for in my opinyon, the father is more in fault to seek an evil
master, then the master is to make an evil scholar. For if I choose evil
taylers to cut my gown, it is my fault that the cloth is lost, and my gown
marred. Albeit the Romans were in all their doings circumspect, yet for this
one thing, I must envy the good doctrine which they gave to noble men's
children. For without doubt, it is impossible that in any city there by a good
common wealth, unless they are very circumspect to bring up young children.
Sabellicus in his rapsodies says, that in the 415 years of the foundation of
Rome. Qintus Seruilius, and Lucius Geminus then consulles, being in the war
against the Volces the stout aduenturous captain Camillus, there rose a great
strife, and contencion in Rome amongst the people, and the knights: and that
contencion was upon the provision of offices. For in great common wealths it
has been an aunciente quarrel, that in knights and gentlemen there surmounteth
pride in commaundyng: and among the people there wants patience in obeyinge.

The knights and gentlemen would they should chose a Tribune Millitare in the
senate, to speak in the name of all the knights, that were absent and present:
for they said, that sense they were always at the war, the whole common
wealth remained in the power of the people. The commons on the other part
importuned, and desired, that a new officer should be created, the which should
have the charge to examine and take account how the youth of Rome were brought
up: because the common people did accuse the knights, and gentlemen, that the
longer they remained in the wars, the more sensuallye their children lived in
Rome. It was decreed then, that a Tribune Millitare should be erected, the
which in aucthority and dignytie should be equal with the senators, and that
he should represente the state of warlike knights: but that office continued no
longer then four years in Rome (that is to wete) til the time yt Camillus
returned from the wars. For things that are grounded of no reason, of them
selves they come to naught. All the knights and gentlemen sought to the
uttermost of their power, to maintain their prehemine^ce: and on the other
side all the cominalty of Rome was against it. In ye end, the good captain
Camillus called all the knights and gentlemen to gethers and said unto them
these words. I am greatly ashamed, to se that the stoutnes should be so little
of the Roman knights, that they should co^discend to the will of the Plebians:
for in deed the mighty do not get so much honor, to overcome the little: as the
little do to strive with the great. I say yt the strife and debate amongst you
in Rome, does displease me much: therefore (you knights) if you will not lose
your honors, you must either kill them, or overcome them. You cannot overcome
them, because they are many: and kill them you ought not, for in the end they
are youres, and therefore there is no better remedy then to dissemble with them.
For things which suffer no force, nor observe not justice, ought always (until
convenient time) to be dissembled. The immortal gods did not create Roman
knights to govern people: but to conquer Realms. And I say further, that
they did not create us to teach laws to ours: but to give laws to
strangers. And if we be the children of our fathers, and immitators of the
ancient Romans: we will not content our selves to command in Rome, but to
command those which do command in Rome. For the heart of a true Roman: does
little esteame to se himself lord of this world: if he know that there is
another to conquer. You others did creat this Tribune Millitare, we being in
the war: whereof now theris no necessitye, since we are in peace. And the
cause why I was willing there should be none in the common wealth, was for that
there was not riches in Rome sufficient to acquit the deserts of the Roman
chiualry. And if you esteem, an honorable office, to be a Tribune Millitaire:
since you cannot al have it, me thinks you should al want it. For among ye
noble men and Plebeians it is not mete, that one alone should enjoy that, which
many have deserved. This history Sabellicus declares, and allegeth Pulio for
his aucthor, and recites, that for this good work that Camillus did in Rome
(that is to wete) to set the great and the small at one: he was as well beloved of
yt romans, as he was feared of the enemies. And not without a just cause: for
in my opinyon it is a greater virtue to pacify his own, then to rob
strangers. As touching the office of this Tribune, whereupon this great
co^tencion rose in Rome I cannot tell which was greater, the folish rashness of
the knights to procure it, or the wisdom of Camillus to abbolish it. For to
say the truth, the art of cheualrie was invented more to defend the common
wealth: then to bide at home, and have the charge of justice. For to the good
knight it seems better to be laden with weapons to resist enemies: then to be
enuyroned with books to determyne causes. Returning therefore to that which the
people said against the soldiers, it was ordained (by the consent of al) that
in Rome an office should be erected, and that he which should have it, should
have the charge to go through Rome, to se what they were in Rome, that did not
instruct their children in good doctrine: and if perchance he found any
neighbors child that was evil taught, he chastised and banished the father.
And truly that punishment was very just, for the father deserves more
punishment, for yt he does thereunto consent: then the child deserves more the
offenses which he does commit. When Rome was Rome, and that of all the world the
common wealth thereof was commended, they chose for an officer therein ye most
ancient and virtuous Roman, who was called the general vysiter of the
children of Rome: and it seems to be true, for so much as he which had this
office one year, hoped to be consul, dictatour. or censor the next. As it
appears by Marcus Porcio, who desired to be corrector of the children: and
afterward succeeded to be censor of the Roman people. For the Romans did
not offer the office of justice to any man, unless he had had experience of al
offices. Patricius Senensis in the book of the common wealth says, that
before the wars were between Carthage and Rome, the common wealth of Carthage
was very well governed, and as it be seemed such a noble city: but it is an
ancient preuiledge of the war, that it kylleth the persons, consumes the
goods, and above al, engenders a new passion and misery: and in the end
destroys al good aunciente customs.

The Carthagians therefore had a custom, that the children, and especially
those which were of honest men, should be put in the temples from iii. years,
till.xii. and so from.xii. til xx. they learned crafts, sciences, and
occupacions, and from.xx. until.xxv. they instructed them in ye feats of
war: and at the end of xxx. years they gave themselves to marriage* For
amongst them it was a law inviolable, that no man should mary until he were
xxx. years of age: and the women xxv. And after that they were married, the
month following they ought to present themselves before the Senate, and there to
chose what kind of estate they would take upon them to live in, and what their
minds most desired (that is to wete) if they would serve in the Temples, follow
the war, or travail the seas, or get their living by land, or follow their
occupacion which they had learned. And look what estate or office that day they
chose, the same they kept and occupied during their life: and truly the law was
very good, because such change of estates and offices in the world, are
occasion that presently so many come to destruction. All the excellent and
ancient Princes had many great philosophers for their masters: and this
seameth to be true by this, that king Darius had Lichanius the philosopher for
his master. The great Alexander had Aristotel the philosopher for his master.
King Artaxerces had Pindarus the philosopher for his master. The aduenturous
and hardye captain of the Athenians Palemo had Xenocrates the Philosopher for
his master. Xemiades (only king of the Corinthians) had Chilo the philosopher
for his master and tutour to his children.

Epamynundes, prince of the Thebaines, had for his master and councelloure
Maruchus the Philosopher.

Ulysses the Greek (as Homere says) had for his master and companyon in his
trauayles, Catinus the philosopher.

Pirrus (which was king of the Epirotes, and great defendoure of the
Tharentines) had for his master and chronicler, Arthemius the philosopher. Of
whom Cicero speaks ad atticum, that his sword was sharper to fight, then his
pen ready to write. The great king Ptholomeus Philadelphus was not only
scholar of the most singular Philosophers of Greece: but also after he was king,
he sent for 72. philosophers wych were Hebrews. Cirus king of the Persians,
that destroyed the great Babylon, had for his master Pristicus the
Philosopher. Traian the Emperor had Plutarche for his master, who did not
only teach him in his youth: but also wrote him a book, how he ought to
govern him self and his common wealth. By these few examples which I have
expressed, and by many other which I omit, Princes at this present may se, how
careful princes were in times past, to give their children wise and learned
men, O princes and great lords, since you that are at this present, do presume
and take upon you that which your forefathers did: I would that now you would
consider, who brought them to so high estate, and who leaves of them eternal
memory. For without doubt noble men never wanne renown, for the pleasures they
had in vices, but for the travails they had in virtues. Again I say, that
princes in times past were not famous for their stoutnes, and apt dysposicion
of their bodies, neither for descent of high and noble lynage, nor yet for the
possession of many realms: or heaping up of great treasours: but they wanne
and obtained immortal renown, for that their fathers in their youth put them
under the tuicio^ of wise and learned tutours, which taught them good doctrine,
and when they were of age gave them good counsaylers to govern the common
wealth. Laertius in ye life of the philosophers, and Boccase in the book of ye
lynage of gods say, That among the philosophers of Athens there was a custom,
that no straung philosopher should read in their schools, before he wear
first examyned in natural and moral philosophy: for among the Greeks it was an
ancient proverb, that in the schole of Athens no vycious man could enter, nor
idle word be spoken, neither they did consent that any ignorant philosopher
should come in to read there. As by chance many philosophers were come from
the mout Olimpus, amongst the residue there was one came to se the philosophers
of Athens, who was native of Thebes, a man (as afterward he declared him
self) in mortal and natural Philosophy very well learned: and since he desired
to remain in Athens, he was examined, and of many and diverse things demanded.
And amongst the others these following were some of them.

First they asked him, what causes women to be so froward, since it is true
that nature made them shamefast, and created them simple? the Philosopher
answered. A Woman is not froward, but because she has to much her will, and
wants shame.

Secondarily they asked him why young men are undone? he answered: because time
abounds them for to do evil, and masters wants to enforce them to do good.

Thirdly they asked him, why are wise men deceived as well as the simple? he
answered. The wise man is never deceived, but by him that uses fair words.
and has evil conditions.

Forthly they asked him, of whom me^ ought most to beware? he answered That
there is to a man no greater enemy, then he which sees that thing in the,
which he desires to have in him self.

Fifthly they asked him, why many princes begin well and end evil? he
answered: princes begin well, because their nature is good: and they end evil,
because no man does gain say them.

Sixthly they asked him, why do princes commit such follyes? he answered:
Because flatterers abounds that deceive them: and true men wants which
should serve them.

Seventhly they asked him, why the ancients were so sage, and men at this
present so simple? he answered. Because the ancients did not procure but to
know, and they present do not travail but for to have.

Eighthly they asked him, why so many vices were nourished in the palace of
princes? he answered. Because pleasures abound, and council wants. The
ninth, they asked him, why the most part of me^ lived without rest, and few
without pain? he answered. No man is more without, and suffers more pain:
the^ he which dies for the goods of another, and little estemeth his own.

The tenth they asked him whereby they might know the common wealth to be
undone: he answered. There is no common wealth undone, but where the young are
light, and the old vicious.

The xi. they asked him wherewith the common wealth is mainteyned? he answered.
The common wealth cannot decay, where justice remains for the poor,
punishment for the tiraunts, weight and measure plentiful: and chefely, if there
be good doctrine for the young, and little covetousness in the old. Affro the
historiographers declares this in ye x book De rebus attheniensium. Truly in
my opinion the words of this philosopher were few, but the sentences were many.
And for none other cause I did bring in this history, but to profit me of the
last word, wherein for answer he says, that all the profit of the common
wealth consists, in that there be princes that restrain the avarice of the
aged: and that there be masters to teach the youthful. We se by experience,
that if the brute beasts were not tied, and the corn and seeds compassed with
hedges or ditches, a man should never gather the fruit when they are ripe. I
mean, yt strife and debate will rise continually among the people, if the
young men have not good fathers to correct them, and wise masters to teach
them We cannot deny, but though the knife be made of fine steel, yet sometimes
it has need to be whet: and so in like manner the young man, during the time of
his youth, though he do not deserve it, yet from time to time he ought to be
corrected. O princes and great lords, I know not of whom you take council when
your son is borne, to provide him of a master and governor, whom you chose
not as the most virtuous, but as the most richest: not as the most sagest, but
as the most vile and evil taught. Finally, you do not trust him with your
children that best deserves it: but yt most procures it. Again I say, O
princes and great lords, why do you not wtdraw your children from their hands
which have their eyes more to their own profit the^ their hearts unto your
service. For such to enrich themselves, do bring up princes vyciously. Let not
princes think yt it is a trifle to know, how to find and chose a good master:
and the lord which herein does not employ his dyligence, is worthy of great
rebuke, And because they shall not pretend ignorance, let them beware of that
man whose life is suspicious, and extreme covetous. In my opinion, in the
palace of princes the office of tutorship ought not to begeuen as other common
offices, that is to wete, by requests or money, by priuyties or importunities,
either else for recompense of services: for it follows not though a man has been imbassadour in strange realms, or captain of great armies in war, or
that he has possessed in the roial palace offices of honor, or of estemacio^
that therefore he should be able to teach, or bring up their children. For to be
a good captain, suffices only to be hardy, and fortunate: but for to be a
tutour, and governor of princes, he ought to be both sage, and virtuous.

Of the ii. children of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, of the which the best
beloved dyed. And of the masters he provided for the other named Comodus*
Chap. xxxv.
MArcus Aurelius the xvii. Emperor of Rome, in yt time that he was married with
Faustine, only daughter of the Emperor Antonius Pius, had only ii. sons,
whereof the eldest was Comodus and the second Verissimus. Of these ii. children
the heir was Comodus, who was so wicked in the 13 years he governed the
empire: that he seemed rather the disciple of Nero ye cruel, then to descend by
the mothers side: from Anthonius the merciful, or son of Marcus Aurelius.
This wicked child Comodus was so light in speech, so dishonest in parson, and
so cruel with his people: that often times (he being alive) they laid wagers
that there was not one virtue in him to be found, nor any one vice in him that
wanted. On the contrary part the second son named Verissimus, was comely of
gesture, proper of person, and in wit very temperate: and the most of al
was, that by his good conversation of al he was beloved. For the fair and
virtuous princes by their beauty draws unto them men's eyes: and by their good
conversation they win their hearts. The child Verissimus was the hope of the
common people, and the glory of his aged father: so that the Emperor determined
yt this child Verissimus should be heir of the Empire, and that the prince
Comodus should be disherited. Whereat no man ought to marvel, for it is but
just since the child does not amend his life: that the father do disinherit
him. When good will does want, and vicious pleasures abound: the children often
times by perverse fortune come to naught. So this Marcus Aurelius being.52.
years old, by chance this child Verissimus (which was the glory of Rome, and
the hope of the father) at yt gate of Hostia, of a sudden sickness dyed. The
death of whom was as universally lamented: as his life of al men was desired.
It was a pitiful thing to see, how woefully the father took the death of his
intierly beloved son: and no less lamentable to behold how the senate took the
death of their prince, being the heir. For the aged father for sorrow did not
go to the Senate: and the senate for few days enclosed themselves in the high
Capitol. And let no man marvel, though the death of this young prince was so
taken through Rome: For if men knew what they lose when they lose a virtuous
Prince, they would never cease to bewail and lament his death. When a knight,
a gentleman a squyre, an offycer, or when any of the people dies, there dies
but one: but when a prince dies, which was good for all, and that he lived to
the profit of al, then they ought to make account that al do dye, and they
ought al greatly to lament it. For often times it chaunseth, that after ii. or
iii. good Princes, a foul flock of tyraunts succedeth. Therefore Marcus
Aurelius the Emperor, as a man of great understanding, and of a princely
parsonne, though the inward sorrow from the roots of the heart could not be
plucked: yet he determined to dissemble outwardly, and to bury his greues
inwardly.

For to say the truth, none ought (for any thing) to show extreme sorrow:
unless it be that he has lost his honor, or that his conscience is burdened.
The good prince as one that has his vineyard frosen, wherein was al his hope,
contented with him self with that which remains, his so derely beloved son
being dead: and commanded the prince Comodus to be brought into his palace,
being his only heir. Julius Capitolinus, which was one of those yt wrote of
the time of Marcus Aurelius said upon this matter, that when the father saw the
disordinate fraylenes, and lightness, and also the little shame which the prince
Comodus his son brought with him: the aged man began to weape, and shed
tears from his eyes. And it was, because the symplenes and virtues of his
dear beloved son Verissimus came into his mind. Though this Emperor Marcus,
for the death of his son was very sorrowful: yet notwithstanding this he
provided, how his other son Comodus should be governed, and this before that
either of age or body he were greater. For we cannot deny, but when Princes are
me^, they will be such as in their youth they have been brought up. The good
father therefore knowing yt the evil inclinacions of his son should do him
damage, and the empire in like manner: he sent throughout al Italy, for the most
sagest and expert men, to be governors and Tutors of Comodus the prince. He
made them seek for the most profoundest in learning, the most renowned of good
fame, the most virtuous in deeds, and the most depest in understanding: for as
the dust is not swept with fine cloth, but with dry bromes: so the lightness and
follies of young me^ are not remedied, but by the hard disciplyne of the aged.
This commandment being published and proclaimed in Rome, and the bruit
scattered through Italye, there came and ran thither diverse kind of sages,
whom he commanded to be examyned. He being informed of the blood of their
predicessours, of the age of their persons, of the government of their houses,
of the spendyng of their goods, of their credit amongst their neighbors, of
the sciences they knew, and above al, they were no less examined of the
pureness of their lives, then of the gravity of their persons: for there are
many men which are grave in open words, and very light in secret works.
Speaking therefore more particularly, he commanded they should examyne the
Astronomers of Astronomy, the philosophers in philosophy, the musitines in
music: the Orators in oracions. And so forth of other sciences in order,
wherein every one said he was instructed. The good emperor was not so contented
to do this once but sundry times, not al in one day, but in many, not only by
an other man, but also by him self.

Finally they were al examyned, as if they had been al one, and that ye same
one should have remained and been kept for all, to be only master and tutor of
the young child and prince Comodus. To acquire a perfect knowledge, and to be
sure not to err in choice of things, in my opinion is not only required
experience of him self, and a clear understanding: but also the advise of an
other. For the knowledge of things wholly together is easy: but the choice of
them particularly is hard. This thing is spoken because the good Emperor
sent, and commanded to chose governors and masters of his children. Of many
he choose few, and of few the most wysest, of the most wysest the most
expert, of the most expert the best learned, of the best learned the most
temperate, of the most temperate the most ancient, and of the most ancient
the most noble. Certainly such election is worthy praise, because they be
true masters and teachers of princes, which are noble of blood, ancient in
years, honest in life, men of little folly, and of great experience. According
to the seven liberal sciences, two masters of every one were chosen, so that
the prince was but one, and the others were.xiiii. but this notwithstanding,
the works of this prince Comodus were contrary to the expectation of his
father Marcus Aurelius, because the intention of the good father was to teach
his son all sciences: and the study of the son was to learn all vices. At
the brute of so great a thing as this was, that the Emperor sought to provide
tutors for the prince Comodus, and that they should not be those which were
best favored, but those which were found the most wysest: in short space
there came so many philosophers to Rome, as if the divine Plato had been
revived again in Greece. Let us not marvel at all, if the sages desired the
acquaintance and familiarity of this good Emperor. For in the end, there is
no man so sage, nor so virtuous in this life, but sometime will seek after the
favors of the world. Since there were many sages, and that of those he chose
but fourtene. It was necessary he should honestly and wisely dispatche and give
the others leave, as did behoue him. And herein the good emperor showed him
self so wise, that showing to some a merry countenance, to others speaking
gently, and to others by a certain hope, and to others by gifts and
presents, all the good company of the sages departed: and the good emperor
dispatched them, not one being sad which departed, but very well pleased. For it
is not comely for the magnificence of a prince, that the man which comes to
his palace only for his service, should return murmuring, or without reward.
This good emperor showed him self sage to seek many sages, he showed him self
wise in the choice of some, and of a good understanding in dispatching others,
and in co^tenting the^ all. For as we see daily by experience, though the
elections be good, commonly great affections thereupon engender. For those, for
not being chosen are sorry, and to see the others chosen are shamefast. In such
case likewise, let it not be esteamed little to search a good remedy. For the
goldsmith ofttymes demands more for the workmanship, then the silver is
worth: I mean, that sometime princes do deserve more honor for the good means
they use in their affairs: then for the good success whereunto it comes.
For the one adventure guides, but the other wisdom aduaunceth. The good
emperor not contented with this, provided that those.xiiii. philosophers
which should remain in his palace, should sit at the table, and accompany
his person: the which thing he did, to see if their life were comfortable to
their doctrine, and if their words did agree to their works. For there are many
me^, which are of a goodly tongue, and of a wicked life. Julius Capitolinus, and
Cinna Catullus, which were writers of this history say, that it was a wonder
to see how this good Emperor did mark them, to know if they were sober in
feading, temperate in drinking, modest in going, occupied in studieng, and
above all if they were very sage in speaking, and honest in living. Would to
God the princes of our time were in this case so diligent, and careful: and
that in committing in trust their affairs, they would not care more for one
then for others. For speaking with due reverence, there abounds no wisdom
in that prince, which commits a thing of importance to that man whom he
knows not, whether he is able to bring it to pass or not. Many talk evil,
and marvel that princes and great lords in so many things do err: and for
the contrary I marvel how they hitte any at al. For if they committed their
weighty affairs to skillful men, though perhaps they err once: yet they
hitte it a hundred times, but when they commit their business to ignorant
men, if they hitte once, they miss a thousand times again. In this case I
say, there is nothing destroys young Princes more, then for that they
commit not their affairs to their old and faithful servants: For in fine
the unfeigned love is not, but in him that eats the princes bread daily. It is
but reason, that other princes take example by this prince to seek good
masters for their children: and if the masters be good, and the scholars
evil, then the fathers are blameless. For to princes and great lords, it a
great discharge of conscience, to see though their children be lost: yet it is
not for want of doctrine, but for abundance of malice. The Roman prince had
a custom to celebrate the feast of the God Genius, who was God of their
birth, and that feast was celebrated every year once, which was kept the
same day of the birth of the Emperor, joyfully throughout all Rome: for at
this day all the prisoners were pardoned, and delivered out of the prison
Mamortina. Yet notwithstanding you ought to know, that if any had sowed
sedition among the people, or had betrayed the armies, or robbed or done any
mischief in their temples: those three offenses were never pardoned nor
excused in Rome. Even as in Christian religion the greatest oath is to swear
by God, so amongst the Romans there was no greater oath, then to swear by
the God Genius. And since it was the greatest oath none could swear it, but by
the license of the Senate: and that ought to be, betwixt the hands of the
priests of the God Genius. And if perchance such an oath were taken of light
occasion, he which swear it was in danger of his life. For in Rome it was an
ancient law, that no man should make any solemn oath, but that first they
should demand license of the Senate. The Romans did not permit, that
liars nor disceiuers should be credited by their oaths: neither did they
permit them to swear. For they said, that perjured men do both blaspheme
the Gods and deceive men. The above named Marcus Aurelius was borne the.xxvii.
day of April, in Mount Celio, in Rome. And as by chance they celebrated the
feast of the God Genius, which was the day of his birth, there came masters
offense, Iuglers, and common players, with other loyterers, to walk and solace
them selves. For the Romans in their great feasts, occupied them selves al
night in offering sacrifices to the gods, and afterward they consumed all the
day in pastimes. Those iuglers and players, showed so much pastime, that all
those which beheld them were provoked to laughe, and the Romans (to say the
truth, were so earnest in matters of pastime, and also in other matters of
weight that in the day of pastimes no man was sad, and in the time appointed
for sadness no man was merry. So that in public affairs they used all to
mourn, or else all to rejoice. Cinna Catullus says, that this good Emperor
was so well beloved, that when he rejoiced, all rejoiced: and when the Roman
people made any great feast, he him self was there present, to make it of more
authority, and showed such mirth therein, as if he alone and none other had
rejoiced. For otherwise if the prince look sadly, no man dare show him self
merry. The historiographers say of this good emperor, that in joyful feasts
and triumphs they never saw him less merry, then was requisite for the feast:
nor they ever saw him so merry, that it exceaded the gravity of his person.
For the prince which in virtue presumes to be excellent, ought neither in
earnest matters to be heavy: nor in things of small importance to show him
self light. As princes now a days go enuironned with men of arms: so did
then the good Emperor go accompanied with sage philosophers. Yea and more then
that, which ought most to be noted, is that in the days of feasts and
pleasures, the princes at this present go accompanied with hongry flatterers:
but this noble Emperor went accompanied with wise men. For the prince that
uses him self with good company, shall always avoid the evil talk of the
people. Sextus Cheronensis says, that a Senator called Fabius Patroclus,
seeing that the Emperor Marcus went always to the Senate and Theaters,
accompanied and enuironned with sages: said one day to him merrily. I pray
thee (my lord) tell me, why thou go not to the Theater, as to the Theater,
and to the Senate, as to the Senate. For to the Senate Sages ought to go to
give us good council: and to the Theaters, fools to make us pastime. To this
the good Emperor answered: my friend, I say thou art much deceived. For to
the sacred Senate, wherein there are so many sages, I would lead all the
fools to the end they might become wise: and to the Theaters where all the
fools are, I would bring the sages, to the end to teach them wisdom. Truly
this sentence was fit for him that spoke it. I admonish princes and great
lords, that in stead to keep company with fools, flatterers, and parasites,
they provide to have about them wise and sage me^, in especially if the fools
be malicious: for the noble hearts with one malicious word are more offended:
then if they were with a venomous arrow wounded. Therefore returning to our
matter, as the emperor was in the feast of the god Genius, and that with him
also were the.xiiii. sage philosophers, (masters of the prince Comodus) a
iugler more conning then all the rest, showed sundry tricks, as commonly such
vain loiterers are wont to do. For he that in like vanities shows most
pastime, is of the people most beloved. As Marcus Aurelius was sage: so he set
his eyes more to behold these.xiiii. masters, then he did stay at the
lightness of the fools. And by chance he espied that five of those laughed so
inordinatly at the folly of these fools, that they clapped their hands, they bet
their feet, and lost the gravity of sages by their inordinat laughter: the
which was a very uncomely thing in such grave persons. For the honest modesty
of the body, is a great witness of the wisdom and gravity of the mind. The
lightness and inconstancy of the sages seen by ye Emperor, and that all the
grave Romans were offended with them, he took it heauely, as well to have
brought them thither: as to have been disceiued in electing them. How be it
with his wysedom then he helped him self as much as he could, in not
manifesting any grief in his heart: but he dessembled and made as though he
saw them not. For sage princes must needs feale things as men, but they
ought to dissemble them as discrete. The Emperor presently would not admonish
them, nor before any reprove them, but he let the feast pass on, and also a
few days after, the which being passed, the Emperor spoke unto them in
secret, not telling them openly, wherein he showed him self a merciful
prince: for open correction is unjust, where secret admonition may take place.
The things which Marcus Aurelius said to those five masters, when he put
them out of his house, he him self did write in the third book and the first
chapter, under the title Ad stultos pedagogos. And said that he said unto them
these, and such other like words.

Of the words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to five of the* xiiii masters
which he had chosen for the education of his son, and how he sent them from
his palace for that they behaved them selves lightly at the feast of the God
Genius. Chap. xxxvi.
MY will was not, my friends, to forsee that which can not be excused, nor I
will not command you that, which I ought not to command: but I desire that
the gods of their grace do remain with me, and that with you the same just
gods may go, and that likewise from me, and from you, the unlucky and
unfortunate chances may be withdrawn. For the unlucky man were better be with
the dead: then remain here with the living. Since that now I had received
you, and with great diligence sought you, to that end you should be tutors to
my son (the prince Comodus) I proteste to the immortal gods, that I am sorry,
and that of your shame I am ashamed, and that of your pain, the greatest part
is mine. And it can be no otherwise, for in the world there should be no
friendship so straight, that a man therefore should put his good name in
danger. The sages that I have sought, were not provided only to learn the
prince Comodus: but also to refourme al those that lived evil in my palace.
And now I see the contrary, for where I thought the fools should have been
made wise, I see that those that were wise, are become fools. Know you not
that the fine gold defends his pureness among the burning cooles? and that
the man endued with wisdom, shows him self wise, yea in the midst of
many fools? For truly as the gold in the fire is proved: so among the
lightenes of fools, is the wisdom of the wise discerned. Do not you know,
that the sage is not known among the sages, nor the fool among the fools?
but that among fools wise men do shine, and that among the sages fools are
darkened: for there the wise shows his wisdom, and the fool shows his
folly. Do not you know that in the sore wounds, the surgian shows his
cunning, and that in the dangerous diseases, the physician shows his
science? And that in the doubtful battles the captain shows his stoutnes,
and that in the boisterous storms, the master shows his experience? So in
like manner the sage man, in that place where there is great joy, and solace of
people, ought to show his wisdom and discretion. Do not you know that of a
moderate wit, there proceadeth a clear understanding, a sharp memory, a
grave person, a quiet mind, a good name, and above all, a temperate tongue?
For he only ought to be called wise, who is discreate in his works, and
resolute in his words* Do not you know that it little avails to have the
tongue expert, the memory lively, the understanding clear, to have great
science, to have profounde eloquence, a sweet style, and ample experience, if
with all these things you be as masters, and in your works as wicked men?
certainly it is a great dishonor to a virtuous emperor, that he should have
for masters of young princes, those which are scholars of vain Iuglers. Do
not you know, that if all the men of this world are bound to lead a good
life, that those which presume to have science, are much more bound then
others are, which by their eloquence presume to confound the world? For it
is a rule certain, that always evil works take away the credit from good
words. And to the end it seame not unto you that I speak of favor, I will
bring here into your memory an ancient law of Rome, the which was made in
the time of Cinna, which said: We ordeine and command, that more greauous
punishment be given unto the sage for one folly only committed by him openly:
then to the simple man for a greater offense committed secretly. O just, and
very just law: O just, and happy Romans, I say unto all those that togethers
did find, and ordeine the law. For the simple man sleyeth but one man with his
sword of wrath: but the sage kills many by the evil example of his life. For
(according to the saying of the divine Plato) the princes and sage sin more
by the evil examples which they give: then in the fault and offense that
they commit. All the aunciente writers affirm, that the triumphant Rome
never began to decay, until the Senate was replenished with sage serpents, and
destitute of simple doves. For in the end there is nothing that sooner
destroys princes, then thinking to have about them wise men, that should
counsel them: when in deed they are malicious, that seek to deceive them. What
a thing was in old time, to see the policy of Rome, before that Sylla and
Marius did alter it, before that Catilina and Catullus did trouble it, before
that Julius Caesar and Pompeius sclaundered it, before that Augustus and Marcus
Antonius destroyed it, before that Tiberius and Caligula did defame it, and
before that Nero and Domician did corrupt it? For the most part of these,
though they were valiant and wan many Realms: yet notwithstanding the vices
which they brought us, were more then the Realms they wanne us. And the worst
of all is, that al our kingdoms are lost, and our vices abide still. If
Liuius and the other historiographers do not deceive us, in old time they
might have seen in the sacret Senate, some Romans so ancient, with heeres so
honorable, others so expert me^, others aged so modest, that it was a wonder to
see the majesty they did represente, and a comfort to hear that which they
said. I speak not that without tears which I will say, that in stead of
these ancient aged persons, there sprange up other young bablers, the
which are such, and so many, that all the common wealth is altered, and Rome
her self sclaundered.

For that land is cursed, and with much misery compassed: where the
governance of the young is so evil, that al wyshe for the reviving of the
dead. If we credit that which the auncientes wrote, we cannot denay, but that
Rome was the mother of all good work, as the ancient Greece was the beginner
of al sciences. So that the effect of the Greeks was to speak, and the glory
of the Romans was to work. But now, through our woful^ destenies, it is all
contrary: for Greece has banished from it all the speakers to Rome, and Rome
has banished from it all the sages to Greece. And if it be so (as it is in
deed) I had rather be banished to Greece with the sages: then to take part with
Rome among the fools. By the faith of a Christian I swear unto you (my
friends) yt I being young, saw an Orator in Rome which was brought up in the
palace of Adrian my Lord, whose name was Aristonocus: of his body he was of
mean stature, lean of face, and also he was of an unknown country, but he
had such a pleasant tongue, that though he had made an oration in the senate
of three hours long, there was no man but willingly was desirous to hear him.
For in the old time, if he that made an Oration in the Senate were eloquent in
his speech, he was heard no less, then if God Apollo had spoken him self.
This philosopher Aristonocus was on the one part so gentle in his speech, and
on the other part so disolute in his life: that he never spoke word to the
Senate, but it deserved eternal memory: and out of that place they never saw
him do good work, but it merited grievous punishment. As I have said, though
in that time I was young, yet I remember, that to see this philosopher so
lost, all the people did pity, and the worste of all was, that they never
hoped of his amendment, since daily more and more he lost his honor. For
there is no man, that by his eloquence may have such renown: but in the end
he may lose it again by his evil life. Now I ask you, my friends, sith you
are in the reputation of sages, which was better, or to say better, which had
been less envied: that this philosopher had been a simple man, and of good
life: then to be (as he was) a man of high eloquence, and of evil condition.
It was impossible, if he had once heard of me that, which many times I have
heard say of him, that he had not counsayled me, yea and futher to do it he
had constrained me, rather to chose the grave, then to live in Rome with
infamy. For he is unworthy to live amongst men, whose words of all are
approved, and his works of all condemned. The first dictatour in Rome was
Largius, and the first lords of the knights, was Spurius. And from the time
of the first dictatour, until the time of Silla and Julius (which were the
first tyrauntes) were four hundred, and fifty years. In the which space, we
never read that any Philosopher spoke any vain words, nor yet committed any
sclaunderous deades. And if Rome had done any otherwise, it had been unworthy
of such praise and estimation as it had: for it is impossible that the people
be well governed, if the Sages which govern them, are in their lives
dissolute. I protest to the immortal Gods, and swear by the faith of a
Christian, that when I consider that which at this present with mine eyes I
see: I can not but sighe for that that is past, and weep for that which is
present. That is to wete, to see then how the armies fought, to see how the
young men trauayled to be good, to see how well princes governed, to se the
obedience of the people. and above all, it was a merueilous thing to see the
liberty and favor which the Sages had: and the subjection and small
estimation that the simple were in. And now by our evil fortune, we see the
contrary in our woeful time, so that I cannot tell, whither first I should
bewail the virtues and noblenes of them that are past, or the vices and
infamies of these which are present. For we neauer ought to cease from
praysinge the goodness of the good: nor to cease from reprouyng the wyckednes of
the evil. O that I had been in that glorious world, to se so honorable and
ancient sages, to govern in pleasure: and for the contrary what grefe and
pytye, shame and dishonor is it, to se now so many dissolute sages, and so many
young and busy heads, the which (as I have said) do destroy all Rome, and
slander all Italy, and dishonor them selves. For the want of virtue which in
them abounds, endomageth the common wealth: and the other vices wherewith they
are replenished, corrupts the people in such sort, that ye weal publyke is
more dyshonored through the dissolute life of them, then it is anoyed by the
weapons of their enemies. I say again, and repete, my friends that the
prosperity of Rome endured.400. and.xv. years, in the which time there was a
great majesty of works, and a marvelous simplicity of words, and above all,
that the best that it had was, that it was rich of the good and virtuous men,
and poor of evil and vicious loyterers. For in the end that city cannot be
called prosperous, which has in it many people: but that which has in it few
vices. Speaking therefore more perticulerly, the cause that moved me to put you
from me is, because in the day of the great feast of god Genius, you showed (in
the presence of the senate) your little wisdom, and great folly: for so much as
all men did behold more ye lightness of your parson, then they did the follies
of the iuglers. If perchance you showed your folly, to thentent men should
think that you were familiar in my royal palace, I tell you that the error
of your thought was no less, then the evil and example of your work: for no
man ought to be so familiar with princes, but (whether it be in sport or in
earnest) he ought to do him reverence. Since I give you leave to depart, I
know you had rather have to help you in your journey a little money, then many
councelles: but I will give you both, that is to wete: money for to bring you to
your iournies end, and also counsels to the end you may live. And meruail not
that I give counsel to them, that have an office to council others, for it
chances oftetimes that the physician do cure the diseases of others, and yet
in deed he knows not his own. Let therefore the last word and counsel be
when you shall be in the services of princes and great lords, that first you
labor to be counted honest, rather then wise. That they do chose you rather
for quiet men: then for busy heads, and more for your few words, then for
your much bablyng. For in the palace of Princes, if the wise man be no more
then wise, it is a great hap if he be much esteemed, but if he be an honest
man, he is beloved and well taken of all.

That Princes and other noble men ought to over see the tutours of their
children, least they conceal the secret faults of their scollers. Chap xxxvii.
We have before rehearsed what conditions, what age, and what gravity masters
ought to have, which should bring up the children of Princes. Now reason would
we should declare, what the counsels should be that princes should give to the
masters, and tutours of their children, before they ought to give them any
charge. And after that it is mete we declare, what the counsel shall be which
the master shall give to his dyscyple, having the government of him.

For it is impossible there should happen any misfortune: where ripe counsel is
ever present. It shall seame unto those yt shall profoundly consider this matter,
yt it is a superfluous thing to treat of these things: for either princes
chose yt good, or else they chose ye evil. If they chose not good masters, they
labor in vain to give the^ good counsel: for the folish maiser is less
capable of counsel, the^ the dyssolute scoler of wholesome admonition. If
perchance princes do make elections of good masters, then those masters,
both for them selves, and also for others ought to minister good counsels. For
to give council to the wise man, it is either a superfluous deed, or else it
comes of a presumptuous man. Though it be true, that he which dare give
council to the sage man is presumptuous, I say in like manner, that the
dyamonde being set in gold loses not his virtue, but rather increseth in price
and value: I mean, that the wiser a man is, somuche the more he ought to
desire to know the opinion of another: certainly he that does so cannot err.
For to none his own council abounds so much, but that he needs the counsel
and opinion of another. Though princes and great lords do se with their eyes,
that they have chosen good masters and tutors to teach their children: yet
they ought not therefore to be so negligent of them selves, but that sometimes
they may give ye masters counsel. For it may be, that the masters be both
noble, and stout, that they be ancient, sage, and moderate: but it may be
also, yt in teaching children they are not expert. For to masters and tutours
of princes, it is not somuche necessary that science does abound, as it is
shame that experience should want. When a rich man lets out his farm or
manner to a farmor he does not only consider with him self before what rent he
shall pay him. but also he couenanteth with him that he shall keape his
grounds well fensed and ditched, and his howses well repaired. And not
contented to receive the third part of the fruit of his vine: but also he
goes twyse or thrice in a year to visit it. And in seeing it he has reason,
for in the end the one occupyeth the goods as tenaunte: and the other does
view the ground as chief lord. Then if ye father of the family with so great
diligence does reco^mend ye trees, and the ground to the labourer: how much
more ought the father to reco^mend his children to the masters? for the father
giving counsel to the master is no other: but to deliver his child to the
treasurer of science. Princes and great lords cannot excuse them selves of an
offense, if after that they have chosen a knight, or gentleman for to be
master, or else a learned and wise man to be tutour, they are so neclige^t as
if they never had had children, or did remember that their children, ought to
be their heirs: certainly this thing should not be so lightly passed over, but
as a wise man, (which is careful of the honor and profit of his child) he ought
to be occupied, as well in taking head to the master: as ye master ought to be
occupied, in taking head to the child. For ye good fathers ought to know,
whether the master that he has chosen can command, and whether his child will
obey. One of the notablest princes among the auncientes? was Sculeucus, king of
the Assiria^s and husband of Estrabonica (the daughter of Demetrius, king of
Macedony) a lady for her beauty in all Greece the most renowned, though of her
fame in deed she was not very fortunat This is an old disease, that happens
always to beautiful women, yt there be many that desire them, and mo that
slander them. This king Seuleucus was first married with another woman, of whom
he had a son called Antigonus, the which was in love with the second wife of
his father, that is to wete, with ye queen Estrabonica, and was almost dead for
love. The which the father understanding, married his son with her, so yt she
that was his stepmother, was his wife: and she yt was a fair wife, was a fair
daughter, and he which was his son, was made his son in law, and he which
was father, was stepfather. The aucthor hereof is Plutarke in his lives, as
Sextus Cheronensis says, in ye third book of the sayenges of the greeks. The
king Seuleucus labored diligently to bring up his son Antigonus well, wherefore
he sought him.ii. notable masters, the one a greek, and the other a latin.
The king Seuleucus here with not contented, provided secreatly (by the mean of
a servant of his, named Parthemius) that he should have no other office in the
palace, but that what the masters taught or did to his son Antigonus in the
day, he should secreatly come and tell him in the night. But by the diligence
of Parthemius, it came to the knowledge of the tutors that they had overseers:
for in ye end there is nothing accustomably, but at the last will be reueiled.
Since the, ii. philosophers knew the secret, one day they said unto the king
Seuleucus these words. Mighty prince Seuleucus, since thou have of trust
committed thy son Antigonus into our hands, why do thou appoint thy
servant Parthemius as accuser of our lives? if thou countest us evil, and him
good, thou shall show us great favor if thou will discharge us, and commit
to him the tuition of thy son. For we let the to know, that to men of honor it
is an intolerable evil to shame the^: and no dishonor to license them. Thou
have appointed Parthemius to go and dog us, to see what we do, or say openly,
and afterward to make relation unto the secreatly: and the worst is, that by
the relation of the simple, we should be condemned being sages: for triacle is
not so contrary to poison: as ignorance is to wisdom. And truly (most noble
prince) it is a great matter, that daily inquisition be made of man: for there
is no beard so bare shaven, but that it will grow again. I mean, that there is
no man of so honest a life: but i^ a man make inquisition, he may find
wherwithall to detect The king Seuleucus answered them. Consider my friends,
that I do know right well, that neither the authority of the parson, nor the
good creadite of renown would be steyned for any other friend in this world: and
if the rude men do it not, much less ought the Sages to do it. For there is
nothing yt men travail for so much in this life, as to leave of the^ good
renown after their death. Since you are sages, and masters of my son, and
likewise counsailers of my house, it is not mete you should with any be
offended: for by good reason he alone ought to be esteemed in the palaces of
princes, yt will give unto the prince good counsel. That which I have said to
Parthemius, was not for the doubt of your faith, neither to think any danger
in your aucthority. And if ye thing be well considered, it goes well for you,
and not evil for me: and the reason hereof is, that either you are good, or else
you are evil. If you be good, you ought to be glad that daily your services be
reported unto me. For the continual betyng in the princes ears of the good
services of his servants: must needs cause at the last their services to be
well rewarded. If you be evil, and in teaching my son negligent: it is but
reason that I be advertised. For if the father be deceived in his opinion, the
son shall receive poison in his doctrine, and also because you shall not undo
my realm, nor slander me by your evil counsel. If the fatal destenies permit
that my son be evil, I am he that loses most thereby* for my realm shall be
distroyed, and my renown utterly abolished, and in the end my son shall not
enjoy the heritage. And if all pass so, you will care litel: for you will say
you are not in the fault, since the child would not receive your doctrine.
Wherefore me think it not evil done to over see you, as you over see him: for
my duty is to see that you be good, and your duty is to travail that your
disciples be not evil.

This king Seuleucus was an honorable man, and dyed aged (as Plutarke says,
and Patroclus more plainly declares, in the third book of the war of the
Assirians) and for the contrary his son Antigonus, came to be a wicked
Prince in all his doings.

And this a man may well perceive, that if he had not been of his father so
much corrected, and of the masters so well instructed: without doubt he would
have proved much more wicked then he was. For young men on the on part being
evil inclined, and on the other part evil taught, it is impossible but that
in the end they should be vicious, and defamed. In my opininion, though
children be not evil inclined, yet the fathers thereof ought not to cease to
correct them: for in time to come those that write, will commend the
diligence of the fathers in correcting the vices of the children. I have
declared this example, to council that the father be not so necgligent, that
he should utterly forget to look unto his son, thinking that now the master
has the charge of him. And of my concell, that father ought in this thing to
be so aduer^ised, that if at the first he beheld the child with two eyes: that
the^ he should look unto him with.iiii. eyes. For oftetimes it is more requisite
that the masters be punished, then the scollers. Though princes are not daily
informed of the life of the masters, as king Seuleucus was: yet at the least
oftetymes they ought to enquire of ye state, of the life, and of the behavior,
both of ye masters, and also of the children. And this thing they ought not to
do only once, but also they ought to call the masters, and council them lykwise
that they have great respect to the doctrine of their children: thinking
always to give them good counsel, to show unto their scollers afterward. For
otherwise ye master immediately is discouraged, when he sees the father to be
necgligent, and nothing careful for ye bringing up of his children. Princes in
one thing ought to have great respect (that is to wete) lest the masters bear
with the secreat vices of children. And he ought not to do thus, but also to
call them unto him, to advise them, to warn them, to pray them, to counsel
and command them, that they have great respect to the bringyng up of his
children: and further, that he give them some notable council, to thentente
that the masters afterward may make relation thereof to their scollers. For
there is no man so weak, nor child so tender: but the force which he has
to be vicious, is enough (if he will) to be virtuous* I would now demand the
masters, and tutour, which do govern the children of noble and virtuous men,
what more strength is required to be a glutton, then to be a sober man? to be a
babbler, or to be silent? to be dylygente, or to be necgligent? to be honest,
then to be dissolute? and as of those few I speak, so I could resite many
others. In this case I will not speak as a man of science, but as one of
experience: and that is, that by the faith of a christian I swear, that with
less trauaill of the master, and more profit of the scoller, he may be
sooner virtuous then vicious. For there is more courage required, in one to be
evil: then strenght in another, for to be good. Also the masters commenly have
another evil property, worse then this which is, they bear with their
scollers in some secreat vices when they are young: from the which they cannot
be withdrawn afterward when they are old. For it chances oftetimes, that
the good inclination is overcome, by the evil custom: and certainly the
masters which in such a case should be apprehended, ought to be punished as
traitors pariured. For to the master it is greater treason, to leave his
disciple amongst vices: then to deliver a forte into the hands of the
enemies. And let no man maruaill, if I call such a master a treator, for the
one yeldeth the forte which is but of stones builded: but the other aduentureth
his son, who is of his proper body begotten. The cause of all this evil is,
that as the children of Princes ought to enherite realms, and the children of
great lords hope to inherit the great estates: so the masters are more
covetous then virtuous. For they suffer their puples to run at their own
wills when they be young, to thend to win their hearts when they shall be old:
so that the extreme covetousness of the masters now a days is such, that it
causes goodmens sons commonly to be evil and vicious. O tutors of princes,
and masters of great lords, I do admonyshe you, and besides that I counsel
you that your covetousness deceive you not, thinking that you shall be better
esteemed for being clokers of vices: then lovers of virtues.

For there is none (old nor young) so wicked, but knows that good is better
then evil. And further I say to you in this case, that oftetimes God
permits (when those that were children become old) their eyes to be opened,
whereby they know the harm that you have done them, in suffering them to be
vicious in their youth: at what time your duty had been to have corrected
their vices. You thought by your goods to be honored for your flattery: but you
find the contrary, that you are despised worthily. For it is the just judgment
of god, that he that commits evil, shall not escape without punishment: and
he that consealeth the evil committed, shall not live vndefamed. Diadumeus the
Historiographer, in the life of Seuerus the.xxi. Emperor) de clareth, that
Apuleius Rufynus, who had been consul twice, and at that time was also
tribune of the people (a man who was very aged and likewise of great
authority thoroughe out Rome) came one day to the Emperor Seuerus, and
said unto him in this sort. Most inuicte Prince, always Augustus, know that
I had.ii. children the which I committed to a master to bring up, and by
chance the eldest increasinge in years, and diminishing in virtues, fell in
love with a Roman lady, the which love came to late to my knowledge: for to
such unfortunate men as I am, the disease is always past remedy, before the
danger thereof comes to our knowledge.

The greatest grefe that herein I feel, is, that his master knew and consealed
the evil, and was not only not a means to remedy it: but also was the chief
worker of the adultery between them to be committed. And my son made him an
oblygation, wherein he bound him self if he would bring him that roman
lady, he would give him after my death, the house and herytages which I have in
the gate Salaria: and yet herwith not contented, but he and my son together
robbed me of much money. For love is costlye to him that maynteineth it, and
always the loves of the children, are chargefull to the fathers. Judge you now
therefore noble Prince, this so heinous and slanderous cause, for it is to
much presumption of the subject to revenge any injury, knowing that the lord
him self will revenge all wrongs. When the Emperor Seuerus had understood
this so heinous a case, as one that was both in name and deed severe,
commanded good inquisition of the matter to be had, and that before his
presence the should cause to appear, the father, the son, and the master,
to the end each one should allege for his own right: for in Rome none could
be condemned for any offense, unless the plainetife had first declared the
fault before his presence, and that the accused should have no time to make his
excuse. The truth then known and the offenders confessyng the offenses, the
Emperor Seuerus gave judgment thus. I command that this master be cast
alive among the beasts of the park Palatine.

For it is but mete that beasts devour him: which teaches others to live
like beasts. Also I do command that the son be utterly dysinheryted of
all the goods of his father, and banyshed into the Isles Balleares, and
Maiorques.

For the child which from his youth is vicious, ought iustlye to be banyshed
the country, and dysherited of his fathers goods.

This therefore (of the master and of the son) was done by the complaint of
Apuleius. Rufinus.

O how unconstant fortune is, and how often (not thynkyng of it) the threde of
life does break. I say it, because if this master had not been covetous, the
father had not been deprived of his son, the child had not been
banished, the mother had not been defamed, the common weal had not been
slaundered, the master, of wild beasts had not been devoured, neither the
Emperor had been so cruel against them, nor yet their names in Hystories
(to their infamies) had always continued.

I do not speak this without a cause, to declare by writing that which the
evil do in the world: For wise men ought more to fear the infamye of the
little pen, then the slander of the bablyng tongue. For in the end, the
wicked tongue can not defame but the living: but the little pen does defame
them that are, that were, and the shall be. To conclude this, my mind is, that
the master should endeavor him self that his scooller should be virtuous,
and that he do not despair, though immediately for his pains he be not
rewarded. For though he be not of the creature, let him be assured that he
shall be of the creator. For God is so mercyefull, that he often times taking
pity of the swette of those that be good, chastneth the unthankful, and
takes upon him to require their services.

Of the determination of the Emperor when he committed his child to the
tutours, which he had provided for his education. Chapter. xxxviii.
CInna the Hystorien in the first book of the times of Comodus declares that
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor chose.xiiii. masters learned, and wise men, to
teach his son Comodus, of the which he refused five, not for that they were
not wise, but for that they were not honest. And so he kept these nine only,
which were both learned in the sciences, and also expert in bringyng up the
children of the Senators, though in deed they were very unlucky in the
bryngyng up of the Prince Comodus. For this cursed prince had nine masters
which instructed him, but he had above nine thousand vices which vndyd him.
The emperor Marcus Aurelius made five books of declamations, and in the third
book the syxte Chapter, under the title ad Sapientes pedagogos, he brought in
these nine masters, and persuaded them greatly that they should be diligent
and attentyue to teach his son Comodus. And in this matter, he spoke unto
them many and grave sentences, the words whereof do follow.

The matter is manifest in Rome, and no less publyshed thorough out all Italy,
what pains I took to search out to many Sages to enstructe my son
Comodus: the which all being examined, I kept only the wysest, and the best,
and though in very deed I have done much, yet I have not done so much as I
am bound.

For Princes in doubtefull matters, ought not only to demand council, of all
the good that be alive: but also to take pain to talk with those which are
dead. That is, to read the deeds of the good in their writings. You were
fouretene masters chosen, whereof I have put out five: so that presently you
ar but nine, and if in deed you be wise men, you shall not be offended with
that I have done. For the grief of evil things proceeds of wisdom, but the
admiration of good things comes of small experience, I do not denay, but
that wise men do feel in them passions as men: but in the end, there is no art
nor science that does excuse us from the miseries of men. But that where at I
marvel is, how it is possible that a wise man should marvel at any thing
in this world: For if the wise man should be astonished at every thing of the
world, it appears that there is little constancy or virtue in him at all.
Returnyng therefore to our particular talk, I have taken you to be masters of
my son, and you se, of many I chose a few, to the end that with few my son
should be taught. For as it is the fathers duty to search out good masters, so
it is the masters duty to be diligent about his scoller. The nource of my
son Comodus gave him suck two years with her teates, at the gate of Hostia.
And his mother Faustine other two years brought him up wantonly in Capua. How
be it this was a sufficient excuse. I would as a pitiefull father (if I
could) give him correction at the least this twentye years. For I swear by
the immortal Gods, that to a Prince that shall be an enheritour, one years
punyshement is more worth: then twenty years of pleasure. Since the nources
which gives the children suck knows little, and since the mothers which
bare them do love them much: and since the child peradventure (as yet) is
but of a weak under standing, they are occupied about the things that are
present, considering that chastysemente in much more betters for him, then
pleasure.

But the wise man which has understanding, ought to thyncke of that that is
past, and by much wisdom to provide for that that is to come: For he can not
be counted wise, that only in one thing is careful. My son Comodus was
borne the last day of Auguste, in a city by Danubio. I shall not forget the
day that ye gods gave him unto me: nor yet this day in the which I commit him
unto you. Of greater reason I should remember that day wherein I put him to be
taught: then the day which I saw him to be borne. For the gods gave him me, as
I gave him to you mortal, since he is a man, but you shall restore him again
unto me, and I likewise him to the Godds as immortal, if he be wise. What will
you I say more unto you, but if you regard that any thing at all which I
say, you will regard much more this which I will say. When the Gods
determined that I should have a child of my wife, and that my woeful destenies
deserved, that I should have such a child: truly the Gods made me a man in the
sprite, and I begot him a beast amongst the beasts in the flesh. But if you
will, you may make him a god amongst the gods by science. For princes win
infamye, for being fearse and self willed: but they get good renown, for
being wise and pacient. I would you should apply this business well, and
therefore it is necessary that you examine him often. For it is a general rule,
that the precious jewel is little regarded, when he which has it knows not
the value thereof. I require that you answer me in this one thing. What did
I give unto my son Comodus, when the gods gave him me, but frail and mortal
flesh? by the corruption whereof his life shall end: but you shall give him high
doctrine, whereby he shall always deserve perpetual memore. For the good
renown is not gotten, by that the weak flesh does: but by that which the
high understanding immagyneth, and by that the curious heart executes. O if
his tender age knew what I gave to his weak flesh, and if his dull
understanding could com to ye wisdom which you may give him: he would call you
his right fathers, and me but his stepfather. For he is the true father that
gives us doctrine to live: and he is but an unjust stepfather, that gives us
flesh to dye.

Certainly the natural Fathers of children, are but their open enemies, and
cruel stepfathers: since we give them such dull understanding, so weak a
memory, a will so froward, life so short, flesh so frail, honor so costly,
health so uncertain, riches so troublesome, prosperity so scarce, and death
so fearful. Finally we give them a nature subject, to infinite alterations,
and great misfortunes. Reason would not you should little regard that which
I commit unto your judgment, that is to wete, that you have the charge of
Comodus my son: For the thing that Princes chefely ought to foresee, is to
whom they ought to recommende the government of their children. To be a
master and Tutor of a Prince in the earth, is to have an office of ye Gods
which are in heaven: because he governs him that ought to govern us, he
teaches him that ought to teach us, he chastneth him that ought to chasten
us. Finally he commands one, that ought to command all. What will you
that I say more unto you. Truly he that has the charge to teach the children
of Princes, and great Lords, is as the governor of the ship, a standarde of
a battaylle, a defense of the people, a guide of the ways, a father of the
Orphans, the hope of pupylles, and a treasourer of all: For there is no other
true treasore in the common wealth but the prince which does maintain and
keep it in good peace, and just justice. I will tell you furthermore, to the
end you shall esteem it more, that when I do give you my son to teach, I
give you more then if I gave you all the riches of the Realm. For in him that
has the reformacion of the childs life, depends the fame of the Father
after he is dead.

So that the Father has no greater renown: then to see his child lead an
honest life. I pray the Gods that they may be so mercyful, and the fatal
destinies so fortunate, that if till this time you have watched to teach the
children of others, that from hence forward you watch to teach this my son
Comodus, which I trust shall be to the comfort of all.

For the thing that is universally good to all, ought to be preferred before
that which tends but to the commodity of some. You see my friends, that
there is a great difference to teach the children of Princes, and to teach
the children of the people: and the cause hereof is, that the greatest part of
those come to the scooles and universities to learn to speak, but I do not
give you my son Comodus, to the end you should teach him to speak many
words, but that you should learn him to do good works.

For all the glory of the Princes is, that in the works which he does he be
vprighte, and in the words that he speaks he be very discrete.

After that the children have spente many years in scooles, after their
Fathers have spente much money upon them, if perchance the child can
dispute in Greek or Latin any thing at all: though he be light and vicious,
the Father thinks his goods well employed: For in Rome, now a days, they
esteem an Orator more, which can do naught but babble: then a philosopher
which is virtuous. O woeful men, that now live in Rome, and much more woeful
shall those be which hereafter shall succeed: For Rome is no more that Rome
which it was wont to be, that is to wete, that the fathers in old time sent
their children to scooles and studies to learn them to be silent: and now
they send them to learn to speak to much. They learned them then to be sage
and temperate: and now they learn them to be dissolute. And the worste of all
is, that the scooles where the sage and pacient were wont to be, and from
whence issued the good and virtuous works: are now full of babbling Orators,
and none issue out from thence at this present, but the evil and vicious. So
that if the sacred Romain laws are exalted once in a week with their tongues:
they are broken ten times in the day in their works.

What will you I say more, since I can not tell you any thing (without hurting
my mother Rome) but that at this present al ye pleasures of vain men, is to see
their children overcome others by disputing: but I let you understand that all
my glory shall be, when my son shall surmount others, not in words, but in
silence, not to be troublesome, but to be pacient: not in speaking subtle
words, but in doing virtuous works. For the glory of good men is in
workyng much, and speaking littell. Consider my friends, and do not forget get
it, that this day I commit my honor unto you, I put into your hands the
estate of Comodus my son, the glory of Rome, the rest of the people which are
my subjects, the government of Italye which is your country, and above all I
refer unto your discretions, the peace and tranquillity of the hole common
wealth. Therefore he that has such a charge, by reason ought not to sleep.
For as the wise men say, to great trust, is required much diligence. I will
say no more, but that I would my son Comodus should be so well taught, that
he should have the fear of god, and the science of philosophers, the virtues
of the ancient Romans, the approved council of the aged, the courage of the
Roman youth, and the constancy of you which are his masters. Finally, I
would that of all the good he should take the good, as of me he ought to take the
heritage, and succession of the Empire. For he is the true prince, and worthy
of the empire, that with his eyes does behold the great signories he ought to
enherite, and does employe his heart how to govern it, whereby he shall live
to the great profit of the common wealth. And I proteste to the immortal gods,
with whom I hope to go, and to the goodness of my predecessors, whose faith I
am bound to keep. I proteste to the Roman laws, the which I did swear to
observe in the conquest of Asia, wherein I bound my self to continue, and to
the frendeshyppe of the Rhodiens, the which I have offered my self to keep,
to the ennemitye of the Affricans, the which not for me, but for the oath of my
predecessors I have bound my self to maintain. And I proteste unto the
vessel of the high Capital, where my bones ought to be burnt, that Rome do
not complain of me being alive, nor that in the world to come she curse me
after my death: If perchance the prince Comodus my son (by his wicked life)
should be occasion of the loss of hinderaunce to the common wealth. And
though you which are his masters undo it, for not geuyng him dew punishment,
and he thoroughe his wicked government destroy it, yet I discharge my self
by all these protestations that I have made, which shall be witnesses of my
will. For the father is bound no more toward his child, but to banyshe him
from his pleasures, and to give him virtuous masters. And if he be good, he
shall be be the glory of the father, the honor of him self, the wealth of you,
and the profit and comoditie of the hole common wealth.

That tutours of Princes and noble men's children ought to be very circumspect,
that their scollers do not accustom them selves in vices whilles they are
young, and specially they must keep them from four vices. Chap. xxxix.
THe good and expert Surgeons, unto great and dangerous wounds, do not
only apply medycynes and oyntementes which do resolve and stop: but also
do minister other good playsters, for to restrain and heal them. And verelye
they show them selves in the one no less sage, then in the other expert: for
as great dylygence ought to be had to preserve the weak fliesh, and to purge
the rotten wound, to the end it may be healed: so likewise the wise
trauailers learn diligentely the way, before they take upon them any
journey, that is to wete, if there be any dangers in the way, either of
robbynge or sleyinge, wherein there is any by pathe that goes out of the
high way.

Truly he that in this point is circumspecte, is worthy to be counted a sage
man: For according to the multitude of the perils of the world, none can be
assured, unless he know first where the danger is, wherein he may fall. To show
therefore that which by these parables I mean, I say, that the tutors and
masters of princes, and great Lords, ought not to be contented only to know
what science, what doctrine, and what virtue they ought to show and teach
their scollers: but also with greater care and diligence the yought to know
from what evils or wicked customs they ought to withdraw the^. For when the
trees are tender and young, it is more necessary to bow them, and cut of the
superfluous branches with knyues: then to gather their furtes with Baskettes.

Those which take upon them to govern Moyles, of great pryse and value, and
those that tame and break horses of a good race, take great pains that such
beasts be light, that they leap well, and be well made to the sporre, and
bridel: but they take much more pains that they be gentill, familiar, and
faithful, and above all, that they have no evil qualities. Then since it is
so, masters ought diligently to watch (if they be good) that in young Princes
there be no apparaunce of any notable vices. For all the virtues which ye young
do learn, does not them so much profit: as one only vice does them hurt, if
they do thereunto consent, knowing that thereby they may be herafter blamed or
despised. For if any man knew a beast, that is wyld and stoburne, and not
gentill, and will bye him at great price: such a one has his head more full
of follyes then of wisdom.

Albeit that masters ought to withdraw their scollers from many evil customs,
amongst all there are four principal, in any of the which if the prince be
defamed, the master which has taught him should deserve great punishment. For
according to the human laws, and customs, all the damage and harm that the
beasts do the vineyarde, the keeper that has charge thereof, shall (as he is
bound) recompense.

First the masters ought to refrain in such sort the tongues of their
scollers, that neither in sport nor in earnest, they permit the^ to tell lies.
For the greatest fault that is in a good and virtuous man, is to be brief in
ye truth: and the greatest villanye that is in a vicious man, is to be long in
lies, Merula in that.v. book of Cesars says, that the first war that Vlpius
Traianus made, was against Cebalus king of Daces, who rebelled against the
Romans, and with no small victory overcame the Emperor Domitian, in a
battle which they fought togethers. For as Nasica said, the pleasures that
Rome had to see many victories were not so great: as the displeasure was
which she took, to see her self once overcome. The good Vlpius Traianus gave
battle to king Cebalus, wherein Cebalus was not only overcome, but also
taken, and afterward brought before the emperor Traianus, which said unto
him these words. Speak Cebalus, why did thou rebel against the Romans,
since thou know that the Romans are invincible. The king Cebalus answered
him. If the Romans could not be ouercom, how did I then overcome the Emperor
Domitian.

Traian the Emperor said unto him again: Thou art greatly deceived (king
Cebalus) to think that when thou ouercamest the Emperor, thou had
overcome: the Romans. For when that Romulus founded Rome the Gods ordained,
that though their emperor dyed in any battle, yet not withstandyng it is
not to be thought that the empire is overcome. The Hystoriographers made a
great matter of the words that this Vlpius Traianus spoke. For therein he
showed, that the Roman empire was invincible.

After that this king Cebalus was dead, and that (for his deserts) he was
deprived: as the Emperor Traian was a merciful prince, so he provided that a
litel child that Cebalus had, should be brought up in his palace, with
intention that if the child became good, they would give him the Realm
which his father (thorough Treason) had lost.

For in Rome there was an ancient law, that all that which the father lost
by treason, the son should recover by his faithful acts. It chanced, that
the good Traian taking his pleasure in the gardins of Vulcan, saw the son of
king Cebalus, and many other young children of Rome, stealing fruit forth of
an orchard, and it is no wonder, for the Locustes did not so much harm to the
Corn, as the children do to the fruits, when they enter into the orchardes.
When ye emperor afterward demanded him from whence he came, he answered:
from his study hearing Rethoricke: but in deed he came from stealing of
fruit. The emperor Traian was so angry and displeased that the child was a
liar, that he commanded he should utterly be deprived and made void of al
hope: to recover ye realm of his father. The Emperor Traian was greatly
importuned, as well of straung Imbassatours, as of his own Country men, that
he would chaung that cruel sentence: For princes in a fury do command that,
which when they are pacient they do undo. The emperor Traian answered them,
if the father of this child which was king Cebalus had been a true prince, he
had not lost his life, neither his Realm, nor had not put me and thempyre so
many times in danger: but since the father was a liar, and the son is not
true, it were to unjust a thing to render him the Realm, For to me it should
be great reproach, and to our mother Rome as much dishonor, that she being the
mother of truth, should give realms to children being liars. This was it
that Vlpius Traian spoke unto the son of king Cebalus. Marcus Aurelius
the.xvii. Emperor of Rome had.ii. sons, as before we have rehearsed, the
eldest of the which was called Comodus: and his father procured greatly to
disinherit him of the empire: For he would that the second son named Verissimus
should have inherited it: and he did not only determine it, but also spoke it
often times openly. For that thing is with great difficulty dissembled, yt
excessiuely is beloved By chance an old Senator, and friend of Marcus the
emperor, one day, both going out of the Senate house, said unto him: I
marvel at the much, most excellent prince, why thou do disherite thy son
which is eldest, to make thine heir the youngest, knowing that they are both
thy sons, and that ye gods have given the no others but them. For the good
fathers are bound to chasten their children, but they have not license to
disherit them. The emperor Marcus Aurelius answered him. If thou were a greek
philosopher, as thou art a Romain citizen, and if thou knew the fathers love
toward his child, thou would not take pity one my son which undoes
the Empire: but thou should have compassion on me his father, which does
disherit him. For the child scarcely knows what he loses, but I that am his
father do bewail the damage which I do unto him. For in the end, there is
not in the world so cruel a father: but if his son should be hurt with the
pomell of the sword in the hand, the father would feel (incontinentlye) the
dent of his blade at his heart. In this case, I swear unto the by the
immortal gods, that I do that which I would not do: and I take that from him
which I would not take. For Anthonius my lord and father in law, gave me
the empire, for no other cause, but because he never found in me any lie: and
for this occasion I do deprive my son from it, for that I never found in him
any truth. For it is not mete that the Empire being given unto me for that I
was true: should be left inheritage to him that is a lier. For in the end it
is better yt the son do lose the heritage, then the father should lose his
renown. By these two examples, those which are the tutors and masters of
princes and great lords may see, how to be diligent to keep them from lies,
whilst they are young: and it ought to be in such sort, that neither in
pastime, neither in earnest aunswering they should be suffered once to tell a
lie. For those that for their pleasure were accustomed to lie in their youth:
will not fail for their profit to lie in their age.

Secondarely, the tutors and masters ought to keep their disciples, that they
be no gamesters, and that they do not accustom them selves in their youth to
be unthrifts: for it is a great token of the decay of the Empire, when the
Prince in his youth is affectionated to play. Experience shows us, that play
is a vice, as Seneca says, which has the property of a raging dog: with
whom if a man be once bitten (unless he has present remedy) forth with he
runs mad, and the disease also continues with him incurable until the
hour of his death. Players not without a cause are compared to mad dogs:
for all those that use it, hurt their conscience, lose their honor, and consume
their substance. It chaunseth often that in that wherein masters should be most
circonspecte, they (for the most part) are most negligent: that is to wete,
that under the coullet of some honest recreation, they agree to their scollers
to use some pastyme, which if therein be contained no commendable exercise, the
children ought not to use it, nor yet the tutors to suffer it. For vice is of
such a property, that if a child in his youth dare play apointe: it is to be
feared when he comes to years, he will play his cote. Wayinge the matter
more depely, and aggravating this vice, I say further, and affirm: that when
the children of Princes and great Lords play, a man ought not to make account
of that which they may win or loose: for that of all miseryes were most
misery, if therefore my pen should forbid them play. For play ought not to
be forbidden to young children, for the money that they lose: but for the vices
which they win thereby, and for the corrupt manners, which therein they
learn. Octauian, who was the second Emperor of Rome, and one of the
fortunatest Emperors that ever was, among all his virtues was noted of one
thing only, which is: that from his youth he was to much given to play at
tennis. Of the which vice he was not only admonished secreatly: but also was
forbidden it openly. For (as Cicero says in his book of laws) when the
Emperor was noted of any open vice, they might boldly reprove him in the open
Senate. When Octauian was for this vice reproved by the Senate, they said he
spoke these words. You have reason (O fathers conscript) in taking from me my
pastime: for it is necessary that the virtues of princes should be so many,
that all men might praise them: and their vices so few, that no man might
reprove them.

These words were notable, and worthy of such an excellent prince. For in the
end, consideringe their delicate and wanton brynging up, together with the
liberty that they have: we ought to thank and commend them for the good
works which they do, and most of all to rejoice for the vices which they
want. To our matter therefore, amongst the other wicked vices that children
get in their youth, when they are players, this is one that they learn to be
thieves, and liars. For the money that they playe-to demand it their fathers
they are afraid, and ashamed: and of their own proper goods, as yet they
have none in their hands. Wherefore a man may easily conclude, that if
children play, of necessity they must steal. The six and thirty Emperor of
Rome was Claudius Luganus, a man very temperate in eating, moderate in
apparel, vprighte in justice, and very fortunate in chivalry: for he did not
only repulse the Goths from Illiria, but also vanquished in a battle the
Germans, wherein were slain above a hundred thousand. This battle was
nere unto the lake Veracus, in a place called Luganus, and for a memory of that
great battle and victory they called him Claudius Luganus. For it was a
custom among the Romans, that according to the good or evil works that
princes did: so they were judged, and known by such surnames, whether it were
good or evil. This Emperor had but one only son, the which was a prince
comely of personage, and lively of understanding: but above all things given
to play, so that these good gifts which nature gave him to work in virtue,
he misused always in play. And amongst young men he desires rather to
haunte vice: then among the philosophers to learn virtue. And hereat a man
ought not to marueyle, for all men of great courage (unless they be compelled
to do virtuous acts) do exercise of themselves many detestable vices. It
chanced when this young prince had no more to play nor gage, he robbed out of
his fathers chamber a rich jewel of gold, whereof also his master was
preuy. And when the knowledge thereof came to the princes ears, he immediately
disherited his son of the Empire, and caused the head of the master to be
cut of his body, and all those likewise that plaide with him, to be banished
the country. This act made every man afraid for correction executed after a
good sort has this property: that it encourages the good to be good, and
fears the wicked from their wickedness.

Merula in the tenth book of Caesar's (where as at large he mentions this
matter) says, that the Romans esteemed more the banishemente of those
players from Rome: then to have drouen out the Goths from Illiria, and to say
the truth they had reason. For a prince deserves a greater crown of glory,
to banishe the vicious from his palace: then he does for chasing the enemies
out of his dominion.

Of two other vices perilous in youth, which the masters ought to keep them
from: and that is to be shameless in countenance, and addicted to the lust of
the flesh. Cap. xl.
THirdly tutors ought to travail, that the children which they have in
charge, be not light and worldly, nor that they do consent that they be to
bold or shameless. And I say, that they do not suffer them to be to light or
unconstant: for of young men, inconstant and light, comes oftentimes an old
man, fond, and unthrifty. I say that they do not suffer them to be to
rash: for of to hardy young men, comes rebellious and seditious persons. I
say that they do not consent they be shameless: for of the unshamefastness,
comes sclaunderous persons.

Princes and great lords ought to have much circumspection, that their
children be brought up in shamefastnes, with honesty. For the crown does not
give so much glory to a king, nor the head does more set forth the man, nor the
jewel more adourne the breast, nor yet the scepter more become the hand: then
shamefastnes, with honesty, beutifieth a young man. For a man of what estate
so ever he be, the honesty which he shows outwardly, does hide many secret
vices, wherewith he is endued inwardly. In the time of the reign of the
emperor Helius Pertinax (the nyntenthe Emperor of Rome) two consulles
governed the common wealth, the one named Verus, and the other Mamillus, one
day they came to the Emperor and were humble suitors to his highness,
besechinge him, that it would please him to receive their two children into his
service, the eldest of the which passed not as yet twelve years of age: the
which request, after the Emperor had granted, the fathers were not negligent
to bring them unto him, and being come before his presence, each of them made
an oration, the one in Latin and the other in Greek. Wherewith the Emperor
was greatly pleased, and all the residue amassed: for at that time none served
the Roman princes, but that he were either very apt to cheualry, or else
toward in sciences. As these two children in the presence of the Emperor made
their orations, the one of the^ beheld the Emperor in such sort, that his
eyes never went of him, neither once moved his head to look down to the earth:
and the other contrary beheld the earth always, and never lift up his head
during his oration. Wherewith the Emperor (being a grave man) was so highly
pleased with the demeanours of this child, that he did not only admit him to
serve him at his table: but also he suffered him to enter into his chamber, and
this was a preferment of great estimation. For princes did not use to be served
at their tables, nor in their chambers with any, unless they were of his own
kynred, or ancient servants. And concerning the other child, which was his
compaignion, the Emperor returned again to his father saiynge, that when
hereafter he should be more shamefast, he would receive him into his
service. And certainly the Emperor had reason: for good and grave princes,
ought not to be served with light and shameless children. I would now demand
fathers which love their children very well, and would they should be
worthy, what it avails their children to be fair of countenance, well
disposed of body, lively of sprighte, white of skin, to have yellowe heeres,
to be eloquent in speech, profounde in science, if with all these graces that
nature gives them, they be to bold in that they do, and shameless in that
they say? the author hereof is Patritius Senesis, in the first book De rege
and regno.

One of the most fortunate princes was the great Theodosius, the which
amongst all other virtues, had one most singular, which was: that he was
never served in his palace with any young man that was unshamefast, or
seditious, nor with an old man which was dishonest. For he said oftetimes that
princes shall never be well beloved: if they have about the^ liers, or
sclau^derers. This good emperor spoke as a man of experience, and very sage:
for if the counselors and familiars of princes be evil taught and impatient,
they offend many: and if they be liers, they deceive all: and if they be
dishonest, they sclaunder the people. And these offenses be not so great unto
them that commit them, as they be unto the prince which suffers them. The
emperor Theodose had in his palace two knights, the one called Ruffinus, and
the other Stelliconus, by whose prudence and wisdom the common wealth was
ruled and governed. And as Ignacius Baptista says, they two were the tutors
and governors of the children of Theodose, whose names were Archadius, and
Honorius: For as Seneca says, when good princes do die, they ought to be more
careful to procure masters and tutors which shall teach their children,
then to procure realms or kingdoms for to enriche them. These two masters,
Stelliconus and Ruffinus had in the palace of Theodose each of them a son,
the which were marvelous well taught, and very shamefast: and for the contrary,
the two princes Honorius, and Archadius, were evil manered and not very
honest. And therefore the good emperor Theodose took these children oftetimes,
and set them at his table: and contrary he would not once behold his own.
Let no man marvel though a prince of such a gravity, did a thing of so small
importance: for to say the truth, the shamefast children, and well taught,
are but robbers of the hearts of other men.

Fourthly, the tutors and masters of princes ought to take good head that
when the young princes their scholars wax great, that they give not them
selves over to the wicked vice of the flesh, so that the sensuality and evil
inclination of the wanton child, ought to be remedied by the wisdom of the
chaste master. For this cursed flesh is of such condition, that if once by
wantonness the wicket be opened, death shall sooner approach: then the gate
shall be shut again.

The trees which budde and cast leaves before the time, our hope is never to
eat of their fruit in season. I mean, that when children haunte the vice of
the flesh, whiles they be young: there is small hope of goodness to be looked in
them when they be old. And the elder we see them wax, the more we may be
assured of their vices. And where we see that vice increases: there we may
affirm that virtue diminishes. Plato in his second book of laws ordeyneth,
and commands, that young men should not marye before they were.xxv. years
of age: and the young maidens at.xx. because at that age their fathers abide
less dangers in begetting them, and giving of them life, and the children
also which are borne, have more strength against the assaults of death.
Therefore if it be true (as it is true in deed) I ask now, if to be married
and get children (which is the end of marriage) the Philosophers do not
suffer, until such time as they be men: then I say that masters ought not to
suffer their scholars to haunte the vices of the flesh when they be children.
In this case, the good fathers ought not alone to commit this matter to
their tutors: but also thereunto to have an eye them selves. For oftetimes they
will say they have been at their devotions in the temples when in deed they
have offered veneriall sacrifice to the Courtisan. The vice of the fleashe is
of such condition, that a man can not give him self to it, without grudge of
conscience, without hurt of his renown, without loss of his goods, without
shortenynge of his life, and also without offense to the common wealth: for
oftetymes, men enclyned to such vice, do rebel, trouble, and sclaunder the
people. Seneca satisfied me greatly, in that which he writes in the second
book De Clementia to Nero, where he says these words.

If I knew the Gods would pardon me, and also that men would not hate me: yet
I ensure thee for the vylenes thereof, I would not sin in the fleashe. And
truly Seneca had reason, for Aristotle says that all beasts after the act
of venery are sorry, but the Cock alone. O governors and masters of great
princes, and lords, by that immortal God which created us I conjure you, and
for that you owe to the nobilite I desire you, that you will bridle with a
sharp snaffle your charge, and give them not the rain to follow vices: for
if these young children live, they will have time enough to search, to
follow, to attain, and also to cast of those yokes. For through our
frayletie, this wicked vice of the fleashe, in every place, in all ages, in
every estate, and at all times (be it by reason, or not) is never out of ceason
What shall I say to you in this case? if the children pass the furiousnes of
their youth without the bridle: then they be void of the love of God, they
follow the trompet of sensuality, after the sound whereof they run
headlong into the yoke, and lose that which profits, to win that which
hurts? For in the carnal vices, he that has the least of that that
sensuality desires, has much more thereof then reason wylleth. Considering
that the masters are negligent, the children bold, their understandings
blinded, and seeing that their appetites do accomplish beastly motions: I ask
now, what remains to the child, and what contentation has he of such
filthe and naughtines? Truly since the fleashly and vicious man is overcome
with his appetite, of those that escape best I see none other fruit, but that
their bodies remain diseased, and their understanding blinded, their memory
dulled, their sense corrupted, their will hurted, their reason subverted, and
their good fame lost, and worste of all, the fleashe remains always flesh. O
how many young men are deceived, thinking that for to satisfy and by once
engaging them selves to vices, yt from that time forward they shall cease to be
vicious: the which thing not only does not profit them, but also is very
hurtefull unto them. For fire is not quenched with dry wood, but with cold
water. But O god what shall we do, since that now a days ye fathers do as much
esteem their children for being fine, and bold minio^s among women, as if they
were very profond in science, or hardy in feles of arms? and yt which is worst,
they ofttimes make more of their bastards gotten in adultry, the^ of their
legitimate child conceived in matrimony. what shall we say the^ of mothers?
truly I am ashamed to speak it, but they should be more ashamed to do it, which
is, because they would not displease their husbands, they hide ye wickedness of
their children, they put the children of their harlottes to the norse, they
redeem their gages, they give them money to play at dyce, they reconcile them
to their fathers when they have offended, they borowe them money to redeem them
when they are indebted: finally they are makers of there bodies, and vndoers of
their souls. I speak this incidently, for that the masters would correct
the children, but the fathers and mothers forbydde them. For it little avails
for one to prick the horse with the spur, when he that sits upon him
holds him back with the bridle. Therefore to our matter, what shall we do to
remedy this il in the young man, which in his flesh is vicious? Truly I see
no other remedy, but with moiste earth to quench the flaming fire, and to
keape him from the occasions of vice. For in the war, honor by tarrying is
obtained: but in the vice of the flesh, the victory by flying is won.

The end of the second book.
The third book of the Dial of princes, with the famous Book of Marcus
Aurelius, wherein he entreats of the virtues which Princes ought to have, as
Justice, peace, and magnificence.
How Princes and great Lords ought to travail to administer to all equal
Justice Cap. i.
EGidius Figulus, one of the most famous and renowned Philosophers of Rome,
said that between.2. of the zodaicall signs ( Leo and Libra) is a virgin
named Justice: the which in times pass dwelled among men in earth, and after
she was of them neclected, she ascended up to heaven.

This Philosopher would set us understand that justice is so excellent a
virtue, that she passes all men's capacity: since she made heaven her mansion
place, and could find no man in the whole earth that would entertayne her in
his house. During the time that men were chaste, gentle, pitiefull, pacient,
embracers of virtue, honest, and true, Justice remained in the earth with
them: but since they are converted unto adulterers, tyraunts, given to be
proud, impatient, liars, and blasphemers, she determined to forsake them and to
ascend up into heaven. So that this Philosopher concluded, that for the
wickedness that men commit on earth, Justice has lept from them into heaven.
Though this seem to be a poetical fiction, yet it comprehends in it high and
profound doctrine: the which seems to be very clear, for where we se justice,
there are few thieves, few murderers, few tyrants, and few blasphemours.
Finally I say, that in that house or common wealth where justice remains, a
man cannot commit vice, and much less dessemble with the vicious. Homer
desirous to exalt justice, could not tell what to say more, but to call kings,
the children of the great god Jupiter: and that not for the naturalitie they
have, but for the office of justice which they minister. So that Homer
concludes, that a man ought not to call just princes other, but the children
of god. The divine Plato in the fourth book of his common wealth says, that
the chiefest gift god gave to men is: that they being (as they be) of such vile
cley, should be governed by justice. I would to God all those which read this
writing, understood right well that which Plato said: For if men were not
endued with reason, and governed by justice, amongst all beasts none were so
unprofitable. Let reason be taken from man wherwyth he is endued, and justice
whereby he is governed: then shall men easily perceive in what sort he will
lead his life. He cannot fight as the Elephant, nor defend him self as the
Tygre, nor he can hunte as the Lion neither labor as the Ox: and that whereby
he should profit (as I think) is, that he should eat Bears and Lions in his
life, as now he shall be eaten of worms after his death. All the Poets that
invented fictions, all the Orators which made Orations, all the Philosophers
which wrote books, all the sages which left us their doctrynes, and all the
Princes which instituted laws meant nothing else, but to persuade us to think
how brief and unprofitable this life is, and how necessary a thing justice is
therein. For the filth and corrupcion which the body has without the soul:
the self same has the commonwealth without justice. We cannot deny but that
the Romans have been proud, enuyous, aduouterers, shameless, and ambicious:
but yet with all these faults they have been great obseruers of justice. So
that if god gave the so many tryumphes being laden and enuironned with so many
vices: it was not for the virtues they had, but for the great justice which
they did administer. Pliny in his second book says, that Democritus
affirmed there were two gods which governed the universal world: that is to
wete, Reward and Punishment. Whereby we may gather, that nothing is more
necessary then true and right justice. For the one rewards the good, and the
other leaves not unpunished the evil. Saint Austyne in the first book De
ciuitare dei says these words. Justice taken away, what are realms but
dens of thieves? truly he had great reason. For if there were no whips for
vacabondes, gags for blasphemers, fynes for perjury, fire for heretics,
sword for murderers, galouse for thieves, nor prison for rebels: we may
boldly affirm that there would not be so many beasts on the mountains, as
there would be thieves in the common wealth. In many things or in the greatest
part of the commonwealth, we see that bread, wine, corn, fyshe, woll, and
other things necessary for the life of the people wants: but we never saw
but malicious men in every place did abound. Therefore I swear unto you,
that it were a good bargayne to change all the wicked men in the common
wealth, for one only poor sheep in the sylde. In the common wealth we see
naught else but whippyng daily, beheddyng, slayinge, drownyng, and hanginge: but
notwithstanding this, the wicked which remain still are so many in number,
that if all those should be hanged that deserve it by justice, a man could not
find hangmen sufficient, nor gallowses to hang them upon. Admit according
to the variety of realms and provinces, that diverse laws and customs have
been instituted therein: Yet for a truth there was never nor never shall be found
any nation or common wealth in the world so barbarous, but has been founded
of justice. For to affirm that men can be preserved without justice, is as
much as to say the fish can live without water. How is it possible that a
common wealth may live without justice: since without her cannot be ruled one
only personae? Pliny in an epistle says, that he him self having the
charge of a province in Affrike, demanded an old man and in government
expert, what he might do to administer justice well? the aged manne
answered. Do justice of thy self, if thou will be a minister thereof: For
the good judge, with the right yard of his own life, ought to measure the
whole state of the common wealth. And he said further, if thou wylt be right
with men, and clean before god, beware of presumpcion in thine office. For
the proud and presumptuous judges often times do contrary in their words,
and also exceade in their deeds. Pliny also says that he profited more
with the counsel this old man gave him; then with all that ever he had read
in his books. O to how much is he bound that has taken upon him to
administer justice? For if such one be an upright man, he accomplisheth that
whereunto he is bound: but if such one of him self be unjust, iustlye of
god he ought to be punished, and likewise of men to be accused.

When princes command their servant or subjects any thing, and that they
cannot accomplish them in such sort as they had charge to do: then he ought to
have them excused (those excepted) which govern realms and provinces. For no
man leaves to administer justice, but for want of knowledge or experience: or
else through abundance of affection or malice. If a captain lose a battle
he may excuse him self, saying his men were fled when they should have
assaulted their enemies. A poast may excuse hi self for yt the waters we^ so
high. A hunter may say the beast is escaped another way and others such like:
but a governor of a common wealth, what excuse can he have that he does not
justice? Conscience ought to burden him, and also he ought to be ashamed to
take upon him the charge of any thing, if he doubt to bring it to effect: for
the shamefast faces and haute courages either ought to put that in execution
which they take upon them, or else they ought to show a lawful cause why it
took no effect. Let us know first what justice is, and then we shall know
what is mete for the administracion thereof. The office of a good judge is to
defend the commonwealth, to help the innocent, to aid the simple, to correct
the offender, to honor the virtuous, to help the orphans, to do forth poor,
to bridel the ambicious: finallye by justice he ought to give each one his
own, and to dispossess those which hold any thing wrongfully of others.

When a prince commands any man to take the charge of justice, and such one
does not seek it of him self, if perchance afterward he did not in all
points uprightly in the administracion thereof, he might have some excuse,
saying that though he has accepted it, it was not with mind because he would
err, but because with good will he would obey. What shall we say of many
which without shame, without knowledge, without experience, and without
conscience, do procure the office of justice? O if princes knew what they give
when they give the charge to any to govern the common wealth? I swear unto
you, that they were better to give them goods to find them for.20. years: then
for to trust them with the charge of justice.20. days. What a thing is it to
see some men shameless, dishonest, great talkers, gluttons, ambitious, and
covetous: the which without any reasonable cause aucthority or knowledge,
demand of princes an office of justice, as if by justice they did demand
their own? Would to god the geuer would have an eye to those which in this wise
do demand. But what shall we say of those that do solicit the^, procure
the^, importune them, beseech them, and more then that, even as without shame
they do demand it, so without conscience likewise they buy it. There remains
in this case more as yet, that is, that if those cursed men do not attain to
that which they demand, and if those (having no conscience) do not give it:
then they blaspheme and complain of those which are in favor with princes, as
if they had done them great iniurye. O what trouble is it to good men to
accomplish the desire of the evil. For the covetous and ambicious persons do
but desire that the good men had the like pain in geuyng that they have in
demanding. Many times I have thought with my self, wherein so many damages of
the common wealth should consist, such disobedience, such contrarieties, and so
many theftes: and in the end I find, that all or the most part proceed in
that, that they provide for ministers of justice, not for conscience sake, but
for covetousness only. Admyt that it appertain to all to desire and procure
justice: yet to none it appertains so much to procure and defend it, as to
the royal person, which the subjects ought some time to fear: but princes
are bound to minister it equally to all. It is a great matter that princes be
pure in life, and that their houses be well ordered, to the end that their
justice be of credyte and authority: For he which of him self is unjust,
gives no hope that an other at his hands should have justice. He which
cannot govern his own house can evil govern the whole common wealth. These
princes which are true in their words, clean in their lives, and just in
their works: though some time they err in the administration of ye common
wealth, all excuse them, saying that they err not thorough the malice of them
selves, but rather thorough the evil counsel of others. So that all which
the good prince does they commend, and all the evil that chances they
excuse. Plutarche in the second book of his common wealth says, that herein
some princes differ from others: For the evil prince is only obeyed, but the
good prince is obeyed, feared, and loved. And more over he that is good, makes
heavy things light with his goodness: and the tyrant that is evil, makes
things which are light to be very heavy through his naughtynes. Happy is the
Prince which is obeyed: but much more happy he, which is obeyed, feared, and
loved. For the body is weary often times to obey: but the heart is never
constrained to love. Titus the Emperor was once demanded of these 2. things,
that is to wete: whether to reward the good, or to punish the evil were for a
prince more natural. He answered. As natural as both the right and left arm
is in a man: so necessary is reward and punyshement in a prince. But as we
help our selves more with the right arm then with the left: so the prince
ought more to endeavor him self to reward then to punish. For punishemement
ought to be by the hands of a stranger: but reward ought to be with his own
proper hands. When we persuade princes to be just, and that they do justice,
it is not to be understood that they should behead murderers, bannishe
rebels and sedicious persons, hang thieves, and burye felons alive. For
such or other like things, rather appertain to bloody hangemen, then to
pitiefull kings. All the profit of justice is, in that the prince be honest of
person, careful for his household, zealous of the common wealth, and not large
of his conscience. For princes ought not to be commended for murderyng many
cruelly: but for refourmyng the common wealth louyngly. Plutarche in the
comfortable oration that he wrote to Appoloni, speaking of the laws which
Promotheus gave to the Egiptians: amongst the residue he resited these three
that follow.

We ordeine and command, that princes lay not hands on others for any crimes
or offenses done unto him self. For princes ought not to use their hands to
revenge their own injuries: but rather by justice to defend other that be
iniuried.

We ordeine and command, that all times when they shall be in their common
wealth and not in wars, they shall not wear weapons defensive, and much
less offensive. For good princes neither ought to be hastye, to the end they
may kill: nor yet to have vices, whereby they may be killed.

We ordeine and command, that the prince do not only not kill with his hands,
but also that he do not see them do justice with his eyes.

For how much noble and worthy a thing it is, before the presence of a
prince that all should receive honor: so sclaunderous a thing it is that any
in his presence should loase their lives.

The way that princes ought to use in chosing their judges and officers in
their countries. Cap. ii.
SParthianus in the lives that he wrote of.30. tyrauntes said, that Ciriacus
the tyrant, had a memorial made of certain of the Senators whom he would
have killed: and when the thing was discovered they slew him. They found in
the hands of an other tiraunt named Regilius, after he was dead, a memorial
of those which with his own hands he had deprived of their lives: wherefore
they afterward deprived him of his burial O how many judges are there in this
world, that do as much auaunce them selves of those whom they have caused to be
whipped, to be slain, to be beheaded, to be hanged quartered and slain: as
others do which have redeemed many captyues, or have married many orphans. Those
judges which according to the order of laws, customs, and iurisdiccions do
punish the evil, I do well allow: but to rejoice and auaunce them selves of
them whom they have condemned, I utterly abhor. For the virtuous and
christian judge ought rather to shed tears in the churches: then by affection
to shed blood of men in the seat of judgment. And for the confirmacion of
that which I have said, I affirm, that the good judge and governor of the
common wealth, ought not to bear in mind the murders and slaughters done by
others: but to record the injuries which they have done them selves. For in
other men's offenses we ought to be silent: and for our own iniquities we ought
to be penitent. Judges execute some punishementes, which men disallowe, and
god does approve: an other time god condemns the^, though the world do allow
them: therefore the surest thing for such judges is, not to reioise of their
brethren whom they have corrected, but what they them selves for their own
offenses have deserved. In judging others, by false witness, the judges many
times against their wills do err: but in their own matters they can never
err (unless they will) since the offenses which we commit are always
certain. Therefore it greueth me that there be some so evil: which being
accused before god would excuse them selves before men, yet their own
brethren with false witnesses they dare condemn. Great care ought princes to
have, to examine them whom they will make judges and gouernoures. For the
judge which daily makes not an accoumpte with his conscience in secret,
shall commit every hour a thousand euylles in the common wealth. O poor and
miserable common wealth, where the governors and judges thereof do not cast
their eyes but unto them wh^e they ought to chastise, where they do not
think in their heart but how they may enryche their coffers, where they
do not occupye their hands but to take brybes, and do not pass the time
but in bankettes: And I said not without a cause bankettes. For there are
many judges which imploye their study more to geate frindes, to maintain
their state proudlye: then for to read books, to judge men's causes
uprightly. The judge which never reads, the judge which never studieth, the
judge which never opens book, the judge which is never in his house, the
judge which day and night robs, how is it possible that he execute one true
justice? There can be no greater fear in a man, nor sclaunder more great in
the commonwealth, then when the judge (who ought to judge and chastise the
offenses of others) is always overwhelmed with vices him self. The judge
which presumes to be good, and will be good, and desires to be good: a man
should find him no where, unless he be studying in his house, or sitting in
the place of justice. Let not princes trust upon this, when they provide
judges and governors for to judge, saying: that if they find any evil, they
will soon cut him of, for such are so evil, that if they want to means to get
to those offices, they shall want no cautils nor corrupt frindes to suborne them
therein. When princes and great lords shall find any judge evil, I
counsel them to avoid him immediatlye, or that they show them selves not
contented with his dooinges: for such one shall forthwith enforce him self to
do justice, with intencion that those of the common wealth might desire him to
be their judge. Although my pen does reprove these Judges which are
negligent and careless, the which neither by knowledge can judge, nor with
stoutnes punish. The judges which judge, and govern, ought not to be with
all so familiar, that all dare take upon them to ask him: for in this case if
some commend his gentle co^uersacion, others will blame his parciall justice. I
counsel, admonish, and require Princes, that they content them selves not
only to be true, pitiful, honest, and virtuous, nor yet to be just: but that
it is as well necessary they be obseruers of justice. For let them know that
there is great difference, between him that is just, and an other that does
minister justice: for to the prince that is good, comes honor to his
parsonne, but from him that ministers justice, comes profit to his common
wealth. Peradventure it is no wonder to see the Prince that will tell no lie,
and to see his ministers not to speak one truth? peradventure I do not think
my self sclaundered, to se the prince temperate in eatinge, and to see all his
servants distempered both with eating and drinkinge? peradventure, and it
is no cause to muse upon, to see the princes chaste and honest: and to see
their servants in flesh, filthye and dissolute? peradventure it is no cause
to marvel to see the prince just, and to love justice: and that very few
of his ministers do minister it.

The end why all these things are spoken is, to advertise Princes that they
be not so careful to be chaste, sober, true and just, but that they know
whether their gouernoures and judges are corrupted, covetous, gredy, unshame
fast, liars, or brybers. For if it touches us much that our Princes be good:
so much more it touches us that the ministers be not evil. One of the things
wherein princes ought to provide with their judges and governors is, that by
no means they suffer their laws and ancient customs to be broken in
their common wealth: and that in their steedes strange customs be not
introduced. For the comminaltye is so variable in that they say, and so light
in that they ask, that they would daily see a new king, and hourly
change a new law. Pliny in an epistle that he writes to Escario says.
Optime apud Persas capitalem per legem fuit prohibitum, nouos aut peregrinos
mores inducere. As if he spoke more plainelye. Amongst the Perses it was a
law inviolable, that no man should bring into the common wealth any
strange custom: and for such an offense they should pay none other
ransom, but the loss of their heads. As men daily do diminishe in
virtue (unless by force they be witholden) and augment in vanity: so they
would invent new deuyses and strange customs, wherewith men should be
decayed, and the common wealth destroyed. For strange meats do alter men's
stomachs. When those of Creta were vngentlye used of the Rhodiens, they did
not pray to their gods to send them pestylence, war, famine, or sedition
among their enemies: but that they would suffer some evil manners to be
brought in amongst their people. Let not those think that shall read this,
that it was a small curse those of Creta desired, and that it was a small
revenge which God gave them of their enemies, if he gave them that which
they did require: For from wars, famine, and pestylence, some may escape: but
with the new and strange deuyses, we see all perish. Of many things the
Historians do reprove the Emperor Sergius Galba, and for one alone they do
praise him, which is that he never consented that in Rome any new law
should be made, nor any old custom broken. And he commanded that those
should be greuouslye punished, which brought in any new law: and he
rewarded those which put him in mind of any old custom, the which he
commanded to be observed. It is a mockerye, yea (better to say) a sclaunder,
to see that some young judges will do that of the common wealth, which a
Taylour does of a gown, (that is to say) to turn him within and without,
before and behind, which they ought not to do, nor the people to consent
thereunto.

For the Prince does not send them to make laws, nor to bring in new
orders, but to the end that they do only preserve the common wealth in
their good customs. Princes ought also to take great care that unto little
and great, rich and poor, they minister equal justice, sith there is no
dyuyne nor humayne law that gives them power and authority to corrupt it,
for if a Prince cannot without reason dispose his own goods, much less he can
make laws and sell justice. We do not deny a Prince but that he is lord of
beasts, of fysh, of birds, of mines, of mountains, of servant and of
fyeldes, finallye that he is lord of the sea and land: but therefore we will
not grant him that he is lord of justice. For there is none other true Lord
of justice but God, which is the self same justice. When a Prince dies and
makes his will he says: I leave all my realms and seignories to the prince
my son and legittimate heir, and do leave unto my second son such an
estate and duchye, and to my daughter such lands, and to all I recommend
justice, to the end they do observe it, and cause it to be observed every
one in his own country. It is much to note that the father does not say
that he leaves unto his son justice, but that he does recommend it unto him:
so that the good princes ought to think that they have not inherited justice
of their predecessoures in form of a patrimony, but that God gave it unto
them of trust. Princes of all things may be called lords save only of
justice, whereof they are but only ministers. We dare boldly say, yt the
prince or great lord which judges causes not according to ye divine will, but
according to their own affection, we will not call him a just judge, but a
rouing thief. For the prince is much worse which robs god of justice:
then the thief which steals the goods from men. Suetonius Tranquillus
recites much wickedness of Domician, and the greatest of all was, the poor,
the Orphans and those which could do little, he always punished: and the
other that were rich and of authority he pardoned. He compounded with some
for money, and with other he dissembled for favor. Lampridius said of
Alexander Seuerus, the.25. Emperor of Rome, that he never kept in his court
any evil man, or suffered any of his parents to be vicious. And when he was
demanded on a time why he banished one of his cosyns, since he was young and a
child? he answered them which entreated him for him and alleged: That though
he was young and his cousin, yet Charior est mihi respub. as if more plainly he
had said, I have none other nerer of kin to me in my palace then the common
wealth. O high, and much more higher words, worthy for a truth to be
written in princes hearts, whereby they ought to be advertised, that he said
not, I take for my kynne one part of the common wealth. For the prince which
fears god, and desired to be found just, as he will indifferentlye be
obeyed of all, so ought he equally to administer justice to all. If they will
not credit me nor my pen, let them credit Plato in the books of his common
wealth: who gives liberty and license to all the Plebeyans, to the end that
every one do love his wife, his children, and his parents. And this sort of
love he will not that princes have, to whom he persuades that first above all
things they love their common wealth: for if the Prince do love any other
thing above his common wealth, it is impossible but that one day for the love
of that he will writhe justice. When Plato gave not lyce^ce to Princes not to
enlarge their love on diverse things, peradventure he would counsel them
that they should do some wrongs. It chaunseth often times that princes do
omit justice, not for that they will not administer it but because they will
not be enfourmed of things, which they ought to remedy, and look unto. And
this is inexcusable, where he hurts his honor, and burdeneth his conscience.
For at the day of judgment, though he be not accused for malice: yet he
shall be condemned for negligence. The prince which is careful, to see and
enquire the dominages of his realms: we may say that if he does not provide
for them, it is because he can do no more, but he which is neglygent to see
them, and know them: we cannot say but if he leave to provide, it is for
that he will not. The prince or great lord, which dare take upon him such
things, what name or renown may we give him? I would not we should call
such a one father of the common wealth: but destroyer of his country. For
there can be no tirannye greater, nor more unequal: then for the Physician to
ask his duetye for his cure, before he has begone to minister the medicine.
That Princes and great lords desire to know their revenues, I allow them:
but in that they care not to know the dommages of their common wealths, I
do discommende them. For the people pay tribute to their Princes, to the
end they should deliver them from their enemies, and defend them from
tyrauntes. For the judges which wilbee evil, though I say much, it will
profit little: but to those which desire to be good, that which is spoken (as
I think) suffyseth. Notwithstanding that which is spoken I say, that judges
and governors ought to consider well with them selves, and see if they will be
counted for just ministers, or cruel tirauntes. For the office of a tyrant
is, to rob the common wealth: and the office of the good Prince is, to
refourme the people.

Princes and great lords, have more busynes then they think they have: to
see all those which will see them, and to hear all those which will co^plain
unto them. And the cause hereof is, admit that which the subject demands,
he presentlye cannot give, nor that whereof he complains, he cannot remedy:
yet notwithstanding they remain after a sort contented, saying that they
have now showed all their complaints and injuries to their princes. For the
wounded hearts often times utter their inward pains which they feel, without
any hope to receive comfort of that which they desire. Plutarche in his
Apothegmes says, that a poor and aged woman, desired king Philipe of
Macedonie (which was the father of king Alexander the great) that he would
hear her with justice: and sith she was very importunate upon him, king
Philip said on a day unto her. I pray the woman be contented, I swear by the
gods I have no leisure to hear thy complainte. The old woman answered the
king. Behold king Phillyppe, if thou have not time to hear me with justice,
resign thy kingdom, and another shall govern thy common wealth.

Of an oracion which a villayne dwellinge near to the river of Danuby made
before the Senators of Rome, concerning the tyranies and oppressions, which
their officers used in his country. And the oracion is divided into three
Chapters. Cap. iii.
IN the.x. year of the reign of the good emperor Marcus Aurelius there
happened in Rome a general pestilence: the which being so outrageous, the
good emperor went into Campaigne, which at that time was very healthful,
and without diseases, though it was very dry, and wanted much of that which
was necessary: yet notwithstanding, the good Emperor was there with all the
principal Senators of Rome. For in time of pestilence, men do not seek
where they should rejoice their parsonnes: but where they may save their
lives. Marcus Aurelius being there in Campania, was sore vexed with a fever.
And as his condition was always, to be amongst Sages: so at that time his
sickness required to be visited of phisicions. The resort that he had in his
palace was very great, as well of Philosophers for to teach: as of
physicians for to dispute. For this prince ordained his life in such sort:
that in his absence things touching the war were well provided: and in his
presence was nothing but matters of knowledge argued. It chaunsed one day as
Marcus Aurelius was environed with Senators, Philosophers, physicians, and
other sage men, a question was moved among them, how greatly Rome was
changed, not only in buyldinges, which almost were utterly decayed: but
also in manners, which were wholly corrupted: the cause of all this evil
grew, for that Rome was full of flatterers: and destitute of those which
durst say the truth. These and such other like words heard: the emperor
took up his hand and blessed him, and declared unto them a notable example,
saying. In the first year that I was co^sull there came a poor villayne from
the river of Danubye, to ask justice of the Senate, against a Censour which
did sore oppress the people, and in deed he did so well propounde his
complaint, and declare the follye and iniuryes which the judges did in his
country: that I doubt whether Marcus Cicero could utter it better with his
tongue, or the renowned Homer have written it more eloquently with his pen.
This villayne had a small face, great lips, hollow eyes, his color burnte,
curled hear, bareheaded, his shoes of a Porpige skin, his coat of gotes
skin, his girdell of bull russhes, a long bearde and thick, his eye breyes
covered his eyes, the stomach, and the neck covered with skynnes, heared as a
bear, and a clubbe in his hand. Without doubt when I saw him enter into the
Senate, I imagined it had been a beast in form of a man: and after I heard
that which he said, I judged him to be a God (if there are Gods) amongst
men. For if it was a fearful thing to behold his person, it was no less
monstrous to hear his words. At that time, there was great prease at the
door of the Senate, of many and diverse persons, for to solicit the affairs
of their provinces: yet notwithstanding this villayne spoke before the others,
for twoe causes. The one, for that men were desirous to hear what so monstrous
a man would say: the other because the Senators had this custom, that the
complayntes of the poor should be heard, before the requests of the rich.
Wherefore this villayne afterward in the midst of the Senate, began to tell
his tale, and the cause of his coming thither: in the which he showed him
self no less bold in words, then he was in his attire strange, and said
unto them in this sort. O fathers conscripte, and happy people, I Mileno a
ploughman, dwelling nere unto the river of Danube, do salute you worthy
Senators of Rome, which are conuented here in this Senate, and I beseech the
immortal gods my tongue this day so to govern, that I may say that which is
convenient for my country, and that they help you others to govern well the
common wealth. For without the healpe of God, we can neither learn the good,
nor avoid the evil. The fatale destines permittinge it, and our wrathefull
Gods forsakinge us, our mishappe was such, and to ye others fortune showed her
self so favorable: that the proud captains of Rome, byforce of arms took our
country of Germany. And I say not without a cause, that at that time the gods
were displeased with us: for if we Germans had appeased our Gods, ye Romans
might well have excused your selves for ouercomminge of us. Great is your
glory O Romans, for the victories ye have had, and tryumphes which of many
realms ye have conquered: but notwithstanding greater shall your infamy be in
the world to come, for the cruelties which you have committed. For I let you
know, if you do not know it, that when the wicked went before the triumphing
chariots saying, live, live, inuincyble Rome: on the other side the poor
captyues went saying in their hearts, justice, justice. My predecessors
enhabited by the river of Danubye, for when the dry earth annoyed them, they
came to recreate them selves in the fresh water: and if perchance the
unconstant water did annoy them, then they would return again to the main
land. And as the appetites and conditions of men are variable: so there is a
time to fly from the land, to refreshe our selves by the water. And time also
when we are annoyed with the water to return again to the land. But how
shall I speak Romans, that which I would speak? your couetousenes of
taking other men's goods has been so extreme, and your pride of commanding
strange countries has been so disordinate: that neither the sea can suffice
you in the depenes thereof, neither the land assure us in the fields of the
same. O how great comfort it is for the troubled men, to think and be assured
that there are just gods, the which will do justice on the unjust. For if the
oppressed men thought them selves not assured, that the gods would wreke
their injury of their enemies: they with their own hands would destroy them
selves. The end why I speak this is, for so much as I hope in the just gods,
that as you others with out reason have cast us out of our houses: so by reason
shall others come after us, and cast you others out of Italy, and Rome both.
There in my country of Germany, we take it for a rule vnfallyble, that he
which by force takes the good of another: by reason ought to lose his own
proper right. And I hope in the gods, yt that which we have for a proverb in
Germany, you shall have for experience here in Rome. By the gross words I
speak, and by the strange apparel which I wear, you may well immagine that I
am some rude v^^laine or barbarous borne: but yet notwithstanding I want not
reason to know, who is just and righteous in holdyng his own: and who is a
tyrant in possessing of others. For the rude men of my profession, though in
good style they cannot declare that which they would utter: yet
notwithstanding that, we are not ignorant of that which ought to be allowed
for good, nor which ought to be condemned for evil. I would say therefore
in this case, that that which the evil with all their tyranny have gathered in
many days, the gods shall take from them in one hour: and contrarywyse all
that which the good shall lose in many years, the gods will cestore it them in
one minute. For speaking the truth, the evil to prosper in riches, is not for
that the gods will it, but that they do suffer it, and though at this hour we
complain disse^bling, we suffer much, but the time shall come that will pay
for all. Beliue me in one thing, O Romans, and doubt not therein: that of the
unlawful gain of the fathers, follows after the just undoing of their
children. Many often times do marvel in my country, what the cause is that
the gods do not take from the wicked that which they win, immediatlye as
soon as they win it: and as I think the reason hereof is, for the
dissembling with them, by little and little they gather together diverse things,
and afterward when they think least thereon, it is taken from them all at
once. For the just judgment of the gods is, that since without reason they
have done evil to others: others by reason should come in like manner which do
evil unto them. It is impossible that the valyant and sage man, who in his
deeds presumes to be wise, should take any taste in an other man's good: for
if he did, he would never content him self with any thing, since he has not
a conscience in that which is evil gotten, I know not Romans, whether you
understand me, but because you shall understand me better, I say, that I
marvel, and I should rather wonder, how the man keeping another man's goods,
can sleep or rest one hour, since he knows he has done injury to the gods,
slau^dered his neighbors, pleased his enemies, lost his friends, and endomaged
those that he robbed, and woorst of all that he has put his person in
peril. And I say, that he has put his person in peril: for the day that any
man determines to take my goods, he will also the same day (if he can) take my
life. It is an odyous thing to the gods, and very slanderous among men, that
men should have so much (thorough their fleshly desires) virtue bound, and
the rain of their evil works so much at liberty, that another man's misery
seems to him riches, and that his own riches seems to him self poverty. I
care not whether he be Greek, barbarous, Roman, present or absent, I say and
affirm, that he is and shall be cursed of gods and hated of men, which without
consideracion will change his good fame into shame, justice into wrong, right
into tyranny, truth into lies, the certain for the doubtful, hatyng his own
proper, and syghing for that of other men's. He that has his chief intencion
to gather goods for his children, and seeks not a good name among the
renowned: it is just that such one do not only lose the goods which he has
gathered, but also that without good name he remain shameful among the wicked.
Since you other Romans naturally are proud, and pride does blind you, you
think your selves happy, that for having so much as ye have more then others,
that therefore you should be more honored then al, the which truly is not so.
For if presently you will not open your eyes and confess your own errors, you
shall se, yt whereas you auaunt your selves to be lords of strange provinces: you
shall find yourselues made slaves with your own proper goods. Gather as much as
you will, let them do all you do command them: yet as I thynk it little
avails to have Plebeians houses with goods, and contrarywyse the hearts to
be possessed with covetousness. For the riches which are gotten with
covetousness, and are kept with avarice, do take away the good name from the
possessour, and do nothing avail to maintein his life. It cannot be suffered
many days, and much less hid many years, that one man should be counted
both for rich among the rich, and for honored among the honorable: for it
is impossible that he which is a great lover of temporal goods, should be a
frynde of his good name. O if the covetous men were of their own honor as
gredy, as they are of the goods of an other desirous: I swear unto you by the
immortal gods, that the little woorme or moth of covetousness would not gnawe
the rest of their life, nor the canker of infamy should destroy their good
name after their death. Harken you Romans, harken what I will say, and I
beseech the gods that you may understand it: For otherwise I should lose my
labor, and ye others should take no fruit of my words. I se that all the
world hates pride, and yet there is none that will follow humanity. Every man
condemns adultery, and yet I se no man that lives chaste. Every man curses
excess, and I se no man live temperatly. Every man praises patience, and I se
no man that will suffer. Every manne blames sloth, and I se no man, but
those that are ydel. Every one blames auaryce, and yet every man robs. One
thing I say, and not without tears in this senate, openly I do declare it,
which is, that with the tongue every man prayseth virtue: and yet they them
selves with all their lymmes are servants unto vices. Do not think that I say
this only for the Romans which be in Illiria: but for the Senators which I
se here in the Senate. Al you Romans, in your deuyses about your arms, have
this for your word. Romanorum est debellare superbos, and parcere subiectis.
Truly you should better have said: Romanorum, est spoliare innocents, and
reddere subiectos. For you Romans are but destroyers of the people that be
peaceable: and robbers of the swette and labors of strangers.

The vyllayne argues against the Romans, which without cause or reason
conquered their countreye, and proved manifestlye that theye thoroughe
offending of their gods, were vanquished of the Romans. Cap. iiii.
I Ask ye Romans what occasion ye have, that are brought up nigh to the
river of Tyber, against us that live in peace, nigh to the river of Danuby.
Peradventure ye have seen us friends to your foes, or else we have showed our
selves your enemies? peradventure you have hard say, that forsaking our own
land, we should go conquer foreign realms? peradventure ye have been
advertised, yt we rebelling against our own lords, should become obedient to
the crewell barbarous? peradventure ye have sent us some imbassadour to desire
us to be your friends: or else there came some from us to rome, to defye ye as
our enemies? peradventure some king died in our realm, which by his testament
made ye heirs to our realm? whereby you claim your title, and seek to make us
your subjects? peradventure by some ancient law or custom ye have found,
yt the noble and worthy Germany, of necessitye is subject to the proud people
of Rome? peradventure we have destroyed your armies, we have wasted your
fields, sacked your cities, spoiled your subjects, or favored your enemies?
so yt to revenge these injuries ye should destroy our la^d? if we had been your
neighbors, or you ours, it had been no marvel though one should have destroyed
the other. For it chau^seth oftentimes, yt through controversy of a little piece
of ground, tedious wars between people arise. Of a troth none of all these
things which I have named, has chaunsed between ye Romans and us Germans.
For in Germany we felt your tyranny, so sone as we hard of your renown. If
ye be grieved with that I have said, I pray you be not offended with that I
will say, which is: that ye name of Romans, and the cruelty of tyrants,
arrived together in one day upon our people. And what more to say, I know not
Romans, of the little care the gods do take, and of the great audacitie yt
me^ have. For I see yt he which possesses much does oppress him which has
but little: and he that has but little, waieth not him yt has much. So
disordered covetousness strives with secret malice, and secret malice gives
place to open theft, and open robbery no man resists, and thereof comes, yt
the couetice of a malicious man is accomplished, to the prejudice of a whole
state. Harken ye romans, harken, and by the immortal gods I do conjure you,
give ear to that I will say, which is, consider well what you have do^^ for the
gods words be in vain, or else men must have an end, the world in time must
needs fall, or else the world shall be no world. Fortune must needs make sure the
pin of the whele, or else yt shall be seen which never was seen, which is: that
which in.8. years ye have won, ye shall withein.8. days lose. For nothing
can be more just, since ye by force have made your selves tirants: then yt the
gods by justice should make ye slaves. And do not think ye romans though you
have subdued Germany, and be lords thereof, that it was by any warrely
industrye: for ye are no more warlike, no more coragious, nor more hardy, ne
yet more valiau^t the^ we Germans, but sins through our offenses we have
provoked ye gods to wrath, they for ye punishment of our disordinate vices
ordained, yt ye should be a cruel plague and scourge to our persons. Do not
take your selves to be strong, neither repute us to be so weak, yt if the gods
at yt time had favored ye one part, as much as ye other: it might perchance
have happened, ye should not have enioied the spoil. For to say the truth, ye
wan not the victory through ye force of weapons, yt you brought from Rome: but
through the infynyte vices, which ye found in Germany. Therefore since we
wear not overcome for being cowards, neither for being weak, nor yet for
being fearful, but only for being wicked, and not having the gods favorable
unto us: what hope ye Romans to become of you, being as you are vicious, and
having ye gods angry with you? Do not think Romans to be the more victorious,
for yt ye assemble great armies, or yt ye abound in treasures, neither for yt
you have greater gods in your aid, or that ye build greater temples, nor yet
for that ye offer such great sacrifices. For I let you know, if ye do not know
it, yt no man is in more favor with the gods, than he which is at peace with
virtue. If ye triumphs of ye conquerours consists in nothing else but in
subtle wits, politic captains, valiant soldiers, and great armies: without
doubt it would little avail to carry all this to the war, sins afterward we se
by experience, yt men can do no more but give the battles, and the gods the^
selves must give the victories. If I be not deceived, I think that for our
offenses we have sufficientlye satisfied the gods wrath. But truly I believe
that the cruelties which ye have done unto us, and the vnthankefullnesse which
you have showed the gods (though as yet ye have not paid it) that once ye
shall pay it. And hereafter it may chance, that as presentlye ye count us for
slaves: so in time to come ye shall acknowledge us for lords. Since the
trauaylynge by the way, I have seen the high mountains, diverse provinces,
sundry nations, countries so savage, people so barbarous, such and so many
miles as Germany is distaunt from Room, I muse what fond toye came in the
Romans heads: to send to conquer Germany. If covetousness of treasures
caused it, I am sure they spent more money to conquer it, and at this present
do spend to keep it, then the whole revenues of Germany amountethe, or may
amount in many years: and perchance theye may lose it, before they recover
that they spent to conquer it. And if ye say unto me Romans that Germany is
not conquered of Rome for ever, but that only Rome should have the glory to
be mistres of Germanye, this also I say is vanitye and follye. For little
avails it to have the forts and castles of the people: when the hearts of the
inhabitauntes are absente. If ye say that therefore ye conquered Germany, to
amplify and enlarge the limittes and bounds of Rome, also me thinkethe this
as foolish an enterprise. For it is not the point of wise and valiant men to
enlarge their dominyons: and diminishe their honor. If ye say ye sent to
conquer us, to the end we should not be barbarous, nor live like tirauntes,
but that you would we should live after your good laws and customs, if it
be so I am well content. But how is it possible ye should give laws to
strangers, when you break ye laws of your own predecessors? great shame ought
they to have, which take upon the^ to correct others, when they have more need
to be corrected the^ selfs. For the blind man ought not to take upon him to
lead the lame. If this be true (as presently it is) what reason or occasion
had proud Rome, to take and conquer the innocent Germanye? Let us all go
therefore to rob, to kill, to conquer, and to spoil, sins we see the world
so corrupt, and so far from the love of god, that every man (as we may
perceive) takes what he ca^, kylleth whom he will, and that which worst of
all is, that neither those which govern will remedy so many evils as are
committed, neither those which are offended dare complain. Ye chief judges at
this day are so hard to be entreated, ye take so little regard unto the poor
oppressed: yt they think it more quiet to remain in trouble at home, then to
come and put up their complaints before you here at Rome. And the cause
hereof is, that there in their country theye have but one which pursues
the^: and here in this senate theye are evil willed of al, and that is, because
he which complains is poor, and the other which is complained on is rich.
Therefore since fortune would it, and the fatal destinies permit it that the
proud Rome should be mistress of our Germanye, it is but reason ye should
keep us in justice, and maintain us in peace. But you do not so, but rather
those which come thither do take from us our goods, and ye yt are here do rob
us of our good name, saying, yt since we are a people without law, without
reason, and without a king (as unknown barbarous) ye may take us for slaves.
In this case ye Romans are greatly deceived, for me thinks with reason ye can
not call us without reason, since we being such as we are, and as the gods created
us, remain in our proper countries, without desiring to seek or invade
foreine realms. For with more reason we might say, that ye were men without
reason, being not contented with the sweet and fertyle Italye: but that
through shedynge of blood you should desire to conquer all the earth. In yt
ye say we deserve to be slaves, because we have no prince to command us, nor
senate to govern us, nor army to defend us, to this I will answer. That since
we had no enemies, we neded no armies, and since every man is contented with his
lotte and fortune, we had no necessity of a proud senate to govern us, and
we being as we are all equal, it need not we should co^se^t to have any
princes amongst us. For the office of princes is to suppress tyrants, and to
maintain ye people in peace. If ye say further yt we have not in our country
a common wealth, nor policy, but that we live as ye brute bests in ye
mountains, in this also you have but small reason. For we in our country did
suffer noe liars, neither rebels, nor sedicious persons, nor me^ yt brought us
(from strange countries) any apparaile for to be vicious, so yt sith in
apparaile we were honest, and in meat very te^perate, we neded no better
behavior. For although in our country there are noe merchands of Carthage,
oil of Mauritania, marcha^ts of Tire, Steel, of Ca^tabrie, odours of Asia,
gold of Spaigne, silver of Britain, Amber of Sidonie, silk of Damasco, corn
of Scicill, wine of Candy, purple of Arabye: yet for all this we are not
brutishe, neither cease to have a common wealth. For these and such other like
things, give more occasion to stir up many vices: the^ for verteous me^ to live
according to virtue. Blessed, and happy is yt commonwealth, not where great
riches abu^deth, but where virtues are highly co^me^did: not where many light
and angry me^ resort, but where ye pacie^t are reside^t: therefore it follows,
yt of yt co^mo^welth of Rome for being rich, we should have pity: and of ye
common wealth of Germany for being poor, ye ought to have envy. Would to god
that ye conte^tacion we have with our poverty, ye others had ye same with your
riches. For then neither ye had robbed us of our countries, nor we had not
comen hither now to complain in Rome of your tyra^nye. I se romans, that ye
one differs much from the other. For ye others, though ye hear our
opressions, yet thereby ye loase not your pastime but we others can never dry
the tears of our eyes, nor cease to bewail our infinite misfortunes.

The villain concludethe his oration against the judges, which minister not
justice, and declarethe how prejudicial such wicked men are unto the publyke
weal. Cap. v.
YE would think I have said all that I can say, but certainly it is not so.
For there remains many things to speak, which to hear ye will be astonished,
yet be ye assured, that to speak then I will not be afraid, since you others in
doing the^ are not ashamed. For an open offense, deserves not secret
correction. I marvel much at ye Romans, what ye meaned to send us (as you
did) such ignorant judges, ye which by the imortal gods I swear, can neither
declare us your laws, and much less they can understand ours. And ye cause of
all this evil is, yt ye sent not those which be best able to minister to us
justice in Germany, but those which have best frindes with you in Rome:
presuppose yt to those of ye senate, ye give ye office of censourship, more for
importunity, the^ for ability. It is little yt I can say here, in respect they
dare do there. That which ye co^mau^d the^ here, I know not but of yt which
they do there, I am not ignorant, which is. Your judges take all bribes yt are
brought unto the^ openly: and they powle and shave as much as they can
secretly. They grievously punish ye offenses of ye poor, and disse^ble with the
faults of ye rich: they co^se^t to many evils, to have occasion to commit
greater theftes: they forget ye government of the people to take their
pleasure in vice. And being there to mitigate sclaunders, theye are those which
are most sclaunderous: and without goods it auailethe no man to ask justice. And
finally under the color yt they be judges of Rome, they fear not to rob all
the la^d of Germany. What meanethe this ye Romans, shall your pride never
have end in co^ma^ding, nor your couetice in robbing? Say unto us what ye will
in words, but oppres us not so in deeds. If you do it for our children, load
the^ with yro^s and make the^ slaves. For ye ca^ not charge the^ with more the^
they are able to carry but of co^ma^deme^ts and tributs ye give us more the^ we
are either able to carye, or suffer. If you do it for our goods, go thither
and take the^ all. For in our country we do not use as ye Romans do, nor
have such co^dicions as ye have here in Rome. For you desire to live poor,
because ye desire to dye rich. If ye say yt we will rebel, I marvel what you
should mean to think so, since ye have spoiled us, robbed us, and handled us
ill. Assure me ye Romans, yt ye will not unpeople us: and I will assure you we
will not rebel. If our service do not contentye, strike of our heads as to evil
men. For (to tell ye the truth) ye knife shall not be so fearful to our necks,
as your tiranies be abhorred in our hearts. Do ye know what you have done, ye
Romans, ye have caused us of ye miserable realm to swear, never to dwell with
our wives, and to sley our own children, rather then to leave them in the
hands of so wicked and cruel tirants as ye be. For we had rather they should
dye in liberty, the^ live in bondage. As desperate me^ we have determined to
suffer, and e^dure ye beastly mocio^s of ye flesh, during ye time we have to
live, to ye end we will not get our wives with child. For we had rather live
chaste.20. or.30. years, the^ to leave our children perpetual slaves If it be
true yt ye children must endure, yt which ye miserable fathers do suffer? It is
not only good to sley the^, but also it should be better not to agree they
should be borne. Ye ought not to do this Romans, for ye la^d taken by force,
ought ye better to be governed, to ye intent yt ye miserable captives seeing
justice duly administered presently, should thereby forget ye tira^ny passed,
and co^te^t themselves with perpetual servitude. And sith it is true, yt we are
come to co^plain of ye oppressions which your officers do here upon ye river of
Danuby, peradventure ye which are of ye se not will here us, and though you are
now determined to here us, yet ye are slow to remedy us: so yt before ye begin
to refourme an evil custom, ye whole common wealth is all ready undone. I will tell
ye of some things thereof, to the intent you may know the^, and then to refourm
the^. If there come a right poor man to demand justice, having no money to
give, nor wine to present, nor oil to promise, nor frindes to help him, nor
reuenew to succor him, and maynteine him in expe^ces: after he has complained
they satisfy him with words, saying unto him yt spedely he shall have justice.
What will ye I should say, but yt in the mean time they make him spend that
little he has, and give hi^ nothing though he demand much, they give him vain
hope, and they make him wast ye best of his life, every one of the^ does
promise his favor, and afterward they al lay hands upon him to oppress
him. The most of the^ say his right is good, and afterward they give sentence
against him: so that the miserable person which came to complain of one,
returns home complaining of all, cursing his cruel destenies, and criynge
out to the just and merciful gods for reuengement. It chaunseth also, that
often times there comes to complain hear in the Senate, some flattering man
more for malice, then by reason of right, or justice: and ye Senators
crediting his double words, and his fained tears, immediatlye ordein a Ce^sor
to go and give audience on their complaints. Who being go^ne, and returned, ye
seek more to remedy and give ear to the complaints of ye Judge: the^ to the
sclaunders which were among the people. I will declare unto you mye life, O ye
Romans, and thereby ye shall se how they pass their life in my country. I
live by gathering akornes in the winter, and reapinge corn in ye su^mer, some
time I fish as well of necessity, as of pleasure, so that I pass allmoste al
my life alone in the fields, or in the mountains. And if you wot not why,
hear me, and I will show you. I se such tirranny in your judges, and such
robberies as they commit among the poor people, and there are such disse^tions
in that realm, such injuries committed therein, ye poor common wealth is so
spoiled, there are so few that have desire to do good, and also there are so
few that hope for remedy in ye senate: yt I am determined (as most unhappy) to
ba^nishe my self out of mine own house, and to separate my self from my
sweet company, to the end my eyes should not behold so miserable a change. For
I had rather wander solitary in the fields, then to see my neighbors hourly
lament in ye streets. For there the cruel beasts do not offend me, unless I
do assault the^: but ye cursed men, though I do serve them, yet daily they vex
me. Without doubt it is a marvelous pain to suffer an overthrow of fortune:
but it is a greater torment when one felethe it without remedy. And yet
witheoute comparison my greatest grief is, when my loss may be remedied, and
yt he which may, will not: and he yt will, can not by any means remedy it. O
cruel Romans, ye feel nothing yt we feel, inespecially I which speak it, ye
shall se how I feel it, since only to reduce it to memory my eyes do dasell, my
tongue will wax weary, my iointes do sever, my heart does tremble, my entrails
do break, and my flesh consumes, what a woeful thing is it, in my country to
se it with my eyes, to hear it with my ears, and to feel it with mine own
hands? Truly the griefs which ye woeful Germany suffers are such, and so
many: that I believe yet ye mercyful gods will have compassion upon us. I will
not desire ye to think sclander of my words: but only I do beseech ye, you will
understand well what I say. For you ymagining (as you do presume to be
discrete) shall see right well that the troubles which came to us from men, and
among men, with men, and by the hands of men: it is a small mattery we as men
do feel them speaking. For according to the truth, and also with liberty, if I
should declare every other just advertisement which came from the senate, and
all the tyranny which your judges commit in the miserable realm, one of
these.2. things must ensue, either the punishment of me, or ye depriuacion of
your officers if I say true. One thing only comfort me, or whereof I with
other unfortunate people have had experience, in that I think my self happy,
to know that the just plagues proceed not from the just gods, but through ye
just deserts of wicked men: And that our secret fault does waken those, to the
end that they of us may execute open justice. Of one thing only I am sore
troubled, because the gods can not be contented, but for a small fault, they
punish a good man much: and for many faults, they punish evil men nothing at
all, so that the gods do bear with the one, and forgive nothing unto the
other. O secret judgments of god, that as I am bound to praise your works, so
likewise if I had license to condemn them, I durst say, yt ye cause us to
suffer grievous pains, for that ye punish and persecute us by the hands of such
judges, the which (if justice took place in the world) when they chastise us
with their hands, they do not deserve to have their heads on their shoulders.
The cause why now again I do exclame on ye immortal gods, is to se, that in
these 15. days I have been at Rome, I have seen such deeds done in your senate
yt if the least of them had been done at Danuby, the gallows and gibbets had been
hanged thicker of thieves, then the vyneyard is with grapes. I am determined to
see your doings, to speak of your dishonesty in apparel, your little
tempera^ce in eating, and your disorder in affairs, and your pleasures in
living: and on ye other side, I see that when your provision arriueth in our
country, we carry into the temples, and offer it to the gods, we put it on
their heads: so that the one meting with the other, we accomplish that which is
commanded, and accurse those that commanded. And since therefore my heart has
now seen, that which it desires, my mind is at rest, in spitting out the
poison which in it abides. If I have in any thing here offended with my
tongue, I am ready to make recompense with my head. For in good faith I had
rather win honor, in offering my self to death: then ye should have it, in
taking from me my life. And here the villayne ended his talk, immediatlye
after Mar. Aur. said to those which were about him. How think ye my frindes,
what kernel of a nut, what gold of the mine, what corn of straw, what rose
of briars, what mary of bones, and how noble and valiant a man has he showed
him self? What reasons so hye, what words so well couched, what truth so true,
what sentences so well pronounced, and also what open malice has he
discovered? By the faith of a good man I swear, as I may be delivered from
this fever which I have: I saw this villain standing boldly a whole hour on
his feet, and al we beholdinge the earth as amazed, could not answer him
one word. For in deed this villain confuted us with his purpose, and astonished
us, to se the little regard he had of his life. The senate afterward, being
al agreed, the next day following we provided new judges for the river of
Danuby, and commanded the villain to deliver us by writing, all that he had
said by mouth, to the end it might be registered in ye book of good saying of
strangers, which were in the senate. And further it was agreed, yt the said
villain (for the wise words he spoke) should be chosen senator, and of the
free men of Rome he should be one: and that for ever he should be sustained with
the common treasour. For our mother Rome has always been praised and esteemed,
not only to acquit the services which has been done unto her: but also the
good words, which were spoken in the Senate.

That princes and noble men ought to be very circumspect in chosinge judges
and officers, for therein consistethe the profit of the public weal, Cap. vi.
ALexander the great (as the historiographers say) in his youth used hu^ting
very much specially of the mountains: and that which is to be marueiled at, he
would not hunt Dear, goats, hares, nor partriges: but Tigers, Lyberdes,
elephants, cocodrilles, and Lions. So that this mighty prince did not only
show the excellency of his courage, in conqueringe proud princes: but also in
chasing of cruel, and savage beasts. Plutarche in his Apothegmes saiethe: that
the great Alexander had a familiar servant, named Crotherus, to whom often
times he spoke these words. I let the to know Crotherus, that the valya^t
princes ought not only to be upright in their realms which they govern: but
also to be circumspect in pastimes which they use, that the authority which
in the one they have won, in the other they do not lose. When Alexander spoke
these words truly he was of more authority then of years: But in the end
he gave this example, more to be followed, and commanded, then to be reproved or
blamed I say to be followed, not in the huntinge that he exercysed: but in the
great courage which he showed. To the Plebeyans and men of base condition, it
is a little thing yt in one matter they show their might, and in other things
their small power is known: but to princes and great lords it is a
discommendable thing, that in earnest matters any man should accuse them of
pride, and in things of sport, they should count them for light. For the noble
and valiant Prince, in things of importance, ought to show great wisdom,
and in mean things, great stoutnes. The case was such, yt Alexander ye great,
hunting on the wild mountains, by chance met with a cruel Lion, and as the
good Prince would wyn his honor with the Lion, and also the Lion preserve his
own life, they were in griepes the one of the other so fast, that both fell
to the earth, where they striued almost half an hour, but in the end the
lion remained there dead, and the hardye Alexander escaped all bloudye. This
hunting of Alexander and the Lion thoroughe all Greece, was greatly renowned.
I say greatly renowned, because ye grauers and painters drew a pourtrait
forthwith in stone work, of this huntinge, and the grauers hereof were
Lisippus, and Leocarcus, marvelous grauers of anuk works, which they made of
metal, where they lively set forth Alexander and the Lion fighting, and also
a familiar servant of his named Crotherus, being among ye dogs beholding
the^. So that the work seemed not only to represent an ancient thing but that
ye Lion, Alexander, Crotherus, and the dogs, seemed also to be alive in the
same chase. When Alexander fought with the Lion, there came an Embassatour from
Sparthes to Macedonia, who spoke to Alexander these words. Would to god
(immortal prince) that ye force you have used with the Lion, in the mountain,
you had employed against some prince, for to be Lord of the earth. By the
words of the Embassatour, and the deeds of Alexander, may easily by gathered,
that as it is comely for Princes to be honest, valiant, and stout: so to the
contrary it is unseemly for them to be bold, and rash. For though princes of
their goods be lyberall, yet of their life they ought not to be prodigal.
The divine Plato, in the tenth book of his laws says, that ye.2. renowned
Philosophers of Thebes, whose names were Adon, and Clinias fell at variaunce
with them selves, to know in what thing the prince is bound to adventure his
life, Clinias said, that he ought to dye for any thing touching his honor.
Adon said the contrary. That he should not hazard his life, unless it were
for matters touching the affairs of the common wealth. Plato says, those.2.
philosophers had reason in yt they said: but admit that occasion to dye
should be offered the prince, for ye one, or the other: he ought rather to dye
for that thing touching justice, then for the thing touching his honor. For
there is no great difference, to dye more for the one, then for the other.
Applying yt we have spoken, to that we will speak, I say, that we do not
desire, nor we will not, that princes and great lords do destroy them selves
with Lions in the chase, neither adventure their persons in the wars, nor
that they put their lives in peril for the common weal: but we only require
them, that they take some pains and care to provide for things belonging to
justice. For it is a more natural hunting for princes, to hunt out the vicious
of their commonweals: then for to hunt the wild bores, in ye thick woods.
To the end princes accomplish this which we have spoken, we will not ask them
time when they ought to eat, sleep, hunt, sport and recreate the^ selves: but
that of the four and twenty hours that be in the day and night theye take
it for a pleasure and commodity one hour to talk of justice. The government
of the commonweal consists not, in that they should travail until they
sweat, and molest their bodies, shed their blood, shorten their lives, and
lose their pastimes: but all consistethe, in that they should be dylygent to
forsee the domages of their common wealth, and likewise to provide for good
mynysters of justice. We do not demand Princes and great lords, to give us
their goods, nor we forbydde them not to eat, to forsake sleep, to sport,
to hunte, nor to put their lives in danger: but we desire and beseech
them, that theye provide good mynysters of justice for the common wealth.

First they ought to be very dyligente to search them out, and afterward to
be more circu^spect to examine the^: for if we sighe with tears to have good
Princes, we ought much more to pray that we have not evil officers. What
profytethe it the knighte to be nimble, and if the horse be not ready? what
avails it ye owner of ye ship to be sage, and expert, if the Pilot be a fool
and ignorant? What profits the king to be valiant and stout, and the
Captain of the war to be a cowarde? I mean by this I have spoken, what
profits it a Prince to be honest, if those which minister justice be
dissolute? What profits it us yt (...) prince be true, if his officers
beliers? What profits it us yt the prince be sober, if his ministers be
dronkerds? What profits it yt ye prince be gentle, and loving, if his
officers be cruel, and malicious? What profits it us, that ye prince be a
geuer, liberal, and an alms man, if the judge yt ministers justice, be a
bryber, and an open thief? What profits it yt the prince be careful, and
virtuous, if the judge be negligent and vicious? finally I say, that it little
avails that ye prince in his house be secretly just, if adjoining to that, he
trust a tiraunt and open these with the government of the common weal.
Princes and great Lords when they are within their palaces at pleasure,
their minds occupied in high things, do not receive into their secreat
company, but their entier frindes. Another time they will not, but occupy them
selves in pastimes and pleasure: so yt they know not what they have to amend in
their persons, and much less yt which they ought to remedy in their commonweals. I will not be so eger in reproving, neither so satirycal in writing, yt
it should seem I would persuade Princes, that theye live not according to the
highness of their estates: but according to the life of the religious. For
if theye will keep them selves from being tyrauntes, or being outragiouslye
vicious: we cannot denay them some times to take their pleasures. But mye
intention is not, so strayghtelye to command Princes to be just: but only
to show them how theye are bound to do justice. Common wealths are not
lost, for that their Princes live in pleasure: but because they have little
care of justice. In the end people do not murmr when the Prince does
recreat his person: but when he is to slack to cause justice to be executed. I
would to GOD, that Princes took an account with godde, in the things of
their conscience, touching the common wealth: as theye do with men,
touching their rentes and revenues. Plutarche in an Epistle he wrate to
Traiayne the Emperor, sayethe: it pleasethe me very well, most puissaunte
Prince, that the Prince be such one, as all may say that in him there is
nothing worthy of reprehension: butte adding thereunto, it dyspleasethe me
much more that he should have so evil judges, that all should say, in them
were nothing worthy of commendacion. For the faults of Princes very well
may be excused: butte the offenses of the officers, can by noe means be
endured. Many Princes and great Lords deceive them selves, in thinking that
theye do their duty, in that theye be virtuous in their persons, but it
is not so: For it suffysethe not a Prince to draw unto him all virtues, butte
also he is bound to root all vices out of the common wealth.

Admit that Princes will not, or of them selves cannot govern the common
wealth: yet let us desire and admonyshe them, to seek good officers to do it
for them. For the poor Plebeian has noe account to render, but of his good
or evil life: butte the Prince shall render account, of his vicious life
which he has led, and of the little care that he has had of his common
wealth.

Seneca in an epistle he wrote to a frinde of his named Lucilla says. My dear
friend Lucilla, I would gladly thou would come and see me here in Rome: but I
pray thee reco^mend to good judges ye I Will of Scicile. For I would not desire to
enjoy thy sight, if through my occasion yt should leave the common wealth
out of order. And to the intent thou may know what condicio^s they ought to
have, whom thou should chose for governors or judges: I will let thee
understand, that they ought to be grave in their sentences, just in their
words, honest in their works, merciful in their justice, and above all, not
corrupted with bribes. And if I do advertise thee of this, it is because if
thou did take care to govern thy common wealth well, thou should now be
circumspect to examine them, to whom presently thou must recommende the
government thereof. I would say afterward, that all that which the
ancient Philosophers have written in many books, and have left by diverse
sentences, Seneca did rehearse in these few words: the which are so grave,
and necessary, that if Princes retained them in their memory to put them in
execucion, and judges had them before their eyes for to accomplish them, they
would excuse the common wealth of diverse slanders, and theye should also
deliver them selves from a great burdeyn of their conscience.

It is not a thing voluntarye, butte necessary, that the mynysters of justice
be virtuous, well established, and very honest: For to Judges nothing can be
more slanderous, and hurtefull, then when theye should reprove young men of
their youth, others may iustlye reprehende them of their lyghtnes. He which
has a public office in the common wealth, and sytteth openly to judge
therein, ought to observe a good order in his person, least he be noted
dysolute in his doing: For the Judge which is without honestye, and
consideracion, ought to consider with him self, that if he alone have
authority to judge of other men's goods, that there are a thousand which
will judge of his life. It is not only a bourden of conscience, to Princes to
commit the charge of governance of the people to dyssolute persons: but also
it is a great contempt, and dysprayse of Justice. For the sentence geeuen of
him who deserves to be judged, is among the people litel esteemed. Plutarche in
his Apothegmes sayethe, that Phillyppe king of Macedony, father of the great
Alexander, created for judge of a province a freende of his, who after he saw
him self in such office, occupied him self more in kemmynge his head, then
in woorkynge or studyinge his books. King Philyppe being enfourmed of the
vanytye and insolencye of this judge, revoked the power which he had geeuen
him, and when he complained to all of the wrong and grief which was done
unto him, taking his office from him, King Phyllippe said unto him. If I
had given the office to thee, for none other cause but being my friend,
beeleue me that nothing in the world could have suffysed to have taken it
from thee: because I loving thee so entierlye as I did, reason would not I
should have deprived thee of this office, wherewith I honored thee. I gave
thee this office, thinkyng yt thou were virtuous, sage, honest, and also a man
well occupied, and me thynkethe thou rather occupyest thy self in beeholdynge
thye person, then in gouerninge well my common wealth: which thou ought
not to consent unto, and much less do in deed. For the judge ought to be so
occupied, in the administracion of the common wealth: that he should have noe
leisure at any time to keame his head. These words the good king Phillip
spoke unto the judge, whom he dysplaced of his office, for being to fine and
dylygent in keamynge his head, and trymmynge his person. It is not only
decent for ministers of justice, to be grave, and honest: but also it
behouethe them to be true, and faithefull. For to a judge whose office is to
judge the truethe, there can be noe greater infamye: then to be counted a liar.
When two Plebeians be at variaunce togethers for one thing, they come before
the judge for naught else, but that he should judge who has right and
justice thereunto. Therefore if such a judge be not counted true, but a liar,
all take his judgment for false: so that if the plainetife has noe more
power, he will obey justice, yet at the least he will blaspheme him that gave
sentence. There are some judges, that presentlye to get more money, to draw
unto them more friends, and to contynewe also in their offices, use such
shameful shifts with the poor plainetifes, and take so large brybes of the
defe^daunt: that both parties are by him self assured of the sentence in
their favor, before he come unto the bar. Many go to the houses of
judges, some to demand, others to give instructions, other to work deceit,
others to importune them, others to win them, but few go to vysyte them: so
that for those and such se^blables, I do advise, and admonish officers, that
theye be just in their sentences, and vprighte in their words.

The mynysters of justice ought to be such, and so good, that in their life
nothing be woorthye of rebuke: neither in their words, any thing worthy of
reproach. For if herein theye be not very circumspect, oftentimes that shall
happen which the gods would not, which is that to the prejudice of the
justice of another, he shall deny the word of him self. It suffysethe not
judges to be true in their words: butte it is very necessary that theye
be vpryghte in their sentences. That is to wete, that for love theye be not
to large, neither for couetuousnesse theye should be corrupted, nor for fear
drawn back, nor with prayours to be flattered, nor with promysses blinded:
for otherwise, it were a great shame and inconvenience, that the yard which
theye carye in their hands should be streyghte, and the life which theye
lead should be very crooked. To the end justices be vprighte, they ought
much to travail to be lyberall: I mean in things wherein theye ought to
geeue sentence. It is impossible that those which have respect in their
sentence to favor their friends, should not accustomablye use to be
revenged of their enemies. Truly such a judge ought not to be counted just:
but a pryuate Tiraunte. He that with affeccion iudgethe, and passion punishes
is greatly deceived. Those inlyke manner which have authority to govern,
and do think that for borrowynge a little of justice theye should therebye
increase, and multyplye friends in the common wealth, are much abused: for
this act before men is so heinous, and before godde so detestable, that
though for a space he refrain his hands, yet in the end he will extend his
power. For the redemer of the world, only father of truth, will not permit
that such do take upon them the title of justice which in their offices do
show so extreme wrong. Helius Spartianus in ye life of Antonius sayethe, that
the good Emperor going to vysite his Empire (as he was in Capua and there
demau^ding of the state of the Censours, whether they were unjust or rightful,
a man of Capua said in this wise: by the immortal gods, most noble Prince, I
swear, that this judge who presently governs here, is neither just, nor
honest and therefore me think it necessary that we deprive him of his
dignity and I will account unto thee, what befell between him and me. I
besought him yt for my sake he would grant me.4. things, which were al
unjust, and he willingly condescended thereunto: whereof I had no less meruel
in my heart, then vexacion in my body. For when I did desire him, I thought
nothing less then to obtein the^ but only for the co^tentacion of those
which instauntlye desired me to do it. And further this Capuan said. By the
GOD Genius, I swear likewise, that I was not ye more fryndely unto him, for
that he said he did it for mye sake, more then for another: for he that to me
would grant these four, it is to be believed that to others he would grant
four hundredth. For the which thou ought to provide, most noble Prince,
because good judges ought to be pacient to hear, and just to determine. By
this notable example, judges ought to have a great respect, not to those which
do desire them: but to that which theye demand. For in doing their duty,
their enemies will proclaim them just: and contrariwise if they do that they
should not do, their nerest friends will count them tirantes. Judges which
pretend favor to the common wealth, and to be careful of their consciences,
ought not to content them selves simply to do justice: but that of them selves
they should have such an oppinion, that none durst presume to come and require
at their hands, any vile or dishonest thing. For otherwise, if we note the
demander to be unshamefast: we must needs somewhat suspecte the judge in his
justice. Princes ought also to be very circumspect, that the judges be not only
contented to be just, honest, and true: but also in them there ought to
remain no avarice, nor covetousness. For justice, and avarice, can seldom
dwell in one house. Those yt have the charge of the government of ye people,
and to judge causes, ought to take great head, that with bribes and prese^tes
they be not corrupted: for it is impossible but that the same day, yt riches
and treasoures in the houses of judges begin to increase, yt the self same day
the administration of justice, should not decay. Licurgus, Prometheus, and Numa
Pompilius did prohibit nothing in their law so much, neither for any other
cause theye ordained so greauous punishments: but to the intent judges should not
be covetous, nor yet thieves. And of truth they had great co^sideracion, to
fore see and forbid it: for the judge that has received part of the theft,
will not give sentence against the stealers thereof. Let not judges be credyted
for saying they receive no silver, nor gold, neither silks, nor jewels, but
that they take only small presents, as fruits, foul, and other trifles.

For oftentimes it chaunseth, that the judges do eat the fruit, and the
poor suter does feel the morsel. Cicero in the book of laws sayethe that
Cato the Censour being very aged, the Senator said unto him one day in the
Senate. Thou know now Cato, that presentlye we are in the Calendes of
January, wherein we use to divide the offices among the people. Wherefore we
have determined to create Manlius, and Calidanus Censours for this year:
wherefore tell us if they be (as thou think) able and sufficient to supply
that rome. Cato the Censour answered them in this wise. Fathers conscripte, I
let you were that I do not receive the one, nor admit the other. For Manlius
is very rich, and Calidanus the citizeine extreme poor, and truly in both
there is great peril. For we see by experience that the rich officers are to
much subject to pleasures: and the poor officers are to much given to
auaryce. And further he said in this case, me thinks that your Judges whom
ye ought to choose, should not be so extreme poor, that they should want
wherewith to eat: neither so rich, that they should surmount in superfluity,
to geeue them selves to much to pleasures. For men by great abundance,
become vicious: and by great scarsitie become covetous. The Censor Cato being
of such authority, it is but reason that we geeue credit to his words,
since he governed the roman Empire so long space, though indede all the poor
be not covetous, nor all the rich vicious: yet he spoke it for shys intent,
because both those Romans were noted of these ii. vices. For the poor
desire to scrape and scratche: and the rich to enjoy and keep. Which of
those twoe sorts of men princes should chose. I cannot, nor dare not rashely
determine. And therefore I do not counsel them, either to despise the poor
or to choose the rich: but that they give the authority of justice to those,
whom they know to be of good conscience, and not subject to covetousness. For
the judge whose conscience is corrupted, it is impossible he should minister
equal justice. A man may give a shrewed guess of suspicion in that judge,
whether he be of a britell conscience, or no if he see him procure the office
of justice for him self. For that manne which willinglye procures the charge
of conscience of another: commonly little regards the burden of his own.

Of a letter which the emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to Antigonus his friend,
answering an other which he sent him out of Scicile, wherein he advertised him
of the cruelty of the roman Judges. and this letter is divided into.5.
Chapters Cap. vii.
MArcus Aurelius, companion in the empire, tribune of the people, present lie
being sick, wissheth unto thee Antigonus, health and comfort in thy
banishement. To fly the extreme heat of Rome, and to read some books which
are brought me, from the realm of Palestine, I am come hither to Capua: and
forth haste I made to ride great iourneis, the ague has overtaken me,
which is more troublesome, then perilous. For it takes me with cold, and
plucketh my appetite from me. The.20. day of January I received thy second
letter, and it happened that thy letter and my fever took me both at one
instaunt: but the fever grieved me in such wise, that I could not long endure
to read thy letter. Me thinks we have no stay nor mean, thou being so
brief, and I so long: for my long letter has taken thy greauous sorrows
from the, but thy short letter could not take my fever from me. Now that my
mind is beating of thy travail, the desire which I have to remedy it is
enflamed. I would tell the one thing, and succor thee with some counsel:
but I find that the consolation which thou want, I cannot give the, and
that which I can give the, thou nedest not. In this letter shall not be written
that which was in the first: but herein I will travail the best I can to
answer thee. I will not occupye my self to comfort thee, because I am so out
of course with this disease, yt I have neither will to write, ne yet an^ favor
in any pleasant things. If perhaps this letter be not sauory, so
compendious, neither so comfortable as those which I was woase to write unto
thee: attribute not the blame unto my good will, which desires to serve the,
but to the sickness that gives no place thereunto. For it suffiseth the sick
to be contented with medecynes, without satisfyinge their fryndes. If thy
comfort consisted in writing many letters, and offering the many word: truly
I would not stick to do that for all my fever. But it neither profits the,
nor satisfies me, since I have little, to profer the much. Talkinge now of
this matter, I do remember that the ancient laws of the Rhodians said these
words. We desire and admonish all men, to visit the captives, the
pilgrims, and the comfortless: and further, we ordeine and comaund, that none
in the common wealth be so hardye to give counsel, unless therewith he give
remedy. For to the troubled heart words comfort little, when in them there
is no remedy. Of a truth the law of the Rhodians is good, and the Roman
which shall observe them much better. Assure thy self that I am very desirous
to see thee: and also I know that thou wouldeste as gladlye speak unto me, to
recount me all thy griefs. Truly I do not marvel, because the wounded
heart quieteth him self more, declaring his own griefs, then hearing another
man's consolations. Thou writest unto me of sondrye things in thy letter,
the effect whereof, that thou certifiest me, is that the judges and officers
in that realm be very rygorous, and extreme: and that therefore the
Cicilians are greatly displeased with the Senate.

Hitherto thou have never told me lie, the which moves me to believe all yt
thou writest now in thy letter. Wherefore I take it for a thing most true:
that for as much as all those of Cicil are malicious and enuyous, they give the
judges just occasion to be cruel. For it is a general rule, where men are out
of order, the ministers of justice ought to be rygorous. And though in other
realms it chaunsed not, it is to be believed that it is true in this realm:
where of the ancient proverb says. All those which enhabite the Isles are
evil: but the Cicillians are worste of all. At this day the wicked are so
mighty in their malices, and the good are so much diminished in their
virtues: that if by justice there were not a brydel, the wicked would surmount
all the world, and the good should vanishe immediatlye.

But retourninge to our matter I say, that consideringe with what and how
many euylles we are enuiroined, and to how many miseries we are subject: I
do not marvel at the vanities that men commit, but I am ashamed of the
cruelty which our judges execute. So that we may rather call them tyrauntes,
which kill by violence: then judges which minister by justice. Of one thing I
was greatly astonyed, and almost past my sense, which is, that justice of right
pertains to the gods, and they being offended will be called pitiful: and
we others borowe justice, and not being offended, do glorify our selves to be
called cruel. I know not what manne will hurt an other, since we see that the
gods forgeuing their proper injuries, have attained the renown of merciful,
and we others punishinge the injuries done unto an other, do remain with the
name of tyrauntes. If the punishment of the gods were so severe, as our sins
are filthye, and that they should measure us with this measure: the only
desert of one offense is sufficient to take life from us.

With reason he cannot be called a man amongst men, but a savage amongst
the savages: that forgetting to be of feeble flesh, tormenteth the flesh of his
brother. If a man behold him self from top to toe, he shall find not one
thing in him to move him to cruelty: but he shall see in him many
instruments to exercise mercy. For he has his eyes, wherewith he ought to
behold the neady and indigent: he has feet to go to the church and sermons:
he has hands to help all: he has his tongue to favor the Orphane: he
has a heart to love god: and to conclude, he has understanding to know the
evil: and discretion to follow the good. If men owe much to the gods, for
geuinge them these instruments to be pitiful: truly they are bound no
less unto them, for taking from them all occasions to be cruel. For he has
not given them horns, as to bulls, neither nails as to the catte, nor yet he
has given them poison, as to the serpent: Fynallye, he has not geeuen them so
perilous feet, as to a horse to strike, nor he has geeuen them such bloudye
teethe, as to the Lion to byte. Then since the gods be pitefull, and have
created us pitiful, and commanded us to be pitiful: why do our judges desire
then to be cruel. O how many cruel and severe judges are there at this
day in the Romayne empire, which under the color of good zeal to justice,
adventure to undo the commonwealth. For not for the zeal of justice, but for
the desire to attain to renown: they have been overcome with malice, and
denied their own proper nature. I do not marvel that a Roman censour
should envy my house, will evil to my fryndes, favor mine enemies, despise
my children, with evil eyes behold my daughters, covet my goods, speak evil
of my parsone: But that which I am ashamed of is, that diverse judges are so
gredye to tear men's flesh, as if they were bears, and man's flesh were
noynted with honye.

The Emperor continues still his letter speakinge against cruel judges, and
recites two examples the one of a pitiful king of Cipres, and the other of a
cruel judge of Rome. Cap. viii.
BY the faith of a good manne I swear unto thee friend Antigonus, that I being
young, knew a judge in Rome whose name was Lycaronicus a man of high stature,
his flesh neither to fat, nor to lean, his eyes were some what bloudye and
read, he was of the lynage of the Senators, and on his face he had but a
little bearde, and on his head he had many white hears. This Licaronicus of
long time was judge in Rome, in the roman laws he was well learned, and in
customs and policies very expert, of his own nature he spoke little, and in
the aunswers he gave, he was very resolute. Amongst all those which were in
Rome in his time, he had this excellencye, which was, that to all he
ministered equal justice: and to suitors with great speed he gave brief
expedition, and dispatched them immediatlye. They could never withdraw him by
requests, never corrupt him with gifts, nor begyle him with words, nor fear
him with threatninges, neither would he receive a brybe of any that did offer
it him: And besides this, he was very severe in condition, churlyshe in
words, vnflectible in requests, cruel in punishementes, suspicious in
affairs, and above all, he was hated of many, and feared of all. How much
this Lycaronicus was hated it cannot be reported, and of how many he was
feared, no man can think. For in Rome when any man was iniuried he said: I
pray god that Licaronicus may live long. When the children did cry, the
mothers immediatlye said unto them. Take heed of Lycaronicus, and straight
way they held their peace: so that with the only name of Lycaronicus men
were astonished, and children kept silence. Thou ought also to know
Antigonus, that when any commotyon did arise in a city, or in any other
province, or that any sclaunder rose and increased therein, they were well
assured, and they said that no other should go thither, but only
Lycaronicus. And to say the truth, when he was arrived at that city or
prouynce, the rebels were not only fled: but also diverse innocents were
for fear of his crueltye hyd. For Lycaronicus was so resolute a parsonne, that
some for ill factes, others for consentinge, some for that they favored not
the good right, others for that they kept them secret: none escaped to be
tormented of his parsonne, or punyshed in goods. Think thou Antigonus that
they have been few whom this Judge has caused to be whipte and carted, cast
into wells, beheaded, taken, banished, and put in the stocks, during the time
that the Romans had him with them? By the immortal gods I swear unto thee,
and as Genius the god of nature may help me, that the gallouses and gibbets
were so furnished with feet, hands, and heads of men, as the shambles were
with oxen, sheep, and kyddes. This Lycaronicus was so fleshely to shed humain
blood, that he was never so conversant nor had so merye a countenance: as the
same day he should cause any manne to be drowned in Tyber, hanged in mount
Celio, be headed in the street Salario, tormented or cast into the prison
Marmortina: O cruel, o fyerse, and unspeakable condition that this judge
Lycaronicus had. For it was not possible that he should be brought up
between the delicate arms of the Romans: but in the vile intrailes of you
venomous serpents. I return ones more to say, that it is impossible he
should be norished with the delicate milk of women: but with the cruel
blood of Tigres. If this Licaronicus were cruel, why did they give him such
authority? I curse such authority. If he did it for that he had great
zeal to justice: I curse such zeal of justice. If he did it to win more
honor, I curse that honor: for that man shall be cursed of the gods and hated
of men, which takes life from others, though it be by justice, only to
increase his renown.

The gods are much offended and the people greatly domaged, where the Senate
of Rome calls that Judge gentle which is corrupted: and him that is cruel
just, So that now amongst the Romayne people, those which heal with oil
are not credited: but those only which cure with fire. If any man think it,
at the least I do not thynk it, that when Licaronicus died, all the cruel
judges did end with him: For through all the Romayne Empire there was no more
but one Licaronicus, and at this present there is above.iii. or.iiii. in
every common wealth.

Notwithout tears I speak that which I will speak, which is, that in those
days as all the judges that ministered were pitiful: so was this Lycaronicus
renowned for cruel. But now since all are cruel, we hope in a judge which is
pitefull. In the.xii. year of the foundation of our mother Rome, the first king
thereof was Romulus, who sent a commandment to all the neighbors and
inhabitants there aboutes, to the end that all banished men, all those which
were afflicted, all those which were persecuted, and all those which were in
necessity should come to Rome, for they should be defended from their
enemies, and succored in their necessities. The fame being spread thoroughout
Italy, of the pity and clemency which Romulus showed in Rome (if the Anualles
of the auncientes do not deceive us) Rome was more peopled with inhabitauntes
in.x. years, then Babylon or Carthage, in a hundred. O noble heart of Romulus,
which such things invented: blessed be that tongue, which commanded that the
famous Rome with clemency and pity should be founded. In the original books
which were in the high capitol once I found diverse letters written, to the
sacred senate and romayne people, and in the beginning of the letters the
words said thus. We the king of Parthes in Asya, to the fathers conscripte of
Rome, and to the happy roman people of Italy, and to all those which with
the Romayne senate are confederate, which have the name of Romans, and the
renoume of clemencye, health and tranquillity to your persons we do send
you, and desire the same of the gods for our selves. Behold therefore
Antigonus, what tytles of clemencye had our first Romans, and what example of
clemencye did the Emperor leave for them to come: so that since the barbarous
strangers called them pitiful: it is not to be believed, that to their
subjects or natural country men they were cruel. As the auncientes have
travailed of al to be beloved, so they at this present through their
cruelties, seek nothing but to be feared. If the gods perhaps should reuyue
the dead, and should compare the lyuinge before them in judgment: I suppose
they would say these are not their children, but their enemies, not encresers
of the common wealth, but destroyers of the people.

I being xxxvii. years of age, lay in winter season in an isle called Chetyn,
which now is called Cipres, wherein is a little mountain as yet full of wood,
which is called mount of Archady, where grows an herb called Ilabia,
which the auncientes say, that if it be cut it droppeth blood: and the
nature of it is, that if one rub any manne with the blood thereof hoate
(although he would not) yet he shall love him, and if they annoint him with the
blood that is cold, he shall hate him.

Of this herb we need not doubt any thing at all, for I did prove it, and
noynted one with that blood, who sooner lost his life then the love which he
bare me. There was a king in that I Will of great example of life, and gretlye
renowned of clemencye, though indeed neither by writing nor by words I could
never know his name: but that he was buried under.iiii. pillars in a tomb of
marble, and about the tomb were engraued these greek and ancient letters,
where amongst other things these words were engraven.

THe mighty gods whiles they drew out the length
Of my weak years to pass the flud of life
This rule I had my common wealth to strenght
To norishe peace and stint vain blastes of strife
By virtues way if ought I could obtain
by vices pathe I never sought to get
by dredles peace if I could right attain
by clatering arms blind hasard could not let
By curteis means if I could overcome
By raging threats I heaped up no dread
By secret shifts if I might guide my dome
by open force I nowlde the pain were spread.
By gentle read if I could chastise eke
by sha^pe ways no further proof I sought
In out ward sight I never thought to streeke
before I had to couerte chekes them brought
My free consent could never vainly bear
my tongue to tell one sweet entysinglye
Nor yet my hollow ears would ever hear
Their crooked tales that flatter often awrye.
My schooled heart was always taught to stay
From egre lust of others heaped good
I forced my self his proper wealth to way
And stand content as fortunes judgment stood.
My friends decay, I always watch to aid^
And recked not for bent of enuies bow
In huge expense I never lavish paid
my glittering gold, nor spared yet to low,
For grievous fautes I never punished wight
with mind appeasde but erst I would forgive
my grief did grow when just revenge did high^
And eke I ioyed to pardon men to live.
A mortal man amongst blind heaps of men,
Nature my mother produced me here
And therefore loo enclosed in this den
The egre worms my senseles carcas tere
Amongst the wights that virtue did enhaunce
A virtuous life, I freely passed on
And since that death his kingdom did aduau^ce
my heavenly spirit, to haunt the gods is gone.
HOw think thou Antigonus, what epitaph was this, and what prince ought he
to be, of whom I should say, his life ought to be glorious, and his memory
eternal? I swear unto the, by the law of a good man, and as the gods may
prosper me, I took not so much pleasure in Pompey with his Jerusalem, in
Semiramis with her India, in king Cirus with his Babylon, in Caius Caesar with
his Gawles, in Scippio with his Affrike: as I have in the king of Cipres in
his grave. For more glory has that king there in that sharp mountain being
dead: then others have had in proud Rome being alive.

Marcus Aurelius continues his letter against cruel judges. Of the words
which the emperor Nero spoke concerning justice, and of the instruccion
the emperor Augustus gave to a judge which he sent into Dacya. Cap. ix.
Neither for that which I write in this letter, nor yet for that which king
Cirus had in his grave: my entencion is not to defend the evil, to the end
that for their evil deeds, and outragiousnes, they should not be punished.
For by this means, it should be worse for me to favor them: then for them to
be evil. For they through debilitie do offend: and I by malice do err. But
in this case it seems unto me, and to all others which are of good
judgment, that since frailty in men is natural, and the punishment which
they geeue is voluntarye: Let judges therefore in ministering justice show,
that they do it for the zeal of the common wealth, and not with a mind to
revenge. To the end the faultye may have occasion to amend the faults past,
and not to revenge injuries present, the divine Plato in the books of his
common wealth said, that judges ought to have two things always present
before their eyes, that is to wete, that in judging things touching the goods
of others, they show no covetousness: and in punishing any man, they show no
revenge. For judges have license to chastise the body: but therefore they have
not license to hurt their hearts. Nero the emperor was greatly defamed in
his life, and very cruel in his justice, and with all his crueltyes i^
chanced, that as one on a day brought him a judgment for to subscribe, to
behead certain murderers: He fetching a great syghe said these words, O
how happy were I that I had never learned to write, only to be excused to
subscribe this sentence. Certainly the Emperor Nero, for speking such a
pitiful word at that time, deserved immortal memory: but afterward his so
cruel life, perverted so notable a sentence.

For speaking ye cruche, one evil work suffiseth to deface many good words. O
how many realms and countries have been lost, not so much for the euilles
which in those the wicked have committed: as for the disordinate Justices
which the ministers of justice therein have executed.

For they thinkinge by rigor to correct the dommages past, have raised up
present sclaunder for ever. It is known to al men, who and what the emperor
Augustus has been, who in all his doings was exceadinge good: For he was
noble, valiant, stout, fyerse, and a lover of justice, and above all very
pitiefull. And for so much as in other things he showed his pitye and
clemency, he ordained, that no prince should subscribe judgments of death
with his own hand, neither that he should see iuystce done of any with his
own eyes. Truly the law was pitifullye ordained, and for the cleanness and
pureness of Emperors very necessary.

For it seems better for Princes to defend their land with the sharp
sword: then to subscribe a sentence of death, with the cruel pen. This
good Emperor Augustus was very diligent to choose ministers of justice, and
very careful to teach them how they should behave them selves in the
common wealth: admonishing them not only of that they had to do, but also of
that they ought to fly. For the mynisters of justice, oftentimes sail of
their duty. In Capua there was a governor named Escaurus, who was a just
judge, though he were somewhat severe: whom the Emperor Augustus sent to the
realm of Dace to take charge of that province. And amongst diverse other
things he spoke these words unto him to retain them in his memory. Frynde
Escaurus, I have determined to pluck thee from Capua, and to put into thy
custodye the government of the prouynce of Dace, where thou shall represent
the royal majesty of my person, and thou ought also to consider well,
that as I make thee better in honor and goods: so thou in like case should
make thy self better in life, and more temperate in justice. For hitherto in
justice thou have been a little to rigorous: and in thy life somewhat to rash.
I counsel thee therefore, I do desire thee, and further I command thee,
that thou change thy trade of life, and have great respect to my honor, and
good name.

For thou know right well, that the only profit and honor of the common
wealth of Romayne Princes, consysteth in having good or evil ministers of
their justice. If thou wylt do that I would thou should, I let the
understand, that I do not commyt my honor in thy trust, neither my justice,
to thintente thou should be an enuyer of the innocent, and a scourge of
transgressors: but that only with the one hand thou help to sustanie the
good, and with the other thou healpe to amend the evil.

And if thou will more perticulerly know my entencion, I do send the, to the
end thou should be graundfather to the Orphans, an advocate for the
wydowes, a plaster for the grieved, a staff for the blind, and a father to
all. Let therefore the resolution of all be, to rejoice mine enemies, to
comfort my frindes, to lift up the weke, and to favor the strong: so that thou
be indifferent to all, and parcyall to none, to the end that through thy
upright dealing, mine may rejoice to dwell there, and strangers desire to come
and serve me here. This was the instruccion which the emperor Augustus gave
to the governor Escaurus. And if a man will consider and way his words well, he
shall synde them compendious enough, that I would they were written in our
judges hearts. By thy letter thou declarest that the judges whom the Senate
sent to that I Will, are not very honest, nor yet without some suspicion of
covetousness. O woeful common wealth, where the judges therofare cruel,
dishonest, and covetous: forth cruel judges seek naught else but the blood
of innocents, they covet the goods of the poor, and they sclaunder the good,
to such and so wicked a commonwealth, I would say that it were better to
remain in the mountains among the brute bestes: then by such unjust judges to
be governed in a common wealth. For the firce Lions (which of all beasts are
most cruel) if in his presens the hunter prostrate him self on the earth
before him, the Lion will neither touch him nor his garment. O my frinde
Antigonus, do thou think that if the common wealth be unhappy which has such
judges, that therefore Rome may reioise which provided them? By the faith of a
good man, I swear unto the, that I count the Senators worse which sent them:
than the Judges which went thither. It is a great grief to a noble and stout
heart to demand justice of a man, which neither is true, nor yet observes
Justice: but it is a greater grief to see a Judge, that to many has executed
tyranny, and to many poor men has done sundry wrongs, afterward not with
the life he leads, but with the authority he has, presumes to correct
diverse Judges. He that has the office to punish the vicious, ought him self
to be void of all vices: otherwise, he that has that office, by tyranny
executes justice, and furthermore he is a traitor to the commonwealth. It is
impossible that any Judge should be good, unless he has the authority of
his office for accessory, and his pure life for principal. The end why a
judge is sent in provinces, is to defyne doubtful causes, to refourme their
manners, to favor those which can little, and by vyole^ce to enforce those
which can do much. And for the most part there is no commonwealth so weak,
but may well hang a thief on the gallouse, though there came no Judge from Rome
to give sentence. O how many judges are there now a days in Rome, which have
caused diverse to be hanged, regarding nothing but the first thief: and they
remain free, having robbed all the people. Which ought to think them selves
assured, that though punishment be deferred, yet in the end the fault shall
not be pardoned. For the offenses which men in their life time do dissemble,
the gods after their death do punish. It is much good for the common
wealth, and no less honor for the prince, which has the charge thereof, that
the Judge be honest of parson, and diligent in justice, and that in no vice
(for the which he punishes other) he be either noted or defamed himself. For
much is the office of justice perverted, when one thief hangs another on
the galouse.

The Emperor follows his purpose in his letter against cruel (...)
declares a notable imbassage which came from Iud^a to the (...) to complain
of the judges that governed that Realm. Cap. x.
IN the third year after Pompeius took the cu^e of ^elya, which now is
called Jerusalem: Valerius Gracchus a Romayne borne, was ^ente at that time
into that region for the Romans. This Gracchus was very stout of courage,
subtyle in affairs, and honest in life: but notwithstanding all this, in
conversation he was unbridled, and in the administracion of justice
exceadynge rigorous. When the Jews saw them selves not only subject to the
Romans, but besides that evil handeled: they determined to send their
ambassador to Rome, to the intent to infourme the Senate of the tyrannyes and
oppressions which were committed in the land. And for to accomplish the same,
they sent a very aged manne (as by the hears of his head did well appear)
who was learned in the Hebrew greek and lattine letters. For the Hebrews are
very apt to all sciences, but in weapons great toward. This Hebrew came to
Rome, and spoke to the Senate in this wise. O fathers conscripte, O happy
people, your good fortune and fatal destenies permittinge it, or to say
better, We forsakinge our God, Jerusalem, which of all the cities of Asia was
lady and maystres, and of all the Hebrews in Palestine mother, we see it now
presentlye servant and trybutarye to Rome: whereof we Jews ought not to
marvel, neither ye Romans to be proud. For the highest trees by behement
wyndes are soonest blown down.

Great were the armies which. Pompeius had; whereby we were vanquished:
but greater has our offenses been, since by them we do deserve to be
forsaken of our God. For we Hebrews have a God which does not put us under
the good or evil fortune: but does govern us with his mercy and justice. I
will that ye hear one thing by monthe, but I had rather ye should see it by
experyence, which is: that we have so merciful a God, that though amongst
50. thousand evil, there was of us but.10. thousand good: yet he showed
such tokens of mercy, that both the Egiptians and the Romans might have
seen how our god can do more alone, then all your gods together. We
Hebrews (agreeynge in one faith and unity) have one only God, and in one
God only we put our trust and belief, and him we desire to serve, though
we do not serve him, neither should serve him, on such condycion to offend
him. He is so merciful, that he would not let us prove what his merciful
hand can do, neither would he put our woeful people in captivity as he
has, nor also our God can deceive us, neither our wrytynges cannot lie.

But the greater offenders we be, the greater lords shall ye be over us.
And as long as the wrath of God shall hang over us, so long shall the power
of ye Romans endure. For our unhappy realm has not geeuen ye our realm
for your deserts: nor yet for that you were ryghtfull heirs thereunto, but
to the end ye should be the scourge of our offenses. After the will of our
God shall be fulfilled, after that he has appeysed his wrath and indignacion
against us, and that we shall be purged of our offenses, and that he shall
behold us with the eyes of his clemencye: then we others shall recover that
which we have lost, and you others shall lose that which you have evil won.
And it may so chance, that as presentlye of ye romans we are commanded: so
the time shall come, that of ye others we shall be obeyed. And for as much as in
this case the Hebrews feel one, and ye Romans feel an other: neither ye can
cause me to woorship many gods and much less should I be sufficient to
draw ye to the faith of one only God. I refer all to God, the creator of
all things, by whose might we are created and governed.

Therefore touching the matter of my embassage, know ye now, that in all
times paste until this present, Rome has had peace with Judea and Judea
has had friendship with Rome: so that we did favor ye in the wars and ye
others preserved us in peace. In generallye nothing is more desired then
peace, and nothing more hated then war. And further all this presupposed, we
se it with our eyes, and also do read of our predecessoures: that the world
has been always in contencion, and rest has always been banished. For in
deed if we see many sighe for peace: we see many more employe them selves to
war. If ye other would banishe those from you, which do move you to bear
us evil will, and we others knew those which provoke us to rebel, neither
Rome should be so cruel to Judea, nor yet Judea should so much hate Rome.
The greatest token and sign of peace, is to dyspatche out of the way the
distourbers thereof. For frendshippe oftentimes is lost, not so much for the
interest of the one or of the other, as for the vndiscretenes of the
mediatoures. When one common wealth stryueth against another, it is impossible
that their controversies endure long, if those which come between them (as
indifferent mediatoures) be wise. But if such one which takes upon him those
affairs, be more earnestlye bent then the enemy wherewith the other fyghteth:
we will say, that he more subtylye casts wood on the fire, then he
draws water to quench the hear.

All that which I say (Romans) is because that since the banishment of
Archelaus from Judea (son of the great king Herod) in his place ye sent us
Pomponius, Mareus Rufus, and Valerius to be our Judges: who have been four
plagues, the least whereof suffyseth to poison all Rome.

What greater calamitye could happen to our poor realm of Palestine, then
Judges to be sent from Rome to take evil customs from the evil: and they
them selves to be inuentoures of new vices? What greater inconvenience can
chance to justice, then when the Judges which ought to punish the lyghtnes
of youth, do glorify them selves to be captains of the light in their
age? What greater infamye can be to Rome, then when those which ought to be
just in all justice, and to give example of all virtues: be evil in all
euylles, and inuentoures of all vices? Wherein appears your little care and
much tyranny.

For all said openly in Asia, that the thieves of Rome do hang the thieves of
Iewrye. What will ye I shall say more (Romans) but that we little esteame
the thieves which keep the wooddes, in comparison of the Judges which rob
us in our own houses.

O how woeful were our fatal destenyes, the day that we became subject to
the Romans. We fear no thieves which should rob us in the high way,
we fear no fire which should burn our goods, nor we fear no tyrauntes,
which should make war against us, neither any Assirians which should
spoil our country: we fear not the corrupt air that should infect us,
neither the plague that should take our lives from us: but we fear your
cruel judges, which oppesse us in the common welthe, and robs us of our
good name. I say not without a cause they trouble the common wealth. For that
laid a part which they say, that laid a part which they mean, and that
laid aparte which they rob, immediatelye they write to the Senate to
consent unto them, not of the good which they find in the auncientes: but of
the lightness which they see in the young. And as the Senatoures do hear them
here, and do not see them there: so ye geeue more credit to one that has
been but three months in the province, then to those which have governed
the common wealth.30. years.

Consider Senatoures, that ye have been made and appointed Senators in this
place, for that ye were the wysest, the honestest, the best experimented, and
the most moderate and virtuous.

Therefore in this above all shall be seen if ye be virtuous, in that you do
not believe all. For if those be many and of diverse nations which have to do
with you: much more diverse and variable are their intencions, and ends, for
the which they entreat. I lie if your Judges have not done so many wrongs
in justice, and forsaken their disciplyne: that they have taught the youth of
Judea inuencions of vices, which neither has been heard of our fathers,
neither read in our books, ne yet seen in our time. Ye others Romans,
since ye are noble and mighty, ye disdain to take counsel of men that be
poor: the which ye ought not to do, neither counsel your friends to do
it. For to know, and to have little seldom times goes together. As many
counsayles as Judea has taken of Rome: so many let now Rome take of Judea.
You ought to know, though your Captains have won many realms by
sheddynge blood, yet notwithstanding your judges ought to keep them, not with
rygorous sheddynge of blood, but with clemencye and winnynge their hearts.

O Romans, admonish, command, pray, and aduertyse your Judges whom ye
send to govern strange prouynces: that they imploye them selves more to the
common wealth of the realm, then their hands to number their fynes and
forfettes.

For otherwise they shall sclaunder those which send them: and shall hurt
those whom they govern. Your Judges in just things are not obeyed for any
other cause, but forasmuch as first they have commanded many unjust
things. The just commandments make the humble hearts, and the unjust
commandments do turn and convert the meek and humble men, to severe
and cruel persons. Humayne malice is so geeuen to command, and is so
troublesome to be commanded, that though they command us to do good, we
do obey euylle: the more they commmaund us evil, the worse they be obeyed
in the good.

Believe me (Romans) one thing, and doubt nothing therein, that of the great
lightness of the judges, is sprung the little fear and great shame of the
people. Each Prince which shall give to any judge the charge of justice, who^
he knows not to be able, does it not so much for that he knows well how to
minister justice: but because he is very craftye to augment his goods. Let
him be well assured, that when he least thinks on it, his honor shall be in
most infamye, his credit lost, his goods diminished, and some notable
punyshement light upon his house. And because I have other things to speak in
secreate, I will here conclude that is open, and fynallye I say, that if ye
will preserve us and our realm for the which you have haserded your selves
in many periles: keape us in justice, and we will have you in reverence.
Command as Romans, and we will obey as Hebrews: give a pytefull president,
and ye shall have all the realm in safegarde.

What will ye I say more, but that if you be not cruel to punish our
weakness, we will be very obedient to your ordinances. Before ye provide for
to command us, think it well to entreat us: for by prayeng with all mekenes,
and not commaundinge with presumpcion, ye shall find in us the love which the
fathers are wont to find in their children: and not the treason which the
lords have accustomed to find in their servants.

The Emperor concludes his letter against the cruel judges, and declares
what the graundfather of king Boco spoke in the Senate. Cap. xi.
ALl that which above I have spoke, the Hebrew said, and not without great
admiracion he was heard of all the Senate. O Rome without rome, which now
haste naught but the walls, and art made a common stews of vices. What
did thou tell me, when a stranger did rebuke and taunte thee, in the
myddest of thy Senate? it is a general rule, where there is corruption of
custom, lyberties are always lost, which seems most true here in Rome.
For the Romans, which in times past went to revenge their injuries into
strange countries: now others come out of strange countries, to assault
them in their own houses. Therefore since the justice of Rome is condemned,
what think thou that I believe of that I Will of Cicil; tell me I pray thee
Antigonus, from whence comes think thou so great offense to the people,
and such corruption to justice in the common wealth? If peradventure thou
know it not, harken and I will tell the. It is an order whereby all goes
without order. Thou ought to know that the counsayloures of princes being
importunate, and the Prince not resistinge them, but suffringe them, they
deceive him, some with covetousness, other with ignorance, geeue from whom
they ought to take, and take from whom they ought to geeue, they honor them
who do dishonor them, they witholde the just, and deliver the covetous, they
despise the wise, and trust the light, fynallye they provide not for the
offices of persons, but for the persons of offices. Hark Antigonus, and I
will tell the more. These miserable judges, after they are provided and invested
in the auctority of their offices (whereof they were unworthy) seeing themselves
of power to co^mau^d, and yt the dygnitie of their offices is much more, then
the desert of their persons: immediatelye they make them selves to be
feared, mynystringe extreme justice. They t^ke upon them the estates of
great lords, they live of the swet of the poor, they supply with malice, that
which they want in discrecion: and that which is worst of all, they myngle
another man's justice, with their own proper profit. Therefore here more what I
will say unto thee, that these cursed judges, saying them selves pestred with
sundry affairs, and that they want the ears of knoweledge, the sails of
virtue, and the ankers of experience not knowing how to remedy such small
evils: they invent others more greater, they disturb the common peace, only
for to augment their own particular profyt. And finally they bewail their
own damage, and are dyspleased with the prosperity of an other. Nothing can
be more just, that since they have fallen into offices not profitable for them,
they do suffer (though they would not) great domages: so yt the one for taking
gifts remain slaundered, and the other forgeuing the^ remains undone. Harken
yet, and I will tell thee more. Thou ought to know, yt the beginnings of
these Judges, are pride and ambition: their means, envy and malice, and their
endinges are death and destruction. For the leaves shall never be grene, where
the roots are dry. If my counsel should take place in this case, such Judges
should not be of counsel with princes, neither yet should theye be defended
of the pryuate, but as suspecte men theye should not only be cast from the
common wealth: butte also theye should suffer death.

It is a great shame to those which demand offices of the Senate, but greater
is the rashness and boldenes of the counsailers, which do procure them: and we
may say, both to the one, and to the other, that neither the fear of god does
withdraw them, nor the power of Princes does bridell them, nor shame does
trouble them, neither the common wealth does accuse them, and fynallye
neither reason commands them, nor the law subdueth the^. But hark, and I
will tell thee more. Thou ought always to know, what the form and manner
is, that the Senators have to divide the offices: for sometimes they give them
to their frindes, in recompense of their frindship, and other times they give
them to their servants, to acquit their services, and sometime also they
give them to solicitours, to the end theye shall not importune them, so that
few offices remain for the virtuous, the which only for being virtuous are
provided. O my frinde Antigonus, I let you to wete, that since Rome did keep
her renown, and the common wealth was well governed, the dylygence which the
Judges used toward the Senate, to the end theye might geeue them offices:
the self same ought the Senate to have to seek virtuous men, to commit such
charge into their hands. For the office of justice ought to be given, not to
him which procurethe it, but to him that best deserves it. In the year of
the foundation of Rome.6. hundredth 42. years, the Roman people had many
wars throughout all the world. To wete Chaius Celius, against those of
Thrace, Gneus Cardon his brother against the Sardes, Iunius Scilla, against ye
Cymbres, Minutius Rufus, against the Daces, Scruilius Scipio against the
Macedonians, and Marius Consul against Iugurtha king of Numidians: and
amongst all these, the war of the Numidians was the most renowned, and also
perylous. For if Rome had many armies against Iugurtha to conquer him Iugurtha
had in Rome good frindes which did favor him King Boco at that time was
king of Mauritanes, who was Iugurthas frinde, and in the end, he was
afterward the occasion that Iugurtha was overthrown, and yt Marius took him.
These two kings Marius the Co^sull brought to Rome, and triumphed of them,
leadinge them before his triumphaunt chariot, their necks laden with yrons,
and their eyes full of tears. The which unlucky fortune, all the Romans which
beheld lamented, and took great pytye of the staungers whom they heard. The
night after the triumph was ended, it was decreed in the Senate, that Iugurtha
should be beheaded, leaving king Boco alive, depryued of his country. And the
occasion thereof was this. The Romans had a custom of long time, to put no
man to execucion, before that first with great dyligence they had looked the
ancient books, to se if any of their predecessoures had done any notable
service to Rome, whereby the poor prisoner might deserve his pardon.

It was found written in a book, which was in the high Capitol, that the
graundefather of king Boco was very sage, and a special friend to the Romayne
people, and that once he came to Rome and made diverse Orations to the Senate,
and amongst other notable sentences, there was found in that book, that he had
spoken these words. Woe be to the that realm where all are such, that neither
the good amongst the evil, nor the evil amongst the good are known. Woe
upon that realm, which is the enterteiner of al fools, and a destroier of
all sages. Woe is that realm where the good are fearful, and the evil to
bold. Woe on that realm where the pacient are despised, and the sedicious
commended. Woe on that realm, which distroie the those that watch for the
good: and crown the those that watch to do evil. Woe to that realm, where
the poor are suffered to be proud: and the rich tiraunts. Woe to that
realm, where all know the evil: and no man does follow ye good. Woe to that
realm, what so many evil vices are openly committed: with in an other
country dare not secretly be mentioned. Woe to that realm, where all procure
that they desire, where all attain to that theye procure, where all think ye
that is evil, where all speak that they think, and finally, where al may do
that which they will. In such, and so unfortunate a realm, where the people
are so wicked, let every man beware he be not inhabitaunt. For in short time,
they shall se upon him, either the ire of the gods, the fury of the men, the
depopulation of the good, or the desolation of the tyrauntes. Diverse other
notable things were contained in those oracions, the which are not (at this
present) touching my letter. But for as much as we thought it was a very just
thing, that they should pardon the follye of the nephewe, for the deserts of
the wise grandfather. Thou shall read this my letter openly to the Pretours,
and Judges which are resydente there, and the case shall be, that when thou
shalt read it, thou shall admonish them, that if they will not amend
secretlye, we will punish them openly. I wrote unto thee the last day, that
as touching thy banyshement I would be thy frinde: and be thou assured, that
for to enjoy thy old friendeshyppe, and to perform mye word, I will not
let to danger mye parsone. I writ unto Panutius my secretary, to succoure
thee with two thousand Sesterses, wherewith thou may relieve thy pouertye:
and from hence I send thee mye letter, wherewithe thou may comfort thy
sorrowful heart. I say no more to thee in this case, but that thoroughe ye
gods thou may have contentacion of all that thou enioyest, health of thy
person and comfort of thy frindes: the bodily euels, the cruel enemies, the
perilous destenies, be far from me. Mark. In the behalf of thy wife Rufa, I
have saluted my wife Faustyne, she and I both have received with joy thy
salutacio^s and with thanks we sent them you again. I desire to see thy
person here in Italye, and wyshe my fever quartene there with thee in Scicile.

An exhortacion of the autcour to Princes and noble men, to embrace peace, and
to eschew the occasions of war. Cap. xij.
OCtauian Augustus, second Emperor of Rome, is commended of all, for that he
was so good of his person, and so well-beloved in all the Romayne Empire.
Suetonius Tranquillus says, that when any man dyed in Rome in his time, they
gave great thanks to the gods for that they took their life from them,
before their Prince knew what death meant. And not contented only with this,
but in their testaments they commanded their heirs, and children, that
yearly they should offer great sacrifices of their propre goods in all the
temples of Rome, to the end the gods should prolong the days of their
prince. That time in deed might be called the golden age, and the blessed
land, where the prince loved so well his subjects, and the subjects so much
obeyed their prince. For seldom times it happens, that one will be content
with the services of all: neither that all will be satisfied with the
government of one. The Romans for none other cause wished for that good
prince (more the^ for the^ selves) life but because he kept the common wealth
in peace. The virtue of this prince deserved much praise, and the good will of
ye people merited no less commendation: he for deserving it to them, and
theye for geuinge it to him. For to say the truethe, there are few in number
that so heartily love others, that for their sakes will hate them selves. There
is no man so humble, but in things of honor will be content to go before,
save only in death, where he can be content to come behind. And this
semethe to be very clear, in that that now dyethe the father, now the
mother, now the husband, now the wife, now the son, and now his
neigheboure, in the end, every man is content with the death of an other,
so that he with his own life may escape him self. A prince which is gentle,
pacient, stout, sober, pure, honest, and true, truly he of right ought to
be commended: but above all, and more then all, the prince which keeps his
common wealth in peace, has great wrong, if he be not of all beloved.
What good can the common wealth have, wherein there is war and discencion?
Let every man say what he will, wytheoute peace noe man can enjoy his own,
noe man can eat wytheoute fear, noe man sleapeth in good rest, noe man
goethe safe by the way, noe man trustethe his neighbor, finallye I say,
that where there is noe peace, there we are threatened daily with death, and
every hour in fear of our life. It is good the prince do scour the realm
of thieves, for there is nothing more unjust, then that which the poor
with toil and labor do get, should with vacabondes in idleness be
wasted. It is good the prince do weed the realm of blasphemers, for it is an
euidente token that those which dare blaspheme the king of heaven, will not
let to speak evil of the princes of the earth. It is good the prince do
clear the common wealth of vacaboundes, and players: for play is so evil a
mote, that it eatethe the new gown, and consumethe the dry wood. It is good
that the prince do forbydde his subjects of prodigal bankettes, and
superfluous apparel: for where men spend much in things superfluous, it
chaunseth afterward that they want of their necessaries. But I ask now what
auailethe it a prince to banishe al vices from his common wealth, if otherwise
he keeps it in war? The end why princes are princes, is to follow the
good, and to eschew the evil. What shall we say therefore, sins that in the
time of war, princes cannot refourme vices, nor correct the vycyous. O if
Princes and noble men knew what damage theye do to their countreye, the day
that they take upon them war, I think and also affirm, that theye would
not only not begin it, nor yet any pryuate person durst scarsely
remember it. And he that does counsel the prince the contrary, ought by
reason to be judged to the common wealth an ennemy. Those which counsel
princes to seek peace, to love peace, to keep peace, without doubt they have
wrong if they be not heard, if they be not beeloued, and if they be not
credited. For the counsailer which for a light occasyon counsayleth his
prince to begin war, I say that unto him either color surmountethe, or else
good conscience wants. It chaunsethe oftentimes that the prince is vexed and
troubled, because one certyfyethe him that a prouynce is rebelled, or some
other prince has invaded his country and as the matter requirethe, the
counsel is assembled. There are some to rash counsailours, which
immediatelye judge peace to be broken as lyghtlye, as others do desire that
wars should not begin. When a prince in such a case asks counsel,
they ought forthewithe not to answer him sodaynely: for things touching
the wars, ought with great wisdom first to be considered, and then
with as much aduisement to be determined. King David never took war in
hand, though he wear very wise, but first he counsayled with Godde. The
good Judas Machabee never e^tred into battle, but first he made his prayer
unto almightye godde. The Greeks and Romans durst never make war against
their enemies, but first they would do sacrifice to the gods, and consulte
also with their Oracles. The matters of justice, the recreacions of his
person, the reward of the good, the punishment of the evil, and the deuydynge
of rewards, a Prince may communicate with any pryuate man: but all matters
of war, he ought first to counsel with God. For the prince shall never
have perfyte vyctorye over his enemies, unless he first commit the quarrel
thereof unto Godde. Those which counsel princes (whyther it be in matters
of war, or in the affairs of peace) ought always to remember this
sentence: that theye geeue him such counsayles always when he is whole in
his chamber, as theye would if theye saw him at the point of death very
sick. For at that instaunte, noe manne dare speak with flatterye, nor burden
his conscience thoroughe bryberye.

Whenne theye entreat of war, theye which move it ought to considre, that
if it came not well to pass, all the blame shall be imputed to their
counsel. And if that his substance be not presently able to recompense the
loss, let him assure him self, that hereafter his soul shall suffer the
pain. Men ought so much to love peace, and so much to abhor war, that I
beeleue that the same preparacion a priest has in his conscience with God
before he presume to receive the holy communion, the same ought a
counsayloure have, before to his Prince he geeueth counsel in war. Since
Princes are men, it is no merueile though they feel injuries as men, and that
theye desire to revenge as men. Therefore, for this cause they ought to have
wise men of their counsel, whereby they should mittigate and assuage their
griefs and troubles. For the counsaylours of princes, ought never to
counsel things they being angry, wherwt after they may justly be displeased,
when they be pacified. Following our matter, in counting the goods which are
lost in loasyng peace, and the euilles which increase in winning wars, I say
that amongst other things the greatest evil is, that in time of war they
lock up closely al virtues, and set at lyberty all vices. During the time that
Princes and great Lords maintain war, though they be lords of their
realms and dominions by right, yet for a truethe theye are not so in deed.
For at that time the lords desire more to content their soldiers, and
subjects: then the souldyers and subjects seek to content the lords. And
this they do, because theye thoroughe power might vanquishe their enemies, and
further thorough the love of their money, relieve their necessities. Either
princes are governed bye that whereunto by sensuality they are moved, or else
by that wherewith reason is contented. If they will follow reason, they have to
much of that they possess: but if they desire to follow the sensual
appetite, there is nothing that will content them. For as it is impossible to
dry up all the water in the sea: so it is hard to satisfye the heart of man
that is couetouse. If princes, take upon the^ wars, saying that their ground
is taken from them, and that thereof theye have a conscience: let them beware
that such conscience be not corrupted. Form the world there is no war
justified, but for the beginning thereof, the princes at one time or an other,
have their conscience burdened. If princes take upon them war for no other
cause, but to augment their state and dygnytye, I say that this is a vain
hope: for theye consume and lose (for the most part) more in one or twoe
years wars, then ever theye get again during their life. If princes
take upon them war, to revenge an iniurye: as well for this also it is a
thing superfluous. For many go to the wars being wronged only with one
thing, and afterward they return iniuried with many. If princes take upon
them war for none other cause but to win honor, me thynkethe also that
that is an unprofitable conqueste. For me thinks that fortune is not a person
so famous, that into her hands a man may commytte his honor, his goods,
and life. If princes take upon them war to leave of them in the world to
come some memory, this no less the^ the other semethe to me vain. For
without doubt, if we examine the histories that be paste, we shall find
those to be more in number, which for beginnynge of wars have been defamed:
then those which for vanquishynge of their enemies have been renowned. If
princes take upon the^ war, supposyng that there are in an other countreye
more pleasures, and delights, then in their own: I say, that to think this,
procedethe of little experyence, and of less conscience. For to a prince there
can be noe greater shame, nor conscience, then to begin wars in strange
realms, to maineteyne his own pleasure and vices at home. Let noe princes
deceive them selves, in thinking that there are in strange countries more
things, then in their own. For in ye end, there is noe land nor nation
in the world, where there is not winter and summer, night and day, sickness
and health, riches and pouertye, myrthe and sadness, friends and enemies,
vicious and virtuous, alive and dead. Fynallye I say, that in all parts all
things agree in one, save only the disposicions of men, which are diverse.
I would ask princes and great lords, the which do and will live at their
pleasures, what theye want in their realms, yea though theye be little? If
theye will hunt, they have mountains and parkes: if theye will fish, theye
have pondes: if theye will walk, theye have rivers: if theye will refreshe
them selves, theye have baynes: if theye will be merye, theye have musicians:
if theye delighte in apparaylinge them selves, theye have cythe clothes: if
theye will geeue, theye have money: if theye desire weomen, theye have wives
if they will take their rest, theye have their gardeines: if winter annoye
them, theye have whote countries: and if theye will eat, theye want no
meats. He that with peace has all these things in his own dominion, why
then with war does he seek them in a strange countreye? Men
oftentimes fly from one countreye to another, not to be more devout, nor
more virtuous: butte to have greater liberty and opportunity to haunte vices.
And afterward whenne theye see the ends of their deeds, theye cannot
refrain their hearts from sighs, since theye might have enjoyed that at
home with peace, which in strange countries they sought with trouble.
There are so few things wherewythe we are contented in the world, that if
perchance a man find in any one place, any one thing wherewithe to
content him, let him beeware that the devil do not deceive him, saying:
that in such another place he may recreate himself better For whyther so
ever we go, we shall find such penurye, and want of true pleasures, and
comfortes, and such coppie and abundaunce of troubles and torments that for
to comfort us in a hundrethe years we scarcelye find one, and to tormente
us, we find at every foot a thousand.

The auctoure recytethe the commodities which come of peace, declaring how
diverse princes upon light occasions have made cruel wars. Cap. xiij.
DImo, an auncyente king of Ponto, said unto a philosopher which was with
him: Tell me philosopher, I have health, I have honor, and I have riches, is
there any thing more to be desired amongst men, or to be geeuen of the
Gods in this life? The philosopher answered him. I see that I never saw,
and I hear that I never heard, For health, riches, and honor, the gods
seldom times do trust in one person, his time is so short that possess
them, that theye have more reason to pray that theye might be quyted of
them, then for to be proud for that theye possess them. And I tell thee
further king Dimo, it little profytethe that the gods have geeuen thee all
these things, if thou do not content thye self therewythe, the which I
think theye have not geeuen thee, nor never will geeue thee. For the gods are
so just in deuydynge their gifts, that to them to whom theye give
contentacion, theye take from them riches: and to those whom theye geeue
riches, they take their contentacion. Plutarche in the first of his pollytike
puttethe this example, and he declares not the name of this philosopher.

O how great a benefyte is that, which the gods geeue to princes and
great lords, in geeuinge them their health, in geeuynge them riches, and in
geuinge them honor, but if besides those he gives them not contentacion, I
say that in geeuynge them the goods, he geuethe them travail and danger.
For if the travail of the poor be greater then the travail of the rich:
wytheoute comparison the discontentacion of the rich, is greater then the
discontentacion of the poor. Men little regarding their health beecome
sick, little esteeminge their riches beecome poor, and because theye know
not what honor is, theye become dishonored? I mean, that the rash princes,
until such time as theye have benne well beaten in the wars, will always
little regard peace. The day that you princes proclayme wars against your
enemies, you set at lybertye all vices to your subjects: Yet you say your
meaning is not theye should be evil. I say it is true. Yet all this joined
togethers, ye geeue them occasion that theye be not good. Let us know what
thing war is, and then we shall see, whyther it be good or evil to follow
it. In wars theye do naught else but kill men, rob the temples, spoil
the people, destroy the innocents, geeue liberty to thieves, separate
friends, and raise strife: all the which things cannot be done wytheoute
great hurt of justice, and scrupulosytie of conscience. The sedycious manne
him self can not denaye us, that if twoe Princes take upon them wars
beetweene them, and that both of them seem to have right, yet the one of
them only has reason. So that the prince which shall fight against
justice, or defend the unjust cause, shall not escape out of that war
justified: Not issuynge out justified, he shall remain condemned: and the
condemnation shall be, that all the losses, murders, burnynges, hangynges, and
robberies which were done in the one or other common wealth, shall remain
upon the account of him, which took upon him the unjust war. Allthoughe
he does not find an other prince, that will demand an accoumpte of him
hear in this life yet he shall have a just judge that will in another place
lay it to his charge. The prince which is virtuous, and presumethe to be a
christian, before he beeginne the war, ought to considre what loss or
profit will ensue thereof. Wherein if the end be not prosperous, he loses
his goods and honor: and if he perchance attain to that he desired,
peradventure his desire was to the damage of the common wealth, and then he
ought not to desire it. For the desire of one, should not hurt the profit of
all. When GOD our lord did create princes for princes, and people accepted
them for their lords, it is to believe that the gods never commanded such
things, nor the men would ever have excepted such, if they had thought ye
princes would not have done that they were bound, but rather that whereunto
they were inclined. For if men follow that whereunto their sensuality
enclinethe them, they do always err. Therefore if they suffer them selves to
be governed by reason, they are always sure. And besides that, princes should
not take upon them wars, for the burdening of their conscience, the
mispendinge of their goods, and the loss of their honor: they ought also to
remember the duty that they owe to the common wealth the which they are bound
to keep in peace and justice. For we others need not governors to search us
enemies but princes which may defend us from the wicked. The divine Plato in
his.4 book de legibus says, that one demanded him why he did exalt the
Lidians so much, and so much dispraise the Lacedaemonians? Plato answered: If
I commend the Lidians, it is for that they never were occupied but in tilling
the field: and if I do reprove here the Lacedaemonians, it is because theye
never knew nothing else but to conquer realms. And therefore I say, that
more happy is that realm, where men have their hands with laboring full of
blysters: then where their arms in fightinge, are wounded with sweordes.
These words which Plato spoke are very true, and would to god that in the
gates and hearts of princes they were written. Plinius in an epistle sayethe,
that it was a proverb much used amongst the Greeks, that he was king which
never saw king. The like may we say, that he only may enjoy peace,
which never knew what war meant. For simple and innocent though a man be,
there is none but will judge him more happy, which occupyeth his
handekerchiefe to dry the sweat of his brows: then he that breakethe it to
wipe the blood of his head. The princes and great lords which are lovers of
war, ought to consider, that they do not only hurt in general all men,
but also specially the good: and the reason is, that allthoughe they of their
own wills do abstain from battle, do not spoil, do not rebel, nor sleye:
yet it is necessary for them to endure the injuries, and to suffer their own
loss and damages. For none are meet for the war, but those which little
esteem their life, and much less their consciences. If the war wear
only with the evil against the evil, and to the hurt and hinderaunce of
the evil little should theye feel which presume to be good. But I am sorry the
good are persecuted, the good are robbed, and the good are slain: For if it
were otherwise (as I have said) the evil against the evil, we would take
little thought both for the vanquishinge of the one, and much less for the
destruction of ye other. I ask now, what fame, what honor, what glory,
what victory, or what riches in that war can be won, wherein so many good
virtuous, and wise men are lost? There is such penurye of the good in the
world, and such need of them in the common wealth, that if it wear in our
power, we with our tears ought to pluck them out of their graves and
geeue them life, and not to lead them into the wars, as to a shambles to be
put toe death. Pliny in one epistle, and Seneca in an other say: that when
theye desired a Romayne captain that with his army he should enter into a
great danger, whereof great honor should ensue unto him, and little
profit to the common wealth: He answered. For nothing would I enter into
that danger if it were not to give life to a romayn citize^. For I desire
rather to go environed with the good in Rome, then to go laden with treasures
into my cou^treye. Comparinge prince to prince, and law to law, and the
christian with the pagan: without comparison the soul of a christian ought
more to be esteemed, then the life of a Romayne. For the good Roman obseruethe
it as a law to dye in the war: but the good christian has this precepte,
to live in peace. Suetonius Tranquillus in the second book of Cesars sayethe.
That among all the Romayne princes there was noe prince so wellbeloued, nor
yet in the wars so fortunate as Augustus was. And the reason hereof is,
because that prince never began any war, unless by great occasyon he
was thereunto provoked. O of how many princes (not ethnicks, but christians) we
have heard and read all contrary to this, which is: that were of such
large conscience, that theye never took upon them any war that was just.
to whom I swear and promise, that since the war which they in this world
beeganne, was unjust: the punishemente which in an other theye shall have is
most righteous. Xerxes king of the Perses being one dayeat dynner, one
brought unto him very fair and sauourye fygges of the province of Athens:
the which beeinge set at the table, he swear by the immortal gods, and by
the bones of his predecessors, that he would never eat fygges of his
countreye but of Athens, which were the best of all Greece. And that which by
word of mouth king Xerxes swear, by valiant deeds with force and shield
he accomplished, and went forthwith to conquer Gretia, for noe other cause,
but for to syll him self with the sygges of that countreye, so that he
began that war not only as a light prince: but also as a vicious man.
Titus Liuius sayethe that when the French men did cast of the wine of Italy,
immediately they put them selves in arms and went to conquer the countreye,
witheout having any other occasion to make war against them: So that the
Frenchemen for the lycorousnes of the pleasant wynes, lost the dear blood
of their own hearts. King Antigonus dreamed one night that he saw king
Methridates with a fyeth in his hand, who like a mower did cut all Italy. And
there fell such fear to king Antigonus, that he determined to kill king
Methridates: so that this wicked prince for credytinge a light dream, set all
the world in an uproar.

The Lumberdes beeinge in Pannonia, herd say that there was in Italy sweet
fruits, sauowry flesh, odoriferous wynes, fair women, good fish, little
cold, and temperate heat: the which news moved them not only to desire
them, but also theye took weapons to go conquer Italye: So that the Lombardes
came not into Italye to revenge them of their enemies, but to be there more
vicious and riotous. The Romans and the Carthagiens were friends of long
time, but after they knew there was in Spain great mines of gold and of
silver, immediatelye arose between them exceadynge cruel wars, so that
those twoe puissaunt realms, for to take each from other their goods,
destroyed their own proper dominions. The authors of the above said, were
Plutarchus, Paulus Diaconus, Berosus, and Titus Liuius. O secret judgments of
god which suffers such things. O mercyful goodness of thee my Lord, yt
permits such things, yt through ye dream of on price in his chamber,
another for to rob the treasures of Spain, another to fly the cold of
Hungary, another to drink the wines of Italy, another to eat figs of Greece,
should put all the country to fire and blood. Let not my pen be cruel against
al princes which have unjust wars. For as Traianus said. Just war is more
worth then feigned peace. I commend, approve, and exalt princes which are
careful and stout, to keep and defend that which their predecessors left
them. For admit that for dispossessing them, hereof comes all the breach with
other Princes. Look how much his enemy offends his conscience for taking it:
so much offends he his common wealth for not defending it. The words which
the divine Plato spoke in the first book of his laws, did satisfye me greatly,
which were these. It is not mete we should be to extreme in commending those
which have peace: nor let us be to vehement in reproving those which have
war. For it may be now, yt if one have war, it is to ye end to attain
peace. And for the contrary, if one have peace, it shall be to the end to make
war. In deed Plato said very true. For it is more worth to desire short
war, for long peace: then short peace for long war. The philosopher Chilo
being demanded whereby a good or evil governor might be known, he au^swered.
There is nothing whereby a good and evil man may be better known, then in
that for the which they strive. For the tyranous Prince offrethe him self to
dye to take from an other: but the virtuous prince trauaileth to defend his
own. When the redemer of this world, departed from this world, he said not I
give ye my war, or leave ye my war: but I leave ye my peace, and geeue you
mye peace. Thereof ensuethe that the good christian is bound to keep the
peace, which Christ so much commanded: then to invent war to revenge his
proper iniurye, which god so much hated. If princes did that they ought to
do, and in this case would believe me: for no temporal thing they should
condescend to shed man's blood, if nothing else, yet at the least the love of
him which on the cross shed his precious blood for us, should from that
clean dissuade us. For the good Christians are commanded to bewail their
own sins: but they have no license to shed the blood of their enemies.
Finally I desire, exhort, and further admonish al princes, and great lords,
that for his sake that is prince of peace, they love peace, procure peace, keep
peace, and live in peace. For in peace they shall be rich, and their people
happy.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes to his friend Cornelius, wherein he
dyscribeth the discomodyties of war, and the vanity of tryumphe. Cap. xiiij.
MArcus Emperor, wysheth to thee Cornelius his faithful friend, health, to thye
person, and good luck against all evil fortune. Withein fiftene days after I
came from the war of Asia, whereof I have triumphed here in Rome, remembrynge
that in times paste thou wear a companyon of my travail, I sent immedyatly to
certyfy thee of my triu^phes. For ye noble hearts do more rejoice of their
fri^ds joy, the^ they do of their own proper delights. If thou will take pains
to come when I se^d to call thee, be thou assured, yt on the one part thou shall
have much pleasure to se ye great abu^da^s of riches, yt I have brought out of
Asia, and to beeholde mye receiuinge into Rome: and on the other, thou can
not keep thy self from weepinge, to se such a sort of captives (the which
entered in before the triu^phant chariotes) bound, and naked, to augment to the
co^querours most glory: and also to them vanquished, to be a greater ignominy.
Seldom times we se the sun shine bright all the day long, but first in the
summer there has been a mist, or if it be in the winter, that has been a frost.
By this parable I mean, that one of the miseries of this world is, that we
shall se few in this world, which now be prosperous: but before have had
fortune, in some cases, very malicious. For we see by experience, some come to
be very poor, and other chance to atteine to great riches: so that thoroughe
the impouerishing of those, the other become rich, and prosperous. The weping
of the one, causes the other to laugh: so that if the bucket that is emptye
above, does not go down: the other which is full beneathe can not come up.
Speaking therefore according to sensuallyty, thou would have been glad yt
day to have seen our triu^phe, with the abundance of riches, ye great number of
captives, ye dyuersitie of beasts, ye valiantnes of the captains, the sharpnes
of wits which we brought from Asia, and e^tred into Rome, whereby thou
might well know the dangers yt we escaped in that war. Wherefore speaking
the truth, the matter between us and our enemies was so debated, that those of
us yt escaped best, had their bodies sore wounded, and their veins also almost
with out blood. I let thee wete, my Cornelius, yt the Parthes are warlike men,
and in dangerous enterprises very hardy and bold. And when theye are at home
in their country every one with a stout heart defends his house, and surely
they do yt like good men, and valiant captains. For if we other romans,
without reason, and through ambition, do go to take another man's: it is mete
and just, that theye by force do defend their own. Let no man through the
abundaunce of malice, or want of wisdom envy the Roman Captain, for any
triumph that is given him by his mother Rome for surely to get this only one
days honor, he adue^tureth his life a M. times in the field. I will not speak
all that I might say of them yt we led forth to the wars, nor of them which
we leave here at home in Rome, which be al cruel judges of our fame: for
their judgment is not upright according to equitye, but rather procedethe of
malice, and envy. Though they take me for a pacient man, and not far out of
order, yet I let thee know my Cornelius, yt there is no patience can suffer,
nor heart dissemble, to see many romans to have such great envy, which
(thorough their malicious tongues) pass not to backebite other men's triumphs.
For it is a old disease of evil men, through malice to backebite that with
their tongue which through their cowardnes, they never durst enterprise with
their hands. Notwithstanding all this ye must know, yt in the war you must
first often hazard your life, and afterward to the discrecion of such tongues
commit your honor. Our follye is so folishe, and the desires of men so vain,
that more for one vain word, then for any profit, we desire rather to get
vain glory with travail: then to seek a good life with rest. And
therefore willinglye we offer our lives now to great travail, and pain
only that among vain men hereafter we may have a name. I swear by the
immortal gods, unto thee mye Cornelius, yt the day of mye triumph, where as
to the seeming of all those of this world I went triumphinge in the chariote
openly: yet I ensure thee my heart wept secreatly. Such is the vanity of men,
that though of reason we be admonished, called, and compelled, yet we fly from
her and contrary, though we be ^^^ked evil handled, and despised of the world,
yet we will serve it. If I be not deceived it is the prosperity of foolish
men, and want of good judgments yt cause the men to enter into others houses
by force rather then to be desiro^^^ be quiet in their own, with a good will.
I mean yt we should in folowinge virtue, sooner be virtuous: then in haunting
vices, be vicious. For speaking the troth, men which in all and for all desire
to please the world, must needs offer them selves to great travail and care.
O Rome, Rome, cursed be thy folly, and cursed be he that in thee brought up so
much pride, and b^ he cursed of men, and hated of gods, which in thee ha^
^uented this pompe^ For very few are they, yt worthily unto it have a^^ ^^d:
but infinite are they, which thorough it have perished. What greater vn^^ ^or
what equal lightness can be, then that a Roman captain, because he ^^h
conquered realms, troubled quiet men, destroyed cities, beaten down castles,
robbed the poor, enriched tiraunts, carried away treasours, shed much blood,
made infinite widows, and taken many noble men's lives, should be afterward
(with great triumph of Rome) received in recompense of all this damage? Will thou now that I tell thee a greater follye, which above al other is greatest? I
let thee wete, infinite are theye that dye in the wars, and one only carries
away the glory thereof: so that these woeful and miserable men, though for
their carcass they have not a grave, yet one captain goes triumphing alone
thorough Rome. By the immortal gods I swear unto thee, and let this pas
secretly, as between frindes, that the day of my triumph, when I was in my
triumphaunt chariot, beholdinge the miserable captives laden with yrons, and
other men cariynge infinite treasures, which we had evil gotten, and to se the
careful widows weep for the death of their husbands, and remembered so many
noble Romans which lost their lives in Affrike: though I seemed to rejoice
outwardly, yet I e^sure thee I did weep drops of blood inwardly. For he is no
man borne in the world, but rather a fury bred up in hell among ye furies, yt
ran at the sorrow of another take any pleasure. I know not in this case, what
reputacion the prince, or captayn should make of him self, that comes from
the war, and desires to enter into Rome, for if he think (as it is reason)
on the wounds he has in his body, or the tresures which he has wasted, on
the places that he has burnt, on the perils yt he has escaped, on the
injuries which he has received, the multitude of men which unjustly are
slain, the frindes which he has lost, the enemies that he has gotten, the
little rest that he has enioied, and the great travail that he has suffered:
in such case I say, yt such a one with sorrowful sighs ought to lament, and with
bitter tears ought to be received. In this case of triumphinge. I neither
commend the Assirians, nor envy the Persians, nor am content with the
Macedonians, nor allow the Caldians, or content me with Greeks. I curse the
Trojans, and condemn the Carthagiens, because yt they proceeded not according
to the zeal of justice: but rather of the rage of pride, to set up triumphs,
endomaged their countries, and left an occasion to undo us, O cursed Rome,
cursed thou have ben, cursed thou art, and cursed thou shall be. For if the
fatal destenies do not lie unto me, and my judgment deceive me, and fortune
fasten not the nail: they shall se of thee Rome in time to come, that which we
others presently se of the realms paste. Thou ought to know, that as thou
by tyranny have made thy self lady of lords: so by justice thou shall return
to be the servant of servants. O unhappy Rome, and unhappy again I return
to call the. Tell me I pray thee, why art thou at this day so dear of
marchaundise, and so chepe of folly? Where are the ancient fathers which
builded thee, and with their virtues honored thee? in whose stead presently
thou magnifyest so many tyrauntes, which with their vices deface thee. Where
are al those noble and virtuous barons which thou have nourished, in whose
steed thou have now so many vicions, and vacabondes? Where are those, which
for thy liberty did shed their blonde, in whose stead now thou have those,
that to bring thee into subieccion, have lost their life? Where are thy valyant
Captains, which with such great travail did endeavor them selves to defend
the walls from enemies, in whose stead have succeeded those that have plucked
them down, and peopled them with vices, and vicious? where are thy great
priests, the which did always pray in the Temples, in whose steed have
succeeded those, which know not but to defile the churches, and with their
wickedness to move the gods to wrath? where are these so many philosophers
and orators, which with their counsels governed the, in whose stead have
now succeeded so many simple, and ignorant, which with their malice do undo
the? O Rome all those auncie^ts have forsaken the, and we succeed those which
now are new, and if thou knew truly the virtue of them, and did
consider the lightness of us: the day that they ended their life, the self
same day not one stone in thee should have been left upon an other. And so
those feldes should have sauoured of the bones of the virtuous: which now
stink of the bodies of the vicious. Peradventure thou art more ancient then
Babylon, more beautiful then Jerusalem, more rich then Carthage, more
strong then Troy, more peopled the Thebes, more in circuit then Corinthe,
more pleasant then Tirus, more fertile then Constantinople, more high then
Camena, more invincible then Aquileia, more priuileged then Gades, more
environed with Towers then Cap^a, and more floryshing then Cantabria. We see
that all those notable cities perished, for all their virtuous defendoures:
and think thou to remain being replenished with so much vice, and peopled
with so many vicious?

O my mother Rome, take one thing for a warning, that the glory which now is
of the, was first of them, and the same destruction that was of them, shall
hereafter light upon the, for such is the world.

For thus goes the world, even as we presentlye see the troubles of them that
be paste: so shall those that be to come, see ours that be present.

Marcus Aurelius goes on with his letter, and declares the order that the
Romans used in setting forth their men of war, and of the outrageous
villanyes which captains and soldiers use in the war. Cap. xv.
I will now declare unto thee, my friend Cornelius, the order which we have to
set forth men of war: and thereby thou shall see the great disorder that is in
Rome. For in the old time there was nothing more looked unto, nor more
corrected, then was the discipline of war. And for the contrary, now a days
there is nothing so dissolute, as are our men of war. News once spread
abrode^ through the empire, how the prince does take upon him any war,
immediatlye diverse oppinions engender amongst the people, and every one
judges dyuerselye upon the war. For as much as the one says it is just,
and the prince that takes it upon him is just. Others say that it is unjust,
and that the prince which began it, is a tyrant. The poor and seditious
persons do allow it, to the end they might go, and take other men's goods by
force. The rich and pacient do condemn it, because they would enjoy their
own in quiet. So that they do not iustifye or condemn war, according to
the zeal of justice: but according to the little or much profit, that shall
follow them of that enterprise. I command which am a Romayne Emperor, war
to be proclaimed, because a city or province has rebelled, and that according
to their custom they do observe the ceremonies of Rome. First you must
understand, the priests must be called to go immediately to pray to the
immortal gods: for the roman people never went to shed the blood of
their enemies in the wars, but first the pristes did shed the tears of
their eyes in the Temples.

Secondly all the sacred Senate does go to the temple of the God Jupiter, and
there they swear all with a solemn oath, that if the enemies (against whom
they go) do require a new confederacion with Rome, or demand pardon of
their faults committed: that (all reuengement laid on side) they shall not
deny them mercy.

Thyrdlye the consul which is appointed for captain of the war, went to
the high capitol, and there he makes a solemn vow to one of the gods,
which lyketh him best, that he will offer him a certain Jewel, if he
return victorious of the same war: and though the jewel which he does
promise be of great value, yet all the people are bound to pay it.

The.4. is, that they set up in the temple of Mars the ensign of the Egle,
which is the ancient roman ensign, and that is, that all the Romans take
it for commandment, that no spectacle nor feast be celebrated in Rome,
during the time that their brethren be in the wars.

The.5. a Praetor mounteth up to the top of the gate of Salaria, and their
he blows the trumpet to muster men of war, and they bring forth the
standers and ensigns to deuyde them among the Captains.

How fearful a thing is it to see, that so soon as the Captain is enuyroned
with thensigne, so soon has he license to commit all euyls, and villanyes. So
that he takes it for a brauerye, to rob the countries whereby he passes:
and to deceive those with whom he practyseth. What lyberty captains and
governors of war have to do evil, and to be evil, it is very manifest
in those whom they lead in their company. For the sons leave their
fathers, the servants their lords, the Scholars their masters, the
officers their offices, the priests their Temples, the amarouse their
loves, and this for none other cause, but that under the color of the
liberties of war, their vices should not be punished by justice. O my friend
Cornelius, I know not how I should begin to say that which I will tell thee.
Thou ought to know, that after our men of war are gone out of Rome they
neither fear the gods, neither honor the temples, they reverence not the
priests, they have no obedience to their fathers, nor shame to the people,
dread of justice, neither compassion of their country, nor remember that they
are children of Rome: and yet very few of them think to end their life, but
that all shame laid aside, they love the condemned ydlenes, and hate ye just
travail. Therefore hark, I will tell thee more, and though it seems much
that I speak, I ensure thee it is but little in respect of that they do, for
so much as some rob temples, others spread rumors, these break the doors,
and those rob the Gods. Somtymes they take the free, somtymes they lose the
bond. The nights they pass in plays, the days in blasphemies, to day they
fight like lions, to morrow they fly like cowardes. Some rebel against the
Captains, and others fly to the enemies. Fynallye, for all good they are
unable, and for all evil they are meet. Therefore to tell the of their
filthynes, I am ashamed to describe them.

They leave their own wives, and take the wives of others, they dishonor the
daughters of the good, and they begile the innocent Virgins, there is no
neighbor but they do covet, neither hostess but yt they do force, they
break their old wedlock, and yearly seek a new marriage: so that they do
all things what they list, and nothing what they ought. Do thou think
presently my friend Cornelius yt there are few evils in Rome, since so many evil
women do go to the war? Here for their sake, men offend the gods, they are
traitors to their country, they deny their parentage, they do come to
extreme poverty, they live in infamy, they rob the goods or others, they
waste their own, they never have quiet life, neither remains any truth in
their mouths: fynallye for the love of them, oftentimes war is moved
again, and many good men lose their lives. Let us leave the reasons, and
come to hystoryes.

Thou know right well, that the greatest part of Asia was conquered and
governed, more with the women Amazones, then with any barbarous people. That
young, noble, and valiant Porro, king of Judea, for want of men, and
aboundans of women, was overcome of the great Alexander. Hanniball the terrible
captain of the Carthagiens was always lord of Italy, until he did permit
women to go to the war. And when he fell in love with a maiden of Capua,
they saw him immediatlye turn his shoulders to Rome. If Scipio the Affricane
had not skoured the Romayne armies of lecherye, the invincible Numantia had
never been won. The Captain Silla in ye wars of Mithridates, and the
courageous Marius, in the war of the Zimbtes, had over their enemies so
many victories, because in their camps they suffered no women. In the time of
Claudius the Emperor, the Tharentines and Capuans were very mortal enemies,
in so much as the one again the other pytched their camp, and by chance
one day in the camp of the Capuans, two Captains fell at varyaunce, because
they both loved one woman, and when the Tharentines perceived their
dissensyon, immediatlye with their power gave them the onset.

Whereof it ensues, that through the naughtynesse of one evil woman, was
lost the liberty of that goodlye city. I had in this war of Parthes 16.
thousand horsemen, and.24. thousand footmen, and.35. thousand women, and the
disorder in this case was so great, that from the host I sent my wife
Faustine, and the wives of diverse other Senators home to their houses, that
they should keep the old and nourishe the young.

Our forefathers led women in the old time to the war, to dress meat for
the whole, and to cure the wounded: but now we lead them to the end
cowardes should have occasyon to be effeminate, and the valiant to be
vicious. And in the end, their enemies do break their heads: but the women
do wound their hearts. I will that thou know other things, my Cornelius,
and they are, that the Gawles, the Vulcanes, the Flaminii, the Regii, the
which are priests of the mother Sibilla, of the god Vulcane, of the god Mars,
and of the god Jupiter, the fear of the gods set aside, leaving their
temples desert, laying of their honest garments, not remembringe their holy
ceremonies, breaking their straight vows, an infinite number of them go to
the camp, where they love more dishonestlye then others: for it is a common
thing, that those which once presume to be solytarye, and shamefaste, after
that they are once fleshed: exceed all other in shame and vice.

It is a dyshonest thing, and also perilous to carye priests to the war:
for their office is to pacifye the gods with tears, and not to threaten men
with weapons. If perchance Princes would say, it is good to carye priests
to the war to offer sacrifices to the gods: To this I answer, that the
temples are buylt to pray, and ye fyeldes for to fight: so that in one place
the gods would be feared, and in an other honored and sacrifyced. In the
year of the foundation of Rome.315. the consul Vietro passed into Asia, and
went against the Palestines, the which there rebelled against ye Romans, and
by the way he passed by the temple of Apollo, in the isle of Delphos, and as
there he made a prayer unto the god Apollo very long, to the end he would
reuele unto him whether he should return victorious from Asia or not. The
oracle answered. O consul Vietro if thou will return victorious from thy
enemies, restore our priests which thou take from our temples. For we
other gods will not: that the man whom we choose for our deuyne service,
ye others should lead to the vices of the world. If it be true (as it is
true in deed) that the god Apollo said unto the consul Vietro, me thinks
it is no just thing to co condescende that priests should go to loose them
selves in the war.

For as thou know my Cornelius, without doubt greater is the offense that
they commit in going to vndooe them selves, then is the service which they
do to princes being desirous to fight.

Let us have the pristes in the Temples to pray, and let us see how the
captains are wont to govern them selves, and in this case thou shall find
that the day that the Senate do appointe a Senator for captain, they prove
him if he can play at the weapons in the Theater.

The Consul leads him to the high capitol with him, the Egle is hanged at
his breast, they cast the purple upon his shoulders, they give him money of the
common treasour, immediatlye he grows into such pride, that forgettinge the
poverty past which he suffered in his country, he thinks one day to
make him emperor of Rome. It is a common thing, that when fortune exalts
men of low estate, to high degree, they presume much, and know little, and
much less what they are woorthe. So that if their feeble force were coequall
to their high mind, one alone should suffice to over come their enemies, and
also to win many realms.

The Captains have taken a custom now in Rome, and they tell me that it is
an invention of Mauritane, that is, that they tease their beardes, they curle
their hears, they clippe their words, they change their garments, they
accompanye with murderers, they go the most part armed, they go very fast
to seem fierce, and to conclude they little esteem to be beloved, and take
it great glory to be feared.

And to thentent thou should know, my Cornelius, how much they would be
feared, I will recyte thee an historye which is, that I standing one day in
Penthapolyn, a captain of mine, I hearing him, and he not seeing me, for so
much as they would not let him do all that he would have done in the
house, he said unto an hostice of his.

Ye other villaynes did never know captains of armies, therefore know it, if
thou do not know it mother, that the earth does never tremble, but when yt
is threatened with a Romayne Captain, and the gods do never suffer the Sun
to shine, but where we others are obeyed.

Sins thou have now hard that he said, hear also the valiauntnes that he
has done. Within short space after, the captain went unto a battle in
Arabia, where he was the first that fled, and left the standerd alone in
the field, the which had almost made me lose the battle. But I in
recompense of his valiant deed, commanded to cut of his great head. For in
giving the onset upon the enemies, the flyenge of one manne does more hurt,
then the fightinge of two thousand does profit. I have often times heard the
emperor Traian my lord say, that the men which in peace seem most
fierce, in wars commonly are most cowardes.

It chances that diverse things are compassed, for having only a good
eloquence, others for having wytche craft, others for being very diligent,
others for opening their purse, and truly this is the most and best mean
that is occupied in Rome. But the affairs of wars do not consiste, in
talkinge many words before their friends: but in fightinge manfullye in the
field against their enemies. For in the end, men most full of words, are for
the most part cowardes in deeds. What will thou I tell the more, my
Cornelius, of the injuries which the captainez do in ye cities whereby they
pass, of the sclaunders which they raise in the provinces where they abide? I
let thee weete, that the little woorme does not so much harm that gnaweth the
wood, the moth to the garments: the spark unto the toae, the locust unto the
corn, neither the wyuell to the garners, as the captains do to the people.
For they leave no beast but they kill, nor orchyarde but they rob, nor wine
but they drink, nor dove house but they clime, nor temple but they spoil, nor
chase but they hunt, no sedicion but they raise, no villainy but that they
commit. And they do more then they ought to do, for they eat without meaning
to pay, and they will not serve unless they be well paid: and the woorst of
all is, that if they have their pay, immediately they change or play it. If
they be not paid, they rob and mutine forthwith: so that with poverty they
are not content, and with riches they wax vicious and insolent. The matter is
now come to such corrupcion, and there is at this day men of war in Rome so
careless, that here no captain seems but an example of murderers, a sturrer
up of sedicious persons, an enuyer of the good, a partaker with all evil, a
thief of thieves, a pirate of rouers, and finally I do not say that they seem
to be: but I do affirm that they are the scourge of your virtuous, and
refuge of the vicious. I would not say this, but yet not withstandyng I ought
to say it, because it is a thing so far out of order, and so much to be
laughed at: that these wicked men though they are our familiar enemies, there
is no prince that rules them, nor Justice that corrects them, nor fear that
does oppesse them, nor law that subdueth them, nor shame that refraineth them,
nor parents that correct them, nor punishment that does abase them, nor yet
death that does end them: but now as men which are without remedy, we let
them eat of all.

Marcus Aurelius Emperor pursues his letter, showing the great damages that
have ensued for the wars begone with strange realms. Cap. xvi.
O Unfortunate Rome, who was not wont to have such evil luck, but the older
thou art, the more unlucky I see thee. For by writings we read, and also with
our eyes we see, that the more fortunat a city or person has been in the
beginning, the more froward fortune is unto him in the endyng. Truly in those
ancient times, and in those glorious worlds, I say when they were peopled with
true Romans, and not as now (they which have no children but bastardes) the
armies were so well taught that came from Rome, as the philosophers which were
in the schools of Greece. If the greek writings do not lie unto me, Phillip
the great king of Macedony, for this is so renowned in histories, and his
son the great Alexander for this was so fortunate in the wars, that they
had their armies so well correct: that it rather seemed a Senate which
governed, then a camp which fought. In that we can gather out of Titus Liuius,
and other writers, from the time of Quintus Cincinnatus dictator, until the
noble Marcus Marcellus, were the most prosperous times of the Romayne empire.
For before kings did trauail, and afterward it was persecuted with tyraunts.
In these so happy times, one of the greatest felicities that Rome had, was to
have the warrelyke discipline well corrected. And then Rome began to fall, when
our armies began to do dommage. For if those of the war have, truce with
vices, the others of the common wealth can not have peace with virtues. O
cursed be thou Asia, and cursed be the day that with thee we had conquest.
For we have not seen the good that have followed us of thy conquest, until
this present, and the loss and dommage which from thee came unto us, shall be
lamented in Rome forever. O cursed Asia, we spent our treasures in thee, and
thou have geeuen to us thy vices. In change of our valyant men, thou have
sent us thy fine mineons, we have won thy cities, and thou tryumphest of our
virtues. We battered thy fortes, and thou have destroyed our manners. We
triumph of thy realms, and thou did cut the throtes of our friends. We
made to thee cruel war, and thou conquerest from us the good peace, With
force thou were ours, and with good will we are yours. We are unjust lords
of thy riches, and just tenauntes of thy vices. Finally thou Asia art a woeful
grave of Rome, and thou Rome art a fylthy sink of Asia. Since our ancient
fathers did content them selves with Rome alone, why should not we their
children content our selves with Rome and Italy? but that we must go to
conquer Asia, where we adventured our honor, and spent our treasure? If those
ancient romans, being as they were, so princely barons in life, and so
valiant in fyghting, and so hardy to command, did content them selves with
this little border: why should not we content our selves not being as they
are, having a realm rich and vicious? I know not what fond toye took us in
the head, to go conquer Asia, and not to content our selves with Rome? Italy
was not so poor of riches, nor so destitute of cities, nor so unpeopled of
people, nor so solitary of beasts, nor so vndecked with buyldinges, nor so
barrayne of good fruits: but that of all these things we had more, then our
fathers wished, and also more then we their children deserved. For me I
would say, that it is for want of judgment or abundance of pride, for us to
seek to exceed our forefathers in seignorie: when we are not coequall unto
them in virtue. I was contented with all things of my forefathers, save only
that they were a little proud, and seditious, and herein we their children do
resemble them well.

For as much as we are not only proud and sedicious, but also covetous and
malycious. So that in virtuous things we go backward, and in unlawful
works we go forward. What is become of the great victories that our
forefathers had in Asia? What is become of the infinite treasure they have
robbed in that country? what is become of ye great number of captives that
they took in the war? what is become of the strange beasts that they sent
into Italy. What is become of the riches which every one brought home to his
house? what is become of the valiant kings which they took in that conquest?
what is become of the feasts and triumphs, wherewyth they entered triumphing
into Rome? What will thou I say more unto thee in this case, (my Cornelius) but
that all they which invented the war are dead, all those which were in Asia
are dead, al those which defended that country are dead, all those which entered
triumphing into Rome are dead, and finally, all the riches and tryumphs which
our fathers brought from Asia, they and those in short space had an end, except
the vices and pleasures whereof we see no end. O if the valiant princes
knew, what a thing it is to invent wars in strange realms, what trauayls
they seek for their persons, what cares in their hearts, what trouble to
their subjects, what waste to their treasors, what poverty to their friends,
what pleasures to their enemies, what destruction of the good, what liberty
of the evil, and what occasion they geeue to strangers to speak, what
universal evil they sow in their natural countries, and what evil poison
they leave to their heirs: I swear by the faith of a good man, that if as I
feel it, princes did feel it, and as I taste it, princes did taste it, and
also as I have proved it, princes did prove it, I do not say that with effusion
of blood I woold take realms by force: but also they offering them to me with
tears, I woold not take the^ willingly. For speaking the truth, it is not the
point of valiant princes for to sustain an other man's, to put their own in
ieoperdye. I ask now, what profit took Rome of the conquest of Asia? I
admit that it durst conquer it, that it was hardye in winning it, obstinate
in fightinge, and happy in taking it: should it therefore be fortunate in
maintaininge it? In this case I say and affirm, and of that I say I do not
repent me: that it is possible to take Asia, but it is but a folly to presume
to maintain it.

Do thou not think it a great folly to presume to maintain Asia, since
there never comes news of a victory, but that it is occasion of an other
battle, and that to sustain war, they rob all Italy? In Asia our money
is spent, our children are perished: In Asia dyed our fathers, for Asia they
make us pay tributes: In Asia the good horses are consumed: Into Asia they
carry all our corn: In Asia all the thieves are nourished: From Asia comes
all the sedicious persons: In Asia all the good do perish: From Asia they
send us all the vices: and fynallye in Asia all our treasures are spent, and
in Asia all our excellent Romans are killed. And since this is the service
that Asia does to Rome, why will Rome continue war with Asia? Other princes
before us have conquered Asia, taken Asia, and possessed Asia: but in the end,
when they saw that it was a country where they feared not the gods, nor
acknowledged subjection to their princes, neither that they were apt to
receive laws, they determined to forsake them: because they found by
experience, that they neither weary their bodies with wars, neither win
their hearts with benefytes. Those Princes not being hardye, nor so bold to
sustain Asia by land, should we others presume to succor it by sea? They
forsake it being neighbors, and will we others maintain it being strangers?
In my oppinion Asia is a country, where all the valiant men have employed
their valauntnes, where all the fools have proved their folly, where all the
proud have showed their pride, where all the princes entered in with might,
where all the tyrauntes have employed their life: but in the end, it neither
profits the one to will it, nor to the others to know it, and yet much
less to vanquishe it.

I know not the man that loves Asia, that wylleth well to Asia, that speaks
well of Asia, or that favors the things of Asia, since she gives us
occasion to speak daily, to sigh nightly, and to weep hourly.

If men atteined to the secret to know the fatal destenies, with ye which
the gods have created Asia, they would not strive so much in the conquest
thereof. For the gods have created it in such a sign, that it should be a
common pasture where all feed, a common market where all sell, a common Inn
where all rest, a common table where all play, a common house where all
dwell, a common country where all remain: and thereof it comes, that Asia
is desired of many, and governed of few. For being as it is a common
country, every manne will make it his own proper.

Peradventure thou wylt think, my friend Cornelius, that I have spoken now
all the euylles of Asia, but harken, yet I will form the a new question
again. For according to the dommages which have followed (from Asia) to our
mother Rome, time shall rather want to write, then matter to declare. Not
without tears I say that which I will say, that there was never any
Romayne Captain that did kylle ten thowsande Asians with the weapons he
brought into Asia; but that he lost a hundredth thousand romans with the
vices they brought to Rome. So that the Asians by the hands of their enemies
died with honor: and left us Romans alive full of their vices with
infamye. I ask now what they were that invented to dyne in common places, to
suppe in secret gardeines, to apparaile the women as men in the theater, to
color the flesh of priests with yellow? to noynt the women as men in the
bathe, the Senators going smellyng to the Senate, Princes to be apparanied
with purple against the ancient decree? to eat twice in the day as the
Tyrant Dennys did, to keep harlottes and concubines as they of Tire do, to
speak blasphemies against the gods which were never heard of before in the
empire? These said vices of Asia, Asia has presently sent to Rome.

At the same time when in those parties of the Orient, the war was kyndeled:
ten valyant capytaynes brought these vices to Rome, whose names my pen
shall pardone to tell, because their vile offenses should not obscure their
valiant deeds. Before that Rome conquered Asia we were rich, we were
pacyent, we were sober, we were wise, we were honest, and above all we
lived contented.

But since that time we have geeuen our selves to forgeat the polycyes of
Rome, and to learn the pleasure of Asia: so that now all vices may be learned
in Rome, as all sciences may be heard in Greece.

By the above rehearsed, all warlyke princes may see, what profit they have
to conquer strange realms. Let us now leave the vices, which in the wars
are recovered, and talk of money which the princes covet and love. And in
this I say, that there is no prince brought into so extreme poverty, as he
which conquereth a strange country.

O Cornelius, thou haste not seen how Princes more of a will then of
necessity do waste their treasoures: how they demand that of another
man's, and how their own does not suffyce them: they take those of
churches, they seek great lones, they invent great tributes, they demand
great subsidies, they geeue strangers occasion to speak, and make them selves
hated of their subjects: fynallye they pray their subjects, and humble
the^ selves to their enemies. Since I have declared the dommages of war, I
will now declare what the original of war is.

For it is impossible that the physician apply unto the sick agreeable
medecyne, if he know not of what humor the sickness does proceed.

Princes since they came of men, are noryshed with men, do counsel with
men, and live with men, and to conclude they are men. Sometime through
pride which abounds in them: sometime through want of counsel, they them
selves imagine, and other flatterers tells, that though they have much in
respect of other princes, yet they can do little. Also they say unto them,
that if their substance be great, their fame ought to be greater. Further
they tell the^, that the good prince ought little to esteem that he has
inherited of his predecessors, in respect of the great deal more he ought to
leave to his successors. Also they tell the^, yt never prince left of him any
great memory, but inue^ting see cruel war against his enemy. Also they tell
the^, yt ye hour that one is chosen emperor of Rome, he may boldly conquer
all the whole earth. These vain reasons being heard of the princes,
afterward as their fortune is base, and their minds high, immediately they
defye their enemies, they open their treasures, they assemble great armies:
and in ye end of all, the gods suffer, that they thinkinge to take an other
man's goods, they waste and lose their own. O princes, I know not who does
deceive ye, that you which by peace may be rich, and by war will be
poor?

O princes, I know not who does deceive you, that you which may be loved do
seek occasions to be hated. O princes, I know not who does begyle ye, that ye
which may enjoy a sure life, do adventure your selves to the mutabilitie of
fortune. O princes, I know not who does deceive you, that you so little
esteem and wey your own haboundaunce, and so greatly set by the want of
others. O princes, I know not who does deceive you, that all having need of
you, you should have need of others. I let thee to wete my Cornelius, though
a prince be more quick and careful then all other his predecessors have
been in Rome: yet it is impossible that all things touching war, should
succeed unto him prosperousely. For in the greatest need of war, either he
wants money, or his subjects do not succor him, or time is contrary unto
him, or he fyndeth perilous passages, he lacks artillarye, or ye Captains
rebel, or else succor comes to his adversaries: so that he sees him self
so miserable, that thoughts do more oppress his heart, then the enemies do
harm his land. Though a prince had no war, but for to suffer men of
war, yet he ought to take upon him no war. I ask thee my Cornelius, what
travail so great to his parsonne, or what greater dommage to his realm can
his enemies do, then that which his own men of war do? The enemies, to
do the worste they can, will but rob our frontiers: but our men of
war do rob all the whole country. The enemies we dare and may resist, but
to ours we cannot, nor dare not speak. The enemies, ye worst they can do, is
once in a month to rob and run their ways: but ours daily do rob, and
remayn still. The enemies fear their enemies only, but ours do fear their
enemies, and have no pity on their frids. The enemies, ye further they go on,
ye more they diminish: but ours ye further they go, ye more they increase. I
know no greater war yt princes can have, then to have men of war in their
realms. For as experience does show us, before ye gods they are culpable, to
princes importunate, and to ye people troublesome: so that they live to the
dommage of all, and to the profit of none. By the God Mars I swear unto thee
(my friend Cornelius) as he may direct my hands in the war, that I have
mo complaints in the Senate, of ye theftes which my captains do commit in
Illiria, then of all the enemies of the Romayne people. Both for that I say,
and for that I keep secret. I am more afraid to create an ensygne of twoe
hundred men of war, then to give a cruel battle to thirtye thousand
men. For that battle, fortune (good or evil) forthwith dispatcheth, but
with these I can be sure no time of all my life. Thou will say unto me
(Cornelius) that since I am Emperor of Rome, I should remedy this since I
know it. For that prince which dissembleth with the fault of another, by
reason he will condemn him, as if it were his own. To this I answer, that
I am not mighty enough to remedy it, except by my remedy there should spring
a greater inconvenience. And since thou have not been a Prince, thou could
not fall into that I have, nor yet understand that which I say. For princes by
their wisdom know many things, the which to remedy they have no power. So
it has been, so it is, so it shall be, so I found it, so I keep it, so will I
leave it them, so I have read it in books, so have I seen it with my eyes, so
I heard it of my predecessors, and finallye I say, so our fathers have
invented it, and so will we their children sustain it, and for this evil,
we will leave it to our heirs. I will tell thee one thing, and imagine that
I err not therein, which is, consideringe the great dommage, and little
profit, which the men of war do bring to our common wealth: I thynk to do
it, and to sustain it, either it is the folly of men, or a scourge given of
the gods. For there can be nothing more just, then for the gods to permit,
that we feel that in our own houses: which we cause others in strange
houses to lament. All those things I have written unto thee, not for that it
skilleth greatly that thou know them: but that my heart is at ease to utter
them: For as Alcibiades said, the chestes, and the hearts, ought always to
be open to their friends. Panutius my secretary, goes in my behalf to
visit that land, and I gave him this letter to give the, with two horses,
wherewith I think thou will be contented, for they are gennettes. The weapons
and riches which I took of the Parthes, I have now divided, notwtstanding I
do send thee.2. Chariottes of them. My wife Faustine greeteth thee, and I
send a rich glass for thy daughter, and a Jewel with stones for thy sister.
No more but I beseech the Gods to geeue thee a good life, and me a good death.

The admonition of the Aucthour to Princes and great Lords to the intent that
the more they grow in years, the more they are bound to refrain from vices.
Cap. xvii.
AVlus Gelius in his book De noctibus Atticis says, that there was an
ancient custom amongst the romans, to honor and have in great reverence
aged men. And this was so inuiolate a law amongst them, that there was none so
noble of blood and lynage, neither so puissaunt in riches, neither so
fortunate in battayles, that should go before the aged men, which were laden
with whit hears: so that they honored them as the gods, and reverenced them
as their fathers. Amongst other the aged men had these preheminences, that
is to wete, that in feasts they sat highest, in the triumphs they went
before, in the temples they did sit down, they spoke to the Senate before
all others, they had their garments surred, they might eat alone in secrat, and
by their only word they were credited as witnesses: Finally I say, that in
all things they served them, and in nothing they annoyed them. After the
people of Rome began war with Asia, they forsook all their good Romayne
customs immediatlye.

And the occasyon hereof was, that since they had no men to sustain the
common wealth, by reason of the great multitude of people which dyed in the
war: they ordained that all the young men should mary, the young maids, the
wydowes, the free, and the bond, and that the honor which had been done
until that time unto the old men, from henceforthe should be done unto the
married men, though they were young. So that the most honored in Rome was
he, not of most years, but he that had most children. This law was made a
little before the first battle of Catthage.

And the custom that the married men were more honored, then the old men,
endured until the time of the Emperor Augustus, which was such a friend of
antiquyties, that he renewed all the walls of Rome with new stones, and
renewed all the ancient customs of the common wealth. Licurgus in the laws
which he gave to the Lacedaemonians ordained that the young men passinge by
the old, should do them great reverence: and when the old did speak, then
the younger should be sylent.

And he ordained also, that if any old man by casualtye did lose his goods and
came into extreme poverty, that he should be sustained of the common wealth:
and that in such sustentacion they should have respect, not only to succor
him for to sustain him, but further to give him to live competently. Plutarche
in his Apothegmes declares, that Cato the Censoure visitinge the corners of
Rome, found an old manne sittinge at his door weepinge, and sheddinge many
tears from his eyes. And Cato the Censoure demanding him why he was so
evil handeled, and wherefore he wept so bitterlye, the good old manne
answered him.

O Cato, the Gods being the only comfortours, comfort thee in all thy
tribulations, since thou art ready to comfort me at this woeful hour.

As well as thou know that the consolations of the heart are more
necessary, then the phisike of the body: the which being applied sometimes
does heal, and an other time they do harm. Behold my scabbed hands, my
swollen legs, my mouth without teethe, my peeled face, my white beard and my
balde head: for thou being (as thou art,) descreete, should be excused to
ask me why I weep.

For men of my age, though they weep not for the little they feel: yet
they ought to weep for the ouermuche they live. The manne which is laden with
years, tormented with diseases, pursued with enemies, forgotten of his
friends, visited with mishappes, and with evil will and poverty: I know not
why he demands long life? For there can be no sharper reuengeme^t of vices,
which we commit: then to give us long life.

Though now I am aged, I was young, and if any young manne should do me any
iniurye, truly I would not desire the gods to take his life, but that they
would rather prolonge his life. For it is a great pity, to hear the man
(which has lived long) account the troubles which he has endured.

Know thou Cato, if thou do not know it, that I have lived.77. years. And
in this time, I have buried my father, my graundefather, twoe Auntes and.5.
uncles. After that I had buried.9. systers, and.11. Brethren. I have buried
afterward, twoe lawful wyfes, and five bond women, which I have had as
my lemmans.

I have buried also.14. children, and.7. married daughters: and therewith not
contented, I have buried.37. Nephues, and.15. Nieces, and that which greaueth
me most of all is, that I have buried two friends of mine, one wc remained in
Capua, and the other wc was residente here at Rome. The death of whom has
grieved me more, then all those of my aliaunce and parentage. For in the world
there is no like loss to that, where a man loses him whom entierlye he loves
and of whom also he is derelye beloved. The fatal destenies ought to content
them selves, to have annoyed mye house with so many mysfortunes. But after all
this, and above all this, theye have left me a wicked nephewe, which shall
be mine heir, and theye have left unto me that all mye life I shall lament.
O Cato, for that thou owe to the common wealth I do desire thee, and by the
immortal gods I do conjure thee, that since thou art a virtuous Roman,
and censor of the people, that thou provide for one of these two things, that
is to wete, that this mye Nephewe do serve me, or else ordeine that I dye
forthewith. For it is a great crueltye that those do pursue me which are
alive, since it is now 40. years that I ceased not to bewail the dead. Cato
being well enfourmed of that the old man had told him, and since he found
all that true which he spoke, he called unto his presence the young Nephew, and
said unto him these words. If thou were such a child as thou ought to
be, thou should excuse me of pain, and thy self of travail. But since
it is not so, I pray thee take that patiently that I shall command thee:
and be thou assured, that I will not command thee any thing that shall be
against justice. For the vicious yonglinges (as thou art) ought to be more
ashamed of the youthefullnes theye have committed: then for the punishment
which is geeuen unto them.

First I command thou be whipte, because thou art dysobedyent, and
troublesome to thy graundefather,

Secondlye I command that thou be banished the limittes of Rome, because
thou art a vicious young man.

Thyrdly, I command that of all the goods thou have enherited, thou shall be
disenherited: because thou do not obey thy graundfather.

And the cause why I give such severe sentence is, to the end that from
he^sforthe the young shall not disobey the aged, and also that those which have
enheryted great treasours, shall not think that men shall permit them to be
more vicious, then others. Phalaris the tiraunt writing to a friend of his which
was very aged, said these words: the which rather seemed spoken of a
Philosopher then of a tirant. I have meruailed at thee and am offended with the
my friend Vetto, to know as I do, that in years thou art very aged, and in
works very young: and also it greeueth me that thou have lost the credit of
knoweledge in the schools. It greeueth me more, that through thee ye
privilege shoold be lost, which the old men have accustomed to have in Greece:
that is to wete, yt all the thieves, all the perjured, and all the murderers
were more sure, when by white hears theye seemed to be old: when they reteyred
to the aulters of the temples. O what goodness, O what wisdom. what
valyauntnes, and what innocencye ought the aged men to have in the ancient
time: since in Rome theye honored them as gods, and in Greece theye
priuileged those white hears as the temples. Pliny in an epistle he wrote to
Fabatus says, that Pirrus king of the Epirotes, demanded a philosopher which
was the best city of the world? who answered. The best city of the world,
is Molerda, a place of three hundredth fyers in Achaia: because all the walls
are of black stones, and all those which govern it have hoarye heads.

And further he said. Woe be unto thee Rome, Woe be unto thee Carthage, woe
be unto thee Numancia, woe be unto thee Egypt, and woe be unto thee Athens
five cytyes which count them selves for the best of the world, whereof I am
of a contrary oppynion.

For theye auaunte them selves to have white walls, and are not ashamed to
have young Senatoures. This philosopher said very well, and I think noe
manne will say less then I have said. Of this word Senex, is deryued the
name of a Senatoure, for so were the gouernoures of Rome named, because the
first King (that was Romulus) chose a hundred aged men to govern the common
wealth, and commanded, that all the other Romayne youth shoold employe them
selves to the wars.

Since we have spoken of the honor which in the old time was geeuen to the
ancient men, it is reason we know now, from what year they counted men
aged, to the end they shoolde be honored as aged men. For the makers of
laws, when they had established the honors which ought to be done to the
aged: did as well ordeyne, from what day and year, theye shoolde beeginne.
Diverse ancient Philosophers did put syx ages, from the time of the birth of
man, till the hour of death.

That is to wete, chyldehood, which lasts till seven years. Infancy, which
endures until seuentene years. Youth, wc continues till thirty years.
Man's estate, which remains till fyftye and five years. Age which endures
till three score and eyghtene years. Crooked age which remains till death.
And so after man had passed five and fyftye years, they called him aged. Aulus
Gelius in his tenth book, in the xxvii. Chapter says, that Tullius
Hostillius (who was king of the Romans) determined to count all the old and
young, which were amongst the people: and also to know which shoold be
called infaunts, which young, and which old. And there was noe little dyfference
amongst the Romayne Philosophers, and in the end it was decreed by the king,
and the Senate, that men till seventeen years shoold be called infaunts, and
till syx and forty shoold be called young, and from syx and forty vpwardes they
shoold be called old.

If we will observe the law of the Romans, we know from what time we are
bound to call and honor the aged men. But addyng hereunto it is reason that the
old men know, to what prowesses and virtues they are bound, to the end that
with reason, and not with faynyng, they be served. For speaking the truth, if
we compare duty to duty, they old men are more bound to virtue: then the young
to service. We can not denay, but that all states of natyons (great and small,
young and old) are bound to be virtuous: but in this case the one is more to
be blamed, then the other.

For oftentimes if the young do offend, it is for that he wants experience:
but if the old man offend, it is for the abundaunce of malice. Seneca in an
Epistle said these words. I let thee weete my friend Lucillus, that I am
very much offended, and I do complain, not of any friend or foe: but of my
self, and ^^^^e other. And the reason why I thynk thus, is that I see my self
old in years, and young in vices: so that little is that wherein I have served
ye gods, and much less is that I have profyted me^. And Seneca says further,
he which praysethe him self most to be aged, and that would be honored for
being aged: ought to be temperate in eatinge, honest in apparayle, sober in
drinking, soft in words, wise in counsel, and to conclude, he ought to
be very pacient in aduersytye, and far from vices which attempt him. Worthy
of praise is the great Seneca, for these words: but more worthy shall ye
old men be, if they will conform their works according to those words.

For if we see them abandon vices, and give them selves to virtues: we will
both serve them, and honor them.

That princes when they are aged, should be temperate in eating, sober in
drinking, modest in apparel, and above all, true in communicacion. Cap. xviii.
IT is consonaunt to the counsel of Seneca, that the aged should be
temperate in eating, which they ought to do, not only for the reputacion of
their persons: but also for the preseruacion of their lives. For the old men
which are drunk, and amarous, are persecuted with their own diseases, and are
defamed by the tongues of other. That which the ancient men should eat (I
mean those, which are noble, and virtuous) ought to be very clean, and well
dressed, and above all, that theye take it in ceason and time: for otherwise,
to much eatinge of diverse things, causes the young to be sick, and
enforces the old to dye. Young men though they eat dishonestly, very hastily,
and eat speakinge, we can do no less but dissemble with them: but the old
me^ which eat much, and hastelye, of necessity we ought to reprove them. For
men of honor ought to eat at the table with a great gravity: as if they were
in any counsel to determine causes. It is not my intention to persuade the
feeble old men not to eat, but to admonish them to eat no more then is
necessary. We do not prohibit them to eat delicate things, but to beware
of superfluous things. We do not counsale them to leave eatinge having need:
but to withdraw them selves from curiosyties. For though it be lawefull for
aged men to eat sufficient, it is not honest for them to eat to overcome
their stomakes. It is a shame to write it, but more shame ought they to have
which do it, which is, that the goods which theye have won and inheryted
by their predecessors, theye have eaten, and dronken: so that theye have
neither bought house, vine, nor yet married any daughter, but they are naked,
and their poor children go to the Tauernes and Innes: and the miserable
fathers to the Hospitalles, and churches. When any man comes to pouertye,
for that his house is burned, or his ship drowned, or that theye have taken
all from him by law, or that he has spent it in pleadyng against his enemy,
or any other inconvenience is come unto him: me thinks we all are bound
to succoure him, and the heart has compassion to beeholde him: but he that
spends it in apparaile not requysyte, to seek delitious wynes, and to eat
delicate meats, to such one I would say, that the pouertye he suffers is
not sufficient for his deserts. For of all troubles there is none so great,
as to see a man suffer the evil, whereof he himself has been the occasion.
Also according to the counsel of Seneca, the ancients ought to be well
advertised, in that they should not only be temperate in eating, but also they
shoolde be sober in drinking: and this both for the preseruacion of their
health, and also reputacion of their honestye.

For if the old Physicians do not deceive us, human bodies do dry and
corrupt because theye drink superfluously, and eat more then nature
requires. If I should say unto the old men, that theye should drink no
wine: theye might tell me, that it is not the counsel of a Christian. But
presuppose theye ought to drink, and that for noe oppynyon theye should
leave it: yet I admonyshe, exhort, and desire them, that theye drink little,
and that theye drink very temperate.

For the disordynate and immesurate drinking, causes young men to be drunk,
and the old men: both drunk and foolish. O how much authority lost
theye, and what grauytye do honorable and ancient men lose, which in
drynkinge are not sober. Which seems to be true, for as much as the man
beeinge laden with wine, though he were the wysest in ye world he should
be a very fool, that would take counsel of such one in his affairs.
Plutarche in a book which he made of the fortune of the Romans said: that
in the senate of Rome, there was an ancient manne, who made great
exclamacions, that a young man had in such sort dishonored him, that for
the injuries he had spoken, he deserved death.

And when the young manne was called for to answer to that he had said
unto him, he answered. Fathers conscripte, though I seem young unto you, yet
I am not so young, but that I knew the father of this old manne, who was a
virtuous and noble Romayne, and somewhat a kynne to me. And I seeing that his
father had gotten much goods fighting in the wars, and also seeinge this
old manne spending them in eating and drinking: I said unto him one day. I
am very sorye, my lord and uncle, for that I hear of thye honor in the
market place: and am the more sorye for that I see done in thy house, wherein
we saw fyftye men armed before in one hour, and we now see a hundredth knaves
made drunk.

And worse then that, as thye father showed to all those that entered his
house, the ensigns he had won in the wars: so now to those that enter
into thy house, thou show them diverse sorts of wynes. My uncle complained
of me, but in this case I make the plaintiff judge, against me the
defendaunt. And I woolde by the immortal gods, he deserved noe more pain
for his works: then I deserve by my words.

For if he had been wise, he would have accepted the correction which
secretlye I gave him: and had not come openly, to declare his faults in the
Senate. The complaynte of the old manne beeinge heard by the Senate, and the
excuse in like manner of the young man: they gave judgment, that theye shoolde
take all the goods from the old manne, and provide him of a tutour which
should govern him and his house.

And theye commanded the tutoure, that from hence forward he shoolde not
geeue him one cup of wine, since he was noted of drunkenness. Of truth the
sentence which the Senate gave was very just. For the old manne which
geeueth him self to wine, has as much need to have a gouernoure, as an
infaunte, or a fool. Laettius made a book of the feasts of Philosophers, and
declarethe sundry auncyente bankettes, among the which he puts one, where
were assembled many great philosophers. And admit that the meats were mean,
and simple: yet the bidden gestes were sage. And the cause why they did
assemble, was not to eat: but to dispute of some grave doctrines, whereof the
philosophers did somewhat doubt: For in those days, the greater ye Stoikes
and the Peripatetikes were in number: so much the more were the philosophers
divided amongst them selves. When they were so assembled, truly they did not
eat, nor drink out of measure: but some pleasant matter was moved between
the masters and the scollers, between the young and the old, that is to wete,
which of them could declare any secret of phylosophye, or any profound
sentence. O happy were such feasts, and no less happy were they that thither
were bidden.

But I am sorry that those which now bid, and those that are bidden, for a
troth are not as those ancients were. For there are noe feasts now adays of
philosophers, but of gluttons, not to dispute, but to murmour, not to open
doubtful things, but to talk of the vices of others, not to confirm
aunciente amities, but to begin new dissensions, not to learn any
doctrines, but to approve some nouelty. And that which worste of all is, that
the old strive at the table with the young, not on him which has spoken the
most grauest sentence: but of him which has drunk most wine, and has
rinsed most cups. Paulus Diaconus in the historye of the Lumbardes
declarethe, yt four old Lumbardes made a banquet, in the which the one drank
to the others years, and it was in this manner. Theye made defyaunce to drink
two to twoe and after each man had declared how many years old he was: the
one dra^ke as many times as the other was years old, and likewise his
companion pledged him. And one of these four companions had at the least. 58.
years: the second.63 the third.87. the fourth.812. so that a man knowethe
not what they did eat in this banquet, either little or much: but we know that
he that drank least, drank 58. cups of wine.

Of this so evil custom came the Goths to make this law, which of many is
read, and of few understood, where it says. We ordeyn and commau^d on
pain of death, that no old man drink to the others years being at the
table. That was made because they were so much given to wine, that they drank
more often, then they did eat morselles. The Princes and great Lords which
are now old, ought to be very sober in drinking, since theye ought
greatly to be regarded and honored of the young.

For speakinge the truth, and with liberty, when the old man shallbee
overcome with wine, he has more necessity that the young man lead him by the
arm to his house: then that he should take of his cappe unto him or speak
unto him with reverence. Also princes and great lords ought to be very
circumspecte, that whenne theye become aged, theye be not noted for young, in
the apparayle which theye wear: For although that for wearinge a fine and
rich garmente, the prince does not enriche or enpouerishe his common wealth:
yet we cannot deny, but that it does much for the reputacion of his person.
For the vanytie and curiosity of garments, does show great lightness of
mind. According to the varietye of ages, so ought the diversity of apparaile
to be, which semethe to be very clear, in that the young maids are
attyred in one sort, the married women of an other sort, the widows of an
other. And likewise I would say, that the apparayle of children ought to be
of one sort, those of young men of an other, and those of old men of an
other, which ought to be more honester then all.

For men of hoarye heads, ought not to be adourned with precious garments:
but with verteous works. To go cleanlye, to be well apparayled, and to be
well accompanied, we do not forbydde the old, especially those which are
noble, and valiant men: but to go to fine, to go with great traynes, and to
go very curious, we do not allow. Let the old men pardon me, for it is
not the office but of young fools: For the one shows honestye, and the other
lightness. It is a confusion to tell it, but it is greater shame to do it, that
is to weete, that many old men of our time take noe small felicitye, to put
caules on their heads, every manne to wear jewels on their necks, to lay
their cappes with agglettes of gold, to seek out diverse inuencions of
metal to load their fingers with rich ringes, to go perfumed with
odiferous favors, to wear new fashioned apparayle, and fynallye I say,
that though their face be full of wrincles, they can not suffer one wrincle
to be in their gown. All the ancient historiens, accuse Quintus Hottensius
the Romayne, for that every time when he made him self ready, he had a
glass before him: and as much space and time had he to streyghten the
plaites of his gown: as a woman had to trymme the hears of her head. This
Quintus Hortensius being Consul, going by chance one day through Rome, in a
narrow streat met with the other Consul, where through the streightnes of
the passage the plaightes of his gown wear undone: upon which occasion he
complained to the senate of the other Consul, that he had done him a great
iniurye, saying that he deserved to lose his life. The authoure of all this is
Macrobius: in the third book of the Saturnales. I can not tell if I be
deceived, but we may say, that all the curiositye that old men have to go
fine, well appareled, and clean, is for no other thing but to shake of age,
and to pretend right to youth. What a grief is it to see diverse ancient
men, the which as ripe figs do fall: and on the other side it is a wonder to
see how in their age they make them selves young. In this case I say, would
to god we might see them hate vices, and not to complain of the years which
theye have. I pray and exhort princes and great lords, whom our sovereign
lord has permitted to come to age, that theye do not despise to be aged.
For speaking the truth, the man which has envy to seem old, does delight
to live in the lightness of youth. Also man of honor ought to be very
circumspecte, for so much as after theye are beecome aged, theye be not
suspected of their friends, but that both unto their friends and foes, they be
counted faithful. For a lie in a young man's mouth, is but a lie: but in the
mouth of an old manne: it is a heinous blasphemye. Princes and great lords
after they are become aged, of one sort they ought to use them selves to
give, and of the other to speak. For good princes ought to sell words by
weighte, and geeue rewards without measure. The ancient oftentimes
complain, saying, that the young will be not conuersaunt with them: and
truly if there be any fault therein, it is of them selves. And the reason is,
that if sometimes theye do assemble togethers to pass away the time, if the
old man set a talkinge he never makes an end. So that a discrete man had
rather go.xii. miles on foot: then to hear an old man talk three hours. If
with such efficacy we persuade old men, that they be honest in their
apparaile: for a truth we will not give them license to be dissolute in their
words, sins there is a great difference to note some man in his apparaile, or
to accuse him to be malicious or a bablet. For to wear rich apparayle,
iniuryeth few: but injurious words hurt many. Macrobius in the first book
of the dreams of Scipio, declares of a philosopher named Crito, who lived a
hundredth and five years: and till fyltye years he was far out of course:
Butte after he came to be aged, he was so well measured in his eating and
drinking, and so ware in his speech, that they never saw him do any thing
worthy reprehension: nor heard him speak word, but was worthy of notynge. On
this co^dicio^ we would give license to many, ye till fifty years they should
be yo^g: so that from thence forth they would be clothed as old men, speak as
old me^ and they should esteem them selves to be old. But I am sorye that all the spring time does pass in flower, and afterward they fall into the grave
as rotten, before they find any time to pull them out. The old do complain
yt the young do not take their advise: and their excuse herein is, that in
their words theye are to long. For if a man do demand an old man his
opynion in a case, immediatelye he will begin to say, that in the life of
such, and such kings and lords of good memory, this was done, and this was
provided. So that when a young man ask them counsel, how he shall behave
him self with the lyuinge: the old man begins to declare unto him, the
life of those which be dead.

The reason why the old men desire to speak so long is that since for
their age they can not see, nor go, nor eat, nor sleep, they would that al
yt time their members wear occupied to do their duties, all that time their
tongue should be occupied to declare of their times past. All this being
spoken, what more is to say I know not, but that we should content our
selves, that the old men should have their flesh as much punished: as they
have their tongue with talk martired. Though it be very vile for a young man to
speak, and slander to a young manne not to say the truth: yet this vice is
much more to be abhorred in old princes, and other noble and worshipful me^,
which ought not only to think it their duty to speak truth, but also to
punish the enemies thereof. For otherwise the noble and valiant knights
should not lose a little of their authority, if a man saw on their
heads but white hears, and in their mouths found nothing but lies.

Of a letter of the Emperor, Marcus Aurelius, to Claudius and Claudinus,
reprouinge them being old men, for that they lived youthefullye. Cap. xix.
Mark Emperor, borne in mount Celio, desires to you my neighbors,
Claude and Claudine, health of your persons, and amendment of your lives.
I beeinge as I am at the conquest of Asia, and you remaining always in the
pleasures of Rome, we understand your news very late, and I think our
letters arrive there as late. Notwithsta^dynge to all those which go thither,
I geeue aunsweres for you others: and of al those which come hither, I demand
of your health. And do not demand of others, how well, and how much I
love you, but of your own proper hearts: and if your heart say that I am a
feyned friend, then I take my self condemned. If perchance your hearts
does tell you that I love you, being true in deed that I hate you, or if I
tell you that I hate you, beeinge true that I love you: of truth I would
pluck such a heart out of my body, and give it to be eaten of the beasts.
For there is noe greater dysceyte, then that which the man does to him self.
If a stranger begile me, I ought to dissemble it: if an enemy deceive me, I
ought to revenge it: if mye fryend misuse me, I ought to complain of him: but
if I do deceive my self: with whom shall I comfort my self? For there is no
patience that can suffer the heart to deceive him self in any thing, which
he has not deeply considered. Peradventure ye will say that I do not
esteame you, and that I have not written any letter unto you of long time. To
this I answer. That you do not attrybute the fault to mye negligence, but
to the great distaunce of Countries that there is from hence to Rome: and also
to the great affairs of Asia, For amongst other discommodities the war
has this also, that it depriueth us of the sweet conversation of our
country. I have always presumed to be youres, and at this present am at no
man's pleasure, more then at yours. And sins you have always known of me,
what you desired to know, I have espied in you others that, which of force I
must speak. For in the end I have not seen any possess so much, to be worth
so much, to know so much, nor in all things to be so mighty, but that one day
he should need his poor friend. The divine Plato said, and also well,
that the manne which louethe with his heart, neither in absence forgets,
neither in presence becomes negligent, neither in prosperity he is proud,
nor yet in adversity abject, neither he serves for profit, nor yet he loves
for gain: and fynallye he defendethe the case of his friend as his own.
Diverse have been the opinions which the ancients held to affirm for what
end friends were taken, and in the end they were fully resolved, that for.4.
causes we ought to chose frindes. The first we ought to have friends, to
treat and be conversant with all: for according to the troubles of this life,
there is no time so pleasauntlye consumed, as in the conversation of an assured
friend. The second is, we ought to have friends to whom we may disclose the
secrets of our hearts for it is much comfort to the woeful heart, to declare
to his fryende his doubts, if he perceive that he does feel them in deed. The
third, we ought to search and chose friends, to thend they help us in our
adversities. For little profytethe it my heart that with tears the friends do
hear all that I bewail, unless afterward in deed he will take pains to
refourme the same.

The fourth, we ought to seek and preserve frindes to thend they be protectors
of our goods, and likewise judges of our euilles: for the good frinde is no
less bound to withdraw us from the vices, whereby we are sclaundered: then to
deliver us from our enemies, by whom we may be slain. The end why I told
you all this was, if that in this letter you chance to light of any sharp
word, that you take it patiently, considering that the love which I bear
you, does move me to speak, and the faith which I owe unto you, does not
suffer me that I should keep it close. For many things ought to be borne
among friends, though theye tell them in earnest: which ought not to be
suffered of others, though theye speak it in gest. I come therefore to show
the matter, and I beseech the immortal gods that there be noe more then
that which was told me, and that it be less then I suspecte. Gaius Furius
your kinsman and my especial friend, as he went to the realm of Palestyne,
and Jerusalem, came to see me in Antioche, and has told me news of Italy
and Rome, and among others, one above all the residewe I have committed to
memory, at the which I coolde not refrain laughinge, and less to be
troubled after I had thought of it. O how many things do we talk in
gest, the which after we have well considered, geeue occasion to be sorye.
The emperor Adrian mye good lord, had a Iester whose name was Belphus young,
comelye, and stout, allbeeit he was very malicious as such are accustomed
to be: and whiles the imbassadours of German supped with the Emperor in
great joy, the same Belphus beeganne to jest of every one that was present,
according to his accustomed manner with a certain malicious grace. And Adrian
perceiving that some changed color, others murmured, and others wear angrye,
he said unto this Iester, frinde Belphus if thou love me and mye service,
use not these spytefull iestes at our supper, which being considered on, may
turn us to evil rest in our beds. Gaius Furius has told me so many
slanders chanced in Italy, such novelties done in Rome, such alteracion of
our Senate, such contention and strife between our neighbors, such lightness
of you two, that I was astonished to here it, and ashamed to writ it. And it is
nothing to tell after what sort he told the^ unto me, unless you had seen how
earnestly he spoke them, imagining yt as he told the^ without taking any
pain, so did I receive them (as he thought) with out any grief: though in
deed every word that he spoke, seemed a sharp percinge arrowe unto my
heart. For often times some tells us things, as of small importance, the
which do prick our hearts to the quick By the oppynion of all, I understand
that you are very old, and yet in your own fantasies, you seame very young.
And further theye say, that you apparel your selves a new now, as though
presentlye you came into the world: and moreover they say that you are
offended with nothing so much, as when theye call you old, and that in
theaters where comedies are played, and in the fields where the brute beasts
do run, you are not the hindmost, and that there is no sport nor lightness
invented in Rome, but first is registered in your house. And finally they say
that you give your selves so to pleasures, as though you never thought to
receive displeasures. O Claude and Claudine, by the god Jupiter I swear unto
you, that I am a shamed of your unshamefastness, and am greatly abashed of your
manners, and above all, I am excedingly grieved for your great offense. For at
that time that you ought to lift up your hands, you are returned again into
the filth of the world Many things men commyt, which though they seem grave:
yet by moderacion of the person that commits them, they are made light, but
speaking according to the truth, I find one reason, wherebye I might excuse
your lightness, but to the contrary I see ten wherebye I may condemn
your follyes. Solon the philosopher in his laws said to the Athenians, that
if the young offended, he should be gentlye admonished, and grieuouslye
punished, because he was strong: and if the old did err, he should be
lightlye punished, and sharpelye admonished, sith he was weak, and feeble. To
this Licurgus in his laws to the Lacedaemonians said contrary, that if the
young did offend, he should be lightly punished, and grievously admonished,
sins through ignorance he did err: and the old manne which did evil,
should be lightly admonished, and sharply punished, sins through malice he
did offend. These two philosophers being (as theye have been) of such
authority in the world that is paste, and consideringe that their laws and
sentences were of such weighte: it should be much rashenesse in not
admittinge the one of them. Now not receyuyng the one, nor reprouynge the
other, me thinks that there is great excuse to the young for their
ignorance, and great condempnacion oath aged for their experience. Once
again I return to say that you pardone me, mye friends, and you ought not
greatly to weye it, though I am somewhat sharp in condempnation, since you
others are so dissolute in your lives: for of your black life, mye pen
does take ynke. I remember well that I have hard of thee Claude, that thou
haste been lusty and courageous in thye youth: so that thye strength of all
was enuyed, and the beauty of Claudine of all men was desired. I will not write
unto you in this letter, mye frindes and neigheboures, neither reduce to
memory, how thou Claude haste employed thy forces in the service of the
common wealth: and thou Claudine have wo^ne much honor of thy beautye: for
sundry times it chanced, that men of many goodlye gifts, are noted of
grievous offenses. Those which striued with thee are all dead, those whom thou
desiredst are dead, those which served thee Claudine are dead, those which
before thee Claudine sighed, are dead: those which for thee died, are now
dead: and sins all those are dead with their lightness, do not you others
think to dye, and your follyes also? I demand now of thy youth one
thing, and of thy beauty another thing, what do you receive of these
pastimes, of these good interteinmentes, of these abundances, of these great
contentacions, of the pleasures of the world, of the vanytye that is paste,
and what hope you of all these to carye into the narrow grave? O simple,
simple, and ignorant persons, how our life consumes, and we perceive not
how we live therein. For it is no felicity to enjoy a short, or long life:
but to know to employe the same well, or evil. O children of the earth, and
disciples of vanytie, now you know that time flyethe without moving his
wings, the life goes without liftinge up his feet, the world dispatcheth
us not tellinge us the cause, men beegile us not mouinge their lips, our
flesh consumes to us unawares, ye heart dies having no remedy, and finally our
glory decays as if it had never been, and death oppresses us without
knockinge at the door. Though a man be never so simple, or so very a fool:
yet he can not denaye, but it is impossible to make a fire in the botome of the
sea, to make a way in the air, of the thin blood to make roughe sinews,
and of the soft veins to make hard bones. I mean that it is impossible,
that the grene flower of youth, be not one day withered by age.

The Emperor followethe his letter and persuades Claudins and Claudinus
being now old, to give no more credit to the world, nor to any of his
deceytful flatteries. Cap. xx.
THat which I have spoken now, tends more to aduertyse the young, then to
teach the old. For you others have now passed the pryme time of chyldehoode,
the summer of youth, and the harvest of adolescency, and are in the winter of
age, where it seems an uncomely thing, that those youerhoarye hears, shoolde
be accompanied with such vain follyes. Sythens young men know not that they
have to end their youth, it is no maruail that they follow the world: but the
old men which see them selves fall into this gyle, why will they run after
vices again? O world, for that thou art the world, so small is our force, and
so great our debylitie, that thou wylling it, and we not resisting it, thou
do swallow us up in the most perilous goulfe, and in the thorns most sharp
thou do prick us: by the pryuiest ways thou leadest us, and by the most
stony ways thou caryest us. I mean yt thou bring us to the highest favors,
to the end that afterward with a push of thy pike thou myghtest overthrow us.
O world, wherein all is worldly, two and fyfty years have passed since in thee
I was first borne, during which time thou never toldest me one truth: but I
have taken thee with ten thousaund lies. I never demanded the thing but thou
did promise it me, and yet it is nothing at all that ever thou dydst
perform. I never put my trust in thee, but ever thou begildst me. I never
came to thee, but thou dydst undo me, finally never saw I ought in thee
whereby thou deseruest love, but allways hatred. This presupposed, I know not
what is in thee O world, or what we worldlyngs want: for if thou hate us,
we cannot hate the, if thou do us injury, we can dyssemble it, if thou
spurn us with thy feet, we will suffer it, if thou beatest us with a staff, we
will hold our peace, also although thou persecutest us, we will not co^playn,
though thou take ours, we will not demand it of thee, though thou do
beeguyle us, we will not call our selves beeguyled, and the woorst of al is,
that thou do chase us from thy house, yet we will not depart from thence. I
know not what this means, I know not from whence this comes, I wore not who
ought to praise this same, yt we covet to follow ye world, wc will none of us,
and hate ye gods wc love us: often times I make account of my years past,
sometimes also I turn and toss my book to see what I have read, and another
time I desire my friends to geeue me good counsel: and for no other end I do
it, then to attain to that I have spoken, and to know that I will say. I readyng
Rethoryk in Rhodes, Adrian my lord mainteynyng me there, knowing yt I was two
and thyrty years of age, it happened, that in the spryng time I found my self
solytaryly, and solytarines with lyberty smelled the world, and smelling it, I
knew it, and knowing it, I followed it, and followyng it, I attained unto it,
and attaynyng unto it, thereunto I joined my self, and joining my self
therewith, I proved it, and in prouyng it, I tasted it, and in tastyng it me
thought it bitter, and in fyndyng it bitter I hated it, and hatyng it I left
it, and leauyng it is returned, and being returned, I received it again:
finally the world inuytyng me, and I not resistyng it two and fyfty years we
did eat our bread togethers, and in one house we have always remained, will thou know after what sort ye world and I do live in one house togethers, or
better to say, in one heart remain? harken the^, and in one word I will tell it
thee. When I saw the world brave, I served him, when he saw me sad, he
flattered me, when I saw him wealthy, I asked him, when he saw me merye, he
begiled me, when I desired any thing, he help me to atteine to it, and
afterward when the same I best enjoyed, then he took it from me, when he saw
me not pleased, he vysited me, when he saw me, he forgot me, when he saw me
overthrown, he gave me his hand to releue me, when he saw me exalted, he
tripped me again to overthrow me. Finally, when I think that I have somewhat in
the world, I find yt all that I have is a burden. If this which I have spoken
of the world be any thing, more is that a great deal which yet of my self I
will say, which is, that without doubt my follye is greater, then his
malice, since I am begiled so often, and yet allwaies I follow the deceiuer O
world, world, thou have such moodes and fashions in thy procedyng, that thou
leadest us all to perdicion. Of one thing I marvel much, whereof I cannot
be satisfied. Which is, since that we may go upon the bridge, and yet without
any gain we do wade through the water, and where as the shallow is sure, we
seek to run into the golfe, and where the way is dry, we go into the
plashe, where we may eat wholesome meats to norishe the life, we receive
poison to hasten death, we seek to destroy our selves, where as we may be
without danger. Fynallye I say, without profit we commit a fault, though we
see with our eyes the pain to follow. Wise men ought circumspectly to see what
they do, to examine that they speak, to prove that theye take in hand to
beware whose company they use, and above all, to know whom they trust. For our
judgment is so corrupt, that to begile us, one is enough: and to make us not
to be disceiued, ten thosande woolde not suffice. They have so great care of
us, I mean the world to beegile us, and the flesh to flatter us, that the
high way being as it is narrow, the patheway dangerous, and full of
pricks, the journey is long, and the life short: our bodies are never but
laden with vices, and our hearts but full of cares. I have wondered at diverse
things in this world, but that which astonieth me most is, that those yt be
good, we make the^ believe they are evil: and those which are euel, we
persuade others to believe that they are good. So that we shoot at the white
of virtues, and hit the butte of vices. I will confess one thing, the which
being disclosed, I know that infamye will follow me, but paraduenture some
virtuous man will marvel at it, that is, that in those two and fiftye years
of my life, I have proved all the vices of this world, for no other intent,
but for to prove if there be any thing, where in man's malice might be
satisfied. And afterward, all well considered, al examined, and all proved, I
find, that the more I eat, the more I dye for hunger, the more I drink, the
greater thirste I have, the more I rest, the more I am broken, the more I
sleep, the more drousier I am, the more I have, the more I covet, the more I
desire, the more I am tormented, the more I procure, the less I attain.
Finally I never had so great pain through want, but afterward I had more
trouble with excess. It is a great follye to think that as long as a man
lives in this flesh, that he can satisfye the flesh: for at the last cast
she may take from us our life, but we others can not take from her her
disordynate covetousness. If men did speak with the gods, or the gods were
conversant with men, the first thing that I woold ask the^ shoold be, why they
have appointed an end to our woeful days: and will not give us an end of our
wicked desires? O cruel Gods, what is it you do? or what do you suffer us? it
is certain, that we shall not pass one good day of life only, but in tasting
this, and that, life consumes. O intolerable life of man, wherein there are
such malices from ye which we ought to beware, and such perils to fall in, and
also so many things to consider, that then both she and we do end to know our
selves when the hour of death approaches. Let those know that know not, that
the world takes our will, and we others like ignorauntes cannot denay it him,
and afterward having power of our will, does constrain us to that which we
would not: so that many times we would do virtuous works, and for that we are
now put into the worlds hands, we dare not do it. The world uses another
subtiltye with us, that to the end we should not strive with it, it prayseth
the times past, because we should live according to the time present. And the
world says further, that if we others employ our forces in his vices, he
gives us license that we have a good desire of virtue. O would to god in my
days I might see, that the care which the world has to preserve us, the
wordlyngs would take it to withdraw the^ from his vices. I swear that the gods
should then have more servants and the world and the flesh should not have
so many slaves.

The Emperor proceeds in his letter, and proves by good reasons, that sith
the aged persons will be served and honored of the young: they ought to be more
virtuous and honest then the young. Cap. xxi.
I Have spoken all this before rehearsed, for occasion of you Claude, and
Claudine, the which at.3. score and 10. years will not keep out of the prison
of the world: You I say, which have your bodies weak and corrupted, what hope
shale we have of young men which are but.25. years of age? if my memory
deceive me not, when I was there, you had nephews married, and of their
children made sure, and two of the children borne: and since that is true, me
thinks when ye fruit is gathered, the leaf is of no value, and after the
meal is taken from the mylle, evil shall the mil grind.

I mean, that the old man ought to desire, that his days might be shortened in
this world. Do not think my friends, that a man can have his house full of
nephews, and yet say that he is very young? for in lodi^ge ye tree with fruits,
the blossoms immediately fall, or else they become wythered. I have imagined
with my self, what it is that you might do to seem young, and cut of some of
your years: and in the end I know no other reason, but when you married
Alamberta your daughter with Drusus, and your near Sophia the fair, with
Tuscidan, which were so young, that the daughters were scarce, 15. years old,
nor the young me^.20. I suppose because you were ritche of years, and poor of
money, that he gave to every on of them in steed of money for dowrye, 20.
years of yours, hereof a man may gather, that ye money of your nephews have
remained unto you, and you have given unto them of your own years: I
understand my friends, that your desire is to be young, and very young, but I
greatly desire, to see you old, and very old. I do not mean in years, which
in you does surmount: but in discrecion, which in you does want. O Claud and
Claudine, note that which I will say unto you, and bear it always in your
memory. I let you wete, that to maintain youth, to deface age, to live
contented, to be free from trauayles, to lengthen life, and to avoid death:
these things are not in the hands of men which do desire them, but rather
in the hands of those which gives them the which according to their justice,
and not to our covetousness, do give us life by weight, and death without
measure. One thing the old men do, which is cause of slaunderinge many, that
is, that they will speak first in counsels, they wylbe served of the young in
feasts, they will be first placed, in all that they say they will be
believed, in churches they will be higher then the resydue, in distributinge of
offices they will have the most honor, in there opinyons they will not be
gain said, fynallye, they will have the credit of old sage men, and yet they
will lead the life of young dotynge fools. All these premynences and
pryuileges, it is very just that old men should have spent their years in
the service of the common wealth: but with this I do advise and require
them, that the auctority given them with their white hears, be not dyminyshed
by their evil works.

Is it a just thing, that the humble and honest young man do reverence, to
the aged man proud, and dysdaynefull? is it a just thing, that the gentle
and gracious young man do reverence, to the envious, and malycious old man? is
it a just thing, that the virtuous, and pacyent young man do reverence, to the
foolish, and vnpacyente old man? is it a just thing, that the stout and
liberal young man do reverence, to the miserable, and covetous old man? is
it just, that the dylygente and careful young man do reverence, to the
neglygente old man? Is it just that the abstynent and sober young man do
reverence, to the greedye, and gluttonous old man? Is it just, that the
chaste, and contynente young man do reverence, to the lecherous, and dyssolute
old man? Me thinks these things should not be such, that thereby the old
man should be honored: but rather reproved, and punyshed. For old men offend
more, by the euel example they give, then by ye fault which they do commit.
Thou canste not denaye me, my friend Claude, that it is thirtye and three years
sithe we both were at the Theathers to behold a play, when thou came late,
and found no place for thee to sit in, thou sayedst unto me who was set, rise
my son Mark, and since now thou art young, it is but just that thou give
me place which am aged. If it be true, that it is xxxiii. years since thou
askedst place in the theathers as and old man, tell me I pray thee, and also
I conjure thee, with what oyntement have thou anointed thy self, or with what
water have thou washed thy self to become young? O Claude, if thou had
found any medicyne, or dyscouered any herb, where with thou could take
white hears from men's heads and from women the wrincles of their face: I
swear unto thee and also I do assure thee, that thou shooldest be more
vysyted and served in Rome, then the god Apollo is in his Temple at Ephesus.
Thou should well remember Annius priscus the old man, which was our
neighbor, and somewhat a kin to thee, the which when I told him that I
could not be filled with his good words, and to behold his ancient white
hears, he said unto me. O my soon Mark, it appears well yt thou have not been
aged because you talkest as a young man: for if white hears do honor ye person,
they greatly hurt the heart. For at that hour when they se us aged, the
strangers do hate us, and ours do not love us. And he told me more, I let the
wete my son Mark, that many times my wife, and I talking of the years of
another perticularly, when she beholds me, and that I seem unto her so
aged, I say unto her, and swear that I am yet yo^ge, and that the white hears
came unto me by great travails, and the age by sickness. I do remember also,
that this Annius Priscus was senator one year: and because he would not
seem aged, but desired that men should judge him too be young: he shaued his
bearde and his head, which was not accustomed among the senators nor
Censours of Rome. And as one day amongst the other Senators he entered into
the high Capitolle, one said unto him. Tell me man, from whence come thou?
What will thou? and why come thou hither? how durst thou being no senator
enter into the Senate? he answered. I am Annius priscus the aged, how
chau^ceth it that now you have not known me? they replied unto him, if thou
werte Annius Priscus thou would not come thus shaven. For in this sacred
senate can none enter to govern the common wealth: unless his parso^ be
endued with virtues, and his head with white hears, and therefore thou art
banished and deprived of thy office. For the old which live as ye young, ought
to be punished. Thou know well Claude, and Claudine, yt that which I have
spoken, is not the faynyng of Homere, neither a fable of Ouide, but that you
your selves saw it with your eyes, and in his banishment I did help him with
money, and more over he was banished another time for the lightness he did
commit in the night in the city, and I marvel not hereof: for we see by
experyence, that old men which are fleashed in vices, are more obstinate to
correct then the young. O what evil fortune have the old men, which suffered
them selves too wax old in vices: for more dangerous is the fire in an old
house, then in a new, and a great cut of a sword is not so perilous, as a
rotten fistule. Though old men were not honest and virtuous, for the service of
the gods and the common wealth, for the saying of ye people, nor for the
example of the young: yet he ought to be honest, if it wear but for the
reverence of their years. If the pore old man have noe teeth, how shall he
eat? If he have no heat in his stomach, how can he dysgest? If he have no
taste, how can he drink? if he be not strong, how can he be an adulterer? If
he have no feet, how can he go? If he have the palsy, how can he speak?
if he have the gout in his hands how can he play. Finally, such like
wordlye and vicyous men, have employed their forces being young, desirous to
prove al these vices: and when they are old it greueth them extreamelye that
they can not as yet acco^pplishe their desiers.

Amongst all the faults in old men (in my opinion) this is the chefest, that
since they have proved al things, that they shoold still remain in their
obstinat folly. There is no part but they have travailed, no villainy but they
have assayed, no fortune but they have proved, no good but they have
persecuted, no evil but has chanced unto the^, nor there is any vice but they
have attempted. These unhappy men which in this sort have spent all their
youth, have in ye end their combs cut with infirmities, and diseases: yet they
are not so much grieved with the vices (which in them do abound) to hinder them
from virtues, as they are tormented for want of corporal courage, to further
them in their lusts. O if we were gods, or that they would geeue us license to
know the thoughts of the old, as we see with our eyes the deeds of the young I
swear: to ye God Mars, and also to the mother Berecinthe, that without
comparison, we woold punish more the wicked desiers which the aged have to be
wicked: then the light deeds of the young. Tell me Claude, and you Claudine, do
you think though you behave your selves as young, you shall not seem to be old?
know you not that our nature is the corruption of our body, and that our body
hinders our understandings, and that the vnderstandyngs are kept of our
soul, and yt our soul is ye mother of desiers and yt our desiers are ye
scourge of our youth, and that our youth, is ye ensign of our age and age the
spy of death, and that death in the end is the house where life takes his
herber, and from whence youth flies a foot, and from whence age can not escape
a horsback? I woold rejoice that you Claude, and Claudine, woolde tell me what
you find in life that somuche therewith you should be contented: since now you
have passed four score years of life, during the which time either you have
been wicked in the world, or else you have been good. If you have been good, you
ought to think it long until you be with the good gods: if you have been evil,
it is just you dye, to the end you be no worse. For speaking the truth, those
which in.3. score and 10 years have been wicked in woorks, leave small hope of
their ame^dment of life. Adrian my lord, being at Nola in Campania, one brought
unto him a nephew of his from the study, where as the young child had not
profyted a little: for he became a great Gretian and latinest, and more over he
was fair, gracious, wise and honest. And this Emperor Adrian loved his nephew
so much, yt he said unto him these words My nephew, I know not whither I
ought to say unto thee, yt thou art good, or evil: for if thou be evil, life
shall be evil imployd on thee, and if thou be good, thou ought to die
imediatly, and because I am woors the^ all, I live longer then all. These
words which Adrian my lord said, do plainly declare and express, that in
short space ye pale and cruel death does assault the good, and le^gthneth life
a great while to the evil. The opinion of a philosopher was, that the gods are
so profound in their secrets, high in their misteryes, and so just in their
woorks, that to men which least profit the common wealth, they lengthen life
longest: and though he had not said it, we others see it by experience. For the
man which is good, and that bears great zeal and friendship to the common
wealth, either the gods take him from us, or the enemies do sley him, or the
dangers do cast him away, or the the travails do finish him. When great
Pompeius and Julius Caesar became enemies, and from that enmite came to cruel
wars, the cronicles of that time declare, that the kings and people of the
occidental part became in the favor of Julius Caesar, and the mightiest and
most puisaunte of all the oriental parts, came in the aid of great Pompeius,
because these two Princes were loved of few, and served and feared of al.
Amongst the diversity and sundry nations of people, which came out of the
oriental part, into the host of the great Pompeius, one nation came marvelous
cruel and barbarous, which said they dwelled in the other side of the mountayns
Riphees, which go unto India. And these barbarous had a custom, not to live no
longer then fifty years: and therefore when they came to yt age, they made a
greater fire and were burned therein alive, and of their own wills they
sacrificed them selves to the gods. Let no man be astoined at that we have
spoken but rather let them marvel of that we will speak (that is to say) that
the same day that any man had accomplished fifty years, immediately he cast him
self quick in to the fire, and the parents, children, and his friends, made a
great feast. And the feast was, that they did eat the fleash of the dead half
burned, and drank in wine and water the ashes of his bones: so that the stomak
of the children being alive, was the grave of the fathers being dead. All
this that I have spoken with my tongue, Pompeius has seen with his eyes for
that some being in ye camp did accomplish fifty years, and because ye case was
strange, he declared it often times in the Senate. Let every man judge in this
case what he will, and condemn the barbarous at his pleasure, yet I will not
cease too say what I think. O golden world, which had such men. O blessed
people, of whom in the world to come shall be a perpetual memory. What contempt
of world? what forgetfulness of him self? what stroke of fortune? what whip for
the flesh? what litell regard of life? O what bridell for the veruous? O what
confusion for those that love life? O how great example have they left us, not
to fear death? Since those heeare have wyllingly despised their own lives,
it is not to be thought that they died to take the goods of others, neither to
think that our life shoold never have end, nor our covetousness in like manner. O
glorious people, and.10. thousand sold happy, that the proper sensuallyty
being forsaken, has overcome the natural appetyte to desire to live, not
beeleeuing in that they saw, and that having faith in that they never saw, they
striued with the fatal destines. By the way they assalted fortune they,
changed life for death, they offered the body to death, and above al have won
honor with the gods, not for that they should hasten death, but because they
should take away that wc is superfluus of life. Archagent a surgio^ of Rome,
and Anthonius Musus, a physician of the Emperor Augustus, and Esculapius father
of the physic, shoold get litel money in that country. He that the^ shoold
have sent to ye barbarous to have done as the Romans at that time did, that
is to wete, to take siroppes in the mornings, pylls at night, to drynk mylk in
the morning, to noynt them selves with gromelsede, to be let blood to day, and
purged to morrow, to eat of one thing, and to abstein from many: a man ought to
think, that he which willingly seeks death will not give money to lengthen
life.

The Emperor concludes his letter, and shows what perilles those old men
live in which dissolutely like young children pass their days, and geeueth unto
them wholesome counsel for the remedy thereof. Cap. xxii.
But returning now to thee Claude, and to thee Claudine me thinks, that
these barbarous being fifty years of age, and you others having above three
score and 10. it should be just, that since you were elder in years you were
equal in virtue, and though (as they) you will not accept death patiently: yet
at the least you ought to amend your euel lives willingly. I do remember, that
it is many years since that Fabritius the young, son of Fabritius the old,
had ordained to have deceived me, of the which if you had not told me, great
inconveniences had happened: and since that you did me so great a benefit, I
woold now requite you the same with an other like. For amongst friends there is
no equal benifit, then to deceive the deceyuer. I let you know, if you do not
know it, that you are poor aged folks, your eyes are soonk into your heads,
the nostrels are shutt, the hears are white, the hearing is lost, the tongue
faltreth, the teeth fall, the face is wrincled, the feet swollen, and the stomak
cold. Finally I say, that if the grave could speak, as unto his subjects, by
justice he might command you to inhabit his house. It is great pity of the
young men, and of their youthful ignorante, for then unto such their eyes are
not opened, to know the mishaps of this miserable life, when cruel death does
end their days, and adiorneth the^ to the grave. Plato in his book of the
common wealth said, that in vain we geeue good counsels, to fond and light
yongmen. For youth is without experience of that it knows, suspicious of that
it hears, incredible of that is told him, despising the counsayl of an other,
and very poor of his own. For So Much as this is true that I tell you Claude,
and Claudine, that without comparison, the ignorance which the young have of the
good is not so much: but the obstinacion which the old has in the euel is
more. For the mortal gods many times do dissemble with a.1000. offeces
committed by ignorance, but they never forgeeue the offense perpetrated by
malice. O Claude, and Claudine, I do not meruel that you do forget the gods
(as you do) which created you, and your fathers, which beegot you and your
parents, which have loved you and your friends, which have honored you: but that
which most I marvel at is, that you forget your selves. For you never consider
what you ought to be, until such time as you be there where you would not
be, and yt without power to return back again. Awake, awake, since you are
drowned in your dreams, open your eyes since you sleep so much, accustom your
selves to trauells, since you are vacabonds, learn that which beehoueth you
since now you are so old. I mean, that in time convenient you agree with
death, before he make execution of life.52. yers have I known the things of
the world, and yet I never saw a woman so aged through years, nor old man with
members so feeble, that for want of strength could not (if they list) do good:
nor yet for the same occasion shoold leave to be euel if they list to be
euel. It is a marvelous thing to see, and worthy to note that all the corporal
members of man waxes old, but the inward heart, and the outward tongue: for the
heart is always green to invent evils, and ye tongue is alwais able to tell lies.
My opinion should be that the pleasant somer being past, you shoold prepare
your selves for the intemperate winter which is at hand. And if you have but few
days to co^tinew, you shoold make have to take up your lodging. I mean that
since you have passed the days of your life with travel, you shoold prepare your
selves against the night of death, to be in the haven of rest. Let mockries
pass as mockries, and accept truth as truth, that is to weete, that it were a
very just thing, and also for your honor necessary, that al those which in
times past have seen you yo^g and foolish, shoold now in your age, se you
grave and sage. For there is nothing that so much forgets the lightness and
folly of the youth, as does gravity and constancy in age. When the knight
ronneth his carire, they blame him not for that the horse mayn is not finely
commed: but at the end of his race he shoold see his horse amended and looked
to* what greater confusion can be to any parson, or greater sclau^der to our
mother Rome, then to see that which now adays therein we see yt is to weete,
the old which can scarcely creap through the streats, to beehold the plays and
games as young men, which search naught else but pomp and vanity. It greeueth me
to speak it, but I am much more ashamed to see, yt ye old Romans do daily
cause the white hears to be plucked out of their heads because they would not
seem old, to make their berd small to seem young, wearing their hosen very
close, their sherts open before, ye gown of the senator imbrodred, the Romayn
sign richly enameled, the collar of gold at the neck, as those of Dace.
Fringes in their gowns, as those of Sapphire, hoopes in their hatts, as the
Greeks, and perles on their fingers, as those of India. What will thou I tell
thee more, then I have told thee, but that they wear their gowns long and
large, as those of Tharenthe, and they wear them of the color as men of war,
and every week they have change as players, and the woorst of all is, that
they show them selves as doting in love now in their age, as others have done
hertofore in their youth. That old men are ouercom by young desires, I do not
meruel, for that brutish lust is as natural, as the daily food: but the old
men (being old men) should be so dissolute, heerewith men justly ought to be
offended. For the old men covetous, and of flesh vicious, both offend the gods,
and sclaunder the common wealth. O how many I have known in Rome, who in their
youth have been highly praised and: esteamed and afterward through geeuing
the^ self to very much lightness in their age, have been of all abhorred. And
the woorst of al is, that they have lost al their credit, their parents, their
favor, and their poor innocent children their profit. For many times the gods
permit, that the fathers committing thoffence, the pain shoold fall upon their
own children. The renowned Gaguino Cato, who descended from the high lignage
of the sage Catoes, was five years Flamen priest, and administrator to the
vestal virgins, three years praetor, two years Censor, one year dictator, and
five times Co^sull, being.75. years old, he gave him self to follow, serve, and
to desire Rosana, the daughter of Gneus Cursius, a lady of troth very young and
fair, and of many desired, and much made of: time afterward passing away, and
god Cupide doing his office, the love was so kindled inwardly in the heart of
this old man, that he rann almost mad: So yt after he had consumed all his
goods in serving her daily he sighed, and nightely he wept, only for to see
her. It chanced that the said Rosana ^el sick of a burning ague, wherewith she
was so diste^pered, that she could eat no meat but desired greatly to eat
grapes: and since there were none ripe at Rome, Gaguino Cato sent to the
river of Rheyn to fetch some being far and many miles distant from thence.
And when the thing was spread through Rome, and that all the people knew it and
the senate understanding the folly of him: the fathers commanded that Rosana
should be locked up with the vestal virgins, and the old man banished Rome for
ever, to ye end that to the^ it shoold be a punishment, and to others an
example. Truly it grieved me sore to see it, and also I had great payns in
writi^g it. For I saw ye father die in i^famy, and his children live in
poverty, I believe yt al those wc shall hear this example. and al those wc shall
read this writing, shall find the fact of this amorous old man, both vile and
filthy, and they will allow ye sentence of ye senate which they gave against him
for good and just. I swear that if Gaguino Cato had had as many young men in his
banishment as he left old men lovers that followed his example in Rome, there
shoold not be cast away so many men, neither so many women evil married. It
chances often times, that when the old men (specially being noble, and
valyant) are aduertysed of their servants, are rebuked of their parents, are
prayed of their friends, and accused of their enemies to be dishonest in such a
place they answer, that they are not in love, but in jest. When I was very
young no less in wisdom, the^ in age, one night in the Capitol I met with a
neighbor of mine, the which was so old, that he might have taken me for his
nephiew, to whom I said these words. Lord Fabricus, are you also in love? he
answered me. You see yt my age suffers me not that I shoold be a lover if
I shoold be, it is but in sport.

Truly I marueiled to meet him at that hour, and I was ashamed to have such an
answer. In old men of great age, and gravity, such request can not be called
love, but grief, not pastime, but loss of time, not mockry, but villainy: for
of love in jest, ensues infamy in deed. I ask you Claude, and Claudine, what
a thing is it to see an old man to be in love? Truly it is no other, but as a
garland before the tauern doors, where al men think yt there is wine, and they
sell naught else but vinegar. They are eggs white without, and rotten within,
they are golden pills, the taste whereof are very bitter, and as e^pty boxes in
shops, which have new writings on them, or as a new gate, and with in the house
is full of filth and cobwebs: finally the old lover is a knight of Exchetes,
which helps to lose money, and can deliver no man from peril. Let this word
be noted, and always in your memory committed, that the old man which is
vicious, is but as a leeke which has the head white, and the tail green. Me
thinks that you ought to break the wings of time, since that you have
feathers to fly withal. Deceive not your self nor your friends and neighbors,
saying that there is time for all. For the amendment is in your hands, but time
is in the hands of god to dispose. Let us come now to remedy this great damage,
do what you can by the day of youth, and deferr it not until the night of age:
for ill cutteth the knife, when the edge thereof is dulled, and ill can he know
the bones which is accustomed to eat the flesh. I tell you, and advertise you
that when the old and rotten houses beeginneth to fall, under set not them with
rotten wood, but with hard timber. I mean, with the upright thoughts of
accounts, which we ought to give to the gods of our life, and to me^ of our
renoume. Forth I say, that if the vine be gathered of our virtues, we ought
to graffe again the amendment: and if ye shreds of our gatherings be dry and
withered, through our peruers woorks, we ought to set them again with new
mould and good desires. The gods are so gentle to serve, and so good to
content, that if for all the services we ow them, and for the gifts which they
geeue us, we can not pay them in good woorks: they demand no more in payment
but good wills. Finally I say, that if thou Claude, and Claudine, have offered
the meal of youth to the world, offer now the blood of age to the gods. I have
written longer then I had thought to do. Salute all my neighbors specially
Drusio the patrician, and noble Romayne widow. I remember that Gobrine your
niece did me a pleasure, the day of the feast of the mother Berecinthia,
wherefore I se^d 2. thou sand Sesterces, one thousand to help to mary her: and
the other thousand, to help to reliue your poverty. My wife Faustine is sick,
and I send you another.1000. Sesterces to geeue to the vestal virgins, to pray
to the gods for her. My wife sends to thee Claudine a cofer, by the immortal
gods I swear unto thee, I can not tell what is in it, I beeseech the godds,
since you are aged, to give you a good death, and to me and Faustine, they
suffer us to lead a good life. Marcus of mount Celio with his own hand writes
this.

Princes ought to take heed that they be not noted of avarice, for that the
coueious man is both of god and man hated. Cap. xxiii
THe great Alexander king of Macedony, and Darius the unfortunate king of the
Persyes, were not only contrary in wars and conquests, which they made but
also in the conditions and inclinations which they had. For Alexander naturally
loved to geeue and spend: and Darius to the contrary, to heap, lock, and
keep. When ye fame of Alexander was spread abroad through out all the world, to
be a prince of honor, and not covetous, his own loved him entierly, and
strangers desired to serve him faithfully, The miserable king Darius, as he
was noted of great avarice and of small liberality, so his did disobey him, and
strangers hated him. Whereof may be gathered that princes and great lords by
geeuing, do make them selves rich: and in keeping, they make them selves
poor. Plutarche in his apothegmes declares, yt after king Darius was, dead
and Alexander had triumphed over all the oriental parts, a man of Thebes being
in the market place of Athenes setting forth the fortune of Alexander, for the
sundry countries which he had conquered: and describing the euel fortune of
Darius, for the great number of men which he had lost, a philosopher with a
loud voice said. O man of Thebes thou art greatly deceived, to think that one
prince loses many seignories: and that the other Prince wins many realms.
For Alexander the great wanne naught but stones, and couerings of cities: for
with his liberality he had alredie gotten the good wills of the cite sins, And
to the contrary, the unfortunate Darius did not lose but stones, and the
couertures of cities, for with his covetousness and avarice he had now lost all the hearts of those of Asia. And farther this philosopher said unto him, that
princes which will enlarge their estates, and amplify their realms in their
conquests, ought first to win ye hearts, and to be noble, and liberal: and
afterward to send their armies to conquer the forts, and walls, for otherwise
litel avails it to win ye stones if the hearts do rebel. Whereby a man may
gather, that that which Alexander wan, he wan by liberalitye and stoutnes: and
that which king Darius lost, he lost for beeinge miserable, and covetous. And
let us not meruail hereat, for the princes and great lords wc are overcome
with avarice, I doubt whither they ever shall see them selves co^querors of
many realms. The vice of avarice is so detestable, so euel, so odious, and so
perilous, yt if a man shoold e^ploy hi^ self to write al ye disco^modites
theru^to belongi^g, my pen should do naught else, then to presume to dry up
all the water in ye sea: For the stomach where avarice enters, causes a man
to serve vices, and worship Idolles. If a virtuous man would prepare him
self to think on the great travail, and litell rest that this cursed vice
bears with him, I think that none would be vicious therein. Though the
covetous man had no other travail, but always to go to bed with danger, and
to rise up with care: Me thinks it is a trouble sufficient for such one when
he goes to bed, thinks that he should be killed in his bed, or that sleping
his cofers should be rifled: and from that time he rises, he is always
tormented with fear to lose that which he has won, and careful to augme^t
that litel in to much. The divine Plato in the first book of his commonwealth
said these words, the men be made rich, because they never learned to be
rich: for he which continually, and truly will become rich, first ought to
abhor covetousness, before he begin to occupy him self to lock up goods.
For the man which sets no bond to his desire shall always have little
though he see himself lord of the world. Truly this sentence was worthilye
spoken of such a man. The sentence of ye Stoyckes does satisfy my mind much,
whereof Aristotel in his pollitikes makes mention, where he says, that unto
great affairs, are always required great riches: and there is no extreme
poverty, but where there has been great abundance. Thereof ensues, that
to princes and great lords which have much, they want much, because to men
which have had litel, they can not want but litel. If we admonish wordlings
not to be vicious, they will always have excuses to excuse them selves,
declaring why they have been vicious: the vice of avarice excepted, to whom and
with whom they have no excuse. For if one vain reason be ready to excuse
then, there are.2000. to condemn them. Let us put example in all the
principal vices, and we shall se how this only of avarice, remains
condemned, and not excused. If we reason why a prince or great lord is haulty
and proud, he will answer that he has great occasion. For the natural
disposition of men is, rather to desire to commau^d with travail, then to
serve with rest. If we reprove any man that is furious, and given to anger: he
will answer us, that we marvel not, since we marvel not of the proud:
For the enemy has no more auctority to trouble any man, then the other to take
revenge of him. If we blame him for yt he is fleshly and vicious, he will
answer us, that he can not absteyne from that sin: for if any man can eschew
ye acts he fights continually with unclean thoughts. If we say that any man
is negligent, he will answer us, that he deserves not to be blamed: for the
vileness of our nature is such, that if we do travail it, immediately it is
weary and if we rest it, immediately it rejoices: If we rebuke any man that is
a glutton, he will answer us, that without eatinge and drinkinge we can not
live in the world: for the divine word has not forbidden man to eat with
the mouth, but the unclean thoughts which come from the heart. As of these
few vices we have declared, so may we excuse all the reasidue: but to the vice
of covetousness, none can give a reasonable excuse. For with money put into ye
cofer, the soul cannot profit, nor ye body rejoice. Boethius in his book of
consolation said, yt money is good, not when we have it in possession, but when
we want it, and in very deed ye sentence of Boethius is very profound: for when
man spends money, he attayneth to that he will, but having it with him, it
profits him nothing. We may say of rich and covetous men, that if they
heap and keep, they say it is but for dear and dry years, and to releue
their parents and friends. We may answer them, that they do not heap up to
remedy the poor in such like necessities, but rather to bring the
commonwealth to greter pouertye. For then they sell al things dear, and put
out their money to great usury: so that this covetous man does more harm with
that he does lend them, then the dry year does with that it has taken from
them. The noble and virtuous men ought not to cease to do well, for fear of
dry years: for in the end if one dear year come it makes all dear, and at
such a time, and in such a case, he only may be called happy, which for being
free and liberal in alms, shall rejoice that his table should be costlye. Let
covetous me^ beware, that for keaping of much goods, they give not to the
deuel their souls: for it may be that before the dear year comes to sell
their corn, their bodies shall be laid in the grave. O what good does god to
the noble men, giving them liberal hearts: and what ill luck have covetous men
(having as they have) their hearts so hard laced. For if covetous men did taste
how sweet and necessary a thing it is to give: they could keep little for them
selves. Now since the miserable and covetous men have not the heart to give
to their friends, too depart to their parents, to succor the poor, to lend
to their neighbors, nor to sustain the orphans, it is to be thought yt they
will spend it on them selves. Truly I say no more, for there are men so
miserable, and so hard of that they have, that they think that as evil spent,
which among them selves they spend: as that which one robs from them of
their goods. How will the covetous and miserable wretch give a garme^te to a
naked man, which dare not make him self a cote? How will he give to eat to the
poor famylyar, wc as a poor slave eats the bread of branne, and sellethe
the flower of meal? How shall the pilgrims lodge in his house, who, for pure
miserye dare not enter? and how does he visit the hospital, and reliue the
sick, that often times hasardeth his own health and life, for that he will not
give one penye to the physician? how shall he succor secretly the poor and
neady, which makes his own children go barefoote, and naked? how can he help
to marye the poor maids being orphans, when he suffers his own daughters
to wax old in his house? how will he give of his goods to the poor captives,
which will not pay his own men their wages? how will he give to eat to the
children of poor gentelmen, which always grudgeth at that his own spend?
how should we believe that he will apparel a widow, hwich will not give his own
wife a hoode? how does he daily give alms, which goes not to the church on
the Sunday because he will not offer one penny? how shall the covetous man rejoice
the heart, since for spending of one penny, often times he goes supperles to bed?
And finally I say, that he will never give us of his own proper goods, which
weapeth always for the goods of an other.

The auctor follows his matter, and with great reasons discommendeth the vices
of covetous men. Cap. xxiiii.
ONe of the things wherein the divine providence shows, yt we do not
understand the manner of her government, is to see that she gives understanding
too a man too know the riches, she gives him force too seek them, subtiltye
too gather them, virtue too sustain them, courage too defend them, and also
long life to possess them. And with all this she gives him not license to
enjoy them, but rather suffers him, that as without reason he has made him
self lord of an another man's, of right he should be made sclaue of his
own: thereby a man may know, of how greater excellencye virtuous pouertye
is, then the outrageous covetousness: for so much as to the poor, god does give
contentation of that litell he has, and from the rich man he takes
contentacion of the great deal he possesses. So that to the covetous man we
se troubles increase hourly: and the gain comes unto him but monthly. Let
us compare the rich and covetous man to the pore potter, and we shall se who
shall profit most, either the potter with his pottes that he makes of earth,
or else the covetous with the money which he has in the earth. Though I make no
answer to this, yet answer herein has been alredye made, that the one is
much better at ease with the earth, then the other is with the good. For the
potter gets his living by selling pottes, and the covetous man loses his
soul by keeping riches. I humblye require ye high princes, and also I beseech ye
great lords, and further I admonish the other nobles, and Plebeiens, always
to have this word in memory, I say, and affirm that the more strongly the
man keapeth, and locketh his treasures: the more strongly, and privily is he
kept: for if he put two keys to keape his treasure he puts seven to his
heart not to spend them. Let the noble and valiant men beware, yt they give
not their minds to heap up treasoures: for if once their hearts be kindled with
covetousness, for fear of spendinge a halfpeny, they will daily suffer them
selves to fall into a thousand miseries. The Plebeiens wc are very rich may
say, yt they have not heaped up much treasures, since they can not behold a
hundred, or two hundred duccates. To this I answer that the estates
considered, ten duccates do as much harm to a treasurer, as to others ten
thousand. For the fault consists not in keaping, or hidi^g (much or litel)
riches: but for so much as in keapinge them, we cease to do many good works.
To me it is a strange matter, that nigardlines has greater force to ye
covetous, then conscience has in others. For there are many, which
notwithstanding conscience, do profit with the goods of others: and the
covetous having more misery then conscience, cannot yet profit with their
own. With much care and no small dilygence the covetous men do provide that
the myllers do not rob the meal, that their beasts make no wastes that the
hunters run not through the corn, that their wine perish not, that those
which owe them any thing, do not go and make them selves bank routes, that
wynetts do not eat their corn, and that thieves rob not their goods: but in
the end they watch none so well, as them selves. For all the others (erely, or
late) have always oportunitye to rob from them somewhat: but the covetous
has never the heart to change a duccate. Men ought to take great pity of a
covetous man, who by his own will, and not of necessity, wears his gown al
to torn, his shoes out, his points without aggletes an evil favored girdle,
his cote rent, his hatte old, his hose seame rent, his cappe greasy, and his
sherte lowsy: finally I say, that diverse of these mysers feign that they have a
great sum to pay, and it is for no other thing, but for not wearyng a good
garment. What can the covetous do more, then for keeping a penny in his pursse,
he will go two months and not trim his beard? Since it is true that
these pynchpenies do behave their persons so evil, do ye thynk they have
their houses any thing the better furnished? I say no, but you shall see their
chambers full of cobwebbes, the doors out of the hingels, the windows riuen,
the glasses broken, the planches lose, the couertures of the house without
gutters, the stools broken, the beds woorme eaten, and chimnies ready to fall:
so that to herber a friend or kinsman of theirs, they are constrained to lodge
him in their neighbors house, or else to send to borrow all that they want. And
passing over the garments they wear, and the housen wherein they dwell, let us
see what table they keep^ for of their gardens they eat no fruit, but that
that falls of the tree, of their vines, but rotten grapes, of their sheep,
the sickest, of their corn, ye wettest, of wine that which has taken wind, of
lard that is yelow, of milk, that is turned: and finally I say, the felicity
that glottons have in eating, the self same have they in keeping. O unhappy are
the glottons, and much more are the covetous: for the taste of one consists
only in the throat, and the felicity of the other consists in that he may
lock up in his chest. We have now seen how ye covetous were simple apparayl,
keep a poor table, and dwell in a filthy house: and yet they less regard
those things that touch their honor.

For if they had their ears as open to here, as they have their hearts bent at
each hour to gather, and heap up: they should hear how they are called mysers,
vserers, nygards, pinchepenies, oppressors, cruel, unthankful, and
unfortunate. Finally I say, that in the commonwealth they are so hated, that all
men had rather lay hands upon their bodies to kill them, then tongues on their
renowm to defame them. The covetous man is of all other most unlucky. For if
we fall at strief with any, he shall find no one friend that will come to
visit him in his house: but he shall have a hundred thieves which will rob
him of his goods. For to revenge a covetous enemy, a man need desire naught
else but that he live long: for he is more tormented in his life with his own
covetousness, then he can be otherwise with any penance. If rych men woold
say unto me, that they do not rejoice to have fair houses, since they may
have them, neither of curious aparel, since they may were it, nor of deinty
meats, since they may eat them, and that that which they do, is not to be
covetous, but for that they are good christians: In so just a thing, reason
woold my pen shoold cease: but I am sorry, they so little esteem things
touching their honor, and much less the matters touching their conscience. If
ye auaricious say he keeps goods to do alms, I do not believe it: for
daily we see that if a poor man ask him alms, he answers them immediately,
god help you, for he has neither purse nor penny. The covetous uses this,
that he never geeueth any alms in his house, but fatt meat, and resty baken,
rotten cheese, and hoar bread: so that it seems rather that they make clean
their house, then geeue alms to the poor. If the covetous man woold tell us,
that that which they have, is to discharge some dets of their predecessors
wherewith they are burdened, I say it is a vain excuse: since we see that the
wills of their fathers, of their mothers, and of their graundfathers, be not
as yet performed, neither will they think to perform them, which seems to
be very true. For since the hour that they laid their fathers in the grave,
they never had any one thought of their dead fathers. He which of pure
covetousness and misery, suffers him self to dye for hunger and cold: I think
he has small devotion to geeue alms, and much less to do any man good. If
the covetous man say unto us, that that which he keeps, is for no other
cause but to buyld a sumptuous chapel, and to leave of them some memory, to
this I answer. That if such one does it with his own proper swet, and makes
restitucion of all the evil that he has done, it shall be sanctified, and of
all good men commended: but if the covetous will that many live in great
poverty, only to make a rich tomb, god does not command that, neither does the
church admit it: for sacrifice done to god with the cries and swet of others,
is not acceptable. If the covetous tell us, that though they heap treasures, it
is not but at their death to distribute it to the poor, and to be brought
honestly to the ground: I say that I commend this purpose, so his intent be
accordingly performed: but I am sorry ye couetouse man shoold think hereby to
merit, and that he shoold thus discharge the wickedness of his life, for the
distribution of a little money after his death.

I woold think it more sure, that princes and great lords shoold spend their
goods, to mary poor maidens, being orphans in their life, then to command
money to be dealt after their death. For often times the heirs or their
executors, the body interred, do little perform the will of the testator: and
much less observe the legacyes beequethed, though it be to ye utter undoing
of the poor orphans. O what guerdon and commendacion deserves he that justly
and truly discharges the legacies of the dead, and of the surplus (if any
be) or with their own, relieve the orphans and mary the poor maidens, keeping
them from the vices of this world. Suppose that a covetous man chances to
traffic at Medine in Spain, at Lions in France, at Lisbone in Portingal, at
London in England, at Andwarp in Flaunders, at Millain in Lombardy, at Florence
in Italy, at Palermo in Scicil, at Prage in Boeme, and at Buda in Hungary:
finally with his eyes he has seen all Europe, and by trafique he has
knowledge of all Asia. Admit now that in every place he has gotten goods, and
that which he has gotten, was not with whole conscience, but according to the
companies, so has the offenses been diverse.

In this case, if at the hour of death, when the covetous man deuydeth his
money beetweene the children, he might also deuyd his offenses, so that he
dispossessing him self of the goods, might thereby be free from the offenses,
then it were well. But alas it is not so, for the wicked children live
tryumphing on the earth with the goods: and the miserable father goes weepyng
to hell with his sins.

Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend Cincinatus who
being a Romayn knight became a merchant of Capua, wherein he touches those
gentlemen which take upon them the trade of merchandise against their vocation.
It is divided into.iii. Chapters. Cap. xxv.
MArck the Emperor, with his brother Annius Verus, fellow in the Empire,
wishes to thee Cincinatus of Capua, health to thy person, and grace against
thy evil fortune. From the feast of our mother Berecinthe, I have seen
neither servant of thy house, nor read any letter of thy hand, which thing
makes me suspect greatly, that thy health is in danger, or that thou
mistrustest our friendship: for earnest friendship, requires daily
communication, or visitation: I pray thee be not so careless from henceforth,
and do not forget us in such wise, I mean, that thou will come and see us, or
at the least that thou will write unto us often: for ye letters of faithful
friends, though utterly they do not take from us the desire of the presence:
yet at the least they make us hope for a meeting. I know that thou may answer
me, that in the common wealth of Capua thou art so busyed, that it is
impossible thou shooldst write unto me: heereto I answer thee: That in no
affairs thou can be so occupied, that it be a lawful let, not to
communicate, or write unto thy friend. For we may well call the time which we
live, to be well employed, which is spent in the service of god, and in the
conversation of our friends. All the residue that we wast in talking,
traueling, sleeping, eating and resting, we ought not to write it in the book
of life, but in the register of death. For all be it that in such semblable
woorks the body is refreshed: yet therewith the heart cannot be comforted. I
swear unto thee therefore (my friend) that it is impossible ye man take any
contentation of any worldly thing, where the heart is not at rest: for our
comfort is not in the sinnues, or in the bones of the body, but in the lively
power of the soul. It is long since that you and I have known togethers, it
is long time likewise that I loved thee, and thou me: and since we are so true
old friends, it is but reason that with good woorks we do renew our friendship.
For falsely they vsurp the name of friendship, which are not co^uersant one with
the other, no more then if they were strangers. The man wc speaks not to me,
wc writes not to me, wc sees me not, wc visits me not, wc geeueth me
not, and to whom I geeue not, I woold not he were my enemy: but it little
avails me that he call me friend, for particular friendship consists not
in abundance, but that friends do open their hearts, and talk with their
persons. Peradventure thou will say, that the great distaunce which is from
Rome to that country, has been occasion to deminish our friendship: for the
noble hearts are on fire with the presence of that they love, and have great
pain with the absence of that they desire. I answer, that the farther the
delicious wines are sent, from the place where they grow: the greater strength
they have. I mean, that herein true friends are known, when their persons are
furthest severed: for then are their wills most conioined. Tell me I pray
thee Cincinnatus, since always thou have found me a diligent friend in thy
service, why do thou mistrust my faithful good will? The green leaves
outwardly do show, that ye tree inwardly is not dry. I mean, that the good
woorks outwardly do declare ye feruentnes of ye heart inwardly. If thou
Cincinnatus presumest to be a true friend of thy friend, I will thou know this
rule of friendship, which is: Where perfect love is not, there wa^teth always
faithful service: and for the contrary he ye perfectly loves, assuredly
shall be served. I have been, am, and will be thine, therefore thou shall do me
great injury, if thou art not mine.

The Emperor proceeds in his letter and declares what virtues men ought to
use, and the vices which they ought to eschew. Cap. xxvi.
IN times past I being young, and thou old, I did succor thee with money, and
thou me with good counsel: but now the world is otherwise changed, in that
thy white hears do judge thee to be old, and thy woorks do cause thee to be
young. Therefore necessity compels me, that we change our style, which is:
that I succor thee with good counsel, though thou geeue me no money therefore:
for I count thy covetousness to be such, that for all ye good counsel, and
cou^selers of Rome, ye wilt not vouchsafe to geeue one quatrine of Capua. Now
for ye good that I wish thee, and for that which I owe to ye law of friendship,
I will presently geeue thee a counsel, whereby thou may know what a good man
ought to do, to be loved of god, and feared and loved of me^. If ye wilt
quietly lead thy life in this miserable world, retain this well in memory which
I write unto thee. First ye good deeds thou have received of any, those shall
thou remember: and ye wrongs thou have sustained, them shall thou forget.
Secondarely, esteem much thy own little: and way not the much of an other.

Thirdly, the company of the good always covet: and the conversation of ye
evil daily fly. Fourthly, to the great show thy self grave: and to the small
more conversant. Fifthly, to those which are present, do always good woorks:
and of those that be absent, always speak good words. Sixthly, way little ye
loss of fortune, and esteem much things of honor. The seventh, to win one
thing, never adventure thou many: nor for many things doubtful, do not thou
adventure any one thing certain. Finally and lastly, I pray thee and advertise
thee that thou have no enemy: and that thou keep but one friend. He which
among the good wilbee counted for good, none of these things he ought to want.
I know well that thou will have great pleasure to see these my counsels well
written: But I ensure thee I shall have greater pleasure, to see them in thy
deeds well observed. For by writing to geeue good counsel, it is easy: but by
woorks to follow ye same, is marvelous hard. My faithful friendship to thee
plighted, and thy great ability considered, caused me always for thee in Rome
to procure honorable offices, and by my suyt thou have been Edite and tribune,
and master of the horses, wherein thou behauedst thy self with such wisdom, that
all ye senate therefore yielded me most hearty thanks, I procuring them for thee,
and thou for thy self winning such perpetual renowm. One thing of thee I
understand, which with good will I woold not have known, and much less that
any such thing by thee shoold have been committed: that is to weet, that thou
leaving thy office of the pretorship in the war by land, have taken upon thee
traffike of a marcha^t by sea: so that those which in Rome knew thee a knight
do see thee now in Capua a merchant. My pen indyting this my letter, for a
time stood in suspense, for no other cause, but only to see what thing in thee
first I might best blame: either ye noble office which thou did forsake, or
the vile and base estate wc thou have chosen. And though thou be so much
bereued of thy senses, yet call to mind thy ancient predecessors which dyed in
the wars, only to leave their children, and nephews armed knights: and that
thou presently seek to lose that liberty through thy covetousness, which they
wanne by their valyauntnes. I think I am not deceived, that if thy predecessors
were revived, as they were ambicious of honor, so woold they be greedy to eat
thee in morsels, sinnues, bones and all. For the children which unjustly take
honor from their fathers, of reason ought to lose their lives.

The castles, towns, housen, mountains, woods, beasts, Jewels, and silver,
which our predecessors have left us, in the end by long continuance do perish:
and that which causes us to have perpetual memory of them, is the good renowm
of their life. And therefore if this be true, it is great shame for the parents
to have such children, in whom the renowm of their predecessors does end. In
the flourishing time of Cicero the orator, when by his counsel the whole
common wealth was governed, he being then of power, both in knowledge and of
money: Salust said unto him in his inuectiue, that he was of base stock:
whereunto he answered. Great cause have I too render thanks unto the gods,
that I am not as thou art, by whom thy high lineage is ended: but my poor stock
by me does now begin too rise. It is great pity to see, how many good, noble,
and valiant men are dead: but it is more greef to see presently their children
vicious, and unthrifts. So that there remains as much memory of their infamy,
as there does of the others honesty. Thou makst me ashamed, that thou have
forsaken to conquer the enemies as a romain knight, and that thou art become a
merchant, as a poor plebeian. Thou make me to muse a littel, my friend
Cincinnatus that thou will harm thy familiars, and suffer strangers to live
in peace. Thou seek to procure death, to those which geeue us life: and to
deliver from death those, which take our life To rebels thou geeuest rest, and
to the peace makers thou geeuest anoyaunce. To those which take from us our own
thou will geeue: and to those which geeueth us of theirs thou will take. Thou
condemnest the innocent, and the condemned thou will deliver. A defender of thy
country thou will not be, but a tirant of thy commonwealth. To al these
things aduentureth he which leaves weapons, and fauleth to merchandise. With
my self often times I have mused, what occasion should move thee to forsake
chiualry, wherein thou had such honor: and to take in hand merchandise,
whereof follows such infamy. I say, that it is as much shame for thee to have
gone from the wars as it is honor for those which are born unto office in the
commonwealth. My friend Cincinnatus, my end tends not to condemn merchandise
nor marchaunds, nor to speak evil of those which traffic, by the trade of
bying and selling. For as without the valiant knights, war cannot be
atchyued: so likewise without ye diligent merchants, the common wealth cannot
be maintained. I cannot imagine for what other cause thou shooldst forsake ye
war, and traffic merchandise, unless it were, because thou now being old,
and want force to assault men openly in the straits: shooldst with more ease
sitting in thy chayer rob secretly in the market place. O poor Cincinnatus,
since thou byest cheap and sellest dear, promisest much and performest
little: thou byest by one measure and sellest by an other, thou watchest that
none deceive thee, and playest therein as other merchants accustom. And to
conclude I swear, that the measure wherewith the gods shall measure thy life,
shall be much iuster then that of thy merits. Thou have taken on thee an office,
wherewith, that wc thy co^paignions in many days have robbed, thou in one hour
by disceit do get, and afterward the time shall come, when all the goods wc
thou have gotten, both by truth, and falshod, shall be lost, not only in an hour
which is long: but in a moment which is but short. Whether we geeue much, we
have much, we may do much, or we live much: yet in the end the gods are so
just, that all ye evil we do commit shall be punished, and for all the good
we woork, we shall be rewarded, so that ye gods oftentimes permit, that one
alone shall scourge many, and afterward the long time punishes all.

The Emperor concludes his letter and persuades his friend Cincinnatus to
despise the vanities of the world, and shows though a man be never so wise,
yet he shall have need of an other man's counsel. Cap. xxvii.
IF I knew thy wisdom esteemed the world, and vanities thereof, so much as ye
world does possess thee, and thy days, as by thy white hears most manyfestly
does appear: I need not take the payns to persuade thee, nor thou shooldst
be annoied in hearing me: Notwithstanding thou being at the gate of great
care, reason woold that some shoold take the clapper to knock thereat, with some
good counsel: for though the raser be sharp, it needs sometimes to be
whet. I mean though man's understanding be never so clear: yet from time to
time it needs counsel. Virtuous men often times do err, not because they woold
fail, but for that ye things are so evil of digestio^, that the virtue they
have, suffiseth not to tell them what thing is necessary for their profit. For
the which cause it is necessary, that his will be brydled, his wit fined, his
oppinion changed, his memory sharpened, and above all, now and then that he
forsake his own advise, and cleave unto the counsel of an other. Men which
covet to make high, sumptuous, fair, and large buildings, have great care that
the foundation thereof be surely laid: for where the foundacions are not sure,
there the whole buyldings are in great danger. The manners and conditions of
this world (that is to weete) the prosperous estates whereupon the children of
vanity are set, are founded of quick sand: in that sort, that be they never so
valiant, prosperous, and mighty, a little blast of wynd does stir them, a
little heat of prosperity does open them, a shower of adversity does wet them,
and unawares death strikes them all flatt to the ground. Men seeing they cannot
be perpetual, do procure to continue the^ selves, in raising up proud
buyldings, and leaving to their children great estates: wherein I count them
fools, no less then in things superfluous. For admit the pillars be of gold,
the beams of silver, and that those which ioyn them be kings, and those which
buyld them are noble, and in that mining they consume a thousand years before
they can have it out of the ground, or that they can come to the bottoms: I
swear unto them, that they shall find no stedy rock, nor lively mountain, where
they may buyld their house sure, nor to cause their memory to be perpetual.
The immortal gods have participated all things to the mortal men, immortality
only reserved: and therefore they are called immortal, for so much as they
never dye, and we others are called mortal, because daily we vanish away. O
my friend Cincinnatus, men have an end, and thou think that gods never ought
to end. Now green, now ripe, now rotten, fruit is severed from this life, from
the tree of the miserable flesh, and esteem this as nothing, for so much as death
is natural. But often times in ye leaf or flower of youth, ye frost of some
disease, or ye peril of some mishap does take us away: so that when we think
to be alive in ye morning we are dead in the night. It is a tedious and long
woork to weue a cloth: yet when in many days it is wouen, in one moment it is
cut. I mean that it is much folly to see a man with what toil he enricheth him
self, and into what peril he puts him self, to win a state of honor: and
afterward when we think little we see him perish in his estate, leaving of
him no memory. O my friend Cincinnatus, for the love that is between us I desire
thee, and by ye immortal gods I conjure thee, yt thou geeue no credit to the
world which has this condition, to hide much copper under little gold, under
the color of one truth, he tells us a thousand lies, and with one short
pleasure, he mingleth ten thousand displesures. He beegyleth those to whom
he pretends most love, and procures great domages to them, to whom he
geeueth most goods, he recompenseth them greatly which serve him in jest, and
to those which truly love him, he geeueth mocks for goods. Finally I say,
that when we sleep most sure, he waketh us with greatest peril. Either thou
know the world with his deceyt, or not: if thou know him not, why do
thou serve him? if thou do know him, why do thou follow him? Tell me I
pray thee, wooldst not ye take that thief for a fool, which woold buy the rope
wherewith he shoold be hanged, and the murderer that woold make the sword,
wherewith he shoold be beheaded? and the robber by the high way, that woold
show the well wherein he shoold be cast? and the traitor yt shoold offer him
self in place for to be quartered? the rebel that shoold disclose him self to
be stoned? Then I swear unto thee, yt thou art much more a fool, wc know
the world, and will follow it, and serve it. One thing I will tell thee, which is
such, that you ought never to forget it: that is to weete, yt we have
greater need of faith, not to beliue ye vanities wc we see, then to beeleue ye
great malices, wc with our ears we here. I retorn to advise thee, to read and
consider this word which I have spoken, for it is a sentence of profound
mystery. Do thou think Cincinnatus, that rych men have little care to get
great riches? I let thee weet, that ye goods of this world are of such
condition, that before the poor man does lock up in his chests a.100.
crowns: he feels a thousand greefes and cares in his heart. Our predecessors
have seen it, we see it presently, and our successors shall see it: that ye
money wc we have gotten, is in a certain number, but ye cares and trauails wc
it brings are infinite. We have few painted houses, and few noble estats in
Rome, ye wtin a little time have not great cares i^ their hearts, cruel enmities
with their neighbors, much evil will of their heirs, disordinat importunities of
their friends, perilous malices of their enemies, and above al in ye Senate they
have innumerable process, and often times to lock a little good in their chests,
they make ten thousand blots in their honor. O how many have I known in Rome,
to whom it has chanced, that all that they have gotten in Rome to leave unto
their best beeloued child: an other heir (with little care) of whom they thought
not, has enjoyed it. There can be nothing more just, then that al those which
have beegyled others with disceits in their life, shoold be found disceiued in
their vayn immaginacions after their death. Injurious shoold the gods be, if
in all the evil that the evil propound to do, they shoold geeue them time and
place convenient to accomplish the same. But the gods are so just and wise,
that they dissemble with the evil, to thend they shoold beegin, and follow the
things according to their own wills and fantasies: and afterward at the best
time, they cut of their lives, to leave them in greter torment. The gods shoold
be very cruel, and to them it shoold be great grief to suffer, yt that
which the evil have gathered, to the prejudice of many good: they shoold enjoy
in peace for many years. Me thinks it is great folly, to know that we are
borne weeping, and to see that we dysighing, and yet for all this that we
dare live laughing. I woold ask the world and his worldlyngs, since that we
enter into the world weeping, and go out of the world sighing, why we shoold
live laughing? for the rule to measure all parts, ought to be equal. O
Cincinnatus, who has beegyled thee, to the end that for one bottel of water of
the Sea of this world for thy pleasure, thou will blister thy hand with the
rope of cares, and broose thy body in thanker of troubles: and above all to
adventure thine own honor, for a glass of water of an other man.

By the faith of a good man I swear unto thee, that for all the great quantity
of water thou drawest, for the great deal of money thou have, thou remainest
as much dead for thrist, drinking of that water: as when thou were without water
in the cup. Consider now thy years, if my counsel thou will accept, thou shall
demand death of the gods to rest thee as a virtuous man: and not riches to
live as a fool. With the tears of my eyes I have beewayled many in Rome, when
I saw them depart out of this world, and thee I have beewayled, and do
beewaile (my friend Cincinnatus) with drops of blood, to see thee retorn into
the world. The credit thou had in the senate, the blood of thy predecessors,
my frenship, the aucthority of thy parson, the honor of thy parentage, the
sclaunder of thy comonwealth, ought to withdraw thee from so great covetousness.
O poor Cincinnatus, consider the white honored hears which do fall, ought to
be occupied in the noble armies: sithe^s thou art noble of blood, valyant in
parson, ancient of years, and not evil willed in the common wealth. For thou
ought to consider, that more worth is reason, for the path way of men which
are good: then the common opinion, which is the large high way of the evil.
For if it be narrow to go on the one side, there is no dust wherewith the eyes
be blinded as in the other.

I will geeue thee a counsel, and if thou feel thy self euel, never count
thou me for friend. Lust no more after ye greasy fatt of temporal goods, sins
thou have short life: for we see daily many, before they come to thy age dye,
but we see few after thy age live. After this counsel I will geeue thee an
advise, that thou never trust present prosperity: for then always thou art in
danger of some evil fortune. If thou art mounted into such pricking thorns as
a fool: me thinks thou oughts to descend as a sage. And in this sort all
will say amongst the people, that Cincinnatus is descended, but not fallen. My
letter I will conclude, and the conclusion thereof see well thou note, that is
to weete, that thou and thy trade shall be cursed, where you other merchants will
live poor, to die rich. Once again I retorn to curse you, for that the
covetousness of an evil man is alwais accomplished, to the prejudice of many
good.

My wife Faustinc does salute thee, and she was not a little troubled when
she knew thou were a merchant, and that thou keep a shop in Capua. I send
thee a horse to ride upon, and one of ye most richest arras of Tripoli to ha^g
thy house withal, a precious ring, and a pommel of a sword of Alexandrie: and
all these things I do not send thee, for that I know thou have need thereof:
but rather not to forget the good custom I have to geeue. Pamphil^ thy aunt,
and my neighbor is dead. And I can tell thee, that in Rome dyed not a woman of
long time, which of her left such renowm: for so much as she forgot all
enmities, she succored the poor, she visited the banished, she entertained
friends, and also I heard say that she alone did light all the temples.
Prestilla thy cousin has the health of body, though for the death of her mother
her heart is heavy. And without doubt she had reason: for the only sorows which
the mothers suffer to bring us forth, though with drops of blood we shoold
beewayl them, yet we cannot recompense them.

The gods be in thy custody, and preserve me, with my wife Faustine from all
evil fortune. Mark of mount Celio with his own hand

The aucthor persuades princes and great Lords to fly covetousness and avarice,
and to beecome bowntifull and liberal, which virtue is ever pertinent to the
royal parson. Cap. xxviii.
PIsistratus the renowned tyrant among the Atheniens, sins his friends coold
not endure the cruelties that he committed, each one returned to his own
house, and utterly forsook him. The which when the tyrant saw, he laid all
his treasure and garments on a heap togethers, and went to visit his friends,
to whom with bitter tears he spoke these words. All my apparel and money
here I bring you, with determination, that if you will use my company, we
will go all to my house, and if you will not come into my company, I am
determined to dwell in yours. For if you be weary to follow me, I have great
desire to serve you: since you know that they cannot be called faithful
friends, where the one cannot bear with the other. Plutarchus in his Apothegmes
says, that this tyrant Pisistratus was very rych, and extreme covetous, so
that they write of him, that the gold and silver which once came into his
possession, never man saw it afterward, but if he had necessity to buy any
thing, if they woold not present it unto him willingly, he woold have it by
force. When he was dead, the Atheniens determined to wey him and his treasure:
the case was marvelous, that the gold and silver he had, weyd more then his
dead body.6. times. At that time in Athens there was a philosopher called Lido,
of whom the Atheniens demanded, what they shoold do with the treasure and
dead body? me thinks (quod this philosopher) that if those which are living,
did know any silver or gold which the tyrant took from them, it shoold be
restored again immediately: and do not meruell, that I do not require it to
be put in the common treasure. For god will not permit, that the commonwealth
be enriched with the theft of Tyraunts: but with the swet of the inhabitants.
If any goods remayn which do not appear from whom they have been taken, me
thinks that they ought to be distributed among the poor, for nothing can
be more just, then that which the goods wherewyth the tyrant has
enpouerished many, with the self same we shoold enrich some.

As touching his burial, me thinks he ought to be cast out to the (...) to
be eaten, and to the dogs to be gnawen. And let no man thynk this sentence to
be cruel: for we are bound to do no more for him at his death, then he did
for him self in his life, who being so overcome with auaryce, that he woold
never disburse so much money, as shoold buy him seven foot of earth, wherein
his grave shoold be made. And I will you know, that the gods have done a great
good to all Greece, to take life from this tyrant. First it is good, because
much goods are dispersed, which heretofore lay hid, and served to no purpose.
Secondly, that many tongues shall rest, for the treasours of this tirant, made
great want in the commonwealth, and our tongues the greatest part of the day
were occupied, to speak evil of his parson. Me thinks this philosopher has
touched two things, which the covetous man does in the common wealth, that is
to wete, that drawing much gold and silver to the hid treasure, he robs ye
merchandise wherewith the people do live: The other dommage is, that as he is
hated of all, so he causes rancour and malice in the hearts of all: for he
makes the rych to murmour, and the poor to blasphem. One thing I read in the
laws of ye Lombards worthy (of truth) to be noted and known, and no less to
be followed, which is: that all those which shoold have gold, silver, money,
silks, and clothes, every year they shoold be registered in the place of
justice. And this was to the end, not to consent nor permit them to heap much:
but that they shoold have to buy, to sell, and to trafik, whereby ye goods were
occupied among the people. So that he which did spend the money to the profit
of his house, it was taken for good of the common wealth. If christians woold
do that now adays which the Lombardes did, there shoold not be so many
treasures hid, nor so many covetous men in the commonwealth: for nothing can
be more unjust, then that one rych man shoold heap up that, which woold
suffice ten thousand to live with all. We can not deny but that the cursed
avarice, and disordinat couetise to al states of men is as prejudicial, as the
moth which eats all garments.

Therefore speaking the truth and with lyberty, there is no house that it does
not defyle: for it is more perilous to have a clod of earth fall into a man's
eye, then a beam upon his foot. Agesilaus the renowned king of the
Lacedaemonians, being asked of a man of Thebes what word was most odible to
be spoken to a king, and what word that was that coold honor him most? he
answered. The prince with nothing so much ought to be annoied, as to say unto
him that he is rich, and of nothing he ought so much to rejoice, as to be
called poor. For the glory of ye good prince consists not in that he has
great treasures: but in that he has geeuen great recompenses. This word
without doubt, of all the world was one of the most royallest, and worthiest to
be committed unto memory. Alexander, Pirrhus, Nicanor, Ptolomeus, Pompeius,
Julius Caesar, Scipio, Hanniball, Marcus Portius, Augustus, Cato, Traian,
Theodose, Marcus Aurelius, all these princes have been very valiant and
virtuous: but addyng heereunto also, the writers which have written ye deeds
that they did in their lives, have mentioned also the poverty which they had at
their death. So that they are no less exalted, for the riches they have spent:
then for the prowesses they have done. Admit that men of mean state be
auaricious, and princes and great lords also covetous: ye fault of the one is
not equal with ye vice of the other, though in ye end all are culpable.

For if the poor man keep, it is for that he woold not want, but if the
knight hoord, it is because he has to much. And in this case I woold say,
that cursed be the knight which trauaileth, to ye end that goods abound, and
does not care that between two bows his renowmsall to the ground. Since
princes and great lords will that men do count them noble, virtuous, and
valiant, I woold know what occasion they have to be nigards and hard.

If they say that that which they keep is to eat, herein there is no reason:
for in the end, where the rich eats least at his table, there are many that
had rather have that which remains, then that which they provide to eat in
their houses. If they say that that which they keep is to apparel them, here
in also they have as little reason: for the greatness of lords consists not, in
that they shoold be sumptuously appareled, but that they provide that their
servant go not rent, nor torn. If they say it is to have in their chambers
precious jewels, in their halles rich Tapestry, as little woold I admit this
answer: for all those which enter into princes palaces, do beehold more if
those that haunt their chambers be virtuous, then that the tapestries be rych.

If they say that it is to compass their cities with walls, or to make
fortresses on their fronters: so likewise is this answer amongst the others
very cold. For good princes ought not to travel but to be well willed, and if
in their realms they be welbeeloued, in the world they can have no walls so
strong as the hearts of their subjects. If they tell us that that they keep is
to mary their children, as little reason is that: for since princes and great
lords have great inheritaunces, they need not heap much. For if their children
be good, they shall increase that shall be left them: and if by mishap they be
evil, they shall as well lose that that shall be geeuen them. If they say unto
us that that which they heap is for the wars in like manner, that is no just
excuse: For if such war be not just, the prince ought not to take it in
hand, nor the people thereunto to condescend: but if it be just, the common
wealth then, and not the prince shall bear the charges thereof. For in just
wars it is not sufficient that they geeue the prince all their goods: but
also they must them selves in parson hazard their lives. If they tell us that
that they keep is to geeue and dispose for their souls, at their dying day: I
say it is not only want of wisdom, but extreme folly. For at the hour of
death, princes ought more to rejoice for that they have geeuen: then for that
at that time he geeueth. O how princes and great lords are evil counseled,
since they suffer them selves to be slaundered for being covetous, only to
heap a little cursed treasure. For experience teaches us, no man can be
covetous of goods, but needs he must be prodigal of honor, and abandon
liberty. Plutarche in the book which he made of the fortune of Alexander,
says that Alexander the great had a private servant called Perdyca, the which
seeing that Alexander liberally gave all that which by great travel he
attained, on a day he said unto him. Tell me, most noble prince, since thou
geeuest all that thou have to others, what will thou have for thy self?
Alexander answered. The glory remains unto me, of that I have won and
gotten: and ye hope of that wc I will geeue and win. And further he said unto
him, I will tell thee true Perdyca: If I knew that men thought, that all that
which I take were for covetousness, I swear unto thee by the god Mars that I
woold not beat down one corner in a town: and to win all the world I woold
not go one days journey. My intention is to take the glory to my self, and to
deuyde ye goods amongst others. These words so high, were worthy of a valyant
and virtuous prince, as of Alexander which spoke the^. If that which I have
read in books do not begyle me, and that which with these eyes I have seen:
to become rych, it is necessary that a man geeue: for ye princes and great
lords which naturally are geeuen to be liberal, are always fortunat to have.
It chances often times, that some man geeuing a little, is counted liberal:
and an other geeuing much, is counted a nigard. The which proceeds of this
that they know not, that liberality and nigardnes consists not in geeuing
much, or little: but to know well how to geeue. For the rewards and recompenses,
which out of time are distributed, do another profit them which receive them,
neither agree to him which geeueth them. A covetous man geeueth more at one
time, then a noble and free heart does in.20. thus says the common proverb, it
is good coming to a niggards feast. The difference beetwene the liberality of
the one, and the mysery of the other is, that ye noble and virtuous does geeue
that he geeueth to many: but the nigard geeueth yt he geeueth to one only.
Of the which vnaduisement princes ought greatly to beware. For if in such case
one man alone shoold be found, which woold comme^d his liberality: there are
ten thousand which woold condemn his covetousness.

It happens often times to princes and great lords, that in deed they are free
to recompense, but in geeuing they are very unfortunate. And the cause is, yt
they geeue it not to virtuous persons and well co^dicioned, but to those which
are unthankful, and do not acknowledge the benefit received. So that in
geeuing to some, they have not made them their friends: and in not geeuing to
others, they have made them their enemies. It suffyseth not to princes and
great lords, to have great desire to geeue: but to know when, how, or where,
and to whom they ought to geeue. For if they be accused otherwise to heap up
treasures, they ought also to be condemned for that they do geeue. When a man
has lost all that he has in play, in whoors, in bankets, and other semblable
vices, it is but reason they be ashamed: but when they have spent it like
noble, stout and liberal men, they ought not to be discontented, for the wise
man ought to take no displesure for that he loses: but for that he evil
spends: and he ought to take no pleasure for that he geeueth, but for that
he geeueth not well. Dion the grecian in the life of ye Emperor Seuerus says,
that one day in the feast of the God Ianus, when he had geeuen diverse rewards
and sundry gifts, as well to his own servant, as to strangers, and that he
was greatly commended of all the Romans, he said unto them.

Do you think now (Romans) that I am very glad for the gifts, rewards, and
recompenses which I have bestowed: and that I am very glorious for ye praises
you have geeuen me? by the god Mars I swear unto ye, and let the god Ianus be
so merciful unto us all this year, that ye pleasure I have is not so great,
for ye I have geeuen: as ye grief is for yt I have no more to geeue.

The auctour follows his intencion and persuades gentlemen, and those that
profess arms, not to abase them selves for gains sake, to take upon them any
vile function or office. Cap. xix.
PLutarche in his Apothemes declares, that king Ptolomeus the first, was a
prince of so good a nature, and so gentle in conversation, that often times he
went to supper to the houses of his familiar frinds, and many nights he
remained there to sleap. And truly in this case he showed him self to be
welbeeloued of his. For speaking according to the truth a prince on whose life
depends the hole state of the common wealth, ought to credit few was the
table, and also fewer in the bed. Another thing this Ptolomeus did, which was,
when he invited his friends to dinner or supper, or other strangers, of soome
he desired to borow stools, of thothers napkins, and of others cups, and so
of other things, for he was a prodygall prince. For all that his servant in
the morning had bought, before the night following he gave it away. One day all the nobles of his realm of Egypt assembled togethers, and desired him very
earnestly, that he woold be more moderat in geeuing: for they said, through
his prodygality, the hole realm was impouerished. The king answered. You
others of Egypt are marvelously deceived, to think that the poor and needy
prince is troubled. In this case I dare say unto you, that the poor and needy
prince ought to think him self happy, for good princes ought more to seek to
enrich others, then to heap up treasures for them selves. O happy is the common
wealth which deserves to have such a prince, and happy is that tongue, which
coold pronounce such a sentence. Certainly this prince to all princes gave good
example and counsel, that is to weete, that for the^ it was more honor, and
also more profit, to make others rich: the^ to be rich them selves. For if
they have much, they shall want no crauers, and if they have little, they shall
never want servant to serve them. Suetonius Tranquillus in the book of
Cesars says, that Titus the Emperor one night after supper, from the bottom
of his heart fetched a heavy sigh, and he being demanded of those which were
at his table why he sighed so sore, he answered. We have lost at this day,
my friends. By the which words the emperor meant, that he counted not that day
amongst those of life: wherein he had geeuen no reward nor gift. Truly this
noble prince was valiant, and mighty, since he sighed and had displeasure,
not for that which in many days he had geeuen: but because that one day he
had failed to geeue any thing. Pelopa of Thebes, was a man in his time, very
valiant and also rich: and since he was fortunat in getting, and liberal in
spe^ding, one asked him why he was so prodigal to geeue? he answered. If to
thee it seems yt I geeue much, to me it seems yet I shoold give more:
since the goods ought to serve me, and not I to honor them. Therefore I will
that they call me the spender of the goods: and not ye steward of the house.
Plutarche in his apothemes says, yt king Darius floutyng at king Alexander
for being poor, sent to know where his treasures were for such great armies,
to who^ Alexander the great au^swered. Tell king Darius, yt he keeps in his
cofers his treasures of metal: and yt I have no other treasures then the hearts
of my frinds. And further tell him, yt one man alone can rob al his treasures:
but he and all the world can not take my treasures from me, which are my
frinds. I durst say, affirming yt Alexander said, that he cannot be called
poor, wc is rich of frinds: neither can he be called rich, wc is poor of
frinds. For we saw by experience, Alexander with his frinds took king Darius
treasures from him: and king Darius with all his treasures, was not puissau^t
enough to take Alexanders friends from him. Those which of their natural
inclinacion are shamefast, and in estate noble, they ought above all things to
fly ye slander of covetousness: for without doubt greater is the honor which is
lost, then ye goods that are gotten. If princes and great lords of their own
natural dispositions be lyberal, let the^ follow their nature: but if
perchance of their own nature they are inclined to covetousness, let them
enforce their will. And if they will not do it, I tell them which are present, yt
a day shall come when they shall repent: for it is a general rule, that the
disordinat covetousness do raise against them selves al venomous tongues. Think
that when you watch to take men's goods, the others watch in like manner to take
your honor. And if in such case you hazard your honor, I do not think yt your
life ca^ be sure: for there is no law that does ordein, nor patience that can
suffer, to see my neighbor live in quiet, by the swet of my brows. A poor man
esteems as much a cloak, as the rich man does his delicious life. Therefore it
is a good consequent, yt if the rich man take the gown from ye poor: the poor
man ought to take life from the rich Phocion amongst the Greeks was greatly
renowned, and this not so much for that he was sage, as for that he did
despise al worldly riches, unto whom when Alexander ye great (king of Macedony)
had sent him a hundredth marks of silver, he said unto those yt brought it. Why
does Alexander se^d this money unto me, rather then to other philosophers of
Greece? they au^swered him. He does send it unto thee, for yt thou art the
least covetous, and most virtuous. Then answered this philosopher. Tell
Alexander yt though he knows not what belongs to a prince, yet I know well
what pertains to a philosopher. For ye estate and office of philosophers, is
to despise the treasures of princes: and the office of princes is to ask
counsel of philosophers. And further Phocion said, you shall say also to
Alexander, yt in that he has sent me, he has not showed him self a pitiful
friend, but a cruel enemy: for esteeming me an honest man (such as he thought
I was) he shoold have helped me to have been such. These words were worthy
of a wise man. It is great pity, to see valya^t and noble men to be defamed of
covetousness, and only for to get a few goods, he abaseth him self to vile
offices: wc appertein rather to mean parsons, then to noble men, and valiant
knights. Whereof ensues, yt they live infamed, and al their friends slau^dered.
Declaring further I say, yt it seems great lightness, that a knight shoold
leave ye honorable state of chiualry, to exercise the handycraft of husbandry:
and yt the horse shoold be changed into oxen, the speres to mattocks, and ye
weapons into plows. Finally, they do desire to toil in the field: and refuse
to fight in the frontiers. O how much some knights of our time have
degenerated, from yt their fathers have been in times past: for their
predecessors did advance them selves of the infidels, wc in the fields they
slew, and their children brag of the corn and sheep they have in their
grounds. Our ancient knights were not wont to sigh, but when they saw the^
selves in great distres: and their successors weep now, for that it rained not
in ye month of May. Their fathers did strive, which of them could furnish most
men, have most weapons, and keep most horses: but their children now adays
contend, who has the finest wit, who can heap up greatest treasour and who
can keep most sheep. The ancients stryued who should keep most men: but
these worldlings at this day strive, who can have greatest revenues. Wherefore
I say, since the one does desire as much to have great rents, as the other did
delyght to have many weapons: it is as though fathers shoold take the sweord by
the pomell, and the children by the scaberd. All the good arts are perverted,
and the art of chyualry above all others is despised: and not without cause I
called it an art, for the ancient philosophers consumed a great time, to write
the laws that the knights ought to keep. And as now ye order of the
Carthagians seems to be most straight: so in times past the order of
knighthod was the streightest. To whom I swear, that if they observed the order
of chiualry, as good and gentill knights: there remained no time vacant for
them in life to be vicious, nor we should accuse them at their death as evil
christians. The true and not feigned knight, ought not to be proud, malicious,
furious, a glutton, coward, prodigal, nigard, a liar, a blasphemer, nor
negligent. Finally I say, that all those ought not to be judged as knights,
which have golden spurs: unless he has there with an honest life. O if it
pleased the king of heaven, that princes would now adays examine as straightly
those, which have cure of souls: as the Romans did those which had but charge
of armies. In old time they never doubbed any man knight, unless he were of
noble blood, proper of person, moderat in speech, exercised in the war,
courageous of heart, happy in Arms, and honest in life: finally, of all he
ought to be beeloued for his virtue, and of none hated for his vice. The
knights in whom these virtues shyned bright in Rome had diverse lyberties, that
is to weete, that they only might wear ryngs, ride on horsback thorough the
streats, they might have a shylde, shit their gates at dynner, they might drynk
in cups of silver, speak to the senate, and make defyaunces, they might
demand the ensign, wear weapons, take ye charge of imbassage, and ward at
the gates of Rome. The auctour hereof, is Blondus in the book of De Italia
illustrata. If Pliny deceive us not in an Epistle, and Plutarche in his
pollitiks, Seneca in a tragedy, and Cicero in his paradoxes, there was nothing
wherein the ancients were more circumspect, then in electing of their knights.
Now it is not so, but that one having money to buy a lordshyp, immediately he is
made knight: and that which is woorst, when he is made a knight, it is not to
fight against the enemies in the field, but more freely to commit vices, and
oppress the poor in the towns. To the end he may be a good christian, he
ought to think upon Jesus crucyfyed: and to be a good knight, he ought always
to beehold the arms of his shyeld, the which his graundfather, or great
graundfather wanne. For they shall see, that they wanne them not being vicious
in their houses: but in sheding the blood of their enemies in the frontiers.

Of a letter which the emperor wrote to Mercurius his neighbor a merchant of
Samia, wherein men may learn the dangers of those which traffyck by sea, and
also see the covetousness of them that travail by land. Cap. xxx.
MArcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, borne in mount Celio, wysheth to thee
Mercurius his special frind, health and consolation in the gods the only
comforters. It seems well, that we are friends, sythe^s we do the woorks of
charyty. For I understanding here thy mishap, immedyatly sent a messenger to
comfort thee: and in hearing my disease, thou se^dell a friend of thine to visit
me. Wherefore men may perceive, if thou had me in mind, I did not forget
thee. I understand yt the messenger yt went, and the other that came, met in
Capua: the one carried my desire for thee, and the other brought thy letter for
me. And if as diligently thou had read mine, as I attentively have hard
thine: thou shooldst thereby plainly know, yt my heart was as full of sorrow as
thy spyrit was full of pain. I was very glad, and great thanks I yield thee, for
yt thou did send to comfort me in my fever tertian: and thy visitacion and
comfort came at the same hour, that it left me. But if ye gods did leave this
fact in my hands, even as they thought it good to fix the fever in my bones: I
woold not leave thee without comfort nor geeue place to the fever to retourn
again. O how great is our pride, and the misery of man's life. I speak this,
because I do presume to take many realms from other, and yet I have not the
power to pluck ye fever out of my own bones. Tell me I pray thee (Mercurius)
what profit is it to us to desire much, to procure much, to attain much, and to
presume much, since our days are so brief, and our persons so frayl? It is long
time since we have been bound togethers in friendship, and many years have
passed sithe^s we have known the one the other: and ye day yt thy friendship
trusted my faith, immediately my faith was bound, yt thy evils shoold be mine,
and my goods thine: for as ye divine Plato said, yt only is true friendship,
where the bodies are.2. and the wills but one. I count yt suspicious
friendship, where the hearts are so divided, as ye wills are severed: for there
are diverse in Rome great friends in words, wc dwell but ten houses in sunder,
and have their hearts ten thousand miles distant. When thou wenst from Rome, and
I came from Samia, thou know the agreement wc we made in Capua, whereof I
trust thou will not deceive me now, but that I am another thou here, and that
thou shooldst be another I there: so that my abse^ce with thy presence, and
thy presence with mine absence be always together. By relacion of thy
messenger, I understood that thou had lost much goods: but as by thy letter
I was informed, yt anguish of thy parson was much greater. As we understand
here thou did send a ship laden with merchandise to Greece, and the mariners and
factours desiring more to profit by their wisdom, then to accomplish thy
covetousness: did cast the merchandise into the Sea, and only they travailed to
save their persons. In deed in so straight and perilous a case, thou have no
reason to accuse them, nor yet they are bound to satisfy thee: for no man can
commit greater folly, then for the goods of others to hazard his own propre
life. Pardon me (Mercury) I pray thee for that I have spoken, and also for
that I will say, wc is, that for so much as the mariners and factours were not
thy children, nor thy kinsmen, nor thy friends: so that thy merchandise might
have come to the haue^ safe, thou had little passed if they had al been
drowned in ye deep goulf of the sea. Further I say, though I woold not say it,
and thou much less here it, yt according to the little care which you other
covetous men have, of the children and factors of others, and according to the
disordinat love wc you have to your proper goods; where as thou weepest
bitterly for the loss of thy goods, though thou had seen all the mariners
drowned, thou wooldst not have shed one tear. For Romain merchants weep
rather for ten crowns lost, wc they can not recover: then for ten men dying,
the which ten crowns woold have saved. Me thinks it is neither just, nor
honest, yt thou do that which they tell me thou do, to complain of thy
factours, and accuse the maryners: only to recover of the poor men by land, yt
which the fish have in their possession in the Sea. For as thou know, no man
is bound to change health, life, nor the renowm of their parsons, for the
recovery of goods. Alas, what pyty have I on thee Mercury, in that the ship was
laden with thy merchandise: and the woorst of all is, that according to my
understanding, and thy feelyng, the Pirates have not cast such fardels into the
sea, as thoughts has burdened and oppressed thy heart. I never saw man of such
condition as thou art, for that thou see that the ship (until such time) as
they cast that merchandise over ye board could not sail safely: and yet thou
do lode thy self with riches to go to thy grave. O grievous and cursed
riches, with the which neither in ye deep seas, neither yet in the main land,
our parsons are in safeguard. Knowing thy property, I woold rather bind my self
to seek thy lead and tin: the^ thy heart so wounded. For in the end, thy lead
is together in some place in the bottom of the sea: but thy covetousness is
scattered through all the whole earth. If perhaps thou shooldst dye, and the
surgions with the sharp raser should open thy stomach, I swear unto thee, by
the mother Berecinthe, (which is the mother of all the gods of Rome) that they
shoold rather find thy heart drowned wc the lead: then in life with thy body.
Now thou can not be sick of the fever tertian as I am, for the heat with in
thy body, and the pain in thy head, woold cause thee to have a double quartain:
and of such disease thou can not be healed in thy bed, but in the ship, not
in land, but in the sea, not with physicians, but with pirates. For ye
phisicions woold carry away the money, and the pirates woold show thee where thy
lead fell. Trouble not thy self so much Mercury, for though thou have not thy
lead with thee in the land, it has thee with it in the sea, and thou ought
enough to comfort thy self: for where as before thou had it in thy cofers,
thou have it presently in thy intrailes. For there thy life is drowned, where
thy lead is cast. O Mercury now thou know, that the day that thou did
recommend thy goods to the unknown rocks, and thy ship to the ragyng seas, and
thy outrageous avarice to the furious wynds, how much that thy factors went
desyryng thy profyt, and gayn: so much the more thou might have been assured
of thy loss. If thou had had this consyderacion, and had used this
diligence: thy desire had been drowned, and thy goods escaped. For men that
dare adventure their goods on the sea, they ought not to be heavy for that
that is lost: but they ought to rejoice for that that is escaped. Socrates, the
ancient and great Philosopher determined to teach us, not by word, but by
woork, in what estimacion a man ought to have ye goods of this world: for he
cast in the sea not lead, but gold, not little, but much, not of another man's,
but of his own, not by force, but willingly, not by fortune, but by wisdom.
Finally in this worthy fact he showed so great courage, that no covetous man
woold have rejoiced, to have found so much in the land: as this philosopher did
delyght, to have cast in the sea. That which Socrates did was much, but greater
ought we to esteem that he said, which was: O ye disceytfull goods, I will
drown you, rather then you shoold drown me. Since Socrates feared, and drowned
his own proper goods: why do not the covetous fear to rob the goods of
other? This wise Philosopher woold not trust the fine gold: and thou do
trust the hard lead. Draw you two lottes, Socrates of Athens, and thou of
Samia. See which of you two have erred or done well: he to carry gold from the
land to the Sea, or thou by the Sea, to bring gold to the land. I am assured,
that the ancient Romans woold say that it is he: but the covetous of this
present world would say, that it is thou. That which in this case I thynk is,
that thou in praysyng yt, do disprayse thy self: and Socrates in dyspraysyng
it, of all is praised and esteemed.

The Emperor follows his matter and concludes his letter, greatly reproving
his friend Mercurius for that he took thought for the loss of his goods. He
shows him the nature of fortune, and describes the conditions of the
covetous man. Cap. xxxi.
THis messenger told me, that thou art very sad, that thou cryest out in the
night, and importunest ye gods, wakest thy neighbors, and above all, that thou
complainest of fortune which has used thee so evil. I am sorry for thy grief:
for grief is a friend of solytude, enemy of company, a lover of darkness,
strange in conversation, and heir of desperacion. I am sorry thou cryest in
the night, for it is a sign of folly, a token of small patience, the point of
no wise man, and a great proof of ignorance: for at the hour when all the world
is covered with darkness, thou alone do discover thy heart with exclamacions.
I am sorry that thou art vexed with the gods, saying that they are cruel. For
so much as if they have taken any thing from thee for thy pride, they shoold
restore it again unto thee for thy humility. For as much as we offend the gods
through the offense, so much do we appease them with patience. O my friend
Mercurius, know thou not that the patience which the gods have in dissembling
our faults is greater, then that which men have in suffering their
chastisements? for we others unjustly do offend them, and they justly do
punysh us. I am sorry, that with thy exclamations and complaints thou
slau^derest thy neighbors: for as thou know, one neighbor, always enuyeth
another, in especially the poor, the rych. And according to my counsel, thou
shooldst dyssemble thy pain, and take all things in good part: for if perhaps
thy riches have caused thy sorrow, thy patience will move them to compassion. I
am sorry thou complainest of thy fortune: For fortune (since she is known of
al) does not suffer her self to be defamed of one: and it is better to thynk
with fortune how thou may remedy it, then to thynk with what grief to
co^playn. For they are diverse men, which to publish their pain are very
careful: but to seek remedy, are as negligent. O poor innocent Mercurius,
after so long forgetfullnesse, art thou more aduysed to complayn of fortune
again? and datest thou defye fortune, with whom all we have peace? We unbend
our bows, and thou wilt charge thy lances: thou know not what war
means, and yet thou will win the victory: all are deceived, and wilt thou
alone go safe? What wilt thou more I say unto thee, since I see thee commyt thy
self to fortune? Do thou know, that it is she that beats down the high
walls, and defends the town dyches: know thou not, that it is she that
peopleth the uninhabitable deserts, and dyspeopleth the peopled Cities? Know
thou not, that it is she that of enemies makes friends, and of friends enemies?
Know thou not, that it is she that conquereth the conquerors? Know thou
not, that it is she that of traitors makes faithful, and of faithful
suspicious? finally I will thou know, that fortune is she which turns realms,
breaks armies, abassheth kings, raises tirants, geeueth life to the dead,
and berieth the living. Do thou not remember, that the second king of ye
Lacedaemonians had over his gates such words.

The palace here beehold, where men do strive, by fruitles toil, to conquer
what they can. And fortune ^cke that princes fancies riue, by his unbridled
will, that always wan.
Certainly these words were high, and proceeded of a high understanding. And
if in this case. I may be beeleeued, they ought to be well noted of wise men,
and not written before the gates, but imprinted within the hearts. Better knew
he fortune then thou, since he took him self for one disherited, and not as
heir: and when he lost any thing as thou, he knew that he received it by
loan, and not that it was his own. Men in this life are not so much deceived
for any thing, as to thynk yt the temperall goods shoold remayn with them
during life. Now that god does suffer it, now that our woeful fortune does
deserve it, I see no greater myshaps fall unto any, then unto them which have
the greatest estates and riches: so that truly we may boldly say, that he
alone which is shut in the grave, is in safeguard from the inconstancy of
fortune. Thy messenger has told me further, that this summer thou preparedst
thy self to Rome, and now that it is winter thou wylt sail to Alexandria. O
thou unhappy Mercury, tell me I pray thee how long it is, sythens thou lost
thy sensis? forasmuch as when this life does end, thy auaryce beeginneth a
new? Thou foundest two cities very meet for thy traffyck, that is to weete,
Rome, which is the scourge of all virtues: and Alexandria which is the chiefest
of all vices. And if thou love greatly these two cities, here I pray thee
what marchaundise are sold therein. In Rome, thou shall lode thy body with
vices: and in Alexandria, thou shall swell thy heart with cares. By the faith of
a good man I swear unto thee, that if perchance thou buyest any thing of that
that is there, or sellest ought of that thou bring from thence: thou shall
have greater hunger of that thou shall leave, then contentacion of that thou
shall bring. Thou do not remember that we are in winter, and that thou must
pass the sea, in the which if the Pirates do not deceive me, the surest
tranquyllyty, is a sign of the greatest torment. Thou myghtst tell me, that
thy ships should retourn without frayt, and therefore they shall sail more
surely. To this I answer thee, that thou shall send them more laden with
covetousness: then they shall return laden with silks. O what a good change
shoold it be, if ye avarice of Italy coold be changed, for the silk of
Alexandry. I swear unto thee, that in such case thy sylk woold frayght a ship:
and our couetyse woold lode a whole navy. That covetousness is great, which the
shame of the world does not oppress: neither the fear of death does cause
to cease. And this I say for thee, that sythens in this dangerous time thou
durst sail, either wisdom wants, or else auaryce and covetousness
surmounteth. To satisfy me, and to excuse thee with those which speak to me
of thee, I can not tell what to say unto them, but that GOD has forgotten
thee, and the seas do know thee. I pray thee what go thou to seek, since
thou leauest the governance of thy house, and saylest in Alexandrie?
Peradventure thou go to the goulph Arpyn, where the maryners cast in thy
lead?

Take heed Mercury, and consider well what thou do, for peradventure where
as thou think to take from the fysh the hard lead, thou may leave unto
them thy soft flesh. I have known many in Rome, which for to recover one part
of that that they have lost, have lost all that which was left unto them. O my
friend Mercury, note, note, note well this last word, whereby thou shall know
what it is that you covetous men gape for in this life. Thou seek care for
thy self, envy for ye neighbors, spurs for strangers, a bayt for thieves,
troubles for thy body, damnacion for thy renowm, unquietness for thy life,
annoyance for thy friends, and occasion for thy ennemies. Finally thou searchest
maledictions for thy heirs: and long suits for thy children: I can not write
any more unto thee, because the fever does so behemently vex me. I pray
thee, pray to the gods of Samia for me: for medecines littel profits, if the
gods be angry with us. My wife Faustine saluteth thee, and she says that
she is sorry for thy loss: she sends thee a rich jewel for Fabilla thy
daughter, and I send thee a commission to thend they shall geeue thee a ship in
recompense of thy lead. If thou saylest with it, come not by Rhodes, for we
have taken it from their pirates. The gods be in thy custody, and geeue me and
Faustine a good life with ours, and a good name among strangers. I do not
write unto thee with mine own hand, for that my sickness does not permit it.

That Princes and noble men ought to consider the mysery of man's nature, and
that brute beasts are in some points (reason set a part) to be preferred unto
man. Cap. xxxij.
MYdas the ancient king of Phrigia, was in his government a cruel tyrant, and
contented not him self to play the tiraunt in his own proper country, but also
maintained rouers on the sea, and thieves in the la^d to rob strangers. This
king Mydas was well known in ye realms of orient, and in such sort, that a
friend of his of Thebes said unto him these words. I let thee to weete king
Mydas, that all those of thy own realm do hate thee, and all the other realms
of Asia do fear thee: and this not for that thou can do much, but for the
crafts and subtilties which thou use. By reason where of, all strangers, and
all thine own have made a vow to god, never to laugh during the time of thy
life: nor yet to weep after thy death. Plutarche in the book of pollitiques
says, that when this king Mydas was born, the ants brought corn into his
cradel, and into his mouth: and when the nurse woold have taken it from him, he
shut his mouth, and woold not suffer any parson to take it from him. They
being all amazed with this strange sight, demanded the oracle what this
beetokened. Who answered, that the child should be marvelous rych, and with
that exceeding covetous: which the ants did beetoken in fylling his mouth with
corn. And afterward he woold not geeue them one only grayn and even so it
chanced, that king Mydas was exceedyng rych, and also very covetous: for he
woold never geeue any thing, but that which by force was taken from him, or by
subtelty robbed. In the schools of Athens at that time flourished a philosopher
called Sylenus, who in letters and pureness of life, was highly renowned. And as
king Mydas was known of many, to have great treasures: so this philosopher
Silenus, was no less noted for despysyng them. This philosopher Silenus
trauaylyng by the borders of Phrigia, was taken by the thieves which robbed the
country: and being brought before king Mydas, the king said unto him. Thou
art a philosopher, and I am a king: thou art my prisoner, and I am thy lord: I
will that immedyatly thou tell me, what ransom thou can geeue me to
redeem thy parson: for I let thee to weete that I am not contented any
phlosopher shoold perysh in my country, because you other philosophers say,
that you will willyngly renounce the goods of the world, sith you can not have
it. The philosopher Silenus answered him. Me thinks (king Mydas) that thou
can better execut tyranny, then to talk of philosophy: for we make no
account that our bodies be taken, but that our wills be at lyberty. Thy
demand is very simple, to demand ransom of me for my parson, whether thou
take me for a philosopher or no. If I be not a philosopher, what moves
thee to fear to keep me in thy realm? for sooner shooldst thou make me a
tyrant, then I thee a philosopher. If thou take me for a philosopher, why
do thou demand money of me? sins thou know I am a philosopher, I am a
craftesman, I am a poet, and also a musicion. So that the time that thou in
heapyng up riches have consumed: ye selfsame time have I in learning sciences
spent. Of a philosopher to demand either gold or silver for ransom of his
parson, is either a word in mockery, or else an invention of tyranny, For
since I was borne in the world, riches never came into my hands, nor after
them has my heart lusted. If thou (king Mydas) wooldst geeue me audience and
in the faith of a prince beeleeue me, I woold tell thee what is the greatest
thing, and next unto that the second, that the gods may geeue in this life: and
it may be, that it shall be so pleasant unto thee to here, and so profitable
for thy life, that thou will pluck me from my enemies, and I may diswade thee
from tirannies. When king Mydas hard these words, he gave him license to say
these two things, swearing unto him to hear him with as much pacyence as was
possible. The philosopher Silenus, having license to speak freely, taking an
instrument in his hands, beeganne to play and sing in this wise.

The senate of the gods when they forethought
On earthly wights to still some ryall grace,
the chiefest gift the heavenly powers had wrought
had been to sow his seed in barrayne place.
But when by steps of such divine constraint,
they forced man perforce to fyxe his line,
The highest good to help his bootles plaint
had been to slyp, his race of slender twine.
For then the tender babes both want to know
the dear delight that life does after hale
And eke the dread, that griefly death does show
Er Charons bote, to Stigeanshore does sal^
THese two things the philosopher proved with so high and natural reasons,
that it was a marvelous matter to see with what vehemence Sylenas the
philosopher sang them: and with what bitterness Mydas the tirant wept. Without
doubt the sentences were marvelous profound, which ye philosopher spoke: and
great reason had that king to esteem it so much. For if we do prepare our
selves to consider whereof we are, and what we shall be, that is to weete,
that we are of earth, and that we shall retourn to earth: We woold not cease
to weep nor sygh.

One of the greatest vanities which I find among the children of vanity is,
that they employ them selves to consider the influences of the stars, the
nature of the planets, the motion of the heavens, and they will not consider
them selves of which consyderacion they shoold take some profyt.

For man geeuing his mind to think on strange things, comes to forget his
own propre. O if we woold consider the corruption whereof we are made, the
fylth whereof we are engendered, the infinite travail wherewt we are borne, ye
long tediousnes wherewt we are norished, the great necessities and suspicions
wherein we live, and above all, the great peril where in we dye: I swear,
and affirm that in such consideracion we find a thousand occasions to wysh
death, and not one to desire life. The children of vanyty are occupied many
years in the schools to learn rethoryk, they exercise them selves in
philosophy, they here Aristottel, they learn Homere without book, they study
Cicero, they are occupied in Xenophon, they harken Titus Liuius, they forget
not Aulus Gelius and they know Ouide: yet for all this I say, that we can not
say that the man knows little, which does know him self. Eschines the
philosopher said well, that it is not the least, but the chiefest part of
philosophy to know man, and wherefore he was made: for if man woold deeply
consider what man is, he shoold find mo things in him, which woold move him to
humble him self, then to stir him to be proud. If we do beeholdyt without
passion, and if we do examine it with reason, I know not what there is in man.
O miserable and frail nature of man, the which taken by it self is littel
worth: and compared with an other thing is much less. For man sees in brute
beasts many things which he does e^uy: and the beasts do see much more in
me^, whereo^ if they had reason, they woold have compassion. The excellency of
the soul laid aside, and the hope which we have of eternal life, if man do
compare the captyuyty of men to the lyberty of beasts, with reason we may see,
that the beasts do live a peacible life: and that which men do lead, is but a
long death. If we prepare our selves to consider, from the time that both man
and beast come into this world, until such time as they both die, and in how
many things the beasts are better then men: with reason we may say, that
nature like a pitiful mother has showed her self to beasts, and yt she does
handle us as an iniust stepmother. Let us beeginne therefore to declare more
particularly the original of the one, and the beginning of the other: and we
shall see how much better the brute beasts are endowed, and how ye miserable
men are disherited.

The auctour follows his purpose, and excellently compares the mysery of
men, with the lyberty of beasts. Cap. xxxiij.
WE ought deeply to consider, that no wild nor tame beast is so long before
he come to his shape, as the miserable man is: who with corruption of blood
and vile matter, is nine months hyd in the womb of his mother. We see the
beast when she is great (if need require) does labor all exercises of
husbandry: so that she is as ready to labor when she is great, as if she
were empty. The contrary happens to women, which when they are big with
child, are weary with going, troubled to be laid, they ride in chariots
through ye market places, they eat little, they brook not that they have eaten,
they hate that which is profitable, and love that which does the^ harm: Finally
a woman with child is contented with nothing, and she fretteth and vexes
with her self. Since therefore it is true, that we are noisome and
troublesome to our mothers, when they bear us in their wombs: why do not we
geeue them some safe conduct, when they are in their delivering? O miserable
state of man, since the brute beasts are borne without destroying their mothers:
but the miserable men before they are born, are troublesome and careful, and
in the time of their birth, are both perilous to them selves, and dangerous
to their mothers. Which seems to be very manifest: for the preparacion that
man makes when he will die, yt self same aught the woman to do, when she is
ready to be delivered. We must also consider, that though a beast has but
two feet, as the birds have, he can go, move, and run, immediately when it
comes forth: but when man is born, he can not go, nor move, and much less
run. So that a popingey ought more to be esteemed, which has no hands: then
the man which has both hands and feet. That which they do to the little babe,
is not but a prognostication of that which he ought to suffer in the progress
of his life: that is to weete. That as they are not contented to put ye evil
dooer in prison, but they lode his hands with yrons, and set his feet in the
stocks: so in like manner to the miserable man, when he enters into the
charter of his life, immediately they bind both his hands and his feet, and lay
him in ye cradel. So that the innocent babe is first bound and rolled, before
he be embraced, or have suck of the mother. We must note also, yt the hour
wherein the beast is brought forth, though it know not ye Sier which begat it,
at ye least it knows ye damme which brought it forth: which is apparent, for
so much as if the mother have milk, the yongling forth with does suck her
teats: and if perchance she have no milk, they go afterward to hide the^
selves under her wings: Of ye miserable man it is not so, but ye day that he
is born, he knows not the nurse that geeueth him suck, neither the father
which has beegotten him, the mother which has born him, nor yet the midwife
which has received him: moreover he can not see with his eyes, hear with his
ears nor judge with the taste, and knows neither what it is to touch, or
smell: so that we see him, to whom ye seygnory over al brute beasts and other
things (that are created) parteineth, to be born the most unable of all other
creatures. We must also consider, that though the beast be never so little,
yet it can seek for ye teates of his mother to suck, or to wa^der in ye fields
to feed, or to scrape ye du^ghilles to eat, or else it goes to ye fou^tayns
and rivers to drink, and yt he lerneth not by ye discourse of time, or yt any
other beast has taught it, but as soon as it is born, so sone does it know
what thing is necessary for it. The miserable man is not borne with so many
present commodities, he can not eat, drynk, nor go, make him self ready, ask,
nor yet complayn, and that which is more, he knows not scarcely how to suck,
for the mothers often times woold geeue to their children (if they could) the
blood of their heart: and yet they can not cause them to take the mylk of their
breasts. O great mysery of man's nature, for so much as the brute beasts as soon
as they are come forth of their mothers womb, can know and seek: but when yt
is offered unto man, he can not know it. We must note also, that to brute
beasts nature has geeuen clothing, wherewyth they may keep them selves from
the heat of Summer, and defend them selves from the cold of winter: which is
manifest, for that to lambs and sheep she has geeuen wool, to byrds
feathers, to hoggs bristels, to horses hear, to fysh scales, and to snayles
shells. Finally I say, there is no beast which has need with his hands to
make any garment, nor yet to borow it of another. Of all this the miserable man
is depryued, who is borne all naked, and dies all naked, not carrying with him
one only garment: and if in the time of his life he will use any garment, he
must demand of the beasts, both leather and wool: and thereunto he must also
put his whole labor and industry.

I woold ask princes, and great lords, if when they are borne, they bring with
them any apparel: and when they die, if they carry with them any treasour? To
this I answer no: but they die as they are borne, as well the rych as the
poor, and the poor as the rich. And admit that in this life fortune does make
difference beetweene us in estates, yet nature in time of our birth, and death,
does make us all equal. We must also think and consider, that for so much as
nature has provided the beasts of garments, she has also taken from them the
care of what they ought to eat: for there is no beast that does either plow,
sow, or labor, but does content her self, and passes her life either with the
little flies of the air, with the corn that she fyndeth in ye highways, with
the herbs in the fyelds, with the ants of the earth, with the grapes of the
vine, or with the fruits which are fallen. Finally I say, that without care all
beasts take their rest, as if the next day followyng they shoold have no need
to eat. O what a great benefit shoold god do to the miserable man, if he had
taken from him the travail to apparel him self, and the care to search for
things to eat. But what shall the poor miserable man do, that before he
eats, he must till, sow, he must reap, and thresh the corn, he must
cleanse it, griend it, paste it, and bake it, and it can not be provided
without care of mind, nor be done without the propre swet of the brows. And if
perchance any man did provide for him self with the swet of others, yet shall
he live with his own offenses. Also in other things the beasts do excel us:
for in the flowers, in the leaves, in the herbs, in the straw, in the otes, in
the bread, in the flesh, or in the fruit which they eat, or in the water which
they drink, they feel no pain, although it be not sweet: nor take any
displeasure, though their meats be not sauory. Finally, such as nature has
provided them, without disgysing or making them selves better, they are
contented to eat. Man coold lose nothing, if in this point he agreed with
beasts: but I am very sorry, yt there are many vicious and proud men, to who^
nothing wants either to apparail, or eat: but they have to much to maintein
them selves, and here with not contended, they are such dronkardes to taste of
diverse wines, and such Epicures to eat of sundry sorts of meats: that often
times they spend more to dress them, then they did cost the bying. Now when
the beasts are brought forth, they have knowledge both of that that is
profitable, and also of that that is hurtful for them. For we see this, that
the sheep flies the wolf, the catt flies the dog, the ratt flies the catt,
and the chicken the kyte: so that the beasts in opening the eyes, do
immediately know the friends who^ they ought to follow, and the enemies whom they
ought to fly. To the miserable man, was utterly denied this so great privilege.
For in the world there has been many beastly men, who has not only attained
that, which they ought to know whiles they lived: but also even as like beasts
they passed their days in this life, so they were infamed at the time of their
death. O miserable creatures yt we are, which live in this wicked world, for
we know not what is hurtful for us, what we ought to eat, from what we
ought to abstain, nor yet whom we shoold hate: we do not agree with those
whom we ought to love, we know not in whom to put our trust, from whom we
ought to fly, nor what it is we ought too choose, nor yet what we ought to
forsake. Finally I say, that when we think often times to enter into a sure
haven, within.3. steps afterward we fall headlong into the deep sea. We
ought also to consider, that both to wild and tame beasts, nature has geeuen
arms, or weapons to defend them selves, and to assault their enemies, as it
appears, for that to birds she has geeuen wings, to the hearts swiftfeete,
to the Elephants, tushes, to the serpents scales, to the Eagle tallons, to the
Faucon a beak, to ye lions teeth, to the bulls horns, and to ye bears paws,
Finally I say, that she has geeuen to the Foxes subtilty to know how to hyde
them selves in the earth, and to the fishes little finnes how to swim in the
water. Admit that ye wretched men have few enemies, yet in this they are none
otherwise priuileged then the beasts: for we see (without tears it cannot be
told) that the beasts which for the service of men were created, with the self
same beasts, men are now adays troubled, and offended. And to the end it seem
not we should talk of pleasure, let every man think with him self, what it is
that we suffer with the beasts of this life: For the Lions do fear us, the
wolfes devour our sheep, the dogs do bite us, the cattes scratche us, the
Bear does tear us, the serpents poyso^ us, the Bulls hurt us, with their
horns, the birds do ouerfly us, the ratts do trouble us, the spiders do annoy
us, and the woorst of all is, yt a litel fly sucketh our blood in ye day, and
the poor flea does let us from sleep in the night. O poor and miserable man
who for to sustein this wretched life, is enforced to beg al things that he
needs of the beasts. For the beasts do geeue him wool, the beast do draw him
water, the beasts do carry him him from place to place, ye beasts do plough the
land, and carries the corn into their barnes. Finally I say, that if the man
receive any good, he has not wherewith to make recompense: and if they do him
any evil, he has naught but the tongue to revenge. We must note also that
though a man lode a best with stripes, beat her, drive her by the foul ways
though he takes her meat from her, yea though her yonglings dye: yet for none
of all these things she is sad, or sorrowful, and much less does weep, and
though she should weep, she cannot. For beasts little esteame their life,
and much less fear death. It is not so of the unhappy and wretched man, which
can not but bewail the unthankfulness of their friends, ye death of their
children, the want which they have of necessityes, the case of adversity which
do succeed them, the false witness which is brought against them, and a
thousand calamities whice do torment their hearts. Finally I say, that the
greatest comfort that men have in this life, is to make a river of water with
the tears of their eyes. Let us inquire of princes and great lords, what they
can do when they are borne, whether they can speak as orators, if they can
run as posts, if they can govern them selves as kings, if they can fight
as men of war, if they can labor as laborers, if they can woork as the
masons, if they knew to teach as masters, these litell children would answer,
that they are not only ignorant of all that we demand of them, but also
that they can not understand it. Let us return to ask them what is that they
know, since they know nothing of that we have demanded them? they will answer
that they can do none other thing, but weep at their birth, and sorrow at
their death. Though al those (which sail in this so perilous sea) do rejoice
and take pleasure, and seem too sleap soundly: yet at the last there comes ye
wind of adversity, which makes them al to know their folly. For if I be not
deceived, and if I know any thing of this world: those which I have seen at
the time of their birth take shipp weeping: I doubt whether they will take land
in ye grave laughing. O unhappy life (I shoold say rather death) which the
mortals take for life, wherein afterward we must consume a great time, to
learn all arts, sciences, and offices: and yet notwithstanding, that whereof
we are ignorante, is more the^ that which we know. We forget the greatest
part save only that of weeping, which no man needs to learn: for we are
borne, and live weeping, and until this present we have seen none dye enjoy.
We must note also that the beasts do live and dye, with the inclinations
where with they were borne: that is to weete, that the wolf follows the
sheep, and not the birds: the hounds follow the hares, and not the ratts: the
sparrow flies at the birds, and not at the fish: the spider eats the flies,
and not the herbs. Finally I say, that if we let the beast search his meat
quietly, we shall not see him geeuen to any other thing.

The contrary of all this happens to men, ye which though nature has created
feeble, yet Gods inte^tio^ was not they should be malicious: but I am sorry,
since they cannot avoid debilyty, that they turn it into malice. The
presumption which they have to be good, they turn to pride: and the desire
they have to be innocent, they turn into envy. The fury which they should
take against malice, they turn into anger: and the liberality they ought to
have with thee good, they convert into auaryce. The necessity they have to eat,
they turn into gluttony: and the care they ought to have of their conscience,
they turn into negligence. Finally I say, that the more strength beasts have,
the more they serve: and the less men are worth, so much the more thanks have
they of god. The innocence of the brute beast considered, and the malice of the
malicious man marked: without comparison, the company of the brute beast is
less hurtful, then the conversation of evil men.

For in ye end, if ye be conversant with a beast, ye have not but to beeware
of her: but if ye be in company with a man, there is nothing where in ye
ought to trust him. We must note also, that it was neither seen, or read,
that there was any beast that took care for the grave: but the beasts being
dead, some ore torn in pieces with Lions, other dysmembred by the bears,
others gnawn with dogs, other remain in the fylds, other are eaten of men, and
other by the ants. Finally, the intralles of the one, are the graves of others.
It is not so of the miserable man, the which consumes no small treasure to
make his tomb, which is the most vaynest thing that is in this miserable life
for there is no greater vanity, nor lyghtnes in man, then to be esteemed for
his goodli and su^ptuous sepulture, and little to way a good life. I will
swear, that at this day all the dead do swear, that they care little if their
bodies be buried in the deep Seas, or in the golden tombs, or that the cruel
beasts have eaten them, or that they remain in the fields without a grave: so
that their souls may be among the celestial companies. Speaking after the
law of a christian, I durst say that it profits little the body to be among
ye painted and carved stones: when the miserable soul is burning, in the fyrye
flames of hell. O miserable creatures, have not we suffycient where with to
seek in this life, to procure, to travail, to accomplish, to sygh, and also
what to beewayle, with out having such care and anguysh, to know where they
shall be buried? Is there any man so vain, that he does not care that other
menn shoold condempn his evil life: so that they praise his rych Tomb? To
those yt are living I speak and say of those that are dead: that if a man gave
them leave to return in to the world, they would be occupied more to correct
their excess, and offenses: then to adourne and repair their graves and
tombs, though they found them fallen down. I cannot tell what to say, more in
this case, but to admonysh men that it is great folly to make any great
account of the graves.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes this letter to Domitius a citezin of Capua
to comfort him in his exile, being banished for a quarrel beetwixt him and an
other about the running of a horse, very comfortable to those that have been in
favor and now fallen in disgrace. Cap. xxxiiii.
Mark the Romain Emperor, borne at mount Celio, to thee Domitius of Capua,
wysheth health, and consolation from Gods the only comforters. The bitter
winter in these parts, have reised boisterus wynds, and the winds have caused
much rayn, and the much rayn has caused great moystures: the which engenders
in me sundry dyseases. Among the which the gowt of my hands is one, and the
Siatica in my leg is another. Eschines the philosopher said, that the liberty
of the soul and the health of the bodi, cannot be esteemed to much and much
less also be bought for money. Tell me I pray thee, what can he do or what
is he worth, yt has neither lyberti, nor health? The divine Plato in his
books of his common wealth, recites three things.

The first, that the man which owes nothing, cannot say that he is poor. For
the day that I ow money to another, another and not my self is lord of mine
own. The second, the man which is no servant, nor captive, has not reason to
say that any thing may make him unhappy. For fortune in nothing shows her
self so cruel, as to take from us the liberty of this life.

The third which Plato said, is that among all temporal goods there is none
more greater, nor greater felicity, then the treasure of health. For the man
which is persecuted with sickness, with riches can have no contentacion. In the
time of our old fathers, when Rome was well corrected, they did not only
ordeine the things of their common wealth: but also they provided for that
which touched the health of every person. So that they watched to cure the
body, and they were circumspect to destroy vices. In the time of Gneus
Patroclus, and Julius Albus, they say that the city of Rome was ordinarily
vysyted with sickness. Wherefore first they did forbid, that in the month of
July, and Augustus, there should be no stews for women. For the blood of the
young, was corrupted in venerial acts.

The second, that no man should bring any fruit from Salon, nor Campania, to
sell during these.2. months in Rome. For the delicate ladies of Rome for
extreme heat, and the poor for their poverty, did not eat in summer but
fruyts: and so the market places were full of fruyts, and the houses full of
agues. The third, they did defend that no inhabitaunt should be so hardy, to
walk after the sunn were set. For the young men, thorough the lightness they used
in the nights, took dyseases which vexed them in the days.

The fourth, they did prohibit that no man should be so hardy, to sell openly
in Rome wine of Candie, or Spain. For in the great heat of the summer, as the
sun is very whot, so the wine as poison does kill young men.

The fifth, that they shoold purge the priuyes, and make clean the streats and
houses. For of the corruption of the air, is engendered the plague among the
people. When Rome was rych, when Rome prospered, all these things were observed
in the common wealth. But since Catilina the Tyrant did rebel, since Scilla
and Marius did slander it, since Caesar and Pompeius did play the tiraunts,
since Octauius Augustus and Marcus Antonius did robb it, since Calligula and
Nero did defame it, they cared litel whither they entered into Rome, to sell the
wine of Spain or Candia. For they feared more the knife of the enemies: then
the heat of the summer. Great reason had the ancients to forbid those things
in Rome, for, to say the troth they are not healthful. When I was young in
Rome, my head did not ache with talking in the night, nor I did feel my blood
chafed with drinkyng wine. Then I was not troubled to iette in the heat in the
summer, nor I was annoyed to goo bare legged in the winter.

But now that I am old, there is no heat but offends me, nor cold but
perseth me. For men through much evil rule in their youth, come to greauous
dyseases in their age. O if mortal men, after that they be old could at any
time woork with the gods, that they shoold beecome young again: I swear unto
thee, by the faith of a good man, that they woold beehaue them selves so well,
that the world should not again deceive them. Since men have been vicious in
their youth, I do not meruell though they are full of dyseases when they are
old. For how can he love his health, which hates virtue? All that which I have
spoken here before is to the end you may know and beeleeue that I am sick,
and that I cannot write unto the so long as I would, and as thou desire: so
that hereof it follows, that I shall bewail thy pain, and thou shall be
grieved with my gowte. I understood here how at ye feast of the god Ianus,
through ye running of a horse, great strife is risen beetweene thee and thy
neighbor Patricius: And the brute was such, that they have confiscated thy
goods, battered thy house, banished thy children, and deprived thee from the
Senate for x. years.

And further, they banished thee out of Capua for ever, and have put thy fellow
in the prison Mamortine: so that by this little fury, thou have cause to lament
all the days of thy life. All those which come from thens do tell us, that
thou art so woeful in thy heart, and so changed in thy parson: that thou do
not forget thy heavy chances, nor receiuest consolation of thy faithful
friends.

Think not that I speak this, that thou should be offended: for according
to the often chaunges which fortune has showed in me, it is long since I knew
what sorrow meant. For truly the man which is sorrowful, sigheth in the day,
watches, in the night, delyteth not in company, and with only care he
rests. The light he hates, the darkness he loves, with bitter tears he
waters the earth, with heavy sighs he perceth the heavens, with infinite
sorows he remembers that that is past, and forseeth nothing that that to come
is. He is displeased with him that does comfort him, and he takes rest to
express his sorrows. Finally, the unfortunate man is contented with nothing,
and with him self continually he does chafe. Beeleue me Domitius, that if I
have well touched the conditions of the sorrowful man, it is for no other
cause, but for that my evil fortune has made me taste them all. And hereof it
comes, that I can so well dyscribe them: for in the end, in things which
touch the sorrows of the spirit, and the troubles of the body, there is great
dyffere^ce from him that has read them, and from him that has felt them. If
thou dydst feel it there, as I do feel it here, it is suffycient to geeue
thee and thy friends great dolor, to think that for so small a trifle thou
should undo thee, and all thy parentage. And speaking with the troth, I am
very sorry to see thee cast away: but much more it greeueth me, to see thee
drowned in so little a water. When men are noble, and keep their hearts high,
they ought to take their enemies agreeable to their estates. I mean, that when
a noble man shall adventure to hazard his person, and his goods, he ought to do
it for a matter of great importance. For in the end, more defamed is he that
overcomes a laborer, then he which is overcome with a knight. O how variable
is fortune, and in how short space does happen an evil fortune? in that which
now I will speak, I do condemn my self, and accuse thee. I complain to the
Gods, I reclayme the dead, and I call the living, to the end they may see, how
that before our eyes we suffer the greeses, and know them not, with the hands
we touch them, and perceue them not, we go over the^ and see them not, they
sound in our ears, and we hear them not, daily they do admonysh us, and we
do not beeleue them: finally we feel the peril, where there is no remedy of
our grief. For as experyence does teach us, with a little blast of wind the
fruit do fall, with a little spark of fire the house is kyndled, with a little
rock the shipp is broken, at a little stone the foot does stumble, with a
little hook they take great fysh, and with a little wound dies a great person.

For all that I have spoken, I mean, that our life is so frayl and fortune so
fykcle, that in that part where we are surest harnessed, we are soonest
wounded. Seneca writing to his mother Albina, wc was banished from Rome, said.

Thou Albina art my mother and I thy son, thou art aged and I am not young, I
never beeleued in fortune, though she woold promise to be in peace with me.
And further he said, all that which is in me, I count it at the dysposition of
fortune, as well of riches, as of prosperitye: and: I keep them in such a
place, that at any hour in the night when she lists, she may carye them
away, and never wake me. So ye though she carry those out of my cofers yet
she should not rob me of this in my intrails. With out doubt such words were
merueylous pythy, and very decent for such a wise man.

The Emperor Adryan my Lord, did wear a ring of gold on his finger which he
said was of the good Drusius Germanicus, and the word about the ring in latin
letters said thus. Illis est grauis fortuna, quibus est repentina. Fortune to
them is most cruel, whom suddenly she assaulteth. We see oftentimes by
experience, that in the fystula which is stopped, and not in that which is
open, the Surgion makes doubt. In the shallow water, and not in the deep
seas, the Pilot despayreth. The good man of arms is more afraid of the
secreate ambushment, then in the open battle. I mean, that the valiant man
ought to beware, not of strangers, but of his own, not of enemies but of
friends, not of the the cruel war, but of the feigned peace, not of the
manifest damage, but of the pryuy peril. O how many we have seen, whom the
myshaps of fortune coold never change, and yet afterward having no care she
has made them fall. I ask now, what hope can man have, which will never trust
to the prosperity of fortune? Since for so light a thing, we have seen such
trouble in Capua, and so great loss of thy person and goods? If we knew
fortune, we woold not make so great complaynt of her.

For speaking the troth, as she is for all, and would content all, though in
the end she mock all, she geeueth and shows us all her goods, and we others
take them for inherytaunce. That which she lends us, we take it for
perpetual, that which in jest she geeueth us, we take it in good earnest, and
in the end, as she is the mocker of all, so she goes mockyng of us, thinking
that she geeueth us another man's, and she takes our own proper. I let thee
wete, that knowing that of fortune which I know, I fear not the turmoyles of
her traueyles neither does her lightnings or thu^ders astony me, nor yet will
I not esteem the pleasantnes, of her goodly fair flatteryes. I will not trust
her sweet reioysings, neither will I make account of her frendshyps, nor I
will join my self with her enemies, nor I will take any pleasure of ye she
gives me, neither grief of yt she takes from me, nor I will have respect
when she tells me truth, nor I do not regard it, though she tell me a lie.

Finally, I will not laugh for that she asks me, nor I will weep for yt
she sends me. I will now tell thee (my friend Domitius) one thing, and
heartily I desire thee to keep it in memory. Our, life is so doubtful, and
fortune so sudden yt when she thretneth, she stryketh not always, neither
does she threaten always when she stryketh. The man which presumes to be
sage, and in all things well provided, goes not so fast, yt at every step
he is in danger of falling, nor so softly, that in long time he cannot aryue
at his journeys end. For the false fortune gauleth in steed of strikyng, and in
steed of gauling strikes:

Therefore since in years I am older then thou, and have more experience of
affairs: if thou have marked that I have told thee, thou wylt remember well that
which I will say unto thee, which is: that that part of thy life is
troublesome, which unto the seems to be most sure. wylt thou that by example
I tell thee all that, which by words I have spoken? Behold Hercules of Thebes,
who escaped so many dangers, both by sea and by land, and afterward came to
die in the arms of a harlotte. Agamemnon the great Captain of Greeks in the
x. years which he warred against Troy, never had any peril: and afterward in
the night, they killed him entering into his own house.

The vnuincyble Alexander the great, in all the conquests of Asia did not dye,
and afterward with a little poison, ended his life in Babylon. Pompeius the
great, dyed not in the conquest of his enemies: and afterward his friend
Ptholomeus slew him. The couragyus Julius Caesar, in.lii. battles could not be
ouercom: and afterward in the Senate, they slew him with xxiii. wounds.

Hannibal, the terryble captain of Carthage, slew him self in one moment
(which the Romans could not do, in xvii. years) only because he would
not com into ye hands of his enemies. Asclipius medius, brother of great
Pompeius, in xx. years that he was a rouer on ye seas, never was in any peril:
afterward drawyng water out of a well, was drowned therein. Ten Captains,
who^ Scipio had chosen in the conquest of Affrike, jesting on a bridge, fell
into the water, and there were drowned. The good Bibulus going triu^phing in his
chariot at Rome, a tile fell on his head: so that his vain glory was the end of
his good life. What wylt thou more I say unto thee, but that Lucia my sister
having a needel on her breast, and her child between her arms: the child
layeng his hand upon the needell, and thrust it into her breast, whereby the
mother dyed. Gneus Ruffirius: Which was a very wise man, and also my kinseman,
one day keamyng his white hears, struck a tooth of the comb in his head,
wherewith he gave him self a mortal wound: so that in short space after his
life had end, but not his doctrine, nor memory. How think thou Domitius: by
the immortal gods I swear unto thee, that as I have declared to thee this small
number, so I coold recite thee other infinyte. What mishap is this after so
many fortunes? what reproach after such glory? What peril after such surety?
what evil luck, after such good success? What dark night after so clear a day?
What so evil enterteinment, after so great labor? What sentence so cruel,
after so long process? O what inconvenience of death, after so good beginning of
life? Being in their stead, I can not tell what I would but I had rather choose
unfortunate life and honorable death: then an infamous death, and honorable
life. That man which will be counted for a good man and not noted for a brute
beast, ought greatly to travail to live well, and much more to dye better. For
the evil death makes men doubt that the life has not been good, and the good
death is the excuse of an evil life. At the beeginnyng of my letter I wrate
unto thee, how that the gowt troubles me evil in my hand. I say it were to
much to write any le^ger, and though the letter be not of mine own hand,
these two days the love that I bear thee, and the grief that holds me, have
stryued together. My will desires to write, and my fingers cannot hold the
pen. The remedy hereof is that since I have no power to do what I would as
thine, thou oughtst to accept what I can as mine. I say no more herein, but as
they tell me thou buildest now a house in Rhodes: wherefore I send thee a
thousand sexterces to accomplysh the same. My wife Faustine saluteth thee, who
for thy pain is sore dyseased. They tell us thou have been hurt, wherefore she
sends thee a weight of the balm of Palestyne. Heal thy face therewith, to
the end the scarres of that wound do not appear. If thou find green
almonds, and new nutts, Faustine desires thee that thou will send her some. By
another man she sends a gown for thee, and a kirtell for thy wife. I
conclude, and do beeseech thee immortal Gods to geeue thee all that I desire
for thee, and that they geeue me all that thou wyshest me. Though by the
hands of others I write unto thee, yet with my heart I love thee.

That Princes and noble men ought to be advocates for widows, fathers of
orphans, and helpers of all those which are comfortles. Cap. xxxv.
MAcrobius in the third book of the Saturnalles says, that in the noble cyty
af Athens, there was a temple called Misericordia, which the Athenians kept so
well watched, and locked, that without leave and license of the Senate no man
might enter in. There were the Images of pitiful princes only, and none
entered in there to pray but pitefull men.

The Atheniens abhorred always severe and cruel deeds, because they would not
be noted cruel. And thereof comes this manner of saying, that the greatest
injury they could say unto a man was, that he had never entered into the scoole
of the philosophers to learn, nor in to the temple of Misericordia to pray. So
that in the one, they noted him for simple: and in the other they accused him
for cruel. The historiographers say that the most noble lineage that was at
that time, was of a king of Athens, the which was exceeding rych and lyberall
in geeuing: and above all very pitiful in pardoning. Of whom it is written,
that after the great treasours which he had offered in the temples, and the
great riches he had distributed to the poor: he took upon him to bring up
all the orphans in Athens, and to feed all the widows. O how much more did
that statut of the said pytyfull king shine in that temple, who norished the
orphans, then the ensigns which are set up in the Temples of the captains,
which had robbed the wydows. All the ancient princes, I say those that have
been noble and valiant, and that have not had the name of tiraunts, though in
some things they were noted: yet they always have been praised, esteemed, and
commended to be gentle and merciful: so that they recompensed the fiersnes
and cruelty which they show to their enemies, with the mercy and clemency which
they used to the orphans. Plutarch in his politikes says: that the Romans
among them selves ordained, that all that which remained of bankettes and
feasts, which were made at marriages and triumphs, shoold be geeuen to wydows,
and orphans. And this custom was brought to so good an order that if any rich
man would use his profit of that which remained, yt orphans might justly have
an accion of felony against him as a thing robbed from them. Aristides ye
philosopher in an oration he made of ye excellency of Rome says that ye
princes of Persia had this custom, never to dyne nor sup, but first ye trumpets
shoold blow at their gates: the wc were more loud, then armonious. And it was
to this end, that all the widows and orphans shoold come thither: for it was a
law amongst them, that all yt which was left at the royal tables, should be
for the poor and indigent persons. Phalaris ye tyrant writing to a friend of
his, said these words. I have receued thy brieef letter, with ye rebuke likewise
wc thou gave me therein, more bitter the^ tedyous. And admit yt for ye time
it grieved me, yet after I came to my self, I received thereby great comfort.
For in the end, one loving rebuke of his friend is more worth: then a feigned
flattery of his enemy. Amongst the things whereof thou accusest me, thou say
yt they take me for a great tiraunt, because I disobey the gods, spoil the
temples, kill the priests, pursue the innocents, rob the people: and the woorst
of all yt I do not suffer me to be entreted, nor permit yt any man be
conuersau^t with me. To that they say I disobey the gods, in very deed they
say true. For if I did all that ye gods would, I shoold do little of that men
do ask me. For as much as they say I robb the temples, thereunto also I
grant: For the immortal gods do demand rather of us pure hearts, then that
we shoold buyld their temples. For that they say I kill priests, I confess also
that it is true. For they are so dissolute, that I think I do more services to
the gods, to put them to death: then they do in doing their sacrifices whiles
they live. For that they say I rob the temples, I also confess it: for I
defending it as I do from enemies, it is but meet and reasonable they find
me and my servants. For yt they say I suffer me not to be entreated, it is
true. For daily and hourly they ask me so many unjust, and unreasonable
things, yt for them and for me it is better to denay them: then for to grant
them. For that they say that I am not conversant with any, I confess it is
true. For ever when they come into my palace, it is not so much to do me
service, as to ask me some particular thing for their profit. For that they
say I am not pitefull amongst the miserable, and will not hear the wydows, and
orphans, in no wise to that I will agree: For I swear unto thee, by the
immortal gods, that my gates were never shutt to widowees, and orphans. Pulio
in the life of the Emperor Claudius says, that ons a poor widow came before
Claudius the Emperor with weeping eyes, to desire him of justice. The good
prince being moved with compassion, did not only weep as she: but with his
own hands dried her tears. And as there was about ye emperor many noble
Romans, one amongst them said unto him. For ye authority and grauitye of
Romayn princes, to hear their subjects in justice, suffiseth only: though
they dry not ye tears of their faces. This emperor Claudius au^swered. Good
princes ought not to be contented, to do no more than just judges: but in
doing justice, a man must know yt they are pitefull. For oftentimes those wc
come before princes, do return more contented with the love they show them:
then with the justice they minister unto them. And further he said. For as much
as you say yt it is of small aucthoryty, and also of less gravity, that a
prince do weep with a widow, and with his hands wype her eyes, I answer: thee
that I desire rather to be partaker of the griefs with my subjects, then to
give them occasion to have their eyes full of tears.

Certeynly these words are worthy to be noted, and no less followed.

Admit that clemency in all things deserves to be praised, yet much more
ought it to be commended, when it is executed on weemen. And if generally in
all, much more in those which are void of health, and comfort. For weeme^ are
quickly troubled, and with greater difficulty comforted.

Plutatche, and Quintus Curtius say, the good intertainment which Alexander
the great, showed unto the wife and children of king Darius (after he was
utterly vanquished) exalted his clemency: in such sort, that they gave rather
more glory to Alexander, for the pity and honesty which he used with the
children, then for the victory he had of the father. And when the unhappy king
Darius knew the clemency and pity, which the good Alexander used to his wife,
and his children, he sent unto him his ambassadors, to the end yt on his
beehalf they shoold thank him for yt yt is past, and shoold desire him that
he would continue so in time to come: saing, that it might chance, that the
Gods and fortune would mitigat their wrath against him.

Alexander answered to the imbassadours these words, Ye shall say in my
beehalf to your king Darius, that he geeue me no thanks for the good and
piteful woork that I have done to his captyue weemen, since he is certain I
did it not for that he was my friend: and I would not cease to do it, for yt
he is mine enemy. But I have done it, for that a gentle Prince is bound to do
in such a case. For I ought to employ my clemency to weemen, which can do
naught but weep: and my puissaunte power Princes shall feel, wc can do naught
else but wage battle. Truly these words were worthy of such a prince, Many
have envy at ye surname of Alexander, wc is great. And he is caled Alexander
ye great, because if his heart was great in ye e^terprises he took upon him,
his courage was much more greter in cities and realms wc he gave. Many have
e^uy at yt renown which they geeue Pompeius, because they call him great, for
this excellent Romayn made him self co^queror of.22. realms, and in times past
has been accompanied with 25. kings. Many have envy at the renown of Scipio
the Affrica^, who was caled Affricane, because he overcame and conquered the
great and renowned city of Carthage: the which city in riches was greater then
Rome, in arms and power it surmounted all Europe. Many have envy at Scipio the
Asian, who was called Asian, because he subdued the proud Asia: the which
until his time was not but as a church yard of Romans. Many have great envy
at the imortall name of Charles, who was called Charles the great, because
being as he was (a little king) he did not only vanquish and triumph over
many kings, and strange realms: but also forsake the royal sea of his own
realm.

I do not maruayl, that the proud princes have envy against the virtuous and
valiant princes: but if I were as they, I would have more envy at the renown
of Antonius the emperor, then of the name and renown of all the princes in the
world. If other princes have attained such proud names, it has been for that
they robbed many countries, spoiled many temples, committed much tyranny,
dissembled with many tyraunts, persecuted diverse innocents, and because they
have taken, from diverse good me^, not only their goods but also their lives:
For the world has such an euel property, yt to exalt ye name of one only, he
puts down, 500. Neither in such e^terprises, nor with such titles, wa^ the
emperor Anthonius Pius his name, and renown. But if they call him Anotonius the
pitefull, it is because he knew not but to be father of Orphans: and was not
praised, but because he was advocate of wydows. Of this most excellent prince
is read, that he himself did here, and judge the complaints and process in
Rome of the orphans: And for the poor, and wydows, the gates of his palace
were always open? So that the porters which he kept within his palace, were
not for to let the enter of the poor: but for to let and keep back the rich.
The historiographers oftentimes say, that this good prince said, that the good
and virtuous princes, ought always to have their hearts open for the poor, and
to remedy the wydows, and never to shut the gates against them. The god Apollo
says, that the prince which will not speedely judge the causes of the poor,
the gods will never permit that he be well obeyed of the rich. O high and
worthy words, that it pleased not ye god Apollo, but our living god, that
they were written in the hearts of princes. For nothing can be more unjust or
dishonest, then that in the palace of princes and great lords, the rich and
fools shoold be dispatched: and the widows and orphans frinds should have no
audience, Happy, and not once, but a hundredth times happy is he, that will
remember the poor afflicted, and open his hand too comfort them, and does not
shut his cofers from helping them, unto him I assure and promise, that at the
straight day of judgment, the process of his life shall be judged with mercy
and pity.

That the troubles griefs, and sorows of widows are much greater, then those
of widdowers: where fore princes and noble men ought to have more compassion
upon the weemen: then on men. Cap. xxxvi.
IT is great pity to see a noble and virtuous man sorrowful, alone and a
widower, if especially he lived contented when he was married. For if he will
not mary, he has lost his sweet company: and if he think to mary an other,
let him be assured he shall scarcely agree with his second wife. There is
much sorrow in that house, where the woman that governed it is dead: For
immediately ye husband forsakes him self, the children do lose their
obedience, the servants beecome neglygent, the hand maids beecome wanto^, the
friends are forgotten, the house decays, the goods wast, the apparel is lost:
and finally in the widowers house there are many to rob and few to labor.
Heavy and lamentable are the thoughts of ye widower: for if he thinks to
mary, it greueth him to geeue his children a stepmother. If he can not be
married, he feels greater pain, seeing him al ye day to remain alone: so
that ye poor miserable man sigheth for his wife he has lost, and weepeth for
her whom he desires to have. Admit yt this be true, there is great
difference from ye cares and sorows of weemen, to yt of men. A thing very
clear, for so much as the widower lawfully may go out of his house, he may
go to ye fields, he may talk with his neigbours, he may be occupied with his
friends, he may follow his suits and also he may be conversant, and refresh
him self in honest places. For commonly men are not so sorrowful in taking ye
death of their wives, as ye wives are, in taking the death of their husbands.
All this is not spoken in ye disfavor of wise and sage men, whom we see make
small streams, with ye tears of their eyes for ye death of their wives: But
for many other vain and light men: wc (the 9. days of the funeral past) a man
does see without any shame to go through ought the strets, beeholding the ladies
and damsells which are in the windows. Truly the woeful women, which are
honest, use not such lightness. For whiles they are widows, it is not lawful
for them to wander abroad, to go out of the house, nor speak with strangers,
nor practice with her own, nor be conversant with her neighbors, nor plead
with their creditours, but agreeable to their woeful estate, to hide and
withdraw them selves in their houses, and to lock them selves in their
chambers: and they think it their duty, to water their pla^ts with tears, and
importune the heavens with sighs. O how woeful? o how grievous? o how sorrowful
is the state of wydowes? for so much as if a widow go out of her house, they
take her for dishonest. If she will not come out of the house, she loses her
goods: If she laugh a litel they count her light, If she laugh not, they call
her an hipocrit. If she go to the church, they note her for a gadder. If she
go not to the church, they say she is unthankful to her late husband. If
she go il apparayled they count her to be a nigard. If she go clenly and
handsome they say nowshee would have a new husband. If she do mainteyne her
self honestly, they note her to be presumptuous. If she keep company,
immediately they suspect her house.

Finally I say, that the poor miserable widows shall find a thousand which
judge their lives, and they have not one that will remedy their pains. Much
loses the woman, who loses her mother which has borne her or her sisters
which she loves, or the fri^des which she knows, or the goods which she
has heaped up: but I say and affirm, that there is no greater loss in ye
world unto a woman, then the loss of a good husband. For in other losses there
is but one only loss: but in that of the husband, al are lost together.
After that the wife does see her loving husband in the grave, I woold ask her
what good could remain with her in her house? Since we know, that if her
husband were good, he was the haue^ of al her trobles, the remedy of al her
necessitys, the inuentour of all her pleasours, the true love of her heart, the
true lord of her parson, and the idol whom she honored: finally he was the
faithful steward of her house, and the good father of her children and
familye. Whether family remains or not, whyther children remains or not, in
the one and in the other, trouble and vexation remains most assuredly to the
poor widow. If perchance she remain poor, and have no goods, let every man
imagine what her life can be. For the poor miserable unhappy woman, either
will adventure her parson to get, or will lose her honesty to demand. An honest
woman, a noble and worthy woman, a delicat woman a sweet woman, a woman of
renown, a woman that ought to maynteyne children, and family, ought to have
great reason to be full of anguishe and sorrow: to see, that if she will
mainteyne her self wc the needle she shall not have sufficiently to find her
self bread and water. If she gain with her body she loses her soul. If
she must demand others, she is sahamed. If she fulfill the testament of her
husband, she must sell her gowns If she will not pay his detts, they cause
her to be brought before the judge. As women naturaly are tender, what heart
will suffer them to suffer such inconuenie^ces? and what eyes can abstain to
shed infinite tears? If perchance goods do remain to the miserable widow,
she has no litel care to keep the^? She is at great charges and expenses, to
sustain, and maintayn her self in long suit about her lands, much trouble to
augment them, and in the end, much sorrow to depart from them.

For all her children, and heirs, do occupy them selves more to think, how
they might inherit: then in what sort they ought to serve her. When I came to
this passage, a great while I kept my pen in suspense, to see whither I ought
to touch this matter or no, that is to weete, that oftentimes the poor wydows
put openly the demand of their goods: and the judges do secretly demand the
possession of their parson. So that first they do injury to her honor, before
they do minister justice to her demands. Though perchance she has no child,
yet therefore she remains not without any comfort, and for that the parents
of her husband do spoil her of her goods. For in this case their heirs often
times are so disordered, that for a worn cloak, or for a broken shirt, they
trouble and sore vex the poor wydow. If perchance the miserable wydow have
children, I say that in this case she has double sorrow. For if they are young,
she endures much pain to bring them up: so that each hour and moment, their
mothers live in great sorows, to think only of the life, and health of their
children. If perhaps the children are old, truly the griefs which remayn unto
them are no less. For so much as the greatest part of them are either proud,
disobedient, malycious, negligent, adulterers, gluttons, blasphemers, false
liars, dull headed, wanting wit, or sickly.

So that the joy of the woeful mothers is to beewayl the death of their
welbeeloued husbands, and to remedy the discords of their youthful children.
If the troubles which remain to the mothers with the sons be great: I say
that those which they have with their daughters, be much more. For if the
daughter be quick of wit, ye mother thinks yt she shall be undone. If she
be simple, she thinks that every man will deceive her. If she be faier,
she has enough to do to keep her. If she be deformed: she cannot mary
her. If she be well manered, she will not let her go from her. If she be
evil manered, she cannot endure her. If she be to solitary, she has not
wherewith to remedy her. If she be dissolute, she will not suffer her to be
punished. Finally, if she put her from her, she fears she shall be
sclaundeted. If she leave her in her house, she is afraid she shall be
stolen. What shall the woeful poor wydow do, seeing her self burdened with
daughters, and environed with sons, and neither of them of such sufficient
age, that there is any time to remedy them: nor substance to maintein them?
Admit that she mary one of her sons, and one daughter, I demand therefore if
the poor widow will leave her care, and anguish? Truly I say no, though she
choose rich personages, and well disposed, she cannot escape, but the day that
she replenisheth her self with daughters in law, the same day she charge
her heart with sorows, travels, and cares. O poor wydows, deceive not your
selves, and do not immagin that having married your sons, and daughters, from
that time forward ye shall live more joyful and contented. For that laid aside,
which their nephews do demand them, and that their sons in law do rob
them: when the poor old woman thinks to be most surest, ye young man shall
make a claym to her goods. What daughter in law is there in this world, who
faithfully loves her stepmother? And what son in law is there in the world,
ye desires not to be heir to his father in law? Suppose a poor widow to be
fallen sick, the which has in her house a son in law, and that a man ask him
upon his oath, which of these two things he had rather have: either to govern
his mother in law, with hope to heal her: or to bury her, with hope to inherit
her goods. I swear that such woold swear, that he coold rejoice more to geeue
a ducket for the grave: then a penny to the physician, to purge and heal her.
Seneca in an epistle says, that the fathers in law naturally love their
daughters in law, and the sons in law are loved of their mothers in law. And
for the contrary he says, that naturally the sons in law do hate their
mothers in law: But I take it not for a general rule, for there are mothers in
law which deserve to be woorshipped, and there are sons in law which are not
worthy to be beeloued. Other troobles chance daily to these poor wydows,
which is, that when one of them has one only son, whom she has in the
steed of a husband, in steed of a brother, in steed of a son, she shall see
him dye: whom since she had his life in such great love, she cannot though
she woold, take his death with patience: So that as they bury the dead body of
the innocent child, they bury the lively heart of the woeful mother. Let us omit
the sorows which the mothers have when their children dye, and let us ask the
mothers what they feel when they are sick? They will answer us, that always
and as often times as their children be sick, the death of their husbands then
is renewed, imagining that it will happen so unto them, as it has done unto
others. And to say the truth, it is not marvel if they do fear. For the vine
is in greater peril, when it is budded, then when the grapes are ripe. Other
troubles oftentimes increase to the poor widows, the which amongst others this
is not the least: that is to weete, the little regard of the friends of her
husband, and the unthankfulness of those which have been brought up with him.
The which since he was laid in his grave, never entered into the gates of his
house: but to demand recompense of their old services, and to renew and beegin
new suits. I woold have declared (or to say better, breefly touched) the
travels of wydows, to persuade princes that they remedy them, and to admonish
judges to hear them, and to desire all virtuous men to comfort them. For the
woork of it self is so godly, that he deserves more which remedyeth ye
troubles of one only: then I which write their miseries all together.

Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to a Romayn Lady named
Lauinia, comforting her for the death of her husband. Cap. xxxvii.
MArcus of mount Celio, Emperor of Rome, cheef consul, tribune of the people,
high Bishop, appointed against the Daces, wishes health and comfort to thee
Lauinia, noble, and worthy Romayn matron, the late wife of the good Claudinus.
According to that thy person deserves, to that which unto thy husband I ought,
I think well that thou will suspect that I way thee little: for yt unto thy
great sorows, complaints, and lamentacions, are now aryued my negligent
consolacio^s. When I remember thy merits, wc can not fail, and imagine that ye
wilt remember my good will, wherewith always I have desired to serve thee: I am
assured, yt if thy suspision accuse me, thy virtue and wisdom will defend
me. For speaking the truth, though I am ye last to comfort thee: yet I was
the first to feel thy sorows. As ignorance is the cruel scourge of virtues,
and spur to all vices: so it chances often times, yt over much knowledge,
puts wise men in doubt, and sclaundereth ye innocent. For as much as we see
by experience, the most presumptuous in wisdom, are those which fall into
most perilous vices. We find the latins much better with the ignorance of
vices: then the Greeks with the knowledge of virtues. And the reason hereof
is, for that of things which we are ignorant we have no pain to attayn unto
them: and less grief also to lose them. My intention to tell thee this was,
because I knew that, which I woold not have known, and have hard that, which I
woold not have hard: that is to weete, yt the days and troubles of Claudinus
thy husband are ended, and now thy sorows ( Lauinia his wife) do begin. It is
now a good while, that I have known of the death of ye good Claudinus my friend,
and thy husband, though I did dissemble it. And by the god Mars I swear unto
thee, that it was not for that I woold not beewayl him, but because I woold not
disco^fort thee. For it were extreme cruelty, that she wc was so comfortless,
and sorrowful, for the absence of so long time: shoold be killed with my hand,
through ye knowledge of the death of her so desired husband. It were to unkind
and unseemly a thing, that she, of whom I have received so many good woorks:
shoold receive of me so evil news. The ancients of Carthage held for an
inviolable law, that if the father did tell ye death of his son, or ye son
the death of the father, or ye woman ye death of her husband, or the husband
the death of his wife, or any other semblable woeful, and lamentable death: that
he shoold be cast into the prison, among them wc were condemned to dye. It
seemed to those of Carthage, that he wc said unto an other, that his brother,
kinsman, or friend, was dead, immediately they shoold kill him, or he ought to
dye, or at the least he shoold never be seen in his presence. If in this
case the law of the Carthagians was just: then I ought to be excused, though I
have not told thee this heavy news. For as often as we see him, who has brought
us any evil tidings: our sorows by his sight is renewed again. Since Claudinus
thy husband dyed, I have not had one hour of rest, for to pass thy time away:
for fear lest such woeful and sorrowful news, shoold come to thy knowledge. But
now that I know thou know it, I feel double pain. For now I feel his death,
my care, and thy want of consolation: and the damage by his death shall follow to
the romayn Empire. Thou have lost a noble Romayn, valyant in blood, moderat in
prosperityes, pacient in adversities, coragious in dangers, diligent in
affairs, wise in counsels, faithful to his friends, subtle and ware of his
enemies, a lover of the common wealth, and very honest in his person: and above
all, and whereof I have most envy is, that he never offended man in his life,
nor hurt any with his tongue. We find seldom times, so many virtues assembled in
one man.

For saying the truth, if a man did narowly examine ye vices of many, which
presume to be very virtuous: I swear that he shoold find more to reprove,
then to praise. Since you have lost so good a husband, and I so faithful a
friend: we are bound, thou to beewayl so great a loss, and I to sigh for so
good a companion. And this I do not desire for Claudine, who now rests among
ye gods: but for us others, wc remayn in danger of so many evils. For ye dead
do rest, as in the sure haven: and we others do sail, as yet in raging sea.
O thou heavy heart, how do I see thee, beetweene the bell and the clappers,
that is to weete, that thou want the company of ye good: and art environed
with the flock of evil. For the wc occasion, I doubt often times, whether I may
first bewaill the evil which live: or ye good wc are dead, because in the end
ye evil men do offend us more, wc we find: then does the good men which we
lose. It is a great pity, to see the good and virtuous men dye: but I take it
to be more sorrow, to see the evil and vicious men live. As the divine Plato
says, the gods to kill the good wc serve them, and to geeue long life to the
evil wc offend them, is a mystery so profound, that daily we do lament it,
and yet we can never attayn to the secrets thereof. Tell me I pray thee
Lauinia, know thou not now, that the gods are so merciful, with whom we go
when we dye, and that men are so wicked, with whom we be whiles we live:
that as ye evil were born to dye, so the good dye to live? for the good man
though he dye, lives: and the evil man though he live, dies. I swear unto
thee by the mother Berecinthia, and so the god Jupiter do preserve me, that I
speak not this which I will speak fainedly: which is, that considering the
reast that the dead have with the gods, and seeing the sorows and troubles we
have here with the living: I say, and affirm once again, that they have greater
compassion of our life, then we others have sorrow of their death. Though the
death of men were as ye death of beasts, that is to weet, yt there were no
furies, nor devils, wc shoold torment the evil, and that the gods shoold not
reward ye good: yet we ought to be comforted, to see our friends dye, if it
were for no other, but to see the^ delivered from ye thraldo^ of this miserable
world. The pleasure yt the Pilot has to be in sure haven, the glory yt the
captain has to see the day of victory, the rest that the traueler has to see
his journey ended, the contentation that the woork man has to see his woork
come to perfeccion, all ye same have the dead, seeing them selves out of this
miserable life. If men were born always to live, it were reason to lament them,
when we see them dye: but since it is troth that they are borne to dye, I
woold say, since needs dye we must, that we ought not to lament those which
dye quickly, but those which live long. I am assured, that Claudine thy
husband, remembering that which in this life he has passed, and suffered, and
seeing the rest that he has in the other: though the Gods woold make him
emperor of Rome, he woold not be one day out of his grave. For returning to
the world, he shoold dye again: but being with the gods, he hops to live
perpetually. Lady Lauinia, most earnestly I desire thee, so vehemently not to
perse the heavens with thy so heavy sighs, ne yet to wete the earth, with thy
so bitter tears: since thou know, that Claudine thy husband is in place,
where there is no sorrow, but mirth, where there is no pain, but rest: where he
weepeth not, but laugheth, where he sigheth not, but sings, where he has
no sorows, but pleasures, where he fears not cruel death, but enjoys
perpetual life. Since therefore this is true, it is but reason the wydow
appease her anguish, considering that her husband endures no pain.

Often times with my self I have thought, what the widows ought to immagin,
when they see them selves in such cares and distress.

And after my count made, I find that they ought not to thynk of the company
past, nor woeful solitarynes wherein they are presently, and much less they
ought to think on the pleasures of this world: but rather to remember the rest
in the world to come. For the true widow ought to have her conversation among
the living, and her desire to be with the dead. If til this present thou had
pain, and trouble, to look for thy husband to come home: have thou now joy,
that he looks for thee in heaven, wherein I swear unto thee, that there thou
shall be better used of ye gods, then he was here of me^. For in this world
we know not what glory means, and there they know not what payns are.
Licinius and Posthumous thy uncles, told me that thou art so sorrowful, that
thou will receive no comfort: but in this case I think not, that thou bewailest
so much for Claudinus, that thou alone do think you have lost him. For since
we did rejoice togethers in his life: we are bound to weep togethers at his
death. The heavy and sorrowful hearts, in this world feel no greater greef: then
to see others rejoice at their sorows. And the contrary hereof is, that the
woeful and afflicted heart feels no greater joy, nor rest in extreme mishaps
of fortune, then to think that others have sorrow and greef of their pain. When
I am heavy and comfortles, I greatly joy to have my friend by me: and my heart
does tell me, that what I feel, he feels: So that all which my friend with
his eyes does beewail, and all that which of my greefes he feels, the more
therewith he burdeneth him self, and the more thereof he discharges me. The
Emperor Octauian Augustus (the histories say) on the river of Danuby, found a
kind of people which had this strange custom, that with eyes was never seen,
nor in books at any time ever read, which was: that two friends assembled, and
went to the aultars of the temples, and there one friend confederat with an
other: so that their hearts were married, as man and wife are married touching
their bodies, swering, and promysing there to the gods, never to weep, nor to
take sorrow, for any mishap that shoold come to their persons. So that my friend
shoold come to lament, and remedy my troubles, as if they had been his own: and
I shoold lament, and remedy his, as if they had been mine. O glorious world, O
age most happy, O people of eternal memory, wherein men are so gentle, and
frendz so faithful: that their own trauails they forgot, and the sorows of
strangers they beewayled. O Rome without rome, O time evil spent, O life to us
others evil employed, O wretch that always art careless, now adays ye stomach
and intrailes are so severed from the good, and the hearts so joined with the
evil: that men forgetting them selves to be men, beecome more cruel then
wyld beasts. I labor to geeue thee life: and thou seek to procure my death.
Thou weepest to see me laugh: and I laugh to see thee weep. I procure that
thou do not mount: and thou seek that I might fall. Finally without the
profit of any, we cast our selves away: and without gayn, we do rejoice to
end our lives. By the faith of a good man I swear unto thee (Lady Lauinia) that
if thy remedy were in my hands, as thy grief is in my heart: I woold not be
sorry for thy sorows, neither thou so tormented for the death of thy husband.
But alas, though I miserable man have the heart to feel thy anguysh: yet I want
power to remedy thy sorows.

The Emperor proceeds in his letter, and persuades wydowes to put their
wills to the will of god, and exhorts them to live honestly. Cap. xxxviii.
SInce thy remedy, and my desire cannot be accomplished, because it is a
thing impossible to receive, and speak with the dead: and not having power, me
think that thou and I shoold refer it to the gods, who can geeue much better
then we can ask. O lady Lauinia, I desire thee earnestly, and as a friend I
counsel and admonish thee, and with all my heart I require thee, that thou
esteem that for well done, which the gods have done, that thou conform thy self
to the will of ye gods, and that thou will naught else, but as ye gods will. For
they only know they err not, wherefore they have assaulted thy husband with so
sodein death: and to thee his wife, have lent so long life. The gods being as
they are, so mighty, and so sage, what is he that can be judge of their
profound iugements. The gods know right well those which serve them, and those
which offend them: those that love them, and those wc hate them: those that
praise them, and those that blaspheme them: those that yield them thanks, and
those which are unthankful. And I tell thee further, that oftentimes the gods
are served more with them which are buried in the graves: then with those which
go weeping through the temples. Will thou now enter into account with the gods?
thou oughtst to note and consider, that they have left thee children to comfort
thy self, they have left thee goods wherewith thou may avoid poverty, they
have left thee friends by whom thou shall be favored, they have left thee
parentz of whom thou art beeloued, they have left thee a good name for to be
esteemed, and health wherewith thou may live: Finally I say, that small is
that which the gods take from us, in respect of yt they leave us. After one
sort we ought to beehaue our selves with men, and after an other we ought to
serve the gods. For to men some times it is requisite, to show a countenance
for to humble them: but to the gods it is necessary, to lie flat on the ground
with thy stomach to honor them. And if the Oracle of Apollo do not deceive us,
ye gods are sooner with humility (wherewith we woorship them) appeased: then
with presumptuous sacrifices (wc we offer unto them) contented. Since thou art
wydow (Lady Lauinia) and art a wise and virtuous woman, beesech the gods to
preserve thy children, to defend thy renowm, and not to sever thy friends from
thee, and that thou scatter not thy goods, to preserve thy person in health,
and above all, to be in their, favor. Thou can not win, nor lose so much
in all thy life: as the gods can geeue, or take from thee in one hour. Woold
to god the wydow knew, how little she wins among men, and how much she
loses among the Gods, when she is not pacient in adversity: for impacience
oftentimes, provoke the gods to wrath. We see it in man's body by experience,
that there are sundry dyseases, which are not cured with words spoken: but with
the herbs thereunto applied. And in other diseases the contrary is seen, which
are not cured with costly medicynes: but with comfortable words.

The end of this comparison tends to this effect, that all the afflicted
hearts shoold know, that sometimes the heart is more comforted with one benefyte
which they do: then with a hundred words which they speak. And at an other
time, the sorrowful heart is better lyghtned, with one word of his friends
mouth: then with all the service of others in the world. O wretch that I am,
for as in the one, and in the other I am destitut: So in all I do want. For
considering thy greatness, and waying my little knowledge, I see my self very
unable. For that to comfort thee, I want science: and for to help thee I need
riches. But I cease not to have great sorrow, if sorrow in payment may be
received. That wc with my person I can do, neither with paper or ynk I will
requite. For the man wc with word only comforts (in effect being able to
remedy) declares him self to have been a feigned friend in times past: and
shows that a man ought not to take him for a faithful friend in time to come.
That which the Romans with the wydows of Rome have accustomed to do, I will
not presently do with thee (Lady Lauinia) that is to weete: that thy husband
being dead, all go to visit the widow, all comfort the wydow, and all weep
with the wydow: and within a few days after, if the woeful wydow have need of
any small favor with the Senate, they withdraw them selves togeether, as if they
had never known her husband, nor seen her. The renowm of ye Romayn wydows, is
very daynty: for of their honesty, or dishonesty, depends the good renowm of
their person, the honor of their parents, the credit of their children, and the
memory of the dead. For this therefore, it is healthful counsayl, for wise men
to speak few words to wydows, and to do infinite good woorks. What avails
it woeful wydows, to have their coffers filled with letters and promyses, and
their ears stuffed with words, and flatteries? If hitherto thou have taken
me for thy neighbor, and parent of thy husband, I beeseech thee henceforth
that thou take me for a husband in love, for father in counsel, for brother
in service, and for aduocat in the Senate. And all this so truly shall be
accomplished, that I hope thou will say: that which in many I have lost, in
Marcus Aurelius alone I have found. I know well (as thou do in like manner)
that when the hearts with sorows are over whelmed, the spirits are troubled, the
memory is dulled, the flesh does tremble, the spirit does change, and reason
is withdrawn. And since that presently sorrow and care, in thy house do
remayn: let the gods forsake me, if I abandone thee, let them forget me, if I
remember thee not. But as Claudine remained thine, wholly till the hour of
death: so Marcus Aurelius will evermore be thine, during his life.

Since I love thee so intierly, and thou trustest me so faithfully, and that
thou with sorrows art so replenished, and my heart with care so oppressed: let
us admit, that thou Lady Lauinia, have the auctority to command me in thy
affayrs, and I license to counsel and aduertyse thee of things, touching thy
honor, and person. For often times the wydows have more need of a mean remedy,
then of a good counsel: I earnestly desire thee to leave the lamentacion of
the Romayn wydows, that is to weete: to shutt the gates to tear their hears, to
cut their garments, to go bare legged, to paynt the vysage, to eat solitarily,
to weep on the graves, to chyd her Chamberlayns, to pour out water with
tears, to put Acorns on the graves, and to byte their nayls with the teeth: For
these things, and such other semblable lightness, beehoueth not the gravity of
Romayn Matrons, either to see the^ or else to know them. Since there is no
extremity but thereunto vice is annexed: I let thee weete (lady Lauinia) if thou
be ignorant thereof, that the widows which are so extreme, do torment them
selfs, do trouble their friends, do offend the gods, do forsake theirs, and
in the end they profit not the dead: and to the envious people, they geeue
occasion to talk. I woold think and me seems, that the women which are
matrons, and widows, ought to take upon them such garment, and estate, the day
that the gods take life from their husbands: as they entend to wear during
their life. What avails it that a wydow be one month shut up in her house,
and that afterward within a year she is met in every place of Rome? what
avails it, that for few days she hydeth her self from her parents, and
friends: and afterward she is found the first at the theaters? what profits
it, that widows at the first do morn, and go evil attired: and afterward
they dispute, and co^plain of the beauty of the romayn wives? what forces it,
that widows for a certain time do keep their gates shutt: and afterward
their housen are more frequented then others? What skilleth it, that a man see
the widows weep much for their husbands, and afterward they see them laugh
more for their pastymes? Finally I say, that it little avails ye woman, to
seem to suffer much openly for the death of her husband: if secretly she has
an other husband all ready found? For the virtuous, and honest wydow,
immediately as she sees an other man alive: she renueth her sorrow for her
husband that is dead. I will show thee (Lady Lauinia) a thing that beefell in
Rome, to the end thou think not I talk at pleasure. In the old time, in Rome
there was a noble and worthy Romayn Lady, wife of the noble Marcus Marcellus,
whose name was Fuluia. And it happened so, that this woman seeing her husband
buried in the field of Mars, for the great greef she had, she scratched her
face, she ruffled her hear, she tore her gown, and fell down to the earth in
a found, by the reason whereof two Senators kept her in their arms, to thend
she shoold torment her self no more. To whom Gneus Flauius the Censour said.
Let Fuluia go out of your hands, she will this day do all the penance of
wydows. Speaking the truth, I know not, whether this Romain spoke with the
Oracle, or that he were a divine: but I am assured that al he spoke came to
pass. For that this Fuluia was the wife of so excellent a Romayn, as the good
Marcus Marcellus was: I woold that so unlucky a chance had not happened unto
her, which was: that whiles the bones of her husband were a burning, she
agreed to be married to an other: and which was more, to one of the Senators
that lyfted her up by the arms, she gave her hand, as a Romayn to a Romayn,
in token of a faithful marriage. The case was so abominable, that of all men
it was dispraised that were present: and gave occasion that they never credit
wydows afterward. I do not speak it (Lady Lauinia) for that I think thou will
do so. For by the faith of a good man, I swear unto thee, that my heart neither
suspecteth it, nor yet the auctority of so grave a Romayn does demand it: for
to thee only ye fault shoold remain, and to me the wonder. Heartily I commend
unto thee thy honesty, which to thy self thou ought, and the care which
beehoueth so worthy and noble a wydow. For if thou art tormented, with the
absence of the dead: thou oughtst to comfort thee, with the reputacion of the
living. At this present I will say no more to thee, but that thy renowm among
the present be such, and that they speak of thee so in absence: that to the
evil, thou geeue the brydell to be silent, and to the good, spurs to come
and serve thee. For the widow of evil renowm, ought to be buried quick. Other
things to write to thee I have none. Secret matters are dangerous to trust,
considering that thy heart is not presently disposed to here news. It is reason
thou know that I with thy parents and friends have spoken to the Senate, which
have geeuen the office that thy husband had in Constantinople, to thy son.
And truly thou oughtst no less to rejoice of that, which they have said of
thee: then for that they have geeuen him. For they say, though thy husband had
never been citizen of Rome: yet they ought to have geeuen more then this, only
for thy honest beehauiour. My wife Faustine saluteth thee, and I will say I
never saw her weep for any thing in the world so much, as she has wept for
thy mishap. For she felt thy loss, which was very great: and my sorrow, which
was not little. I send thee.iiii. thousand sexterces in money, supposing that
thou have wherewith to occupy them, as well for thy necessaries, as to
discharge thy debts. For the complaints, demands, and processes, which they
minister to the Romayn matrons are greater: then are the goods that their
husbands do leave them. The gods which have geeuen rest to thy husband O
Claudine, geeue also comfort to thee his wife Lauinia, Marcus of mount Celio,
with his own hand.

That Princes and noble men ought to despise the world, for that there is
nothing in the world but plain disceit. Cap. xxxix.
PLato, Aristotle, Pithagoras, Empedocles, Democrites, Selcucus, Epicurus,
Diogenes, Thales, and Methrodorus, had among them so great contention to
describe the world, his beginning, and property: that in maintaining every one
his oppinion, they made greater wars with their pens: then their enemies
have done with their lances. Pithagoras said, that that which we call the
world is one thing, and that which we call the universal is an other. The
philosopher Thales said, that there was no more but one world: and to the
contrary, Methrodorus the astronomer affirmed, there were infinite worlds.
Diogenes said, that the world was everlasting. Seleucus said, that it was not
true: but that it had an end. Aristotle seemed to say that the world was
eternal. But Plato said clearly, that the world has had beginning, and shall
also have endyng. Epicurus said, that it was round as a ball. Empidocles said,
that is was not as a bowl: but as an egg. Chilo the philosopher (in the high
mount Olimpus) disputed, that the world was as me^ are: that is to weete, that
he had an intellectible and sensible soul. Socrates in his school says, and
in his doctrine wrote that after.37. thousand years, all things shoold return
as they had been before. That is to weet, that he him self shoold be born a
new, and shoold be norished, and shoold read in Athens. And Dennis ye tyra^t
shoold return to play ye tyra^t in Siracuse, Julius Caesar to rule Rome,
Hanniball to conquer Italy: and Scipio to make war against Carthage,
Alexander to fight against king Darius, and so forth in all others past. In
such and other vayn questions, and speculations, the ancient philosophers
consumed many years. They in writing many books have troubled their spirits,
consumed long time, trauayled many countries, and suffered innumerable dangers:
and in the end they have set forth few trueths, and many lies. For the least
part of that they knew not, was much greater: then all that which they ever
knew. When I took my pen in my hand to write the vanity of the world: my
entention was not, to reprove this material world, the which of the four
elements is compounded. That is to weete, of the earth that is cold and dry: of
the water that is moist and cold: of the air, that is whot and moist: of fire
that is dry and whot: So that taking the world in this sort, there is no reason
why we shoold complayn and lament of it, since that without him we cannot
live corporally. When the paynter of the world came into the world, it is not
to be beeleeued that he reproved the water which bare him, when he went
upon it: nor the air that ceased to blow in the sea, nor the earth that
trembled at his death, nor the light which seized to light, nor the stones
which brake in sonder, nor the fish which suffered them selves to be taken, nor
the trees which suffered them selves to be dry, nor the monuments that
suffered them selves to be opened. For the creature knowledged in his creator
omnipotency, and the creator founded in the creature due obedience. Oftentimes
and of many parsons we here say, o woeful world, o miserable world, o subtyl
world, o world unstable and unconstant. And therefore it is reason we know what
the world is, whereof the world is, from whence this world is, whereof this
world is made, and who is lord of this world: since in it all things are
unstable, all things are miserable, all disceitfull, and all things are
malicious which can not be understood of this material world. For in the
fire, in the air, in the earth, and in the water, in the light, in the
planets, in the stones, and in the trees, there are no sorows, there are no
miseries, there are no disceit, nor yet any malice. The world wherein we are
born, where we live, and where we dye, differs much from the world, whereof
we do complayn: for the world against whom we fight, suffers us not to be
in quiet one hour in the day. To declare therefore my entencion, this wicked
world is no other thing, but the evil life of the worldlings, where the earth
is the desire, the fire the couetice, the water the inconstancy, the air the
folly, the stones are the pride, the flowers of the trees the thoughts, the
deep sea the heart. Finally I say, that the son of this world, is the
prosperity: and the moon is the continual change. The prince of this so
evil a world is the devil, of whom Jesus Christ said. The prince of this
world shall now be cast out: and this the redeemer of the world says. For
he called the worldlings and their worldly lives the world. For since they be
servant of sin, of necessity they must be subjects of the devil. The
pride, the auaryce, the envy, the blasphemy, the pleasures, the lechery, the
negligence, the glottony, the ire, the malice, the vanity, and the folly.

This is the world against which we fight al our life, and where the good are
princes of vices, and the vices are lords of the vicious.

Let us compare the travels which we suffer of the elements, with those which
we endure of the vices, and we shall see, that little is the peril we have
on the sea, and the land, in respect of that which increases of our evil
life. Is not he in more danger, that falls through malice into pride: then
he which by chance falls from a high rock? Is not he who with envy is
persecuted, in more danger: than he that with a stone is wounded? Are not
they in more peril, that live among vicious men: than others that live among
bruit and cruel beasts? Do not those which are tormented with the fire of
covetousness suffer greater danger, then those which live under the mount
Ethna? Finally I say, that they be in greater perils, which with high
immaginations are blinded: then the trees which with the importunat wyndes are
shaken. And afterward this world is our cruel enemy, it is a deceitful
friend, it is that which always keeps us in travel, it is that which takes
from us our rest, it is that that robs us of our treasor, it is that which
makes him self to be feared of the good, and that which is greatly beeloued
of the evil. It is that which of the goods of other is prodigal, and of his
own very miserable. He is the inuenter of all vices, and the scourge of all
virtues. It is he which entertaineth al his in flattery and fair speech. This
is he which brings men to dissension, that robs the renowm of those that
be dead, and puts to sack the good name of those that be alive. Finally I
say, that this cursed world is he, which to all ought to render account, and
of whom none dare ask account. O vanity of vanity, where all walk in vanity,
where all think vanity, where all cleue to vanity, where all seems vanity:
and yet this is little to seem vanity, but that in deed it is vanity. For as
false witness shoold he bear, that woold say that in this world there is any
thing assured, healthful, and true: as he that woold say that in heaven there
is any unconstant, variable, or false thing. Let therefore vayn princes see, how
vayn their thoughts be, and let us desire a vayn prince to tell us how he
has governed him with the vanities of the world. For if he beeleeue not that
which my pen writes, let him beeleeue that which his parson proves. The
words written in the book of Ecclesiastes are such.

I David's son that swaies the kingly seat
with hungry thurst, have thrown amid my breast
A vayn desire to prove what pleasures great
In flying life have stable foot to rest.
To taste the sweet that might suffice my will
with rayned course to shun the deeper way
whose streams of his delight, shoold so distill
as might content my restles though to stay
For lo, queen follies imps through vayn beelief
So proudly shape their search of tickle retch
that though desert auailes the wave of grief
to science top their claimming will does stretch
And so to draw some nice delighting end
Of fancies toil that feasted thus my thought
I largely wayed my wasted bounds to bend
to swelling realms as wisedoms dyall wrought.
I ryall courts have reached from the soil
to serve lodge my huge attending trayn
Each pleasant house that might be heapt with toy^
I reared up to weeld my wanton rayn.
I causd to plant the long unused vynes
to smooth my taste with treasure of the grape
I sipped have the sweet in flaming wynes
old rust of care by hidd delight to skape.
Fresh arbors I had closed to the skies
A shrouded space to use my fickle feet
rich gardens I had dasing still mine eyes
A pleasant plot when dainty food was meet.
High shaking trees by art I strove to set
to freight desire with fruit of leeking taste
When broyling flame of summers sun did hett
the blossomd bows his shooting beams did wast.
From rocky hills I forced to be brought
Cold silver springs to bayne my fruitful ground
Large thrown out ponds I labord to be wrought
where numbers huge of swimming fish were found.
Great compast parkes I gloried long to plant
And wild forests where swarmed herds of dear
thousands of sheep no cattal could not want
with new increase to store the wasted year.
Whole rowts I kept of servile wights to sarue
Defauts of princely courts with yrkesom toil
whose skilful hand from conning coold not swerve
their sway was most to deck my daynty soil
The learned wights of musikes curious art
I trained up, to please me with their play
whose sugared tunes so sailed to my heart
As flowing greef, agreed to ebb away.
The tender maids, whose stalk of growing years
yet reached not to age his second rayn
whose royal fames, were swalowed in no cares
But burnt by love as beauties lot does gayn
Lo I enjoyed to feed my dulled spirit
with strayned voice of sweet alluring song
but yet to mount the stage of more delight
I ioyed to see their comely daunces long.
The hills of massy gold that I vpheapt
So hugie were by hoord of long excess,
That clottered clay, with prouder price was kept
In sundry realms, when ruthful need did press.
In some I say, my bodies roling guide
did gase for naught, but subject lay to sight
My judge of sounds, wished nothing to abide
but was instild to kindle more delight.
The clother of my corpse yet never felt
that pleased him ought, but ay it touched again
my sycher of savors, if ought be smelt
that might content, his woold was never vayn.
The greedy sighs of my devoured breast
Travailed in thought to conquer no delight
but yielded straight as wire to the wrest
to office such, as wanton will be hight.
But when the doors of my abused eyes
were hoysed up with looks and looks again
And that my egre hands, did ay enclyne
to touch the sweet, that seasond still their pain,
When wanton taste, was fed with each conceit
That strange devise brought forth from flowing wit
when restless will was ballast with the weight,
of princely reach, that did my compass fit,
I saw by search, the sorry unstable bloome
the blasted fruit, the flitting still delight
The fyckle joy, the often abused doom
the slipper stay, the short contented sight
Of such as set their heaven of lingering life
In pleasures lap, that laughes at their abuse
whose froward wheel, with frowning turn is rise
to drown their bliss, that blyndly slept with use.
For lo, the course of my delighting years
that was embraste in arms of fancies past
when wisdoms son, through follies clouds aperes
does blush to here, the count that pleasure cast.
So now I see the mass of huge delight
with flattering face does promise but decay
whose flitting foot, entysed once to flight
his restles wings, do seek to sore away.
Lo thus he slips, reclaimd with endless pain
Possessed a while, departing soon again.
This says the sage Solomon, talking of the things of the world: the which as
he spoke of the world, so had he proved it in deed in his parson. Crediting,
as it is reason to such high doctrine, I cannot tell what my pen can write more
in this case, since he says, that after he had all proved, experimented,
possessed, and tasted, he found that all that we procure and have in this
world is vanity. O princes, and great lords, I beesech ye, and in the name of
Jesus christ I exhort you, with great discretion to enter into this deep seas:
since this order is so disordered, that it brings all disorders, and evil
customs. For all those which shall trauail by ye way, when they shall think to
go most sure in ye midst of their journey, they shall find them selves to be
lost. None ought to agree with the world, for that he might live sure in his
house: for day and night, to all worldlings he has his gate open, making
their entry large and sure. But let us beeware we enter not, and much more
that we lode not our selves with his vices, and be delighted with his
pleasures. For since we do wax worse, and that we are entered therein,
though we do repent, by no way we find the sure coming out, but ye first
we must well pay for our lodging. I marvel not though the worldlings at every
moment be deceived, sins superfyciously they beehold ye world with their eyes,
and love it profou^dly with their hearts. But if they desired as profoundly to
consider it, as they do vaynly follow it, they shoold see very plain that ye
world did not flatter them with prosperity, but threaten them with adversity. So yt
under the greatest point of the dye, which is the vi. is hyd ye least which is
the ase, I woold counsel princes, and great lords, that they woold not
beeleeue the world nor his flatteries, and much less beeleeue them selves nor
their vayn ymaginacions. The which for the most part do think that after they
have travailed and heaped up great treasure, they shall enjoy but their own
trauail, without the trouble of any man, or that any man do go again them. O
how vayn is such thought, and how often does it change contrary. The world is
of such an evil condition, that if he let us rest our first sleep, as well
us, as that which we have gotten, immediately in the morning, yea oftentimes an
hour from thence, he waketh us with a new care, and now he has prepared for
us some mean, to occupy our selves about some other trouble.

The autour follows his intencion, and speaks vehemently against the
dysceyts of the world. Cap. xl.
THemperor Traian said one day to his master (which was Plutarche the great
philosopher) tell me master, why there are commonly more evil then good? and
why without comparison there are mo which follow vices, than those which
embrace virtue? The great Plutarche answered. As our natural inclinacion is
more geeuen to lasciuiousnes and negligence then to chastity and abstinence: so
the men which do enforce them selves to follow virtue are few, and those which
geeue slack ye reyns to vices are many. And know thou, if thou know it not
(most noble Prince) that all this evil proceeds, that men do follow men,
and that they suffer not reason to follow reason. Feeble, and miserable is our
nature, but in the end we ca^ not den^y, that for all our travails we may
find remedy in it, which seems to be true. For so much as if the sun does
annoy us, we do retire to ye shadow. If we are grieved going on foot, we
do remedy it going on horseback. If the sea be dangerous, we sail with
shyps, If the cold do vex us, we approach near the fire. If thurst does
trouble us, we do quench it with drink, If rayn does wet us, we go into
houses. If the plague be in one place, we fly into another. If we have
enemies, we comfort our selves with our friends. Finally I say, that there is
no sorrow, nor travail, but that a man has found some rest and remedy. This
presupposed to be true (as it is troth in deed) now I ask all the
worldlings, if they have found any remedy against the troubles and disceits of
this world? If I be not deceived, and if I understand any thing of this world,
the remedy which the world geeueth for the troubles, certainly are greater
travails, then the travails them selves: so that they are salues that do not
heal our wounds, but rather burn our flesh. When the diseases are not very old
rooted, nor dangerous, it profits more oftentimes to abide a gentle fever:
then to take a sharp purgacion. I mean, that ye world is such a deceyuer, and
so double, that he does contrary to that he punishes. That is to weete,
that if he do persuade us to revenge an injury: it is to the end that in
revenging that one, we shoold receive a thousand inco^ueniences. And where as
we think it takes from us, it increases infynite. So that this cursed guide,
making us to beeleeue it leads us upon the dry land among our friends: causes
us to fall into the imbushment of our enemies. Princes and great lords, in the
thoughts they have, and in the words that they speak, are greatly esteemed:
and afterward in the woorks which they do, and in the affairs they travail,
are as little regarded. The contrary of all this does the wicked world, who
with all those he companieth, in his promises he is very gentle: and
afterward in his deeds, he is very proud. For speaking the troth, it
costeth us dear: and we others do sell it good chepe. I say much, in saying
that we sell it good chepe: but in manner I shoold say better, that we geeue
it willingly. For few are those in number which carry away wages of the world:
and infinite are those, which do serve it only for a vayn hope. O princes,
and great lords, I counsel and require you, that you do not trust the world,
neither in word, deed, nor promise, though he swear and swear again, that
he will keep all he has promised with you. Suppose that the world does
honor you much, flatter you much, visit you often, offer you great treasures, and
geeue you much: yet it is not because he will geeue it ye by little and little,
but that afterward he might take it all from ye again in one day. For it is
the old custom of the world, that those which above all men he has set
before: now at a turn, they are furdest beehinde. What may we have in the
world and in his flatteries, since we do know, that one day we shall see our
selves depryued thereof? and that which is more, he uses such craft and
subtilty with the one and the other, that in old men whom reason woold shoold
not be vicious, he (the more to torment their parsons) has kyndled a greater
fire in their hearts, so that this malicious world puts into old riches, a
new covetousness: and in the aged, engenders cruel auaryce, and that in that
time, when it is out of time. We ought greatly to consider, how by the world
we are deceived: but much more we ought to heed, that we be not by it
distroyed. For where as we thynk to be in open lyberty: he keeps us secret
in prison. We thynk we are whole, and he geeueth us sickness. We thynk we
have all things: yet we have nothing. We thynk that for many years long
shall be our life, when yt at every corner we are assaulted of death. We think
yt it counts us for me^ yt be wise, when he keeps us bond like unto
fools. We think yt it increases our good, when yt in deed it burdeneth our
co^sciens. Finally I say, that by the way where we thynk to continue our
renown, and life: we lose without recovery, both life and fame. O filthy
world, that when thou do receive us, thou do cast us of: when thou do
assemble us, thou do seperat us: when thou seem to rejoice us, thou
make us sad: when you please us: how thou displeasest us: when thou exaltest
us, how thou hu^blest us: and when thou do chastise us, how thou reioicest.
Finally I say, yt thou have thy drynks so impoysoned, that we are without
thee, with thee, and having the thief within the house, we go out of the
doors to seek him. Though men be diverse in gestures: yet much more are they
variable in their appetites. And since ye world has experience of so many
years, it has appetites prepared for all kind of people. For the presumptuous
he procures honors, to the auaricious he procures riches, and to those
which are gluttons, he presents diverse meats. The fleshly he blinds with
women, and the negligent he lets rest: and the end why he does all these
things, is that after he has fed them as fysh, he casts upon them the
nets of all vices. Note princes, and great lords, note noble men, though a
prince do see him self lord of all the world, he ought to thynk that of no
value is the seignory, onles he him self be virtuous. For little it profits
that he be lord of the vicious: which is him self the servant of all vices.
Many say that the world does beeguile them: and other say that they have no
power against ye world. To who^ we may answer. That if at the first
temptacions we woold have resisted the world: it is impossible yt so
oftentimes it durst assault us. For of our small resistaunce, comes his so
great audacity. I can not tell if I shall dissemble, I shall hold my peace, or
whither I shall say that I woold say, since it greeueth my heart so much, only
to think of it. For I feel my eyes redyer to lament it, then my fingers able
to write it. It is so, that every man suffers himself to be governed so of
the world: as if god were not in heaven, and he had not promised to be a good
christian here in earth. For all that he will, we will, that which he
follows, we follow, and that which he chooses we choose. And that which
is greatest sorrow of all, if we do refrayn our selves from adversity, it is
not for that of our own nature we woold cease from it: but because the world
will not command us to do it. Little is that which I have spoken, in respect
of that I will speak: which is, that the world has made us now so ready to his
law, that from one hour to another, it changes the whole state of this life.
So that to day he makes us hate that, which yesterday we loved, he makes us
complayn of that, which we commended: he makes us to be offended now with
that, which before we did desire: he makes us to have mortal enemies of
those, which before were our special friends. Finally I say, that the world
makes us to love that in our life, which afterward we beewaile at the hour
of death. If the world did geeue unto his minyons, any perfect and accomplished
thing: it were somewhat that for a time a man should remayn in the service of
his house: But since that in the world all things are granted not during life,
but as lendyng, which ought to be rendered the day following: I know not what
man is so very a fool, that in the world does hope for any perpetual thing?
For all that he geeueth, he geeueth with such condition, that they shall
render it unto him when he shall demand it: and not at the dyscrecion of him
that does possess it. Peradventure ye world can geeue us perpetual life? I
say certainly no. For in the sweetest time of all our life, then suddenly we
are assaulted of cruel death. Peradventure the world can geeue us temporal
goods in abundaunce? I say certainly no. For no man at any time had so much
riches: but that which he wanted was more, then that he possessed.

Peradventure the world can geeue us perpetual joy? I say certainly no.

For exemptyng those days which we have to lament, and also the hours which
we have to sygh: there remains not for us one moment to laugh. Peradventure
he can geeue us perpetual health? I say certainly no. For to men of long
life, without comparison the diseases are more which they suffer: then the
years are which they live. Peradventure the world can geeue us perpetual rest?
I say certainly no. For if the days be few, wherein we see the elements
without clouds: fewer are the hours, which we feale our hearts without cares.
Therefore since that in this miserable world there is no health perpetual, nor
life perpetual, nor riches perpetual, nor joy perpetual, I woold know what
it is that the worldlyngs woold of the world, since they know that it has no
good thing to geeue them, but only by lendyng, or by usury? If it be usury,
there is no gayn of money: but rather retourn, with restitucion of vices. O
children of vanyty, O masters of lyghtnes, since it is so, that ye now
determyne to follow and serve the world: look not of the world to have any
thing, but things of the world. In it is nothing but pride, envy, leachery,
hate, ire, blasphemy, auaryce, and folly. And if ye ask if he have in his
governance any virtuous thing, he will answer you that he does never sell
such marchaundyse in his shop. Let no man thynk that the world can geeue us
that, which it has not for it self. And if we will change any thing with it,
and it with us: he is so subtle to sell, and so curious to buy, yt that which
he takes shall be of great measure, and that which he sells us, shall want
much weight.

Of a letter the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend Torquatus to
comfort him in his banishment, which is notable for all men to learn the
vanities of this world. Cap. xli.
MArcus Emperor of Rome companion in the empire, with his brother Annius Verus,
to thee Torquatus of ye city of Gayetta wishes health to thy parson, and
strength against thy evil fortune. I being in the Temple of the vestal virgins,
about three months hence, I received a letter of thine: the which was in such
sort, that neither mine eyes for that time could make an end to read it, nor
since I have had the heart to answer it. For in the inconveniences of our
friends, if we have no faculty nor might for to remedy it, at the least we are
bound to beewaile it. Thy sorrow makes me so heavy, thy pain does trouble me
so much, I am so careful of thy anguish, so tormented with thy grief, that if
the gods had geeuen power to woeful men to depart their sorows, as they have
geeuen to rych men to depart their goods: by the faith I owe to god, I swear,
that as I am the greatest of thy friends, I woold be he which shoold take the
most part of thy griefs. I know right well, and as well as he that has
proved it, that as much difference as there is beetween the bark and the tree,
the mary and the bone, the corn and the straw, the gold and the dross, the
truth and the dreams: so much is there to here the travails of another, and
to taste his own. Notwithstanding comfort thy self my friend Torquatus: for where
the friends be true, the goods and the evils are common beetwyxt them.
Oftentimes with my self I have marueiled, to what end, or intencion, the
immortal Gods have geeuen travail, and torments to men, since it is in their
power to make us to live without them. I see no other thing, why the myshaps
ought pacyently to be suffered: but because in those, we know who are our
faithful friends. In battle the valiant man is known, in tempesteous
weather the Pilot is known, by the touch stone gold is tried, and in aduersyty
the friend is known.

For my friend does not enough to make me merry, unless also he does take
part of my sorrow. I have heard say here, and now by thy letter I have seen,
how they have banished thee from Rome, and confyscated thy goods, and that for
pure sorrow thou art sick in thy bed: whereof I marvel not that thou art sick,
but to be as thou art alive. For saying to thee the truth, where the heart is
sore wounded, in short space it has accustomed to yield up unto the body. I
see well that thou complaynest, and thou have reason to complayn, to see thy
self banyshed from Rome, and thy goods confiscate, to see thy self out of thy
country, without any parentage: yet therefore thy sorrow ought not to be so
extreme, that thou shooldst put thy life in hazard. For he alone ought to
have license, and also is bound to hate life, which does not remember that
he has served the Gods, nor has done any profyt to men. If the affairs of
the Empire did not occupy me, and the emperyall majesty did not wythdraw me:
I woold immedyatly have to come to comfort thy person, where thou shooldst have
seen by experience, with what grief I feel thy trouble. And therefore if thou
take me for thy friend, thou oughtst to beeleeue of me that, which in this
case I woold of thee: which is, that as thou have been the most entyer friend
which I had in Rome: so is this the thing that most I have felt in this life.
Tell me my friend Torquatus, what is it thou suffrest there, that I do not
lament here? It may be that sometime thou laughest, but I allways weep:
sometimes thou comfortest thy self, but I am allways sad. It may be that thou
lightnest thy pain: but I am in sighyng. It may be that sometimes thou castest
from thee sorrow: but for me I cannot receive consolation. It may be that thou
hopest remedy of longlyfe: but for me I find no remedy more healthful, then
present death. Finally I say, that here I feel all that thou feel there,
and furthermore I suffer all that, which as a friend I ought to suffer here: so
that both our pains are made one most cruel sorrow, wherewyth my woeful life
is tormented. I woold greatly desire to come and see thee, and to help to
dysburthen thee of this charge. And since it is impossible for me, I send thee
this letter, wherein perchance thou shall find some comfortable words. For
thou know, that if the true friends cannot do that which they ought: yet they
do accomplish it, in dooyng that they can. If my memory deceive me not, it is
well two and thirty years since we two have known togethers in Rome, during
the which, fortune has made here beetween us diverse alteracions, in the which
time I never saw thee one day contented. For if thou were sad, nothing did make
thee merry, but were as a man without taste: and if thou were joyful, thou
esteemedst it little, as a man being troubled. Therefore if the truth be so
(as in deed it is) that in trauayles thou were laden with sorows, and in
prosperities thou were evil content, so that of nothing in the world thou
take any taste: why is it (my friend Torquatus) that now again thou art in
dyspaire, as if thou cammest new into this world? Thou dydst rejoice thy
self.xxxii. years, with the tryumphs and prosperyty of Rome: and thou
complainest only of three months, that fortune has been contrary unto thee.
O Torquatus, Torquatus, do thou know that the wise men (in whom wisdom
reigns) have more fear of two unhappy days in this life: then of two
hundredth of prosperous fortune? O how many have I seen go out of their
prosperyties, with the charges of another man, and their own proper vices? so
that the vayn glory and the failing prosperity endured few days: but the grief
of that they have lost, and the enmyties which they have recovered, endure many
years. The contrary of all this comes to infortunat men, which escape out of
their tribulacions spoiled of vices, enuyronned with virtues: persecutours of
evil, zelers of good: friends of all, and enemies of none: contented with
theirs, and not desyryng others: finally they are escaped wisely from the snare,
and have gathered the rose, not hurting them selves with the pricks. What wylt
thou that I say more unto thee, but that the most fortunat are vanquyshed in
peace: and the unfortunate are conquerers in war? One of the sentences which
most have contented me, of those which the auncyents have spoken, is this, of
the divine Plato. That those wc are in prosperyty, have no less need of good
counsel: then the unhappy have of remedy. For no less do they travail,
which go always in the plain way: then those which mount on the sharp craggy
mountayn. According to that I have gathered of thy letter, me seems that
when we hope most rest, greatest travail has succeeded to thee. And hereof I
do not marvel, nor thou oughtst not to be offended. For as experience
teaches us, when the trees have the blossoms, then they are most subject to
the frost. And when glasses are drawn out of the furnace, they break. The
captayns having won the victory, do dye. When they will put the key in the
door, the house does fall. The pirates perish, withyn the kenning of land. By
that I have spoken I mean, that when we thynk to have made peace with fortune,
then she has a new demand ready forged. All new chaunges of fortune, causes
allway new pain to the parson: but oftentimes it is cause of more great
fortress. For the tree bears not so much fruit, where it first grew, as
there where it is again planted: and the sauors are more odiferous, when they
are most chafed. I mean, that men of hye thoughts, the more they are wrapped in
ye frownings of fortune, the more valiant and stout they show them selves. The
man utterly is foolysh, or has great want of understanding, who hops at any
time to have perfect rest, immaginyng that the world will geeue no assault
upon him: but that the time shall come, wherein he shallbee without care and
fear. This miserable life is of such condition, that daily our years do
diminish, and our troubles increase. O Torquatus, by the immortal gods I do
desire thee, and in the faith of a friend I do require thee, thou being born
in the world, nouryshyng thy self in the world, living in the world, being
conuersaunt in the world, being a child of the world, and following the world,
what dydst thou hope of the world, but things of the world? Peradventure thou
alone wilt eat the fleash without bones, geeue battle without peril,
travail without pain, and sail by the sea without danger. I mean, that it is
impossible for mortal men to live in the world, unless they will beecome
subject to the sorows of the world. The world has allways been the world, and
now the world shallbee after us, and as a world shall handell the worldlyngs,

The wise men, and those which of their estates are careful, are not contented
to see, nor superfycially to know the things: but rather way them profoundly. I
say this, because if thou knewst thy debylyty, and knewst fortune, and her
change, if thou knewst the men, and their malyces, if thou knewst the world,
and his flatteryes: thou shooldst win no little honor, where as otherwise thou
may chance to get infamy. We are now come to so great folly, yt we will not
serve the Gods, wc have created us: nor abstain from the world, wc persecuteth
us. And the best is, yt he not wyllyng us (but rather reiectyng us) we say yt
of our own wills we will love and serve him: and yet knowing that those which
longest have served the world, do go out of his house most bytterly
lamentyng. Oftentimes I stay to thynk, that according to the multitude of men
which follow the world, being allways evil handled of the world) if the world
did pray them, as he does annoy them, if he did comfort them, as he does
torment them, if he kept them, as he banysheth them, if he exalted them, as
he abuses them, if he received them, as he expels them, if he did
contynew them, as he consumes them: I thynk that the Gods should not be
honored in heaven, nor the Temples woorshypped in the earth. O Torquatus my
friend that which now I will say of thee, thou may say of me. That is to
weete, how much we put our confydence in fortune, how lewdly we pass our
days, and how much we are blinded in the world: yet for all that we credyt
his word as much, as though he had never mocked any.

Marcus Aurelius goes on with his letter and by strong and high reasons
persuades all that live in the world, not to trust the world, nor any thing
therein. Cap. xlij.
TEll me I pray thee Torquatus, what wylt thou hear more? What will thou see
more? and what wylt thou know more, to know the world? seeing how until this
present thou have been handled of the world? thou demaundest rest, and he
has geeuen thee trouble. Thou demaundest honor, and he has geeuen thee
infamy. Thou demaundest riches, and he has geeuen thee poverty. Thou
demaundest joy, and he has geeuen thee sorrow. Thou demaundest to be his,
and he has geeuen thee his hand. Thou demau^dest life, and he has geeuen
thee death. Therefore if it be true, that ye world has handled thee in this
wise, why do thou weep to return again to his wicked house? O fylthy world,
how far art thou from just: and how far ought they to be from thee, which
desire to be just. For naturally thou art a friend of novelties, and enemy of
virtues. One of ye lessons which the world reads to his children is this: yt
to be true worldlings, they shoold not be very true. The which experience
plainly shows us, for the man which medleth much with the world, leaves
always suspicion of him that he is not true. The world is an imbassadour of
the evil, a scourge of the good, cheifest of vices, a tyrant of the verteous,
a breaker of peace, a friend of war, a sweet water of vices, the gawle of the
virtuous, a defender of lies, an inuenter of novelties, a trauailer of the
ignorant, a hammer for the malicious, a table of gluttons, and a furnace of
concupyscence: finally, it is the peril of Charibde, where the hearts do
perish: and the danger of Scilla, where the thoughts do wast. Presuppose that
these be the conditions of the world. The troth is, yt if there be any
worldlyng who complains to be evil content with the world shall he therefore
change his style? Truly no, and the reason is, that if perchance one
worldling shoold go out of the house of the world, there are ten thousand
vanities at his gate. I know not what wise man will live in the world with such
conditions, since the vices wherewith we do rejoice our selves are very few,
in respect of the torments which we suffer. I say not that we do hear it by
hear say, and read them in books: but we see with our own eyes, the one to
consume and wast the goods, others by mysfortune to fall, and lose their
credyt, others to fall and lose their honor, and others to lose their life, and
all these myseries seen, yet nevertheless every man thinks to be free by
privilege, where there is none priuileged: O my friend Torquatus, of one thing
I assure thee, which is, that the men which are borne of women are so evil a
generation, and so cruel is the world where in we live, and fortune so
empoysoned with whom we frequent: that we cannot escape without being
spurned with his feet, bytten with his teeth, torn with his nails, or
impoysoned with his venym. Peradventure thou may say unto me that thou have
seen some in Rome, which have lived long time, fortune never being against
him? To this I answer thee, that thou oughtst rather to have pyty upon him,
then envy: for it is not for his profyt, but for his great hynderaunce. For the
world is so malycious, that when it seems to be most our friend, then it
woorketh us most dyspleasure. The healthful men dye rather of a short disease
in few days: then the dry and feeble men do, with a disease of many years.
By this comparison I mean, that since man cannot escape, nor live without
travail: it is much better, that by little and little he tastes them, then
they enter all at one time into his house. O how much ought the man to be
hated of the immortal gods, who knows not what travail means in this
world? For he only ought to fear fortune, who knows not fortunes force.
Since the gods woold permyt, and thy myshap has been such, that thou have
found more danger, where thou thoughtst most surety as a man evil fortuned:
it is reason that we apply unto thee some new ware, to the end thou lose not
thy good renown, since thou have lost thy evil goods,

Tell me I pray thee (Torquatus) why do thou complayn as a man sick? why
cryest thou as a fool? why syghest thou as a man in dyspayre? and why do
thou weep as a child? Thou art come out of the way.

And thou complainest to have lost thy way. Thou sailest by the broiling seas:
and thou wonderest that ye waves do assault thee. Thou have ascended ye
steep, and craggy mountayns: and thou complaynest that thou art weary. Thou
walk by the thorns: and wylt not that thy gown be torn.

Dydst thou thynk in the top of the high mountayn to live most sure? By that I
have spoken, I will ask what dyligent service thou have done to the world,
that thou wooldst the gods of heaven shoold recompense thee? Wooldest thou of
fortune a safe conduct, she being (as she is) enemy of many, nature being
not able to geeue it, the which is mother of all? O my friend Torquatus, that
which the pytyfull nature cannot promise thee, dydst thou thynk that fortune
(which is the just stepmother) should geeue? It is impossible that the Sea
should always promise us suerty, and the heaven clerenesse, the summer dews,
and the winter frosts. Mark well, mark my friend Torquatus, that all natural
things are subject to change every year: but all the worldlyngs ought to
endure to eclypse every moment.

Since the natural goods cannot always be in one man's custody, being
necessary, it is just that the goods of fortune perysh, since they are
superfluous. Unjust shoold the Gods be, if that which is to the damage of so
many, they had made perpetual: and that which is to the profyt of all, they
had made mortal. I will no more reduce to thy memory, the prosperyty wc thou
have had in times past: before yt we treat how fortune handles thee at this
present. The deceytfull fortune, when at thy gate she sold her marchaundyse,
knowing that she sold unto thee, and thou being ignorant of that thou
boughtst: she gave thee fruitful ground, and afterward made it unto thee
paynfull. She has geeuen thee sower for sweet: and the sweet she has
returned to the sower. She has geeuen thee the evil for the good: and where
that thou have sold her good: she returned unto thee evil. Finally she has
beeguyled thee in the just pryse: thou not supposyng that thou had received
any damage. We can do no less in this case but to have compassyon upon
thee: yet though they condemn malicyous fortune for sellyng, they will note
thee simple in buying. For in the shop of fortune, all marchaundyse are
suspycious. O unhappy that we are, I say those which meddle with the world:
for in his market they see naught but lies, and we do not trust but in the
ouerthrows of our renown: which are not paid, but with the cost of our life.
And the factours of that fair, geeue us nothing by weight, or measure: for
they are a sort of vacabounds, and the woorst of all is, knowing that they
ought to lose with fortune, all seek to buy at her shop. Geeue thy self to the
world, love the world much, serve the world well, follow the world well, and
feel the world well: for in the end of the journey, the world requires thee
to be like unto his inconstancy. I woold enter into count, not with the world,
which in the end is the world: but with the worldlyngs, which are in love with
the world. For in the end, either it is good or evil. If the world be good
for them, whereof do they complain? If he be evil, why do they follow
him? They can not (though they woold) deny one of the two errors wherein the
worldlyngs fall: that is to weete, that they serve an evil master, or that
they murmour of a good lord. Tell me my friend Torquatus what dydst thou hope,
since thou made so long time a countenance to the world? two and thyrty
years thou have served the world, and have been in his favor: wherefore it
were now hye time that between thee and him were some dyscord. For beetweene
the graundfathers and the nephews, beetween the father and the children,
beetween the uncles and the nephews, daily we see great strifes: and did
thou think, that beetween thee and fortune, perpetual peace shoold be? She
gave not to Belus king of the Assirians but.ix years of prosperity. To the
Queen Semiramis six only. To Label king of the Lacedaemonians. five. To the
king of Chaldeans. four. To the great Alexander. four. To the great Amilcar
king of Carthage two. To our Julius Caesar one, and to infinite others she gave
not one. If the world were pacyent he shoold be no world, if the world were
constant, he shoold be no world, if the world were sober, he shoold be no
world, if the world were true, he shoold be no world, if the world were
corrigible, he shoold be no world: finally I say, that for naught else the
world is world, but because there is nothing in him worthy to be beeloued:
and many things in it that deserves to be reproved. If thou were wise, and
knewst any thing of the world, in all the discourse of those.xxxii. years, thou
had not eaten without care, nor had gone without guyles, and had not
spoken without suspicion, nor slept without assault, nor trusted any friend. For
the war men do thynk always, wherein their enemies may beeguile them,
wherein they them selves may fail, and wherein fortune may let them. I know
not if it be that the world of him self be happy, or that the worldlings are
fools. For if one stranger, one neighbor, or our proper brother does envy
us, we will never (though he do require us) pardon him, and we cease not to
follow the world, though we know he presecuteth us. So that we draw our
sweords against flies: and will kill the elephants with needles. There is no
greater ill in the world, then to thynk all things in the world are in
extremyty. For if we be abased, we sigh always to mount: and if we be
high, we weep allways for fear of falling. Such ouerthrows has the world,
and his snares are so secret: that we are no sooner shipped, but we see both
our hands and feet entangled in vices: by the which our lyberty is brought
into such extreme and cruel captivity, that we beewayle our mishaps with
roaryng voice as brute beasts: but as men we dare not once utter them. I know
not whereof this comes, for some I see which willingly fall, and other I see
which woold recover them selves. I see diverse that woold be remedyed, and I
see all do complain: but in the end I see no man that does amend. These
things I have written unto thee, for no other thing, but because from hence
forth thou shooldst live more circumspectly: for as thou know, I say
nothing, whereof I have not had long experyence. The colt which thou have sent
me is proved very good, especyally for that he leapeth very well, and for
the caryer he is exceedyng ready, and has a comely grace. I send thee two
thowsa^d sexterces, wherewt thou may relieve thy necessityes. Fyndyng
opportunity, as touching thy banishment, I will speak to the senate in thy
beehalf. I say no more to thee, but that the consolacion of the gods, and the
love of the gods be with thee Torquatus. The malice of the evil, and the ire
of ye furies, be absent from me Marcus, My wife Faustine saluteth thee. And
in her beehalf, and mine, recommend us to thy fair daughter in law Solophonia,
and thy daughter Amilda. Mark of mount Celio, writes to thee Torquate, with
his own hand.

Princes and noble men ought not to bear with iugglers, iesters, parasytes,
and common players, nor with any such kind of raskals, and loyterers. And of
the laws which the Romans made in this beehalf. Cap. xliij.
LIcurgus, Promotheus, Solon, and Numa Pompilius, famous inuenters, and
ordeyners of laws, showed the subtilty of their wits, and the zeal which
they had to their people, in ordeining many laws which they taught: not only
what they ought to do: but that which they ought to fly. For the good and
expert phisicions do deserve more praise to preserve us before we are sick:
then to heal us after we are diseased Plutarche in his apothegmes never
cease to exalt the Lacedaemonians, saying: that when they did observe their
laws, they were the most esteemed of all the greeks: and after that they brake
them, they were the most vylest subjects, which ever the Romans had. The
felicity or infelicity of realms, does not consist to have good or evil laws:
but to have good or evil princes. For little profyteth us the law to be just,
if ye king be wicked., Sextus Cheronensis in the life of Nerua says, when the
romans and the Greeks had wars togethers, and that the imbassadours of
these two nations were at controversy, which of them shoold have the Rhodiens
to be their friends: the Greek ambassador said to the Romayn. Ye ought not
to make your selves egall, O Romans, with the Greeks, sins the troth is, that
ye came from Rome to Greece to seek laws. The romain ambassador answered
him, I grant thee, that from Rome we sent to seek laws in Greece: but thou will not denay, that from Greece you have brought the vices to Rome. I say unto
thee the troth, that without comparison, greater damage have the vices done
unto us: then your laws has profyted us. Plutarche in an epistle he wrate to
Traiane, said these words. Thou writest unto me, most noble prince, that thou
art occupied in ordeyning new laws: but in my oppinion it had been much better,
that thou had kept, and caused to be kept the old. For little profyteth it to
have the books full of good laws, and that the common wealth be full of evil
customs. I have seen very few Princes, but to make laws they had hability
sufficient and to keep them, they have felt in them selves great debylity and
weakness. Hereof we have example. For Nero was he which made the best laws
in Rome: and that afterward of life was most corrupt. For the gods oftentimes
permit, that by the hands of some evil men, the others shoold be constrained
to be good. Plutarche says further. If thou wilt (noble Prince) trust thine
own understanding, in my poor counsayl, in few words I woold recite unto thee
al ye ancient laws. I will send thee very brief and sweet laws, not to thend
thou shooldst publysh them in Rome: but to the end thou keep them in thy
house. For since thou have made laws for all. I will make laws for thee. The
first law is, that thou beehaue thy self in such sort, that thou be not noted
of any notable vice: For if the prince be virtuous in his palace, none dare
be dyssolute in his house.

The second law is, that equally thou keep justice, as well to him which
lives far of, as to him which is near about thee: for it is much better yt
thou depart of thy goods to thy servants, then that thou shooldst geeue that
justice, which apperteineth to others. The third law is, that thou delyght in
word and deed to be true, and that they take thee not in this default to
speak too much. For princes which in their words are uncertain, and in their
promyses doubtful, shall be hated of their friends, and mocked of their enemies.

The fourth law is, that thou be very gentle of condition, and not forgetful
of services done. For unthankful princes are hated of god, and despised of me^.

The fifth law is, that as a pestilence thou chase from thee flatterers. For
such with their evil life, do disturb a whole common wealth: and with their
flatteries, do darken thy renown. If thou (most noble prince) wilt observe
these.v. laws, thou shall need to make no more laws: For there is no need of
other law in the common wealth, but to see that the prince be of good life.
This wrote Plutarche to Traian, and every virtuous man ought to have them
written in his heart. I was willing to touch this history only to show the
profyt of this last law, where it says, that princes admit into their
conversation no flatterers, of whom it is reason we talk of now: For so much
as there are diverse men, with whom they lose their time, and spend their goods.
When Rome was well ordered, two officers were greatly esteemed to the Romans.
The one was the masters of fence, which were as men that fought and turned,
and many times in that fight they were slain. And the cause to invent this
play, was to ye end young men (not expert in war) shoold see the swords
drawn, sharp speres, shootyng of crossebows, to geeue blows with their sword,
to shed blood, to geeue cruel wounds, and to sley men: For in this sort they
lost fear, and in going to the war they recovered courage. The man which
has once past a fourd in the water though it be in the night, dare pas it
again. But he which has never passed it over though it be in the day, dare
not adventure it. I mean, that the Romans were very sage, to show unto their
children the dangers, before they did put them therein. For this is the
difference beetwene the fearful heart, and the courageous stomach, in that the
one flies from a distaffe, and the other is not afraid of a sweord.

The second office which was esteemed in Rome was, that of the iugglers,
iesters, comediants, and of such others, which invented plays, and pastimes:
and the romans devised these sports, to rejoice the people: and in especially
men of war, whom they feasted at their going forth, and much more at their
coming home. For the Romans thinking that they shoold be with such glory
received, went with determinacion either to win the victory, or to dye in
battle. The ancient and true Romans had such care for the common wealth of
their people, that they consented that iesters shoold jest, iugglers shoold
iuggle, and the players of enterludes shoold play: But this was not through
abundaunce of vanyty, nor for want of gravity, but to take from the Plebeians
occasion of idleness, and to keep them occupied in other particular plays:
they woold that all the pleasures shoold be taken togethers. Not without cause
I say, that the pleasures were taken in commen, that is to weete, that no
romayn could play any plays particularly, make any bankets, represent
comedies, nor make any feasts beeside those, which they made to rejoice the
whole people, so that in Rome they trauayled severally, and rejoiced togethers.
I would to god that such and so excellent a romain custom were observed in our
christian common wealth.

But I am very sorry that indifferently rich, and poor, great and small, do
play comedyes, roune the bulls, make just ordein bankets, wear devises, feast
the ladies spend in bankets and invent feasts. The which things altogether do
redound to the damage of the common wealth, to the wast of the goods, and to
the corrupcion of the manners: for the particular pastimes do increase new
vices to breed in me. These players did serve in rome to make pastime at the
great feasts of their Gods: For since Romans were great worshippers of their
gods, and so careful of their temples, they sought to feast them all the ways
they could invent. Truly this was done by the divine sufferance, for their gods
being laughing stocks (as in deed they were) the living god would they should
be served, honored, and feasted by iestures, and mocks. Blondus in the third
book de Roma triumphante mencioneth the which I have have spoken, and says.
That the Romans were no less curious to give laws to the iudglers, and
iesters, which went mocking up and down Rome: then to the captayns which were
fighting in the war. For though they did permit iesters, players and iuglers,
to exercise their offices: yet they did command them that their lives might
be upright and just. Amongst others, such were the laws, which the romans
ordained for these iesters, iuglers, players, and tomblers.

The first law was, they commanded that they should all be known, and
examined, to see if they were honest men, wise, and sage. For the more their
offices were vain, so much the more they provided, that they were geeuen to
wise men. The second law commanded to examine them, to see if they were able,
and comely to exercise their offices: and in deed in this case, as well as in
the other, they had reason, as very a fool is he wc for harkneth to a fool
not pleasant, as the fool him self.

The third law was that they did not permit any Roman iugler to exercise such
feats, oneles he had some other craft. So that if they occupied the holy days
to play and show pastyme in the streats, the other days they should woork at
home at their houses. The fourth law was, that no iugler nor vice should be so
hardy in his ostentacions to speak any malices: and in deed it was a law very
necessary. For often times they are few which do rejoice at their mockryes:
and many which complain of their malices.

The fifth law was that no iugler or iester, should be so bold to make any
pastimes in any particular houses, but in open places. For otherwise, those
which spoke them beecame hardy, and those which heard them were vicious.

The Romans not contented to have made these laws, ordained that the iuglers
for no pastimes showed, or any other thing spoken should be so bold as to
receive any money. And to avoid their complaynts, and to satisfy their pains,
they allowed every one of them a thousand sexterces yearly out of the common
treasure. We ought greatly to praise the providence of ye Romans, which have
prescribed a kind of life for the iesters to live: eue^ as they did to other
men of rome, and to the captains of war. And in this place no less tha^ in an
other grave thing, they showed their wisdom. For a governor of a common
wealth trauaileth more to correct fools, the^ to govern ye sage.

How some iesters were punished by the ancients, and of the iesters and
loyterers of our time. Cap. xliiii.
IVlius Capitolinus in the book of the manners of the ancients says, that in
times past, the iesters, and iugglers were greatly esteemed. And we will not
deny but that they had reason, sins with them they honored the gods they
took their pleasures, the rejoiced their feasts, they were very quick men,
nor importunate, nor covetous. The iester has no grace, unless immediately a
man puts his hand to the purse. We find so^e fragments of an oration which
Cicero made in the senate, greatly reproving the Senators, and all the people,
because they so willingly gave ear to this iester, who stirred up sedition
among the commons, his name was Roscio, who was so greatly esteemed in rome
that the Romans did more willingly hear that which he said in his jests,
than that which Cicero spoke in good earnest: This iester Roscio and Cicero
stryued which of them both were of greater wit, Roscio for prese^ting a thing
with diverse jests, or Cicero pronouncing waity matters in earnest. When I read
in Julius Capitolinus that which I have spoken, I will not cease to confess
mine innocence, for that I could not then keep my self from laughing to see
that Roscio, being Prince of folly: did presume to dispute with Cicero, which
was father of eloquence. Since all these things are unstable in one, so from one
day to another we see them change. The romans did greatly esteem the
policy of the common wealth, the discipline of war, the nurture of children,
the exercise of the young, and the honesty of the players, and iuglers: the
which in time came to be dissolute, that very often they were occasion of great
slander among ye people. The which by the Romans seen, and considered, and
that the iesters which were wont to show them pleasures, were cause of
discension (and where all they commanded them to be resydente in their
offices, they were vacabonds, and that using them as sages, they lived as
loyterers and fools, not contented with that yt they gave them of the common
treasure, but they went begging of every man) the Senate of rome determined
among them selves to banish all the iuglers, and iesters, out of the common
wealth. On this execution of these loyterers, sprang dyues dyssentions among
the people. For the Princes which were good, cast them out: and those which
were evil, called them in. So that one of the tokens which were in Rome to
know a virtuous, or vicious prince was to see if he maintained iesters,
iuglers, or vacabonds, among the people. Plutarch in his Apothegmes says,
that the Lacedaemonians did never permit any iugler or iester to be in the
common wealth. And when one did demand a Lacedemonian, by an imbassador of
Rhodes, what was the occasion to make such a law, since the the iesters, and
players, showed pleasure to the people, and the people lost naught but laughed
at their folly: the Lacedemonian answered. Lycurgus saw, hard, felt, or red
some great damage the iesters, iuglers or players, might do in the commonwealth, since against them he made this so straight a law. But that which I
know is yt we Greeks are better, weeping with our sages: then are the Romans
laughing at their fools. Dio in the life of Traian declares, that there came
a iugler to Rome from Affricke, whose conueyance was so clean, that it was a
wonderful thing to see what seats he did, and to hear what words he spoke.
And when they prayed the good Emperor Traian, that it would please him to hear
him, he answered. It is not for the authority of a grave and virtuous prince,
that in his presence any such vain thing should be showed. For in such a
case, he shoold be no les noted of lightness, then the other accused of folly.
And further he said. Before princes a man should not be so hardy to speak
dishonest words, nor show light representacions. And in such case as much
pain deserve they which move him thereto: as those which do represent them.
For a man ought not to put before princes things which should allure them to
vices: but things wc shoold move them to virtues. Certainly these words were
worthy of such a personage. Suetonius Tranquillus in the life of Augustus
declares, yt in Rome there was a iester very pleasant and of an excellent wit
caled Epifanius who one day upon a holyday to show the Emperor so^e pleasure
and hoping to have a good reward, went to ye palace at one time in ye attire
of a page, and another time i^ ye habit of a Romayn matron: and so truly
counterfeted every thing that it seemed not to be him, but the self same
parson he represented. The Emperor Augustus was greatly displesed with that
the iester had done, and commanded forth with that he shoold be whipped iii.
tyms about the theater. And when he complained, that the Emperor commanded
vacabonds to be whipped once, and he thrice, the Emperor Augustus answered.
Once they shall whip thee, for the injury thou did to the Romayn matron, whom
thou did represent. The second time they shall whip thee, for the presumption
that thou have to represe^t it before my parso^. The third for ye time thou
have made diverse lose, for beeholding and hearing thee. For iesters do not
deserve so much punishment, in the iestes and mockries they do say: as for the
time which they lose, and cause others to lose. Certainly the punishment which
was geeuen to the iester, was very just: and exceading good were the words,
which Augustus said. There was an other in the time of Augustus whose name was
Pilas. And when the Emperor had banyshed all the iesters, and iuglers from
Rome, this Pilas was so pleasant, and merry with all persons, that with great
instau^ce they be sought ye Emperor to revoke yt sentence. And ye request in
deed was so great as if it had been for a Philosopher, they could have done no
more. For dayn, and light me^, employ rather yt they have, on him who brings
unto them some folly: then on one, which teaches and corrects their life.
The Emperor condescended to the request of the people, on such condition, that
they should geeue a master and tutor to Pilas, that shoold chastise and
correct him as a fool. Saying, yt since sages took fools to be their
masters, that ye fools also shoold have sages for masters. The case was that
one day he that had the charge of Pilas, did rebuke him for certain lightness
that he had done, or for some dishonesty that he had said: whereat Pilas was
exceading wrath with him. The which the emperor vndesta^ding, commanded he
should be whipped and banished for ever. When Augustus gave this sentence they
say he said these words. Rome has been mighty, and puisaunt enough, to make
her enemies stoop: and now she is not able to banish iesters, and fools. And
that that is worse of al, they have presumption to vex us, and we have not
courage to reprove them. The Lacedaemonians had great reason and also the
Romans, to ryd their common wealth of iesters. For they are idel, vicious,
dishonest, malycious, and preiudyciall to the common wealth. These iesters and
iuglers are idell, seeing that more then others, they eat the swette of others.
They are vicious, for they can not exercise their offices but in vices, and in
treatyng with vicious men. They are dishonest, for they get not to eat by
doing good woorks: but by speaking dyshonest words. They are malicious, for
they have accustomed when they love not a man, immediately to speak evil of
him. They are unprofitable for the common wealth, for they mock us and sell us
vain words: and we pay them good money. The world is come to so great folly,
and corruption, that eue^ as grave and wise men think it great inconvenience,
to be conuersaunt with vain, and fond men: so the Lords of estate think it an
honor, to have in their house, some foolysh iesters, yea better to say (with
reverence of speech) raylyng knaves, which speak not to please and show
pastyme, but to offend the present, and rayl at the absent, as well of the high,
as ye low, and that that is more yet then this, is that they are not contentyd
to have given this enterteinment and welcome to the noble men and Ientlemen
that are at their lords board: but they must needs have a cast at my lord him
self to chere him with all: which intolerable abuse ought not only not to
be suffered, but with most sharp correction punished. But what shall we say,
that for the most part the lords are so vain and the iesters so presumptuous
and arrogant: that the Lords have more care to content them, then they have to
please the lords. In the house of a lord, a fool at the end of the year will
ask more, then any other of those which are most ancient, so that the follyes
of one are more acceptable, then the seruyces of all. It is shame to speak it,
and no less to write it, that the Children of vanity are so vain, that they
brybe a fool or a iester no less in these days, to the intent he may be a
mean for them unto the Prince: then they did in times past desire Cicero, to
make an oration for them before the Senate. It is for want of understanding,
and through the vilety of person oppression of the heart, and disprayse of
renown, to be desirous by the mean of fools, too attain to any thing. For
he can have no great wysedo^e, which puts his hope in the favor of a fool.
What remains for me to say, when I have said that which I will say? And it
is, that if a iester or fool say openly to some lord, God save your life my
good lord. Oh he is a noble man in deed he will not stick to geeue him a
gown of silk: and entering into a church, he would not geeue a poor man a
halpeny.

O what negligence is there of princes? O what vanity of Lords? since they
forsake the poor and wise, to enrych the iesters and fools. They have enough
for the world, and not for Ihesus Christ: they geeue to those that ask for his
lovers sake, and not to those which ask for the health of the soul. He ought
not to do so: for the knight which is a Christian, and not a worldlyng, ought
rather to will that the poor do pray for him at the hour of death: then that
the fools, and iesters should praise him in his life.

What does it profit the soul, or the body, that the iesters do praise thee
for a cote thou have geeuen them: and that the poor accuse thee, for the bread
thou have denayed them? Peradventure it will profyt thee as much, that a fool or
a flaterer, go before a Prince apparayled with a new lyuery of thine: as the
poor men shall do thee damage before God, to whom thou have denied a poor
ragged shirt? All gentlemen, and noble parsonages, in the name of our savior
Jesus Christ I admonysh, exhort, and humbly require, that they consider well
what they spend, and to whom they geeue, for the good Princes, ought to have
more respect of the necessityes of the poor: then of the follyes of
counterfayts. Geeue as ye will, divide as ye list, for at the hour of death,
as much as ye have laughed with the fools, for that ye have geeuen them, so
much shall ye weep with the poor, for that ye have denayed them. At the hour
of death it shall be grievous pains to him that dies, to see the flesh of the
orphans all naked, and to beehold counterfaite fools laden with their
garments. Of one thing I am amassed, that indifferently every man may beecome a
fool, and no man let him: and the woorst of al is, if once a fool beecome
covetous, all the world afterward cannot make him to to be in his right
senses. Truly such one which has no reason to be a fool, at the least he
has good occasion: since he gets more to eat playeng, the^ the others do
woorking. O what negligence of the princes, and what small respect of the
governors of the common wealth is this? that a young man, whole, stout, strong,
and valiant, should be suffered to go from house to house from table to
table, and only for babbling vain words, and telling shameful lies, he
should be counted a man of an excellent tongue? Another folly there is in this
case, that their words are not so foolish, as their deeds are wicked. And
though they have a good, or euel grace: yet in the end, they be counted in the
common wealth, as loyterers and fools. I know not whether in this case is
greater, either their folly, or our lyghtnes: for they use as fools, in
telling us lies, and we pay them good money. The Romans did not permit in
their common wealths, old stale iesters: nor we Christyans ought to retain
into our houses, idel loyterers. Ye ought to know that more offends he which
sins with a defourme woman: then he which sins with a beautiful lady.
And he which is drunk with sower ale offends more then he which is drunk
with sweet wine. And so in like manner greater offense commit they which lose
their times with fools that have no grace: then with iesters, which have good
wits. For it may be permitted sometime, that the sage man for the recreation
of his spyrits, do frequent the company of some pleasant man.

Of a letter which ye Emperor wrote to Lambertus his friend, governor of
Helespont certifying him that he had banished from Rome all fools and
loytering plaiers and is divided into.3. chapters, a notable letter for those
that keep counterfeit fools in their howses. Cap. xlv.
MArcus Aurelius only Emperor of Rome, lord of Asia, confederate with Europe,
friends of Affricke, and enemy of the wars, wishes health to thee Lambert,
governor of the I Will of Helespont. With the furs which thou did send me. I
have caused my gown to be furred, and am girded with the girdel which thou
did present me, and am greatly contented with thy hounds. For all is so
good, that the body does rejoice to possess it, and the eyes to beehold it,
and also the heart to render thanks for it. Where I did ask a few things of thee
in jest, thou have sent me many in ernest, wherein not as a servant, but as a
friend thou have showed thy self. For the office of noble and worthyharts, is
to offer to their friends, not only that which they demand: but that also which
they think they will demand. Truly thou have better measured thy services, by
thy noblenes: then I thee demand by my covetousness. For if thou do
remember, I did demand of thee only.xii. skins: and thou have sent me.12.
dosen. I told thee that I desired.6. hounds for to hunt: and thou have sent
me.12. of ye best that can be found in the I Will. In such sort, that I have had
honor: and thou have wonn renown. For in the litel I have demanded, they
shall see my little covetousness: and in the much thou have sent me, they shall
perceive thy great lyberalyty. I esteem highly that which thou have sent me:
and I beeseech the gods send thee good luck. For thou know, we may render
thanks for ye benefits received: but we have not the power to requite the
gentleness showed. For the man which dare receive of an other any gift, does
bynd him self to be his slave. I can not be thy slave, for I am thy friend:
and thereof thou oughst to rejoice, more then an other. For being a servant,
I should serve thee with fear: but being thy friend, I will profit thee with
friendship. Therefore to declare the chief occasion wherefore I write unto thee
at this present, I say, I send thee.3. ships laden with iesters and iuglers,
loyterers, vacabonds, and fools: and yet I do not send unto thee all the
vacabonds which are in Rome, for the^ thy I Will should be peopled with
strangers. The office that they had, was that soom of the^ iested and rayled
at the table, soome sang sundry malicious songs at marriages, others told lies
and news for their dinners at the gates, other played common plays in the
streats, other enterteined the roman matrones with foolish nouells and tales,
others set forth vain and light books of rymes and ballets: and yet I swear
unto thee by the god Hercules, these loiterers wanted no fools to here them. I
let thee weete, my friend Lambert, that these loyterers are such, and their
scolers in number so many that though the masters may be in.3. ships carried:
yet the scholars could not be in an hundred transported. Of one thing I
meruell much, and also I affirm, that the Gods be offended, since earthquakes
overthrew the houses, the great waters carry away the bridges, the frost freese
the vines, the corrupt air infecteth the wise men: and yet is there no plague
that consumes the fools? O how unhappy art thou Rome, unto him that shall
well beehold thee, and dilygently search thee. For in thee wants valyant
captayns, honest Senators, just Ce^sors, faithful officers, and virtuous
Princes: and only there abounds fools, iesters, plaiers, dysers, loyterers,
and vacabo^ds. O what service thou should do to the gods, and profit to our
mother Rome, if for.3. ships of fools, thou did send us one bark only of
wise men? I would not say (but I will not cease to say) that I have seen
fools, that I have heard many folys: but I never saw so great fools, nor hard
such extreme folly, as that of some noble romans, and Italyens, who think it a
great act to keep a fool in their house. I judge him to be a greater fool,
that so desires to keep a fool: then the fool him self. For a fool has a
semblaunce of the sage, after that he accompanies with a sage: but the sage
shows him self a fool, after he accompanies with a fool. Why do men
seek things of mockry? since all that is in the world is mockry? Why seek
we fools? Since all that we say, is nothing but folly? Why do we rejoice
with those which flatter us? since there are none, that say one only truth?
Why do we seek fained fools: Since that all, or the most part of us all,
are very fools? I see diverse in Rome, the which though they company with
honest men, are dissolute, companyeng with sages they are simple, treating with
wise men, they are without consideracion, and being conversant with fools,
they think to be sage. If we keep company with pitefull, we shall be
pityfull.

If we be conversant with the cruel, we shall be^e cruel. If we comunicate
with liars, we shall be liars. If we haunt the true, we shall be true: and if
we desire the foolish, we shall be fools. For according to the masters and
doctrines we have: such shall be the sciences which we shall learn, and the
woorks which we shall follow. The famous tirant Dionisius the Siracusane, which
was in Scicil, said unto the philosopher Diogenes. Tell me Diogenes, what
kind of me^ ought we to have in our houses, and with what persons ought we
to divide our goods? Diogenes answered him. The wise man which will live in
peace with the common wealth, and that will not see his goods evil employed,
ought not to geeue to eat, nor to accompany with any, but with the aged persons
which should counsel them, and with the young which should serve them, with
friends which should favor them, and with the poor, to the end they should
praise them. Denis the tiraunt greatly commended that, which Diogenes the
philosopher told him: but he could never profyt with that counsel. For as
he showed him self a tirant in robbing: so he showed him self also
indiscreet in spending. Presuppose that that which Diogenes the philosopher
spoke were true, that is to weete, that we ought to feed the aged, servants,
friends, and poor: we see by this answer, it is not just to geeue to eat,
either to iesters, minstrels, parasites, flaterers, loiterers or fools. First
me seems, that a man ought not to think that fools are capable to geeue
counsel, since they have it not for them selves: for it should be great folly
to use men as sages, which of their own will have made them selves fools. The
second, me seems that it is a vain thing to think, that the iesters should
serve as servants: for these unhappy people, to fly travail only, have taken
upon them this office so sclaunderous.

Thirdly it seems to be a shamefast thing, and of great inconuenyence, that
any noble and sage? man should determine, to have any flatterer, or iester for
his famylyar friend: for such ought not, nor cannot be counted among ye true
friends, since they love us not for ye virtue we possess, but for the goods
which we have. Fourthly me thinks it a vain thing to think, that under the
color of poverty it should be just, to geeue meat to iesters, or loyterers:
for we cannot say ye such are poor for that they want riches, but that folly
abounds in them. Since therefore a man is defamed to have such iesters,
flatterers, and loyterers for friends, and that for being servants they are
unable, and with out wit to ask them counsel: me thinks it is a great
folly, to spend his goods on such loyterers. For as their intencions to the
gods only are manifest, and to men secret: so their is nothing wherein the good
do approve and manifest their intencions to be good, or evil, more then in
the words which they speak, and in the companies which they keep.

Marcus Aurelius goes forward with his letter and declares how he found the
sepulchers of many learned Philosophers in Helespont, whereunto he sent all
these loyterers. Cap. xlvi.
I will thou know Lambert, that thy I Will is consecrated with the bones of many
excellent men, the which were banyshed by sundry tirannous Princes of Rome. The
ancients greatly commend that I Will, because there are therein stones caled
Amatistes, tame dear, fair women, familiar wolfes, swift dogs of foot, and
pleasant fountains.

Yet notwithstanding I will not cease to commend these things which rejoice
those that be present, and also comfort those that be to come. For I esteem
more the bones, which the earth do cover: then the riches, which grows
thereon. If thou have not lost the sense of smelling, as that I Will does sauoure
unto me of sages: so does Rome stynk of fools. For, for the time it is less
pain, to endure the stink of the beast: then to hear the words of a fool.
When the wars of Asia were ended, I returned home by that isle, wherein I
visited all the living people, and all the graves of the dead philosophers. And
for, a truth, I tell thee Lambert, ye that journey was very trublesome unto
me: for here in my person endured much pain, on the land I suffered diverse
dangers, and on the sea I saw my self in sundry perils. In the city of
Corinthe (where thou art resident at this present) in the midst of the market
place, thou shall find the grave of the philosopher Panimio, to whom the
straight friendship auayled litel, which he had with Ouide: but the enmity
greatly endomaged him which he had with Augustus the emperor. Two miles from
Theadfonte at the foot of the mountains Arpines thou shall find the grave of
the famous orator Armeno, who was by the co^sul Scilla unjustly banished, And
of troth, as here was much blood lost, because Scilla should not enter into
Rome: so there were not few tears shed in Italye, for the banishment of this
philosopher. In the gate of Argonata, hard by the water, in the top of a high
rock, thou shall find the bones of Celliodorus the Philosopher, who observed
all the ancient laws: and was a great enemy of those, which brought in new
customs, and statutes.

This good Philosopher was banyshed, in ye prosperitye and fury of ye Marians:
nor for the evils they found in him, but for the vices he reproved in them. In
the fyldes Heliny, there was a great tomb, within the which were the bones of
Selleno the philosopher, who was as well learned in the.vii. lyberall arts: as
if he himself had first invented them.

And he was banished by ye Emperor Nero, for because he persuaded this cruel
Emperor, to be merciful, and pyteful. In ye same fyeldes Heliny out of the
woods toward the west part, you shall find the grave of ye philosopher
Vulturnus a man in Astrology profoundly learned wc little auayled him in his
banishment

For he was banished by Marcus Antonius, not for that Marcus Antonius would
have banished him (for he was not offended by him) but because his love
Cleopatra hated him, as her mortal enemy.

For women of an evil life, revenge commonly their angry hearts, with the death
of their especial friends. Diverse other tombs in that I Will I saw, the names
whereof though in writing I have them: yet at this present I cannot call them to
memory. Well, by the faith of an honest man I swear unto thee, that thou shall
find al true which I have told thee. Now I tell thee Lambert, that I visiting
those graves, their disciples did not bear them greater obedience, when they
were alive: then I did reverence now they are dead. And it is true also, that
in all that time my eyes were as much wet with water, as their bones were
covered with earth. These philosophers were not banyshed, for myscheues by
their persons committed, nor for sclaunders they had done in the common
wealths: but because the deeds of our fathers deserved, that they shoold be
taken from their company, and we their children were not worthy, to have the
bones of so famous, and renowned sages in our custody. I cannot tell, if the
envy I have to that I Will be greater, or the pyty I have of this miserable Rome:
for the one is immortal by the graves of the dead, and the other is defamed
with the life of the living.

I desire thee heartily as a friend, and do command thee as a servant, that
thou keep ye pryuyleges which I geeue to that I Will, without breakyng any one.
For it is very just, that such cities peopled with such dead, should be
priuileged of ye living. By this Centurion, thou shall know al things which are
chanced amongst the prisoners.

For if I should write all the whole matter unto thee as it was done: I e^sure
thee, unto me it would be much pain to write it, and to thee great trouble
to read it. It suffyceth presently to say that the day of the great solempnitie
of the mother Berecinthe a sclaunderer arose in Rome by the occasion of these
iesters, scoffers, and loyterers: and by the faith of a good man, I swear unto
thee, that the blood which was shed through the places, surmounted the wine
which was drunk at the feast. And think not that which I say to be little that
the blood which was shed, surmounted the wine that was drunk.

For as thou now know, the Citezins are come to so great folly: that he
which was on that day most drunk, they said that he had offered unto the Gods
greatest sacrifyces. I am yet afraid, to remember the crueltyes which that day
I saw with my own eyes: but I am much more ashamed of that which they talk of
us in strange realms. For the noble and worthy hearts, do not count it so
much to receive a great wound: as to take it of a cowardly man. There is great
dyfference beetweene the netts, where with they take brydes, and no less is
there beetwene the hooks, wherewith they take fysh. I mean that the knife which
cutteth the flesh, dyffereth much from the knife which hurts the heart. For
the hurts of the body, with surgions may be healed: but the gods only are the
phisicions of the peryls of the heart.

I saw Rome which was never vanquyshed by valiant men at that day overcome by
loyterers. Rome which could never be wonn by those of Carthage, is now wonn by
iesters, players, and vacabonds. Rome which triu^phed of all the realms, is
now vanquished of the loyterers, iesters, and idel persons.

Finally, we saw that Rome which in times past gave laws to the Barbarous, is
now beecome ye slave of fools: in this case I have been so troubled, that I
cannot tell what to say, and less what I write unto thee. One thing comforts
me, that since Rome and her Romans do not rejoice them selves but with
fools: that she and her children be not punyshed, but by the hands of
fools. I think not that in this case ye Gods do any wrong, if Rome which
laughed through mockry at the players: do weep one day with the loyterers in
good earnest. Thou might demand me Lambert, since we other Princes are
bound to maintain equal justice with al: wherefore we do dissemble many
offenses which others have done in earnest: and yet we will not pardon those
iesters, since all that they have invented, was for mirth and pastyme? I promise
thee, though their offenses were great in deed: yet I do not banish them so
much for the blood they have shed, as for the good orders which they have
perverted. Once again I retourn to say unto thee, yt I have not banyshed them
so much for because they were occasion of murders: as to be teachers of all
lies. Without co^paryson, greater is the offense to the gods, and greater is
the damage to the common wealth to take away (as these loyterers have done) the
senses of wise men: then that which the murderers do, to take life from their
enemies. The end of these iesters, scoffers, iuglers, idell men, and those kind
of rascalles, is always to persuade men yt they speak continually in mockries,
treat continually in mockries, and to rid them of their sorows, and all this
is but to deceive them of their goods. In the which case I say, and so pleased
it the gods, that they shoold content them selves with the goods, without
robbing us of our wisdom. When Scipio the Affrican had ended the wars of
Affrike, he went through Rome accompanied not with valiant captains: but
with the plaiers, iesters, and iuglers. The which a philosopher seeing, said
unto him these words. O Scipio, according to the much they have talked of thee,
and the little I see in thee, it had been better thou had dyed in Affricke,
then to come to Rome. For thy high acts, in thy absence did astony us: and thy
light nesse in thy presence does offend us. To thee it is great infamy, and to
the sacred senate little honesty, that thou having conquered so mighty princes in
affricke, should go accompanied with fools, and madd men in Rome. I let thee
weete Scipio, that thy life had not then so much peril among thy enemies: as
thy honor has at this present among fools. These words were very good,
though they were evil received, of humayne malice. For by reason of these
words the poor aged philosopher was banished (by the friends of Scipio) out of
Italy and sent to the I Will of Helesponte.

The Emperor ends his letter, and shows the cause and time why and when
these iesters, and iuglers were admitted into Rome. Cap. xlvii.
AFter that these loyterers and vacabounds shall la^d in thy I Will, thou shall let
them go at liberty and shall take none of their goods: but you shall advertise
them that they be not so hardy, to exercise their crafts nor feats. For if
they do the contrary thou may make them lose their life in thy I Will, wc I
have condicionally pardoned here in Rome. One thing I command thee, and I
beesech thee forget it not, that is to wete: that thou compel them to labor,
and that in no means thou suffer them to be idle.

For Idleness is the mother of al vices in the parson, and the causer of al
sclau^ders which arise in the common wealth. Since we know not but to labor,
and the loyterers know not but to loyter, I would say, that with more reason
they might say that we were not sage: then we might say that they are fools.
For wrongfully are they called fools, which by craft eat the swette of others:
Seeing the little regard we have to these loyterers, and considering how much
we presume: by the faith of a good man I swear unto thee Lamberte, that with
greater reason they should mock our woorks: then we others should laugh at
their words. For they profit more with our goods, then we do of their
folly. In the, CCxli. of the foundation of Rome a sore plague came into Italy.
The which being ended, they determined to tell not the thousands of menn that
were dead: but the small number of those which remained alive. Rome afterward
being so solitary, and Italy so desolate, only to rejoice the people, and to
the end the cities should not remayn uninhabited, the first theathers were
invented, and then first were these players received. For until that time the
Romans knew no other thing, but to offer sacrifice to their gods in the
temples: and to fight against their enemies in the feeldes. O lamentable thing
to hear, that this plague lasted only.xxiiii. months, and the rage and folly
of these players, and idel men, has endured more then.iiii. years. Would to
the immortal gods, that yt plague had ended those few which remayn: before
this cursed generation had brought so abominable customs into Rome. For much
better had it been for our mother Rome, that she had wanted inhabiters, than
such raskals should have come and dwelled therein. I know well (Lambert) yt
these parsons do greatly complain of me, and that the complaynts which they
do in the beeginning, shall not have an end there: but I care not much for the
complaints of the euel wc do serve for no other thing but to reprove ye
justices which are ministered unto them by the good. The princes in that they
command, and the judges in that they execute, ought not much to esteem the
complaynts of al those which say they have wrong: Provided that the cause be
justified, and that under the color of justice they do no wrong in deed. In
the flatteries which they tell us concerning our glory, and in the sclaunders wc
they speak of us concerning our reproach, wise men ought well to note the
nature of ye parson which speaks it, whether that be true which he
speaks, and what moves him to tell it, For as it is a shame for to be
rebuked of a man which is honest: so it is no small infamy to be praised of
those which are evil.

Since the time I was borne, I never saw any thing less profitable in the
common wealth, nor more vain, neither worse inuencions, nor colder recreations
then these are, which these iesters, players, and iuglers do invent.

What thing can be more monstrous, then to see the folly of a fool bring
diverse wise men out of their wits? What greater mockry can there be, then
that al do think that the jests of a fool ought to be rejoiced at, with the
laughter of the sage? What greater sclaunder can there be, the^ that in the
offices of the noble and worthy Romans, the gates should always be open for
fools: and the wise men should find them always shutt? What greater cruelty
can there be in Rome, then that the senators and rich men geeue more to a
player, for a song which he sings in one hour, then they do to the
servant for serving them a whole year? What greater theft can there be than
this, that the garrisons which are in Illiria want: and players, iesters
iuglers, flatterers, and loyterers, in Rome have to much? What greater sha^e
can Rome receive then this, when it shall be said in time to come, that
iuglers, players, parasites, iesters, and flatterers, have won more with
their iugling, playing, jesting and flattering: then diverse captayns with their
wepons, and triumphs? Beehold therefore Lambert, what difference there is
beetwene captayns, and loyterers. For when the one went through Rome, sowing
their follyes from gate to gate: the others went from realm to realm consuming
their goods, aduenturing their lives, fighting against the barbarous people,
and shedding their own proper blood.

And in the hindermost part of Spain, when those of Seuill had war with the
Gaditanes, it chanced that even in the midst of the time those of Seuil
wanted money, and, ii. parasites offered them selves for.ii. years to sustain
the wars, with their own proper goods: so that with the riches of two fools:
many wise men were overcome. When the Amazones were ladies of Asia, then they
buylt the great temple of the goddess Diana. And as the histories account,
only with that they took away from a player, was buylt this noble temple. If
the histories of the Egiptians do not deceive me, king Cadmus, who with
a.100. gates buylt the great city of Thebes, for such a buylding, so high and
monstrous a city, all his subjects together gave him not so much, as two
parasits did alone. When the good emperor Augustus renewed the walls of Rome,
and made them of hard stone, which before that time were only of earth and
brick, toward such a costly woork, he had more of two parasites which were
drowned, then of all the city beeside. I being in the city of Corinthe, saw an
ancient tomb, wherein the Corinthians say their first king was buried. And the
historiographers say that this king was a great wrostler, other say he was a
parasite, others say he was a iugler, but how so ever it was, he was first a
iester, and obtained a realm in earnest. Beehold therefore La^bert, how they
are neglected of the gods, and favored of fortune, and in how little estimacion
the goods of this life ought to be esteemed: sins some by counterfayting the
fools, leave of them as great a memory of their folly, as the others do by
their wisdom. There is one thing only of these loyterers that pleseth me,
that is to weete, that in presence they make every man laugh with the follyes
they speak: and after that they are gone, al remain sad for the money they
carry away. Truly it is a just sentence of the gods, that those which have taken
vanie pleasures togethers, do weep after wards for their losses severally. At
this present I will write no more unto thee, but that I send thee this letter
written in Greek, to the end thou may read it to all those of that isle. And
thou shall immediately dispatch the ships, to the end they carry the provisions
to the men of war in Illiria. Peace be with thee Lambert, health and good
fortune to me Mark.

The senate saluteth thee, and do send thee the prorogation of the gouerme^t
for the next year. In the calends of January thou shall say Gaude felix. my
wife Faustine comme^deth her to thee, and sends thee for thy daughter a rich
girdel. In payment of thy seruyces, I send thee.ii. rich jewels, ii. light
horses, and one laden with.4000. sexterces. Marcus of mount Celio, with his own
hand writes unto thee.

That princes and noble men ought to remember that they are mortal, and must
dye, where are sundry notable consolations against the fear of death. Cap.
xlviii.
CLeobolus and Biton were the sons of a renowned woman, the which was Nun
to the goddess Juno: and when the day of that solemn feast was celebrated,
her children prepared a chariot, wherein their mother shoold go to the temple.
For the Greeks had this custom, the day that the priests went to offer any
sacrifyces, either they were carried on men's arms, or in chariots. They
adourned their temples so well, they esteemed their sacrifices so much, and did
so much honor their priests: that if any priest did set his foot on the
ground, that day they did not permit him to offer any sacrifices to the gods.
It chanced as this Nun went in her charyot, and her children Cleobolus and
Biton with her, the beasts which drew the chariot, suddenly fell down dead.x.
miles from the temple of the goddess Juno. The children seeing the beasts
dead, and that ye mother coold not go a foot, and that the chariot was al
ready, and that there were no beasts to draw it: they (as loving children)
determined to yoke them selves, and draw the chariot as if they had been dome
beasts. And as ye mother carried the^.ix. months in her womb, so did they draw
her in the chariot.x. miles. Now for that they passed through infinite nomberz
of men, to the great feast of the goddess Juno: every man seeing Cleobolus and
Biton yoked in the chariot like beasts, were greatly amazed, saying that these
two children deserved with great rewards to be recompensed. And truly they
said justly, and so the deserved it. For they deserved as much to be praised
for the example which they showed to all children to reverence their parents:
as for carrying their mother in ye chariot to the temple. So after that the
feast was ended, ye mother not knowing how to requite the benefit of her
children, with many tears beesought the goddess Juno, that she with ye other
gods woold be contented, to geeue her.ii. children the best thing that the
gods coold geeue to their friends. The goddess Juno answered her, that she
was contented to require the other gods, and that they woold do it. And the
reward was, that for this noble fact the gods ordained, that Cleobolus and
Biton shoold sleep one day well, and in the morning when they shoold wake,
they shoold dye. The mother pitifully beewayling the death of her children: and
complaining of the gods, the goddess Juno said unto her. Thou have no cause
why to complayn, sins we have geeuen thee that thou have demanded: and have
demanded that which we have geeuen thee. I am a goddess, and thou art my
servant and therefore the gods have geeuen to thy children the thing, which
they count most dear, which is death. For the greatest revenge which amongst
us gods we can take of our enemies, is to let them live long: and the best
thing that we keep for our friends, is to make them dye quickly.

The auctor of this history is called Hisearchus in his politikes, and Cicero
in his first book of his Tusculanes. In ye I Will of Delphos, where ye Oracle of
ye god Apollo was, there was a sumptuous temple, the which for want of
reparacion fell down to the ground as often times it chances to high and
sumptuous buyldings, which from time to time are not repaired. For if ye
walls, dungeons, castles, and strong houses coold speak, as well woold they
complayn for that they do not renew them, as the old men do for that we do
not cherish them. Triphon, and Agamendo, were two noble personages of Greece,
and counted for sage and rich men: the which went unto the temple of Apollo,
and buylt it new again, as well with the labor of their persons, as with the
great expenses of their goods. When the buylding was atchiued, ye god Apollo
said unto them, that he remembered well their good service, wherefore he woold
they shoold demand him any thing in reward of their trauail, and with a good
will it shoold be granted. For the gods use, for a little service, to geeue a
great reward. Triphon, and Agamendo, answered unto the god Apollo, that for
their good will, for their travel, and for their expenses, they demanded no
other reward: but that it woold please him to geeue them the best thing that
might be geeuen unto man, and that unto them were most profit: saying, that
the miserable men have not the power to eschew the evil, nor wisdom to choose
the good. The god Apollo answered, that he was contented to pay them their
service which they had done, and to grant them that which they had demanded.
By reason whereof, Triphon, and Agamendo having dyned, sodeinly at the gates of
the temple fell down dead. So that the reward of their travel, was to pluck
them out of their misery. The end to declare these two examples is to thend
that al mortal men may know, that there is nothing so good in this world as to
have an end of this life: and though to lose it there be no savor, yet at the
least there is profit. For we woold reprove a traueler of great foolishnes, if
sweating by the way he woold sing: and after at his journeys end he shoold
beegin to weep. Is not he simple, which is sorry for that he is comen into
the haven? is not he simple, that geeueth the battle, and fights for that
he has got the victory? Is not he stubbern, which is in great distress, and
is angry to be succored? Therefore, more foolish, simple, and stubbern is he,
which traueleth to dye, and is loath to meet with death. For death is the true
refuge, the perfect health, the sure haven, the whole victory, the flesh
without bones, fysh without scales, and corn without straw: Finally after
death we have nothing to beewail, and much less to desire.

In the time of Adrian the emperor, a philosopher called Secundus (being
marueilously learned) made an oration at the funeral of a noble Romayn matrone
(a kinswoman of the emperors) who spoke exceeding much evil of life, and
marvelous much good of death. And when the emperor demanded him what death
was, the philosopher answered: Death is an eternal sleep, a dissolucion of the
body, a terror of the rich, a desire of the poor, a thing inheritable, a
pilgrymage uncertain, a thief of men, a kind of sleaping, a shadow of life, a
seperacion of the living, a company of the dead, a resolution of all a rest of
travels, and the end of all idle desires. Finally death is the scourge of all
evil, and the cheef reward of the good.

Truly this philosopher spoke very well, and he shoold not do evil, which
profoundly woold consider that he had spoken. Seneca in an epistle declares,
of a philosopher whose name was Bassus, to whom when they demanded what evil a
man can have in death, since men fear it so much, he answered. If any damage
or fear is in him who dies, it is not for the fear of death: but for the vice
of him which dies. We may agree to that the philosopher said, that even as
the deaf can not judge harmony, nor the blind colors: so likewise they cannot
say evil of death, in especially he which never tasted it. For of all those
which are dead, none returned again to complayn of death: and of these few that
live, all complayn of life. If any of the dead returned hither to speak with
the living, and as they have proved it, so they woold tell us. If there were any
harm in secret death, it were reason to have some fear of death? But though a
man that never saw, hard, felt, nor tasted death, does speak evil of death,
shoold we therefore fear death? Those ought to have done some evil in their
life, which do fear and speak evil of death. For in the last hour, in the
straight judgment, the good shall be known, and the evil discovered. There is
no prince nor knight, rich nor poor, whole nor sick, lucky nor unlucky, which
I see with their vocacions to be contented, save only the dead: which in their
graves are in peace and rest, and are neither covetous, proud, negligent, vayn,
ambitious, nor dissolute. So that the state of the dead ought to be best,
since we see none therein to be evil contented. And since therefore those
which are poor, do seek wherewith to enrich them selves, those which are
sad, do seek whereby to rejoice, and those which are sick, do seek to be
healed, why is it, that those which have such fear of death, do seek some
remedy against that fear? In this case I woold say, that he which will not
fear to dye, let him use him self well to live. For the giltles takes away
fear from death. The divine Plato demanded Socrates how he beehaued him self
in life, and how he woold beehaue him self in death, he answered. I let thee
weete, that in youth I have traueled to live well, and in age I have studied to
dye well: and since my life has been honest, I hope my death shall be joyful.
And though I have had sorrow to live, I am sure I shall have no pain to dye.
Truly these words were worthy of such a man. Men of stout hearts suffer
maruelously, when ye swet of their travel is not rewarded, when they are
faithful, and their reward answers nothing to their true service: when for
their good services, their friends beecome unthankful to them, when they are
worthy honor, and that they prefer them to honorable rome and office. For
the noble and valyant hearts, do not esteem to lose the reward of their labor:
but think much unkindness, when a man does not acknowledge their travel. O
happy are they that dye: For without inconvenience and without pain every man
is, in his grave. For in this tribunal, justice to all is so equally observed:
that in the same place where we have deserved life, in ye same place we
merited death. There was never nor never shall be judge so just, nor in
justice so vpryght, that geeueth reward by weight, and pain by measure: but
sometimes they chastise the innocent, and absolve the gylty, they vex the
faultlesse, and dissemble with the culpable. For little avails it the plaintiff
to have good justice: if conscience want to the judge that shoold minister.
Truly it is not so in death, but all ought to count them selves happy. For he
wc shall have good justice, shall be sure on his part to have the sentence. When
great Cato was censor in Rome, a famous Romayn dyed, who showed at his death a
merueylous courage: and when the Romans praised him for that he had so great
virtue, and for the words he had spoken, Cato the Censour laughed at that they
said, for that they praised him. And he being demanded the cause of his
laughter, answered. Ye marvel at that I laugh, and I laugh at that you
marvel. For the perils and travels considered wherein we live, and ye safety
wherein we dye. I say, yt it is no more needful to have virtue and strength to
live, then courage to dye. The aucthor hereof is Plutarch in his Apothegmes.
We cannot say but that Cato the Censour spoke as a wise man, since daily we
see, shamefast and virtuous persons suffer hunger, cold, thrist, travel,
poverty, inconvenience, sorows, enmities, and mishaps: of the wc things we
were better to see the end in one day, then to suffer them every hour.

For it is less evil to suffer an honest death: then to endure a miserable
life. O how small consideration have men to think, that they ought to dye but
once. Since the truth is, that the day when we are born, and comen in to the
world is the beeginning of our death: and the last day is when we do cease to
live. If death be no other but an ending of life, then reason persuades us to
think, that our infancy dies, our chyldhod dies, our manhod dies, and our
age shall dye: whereof we may consequently conclude, that we dye every year,
every day, every hour, and every moment. So that thinking to lead a sure life,
we taste a new death. I know not why men fear so much to dye, since that from
the time of their birth, they seek none other thing but death. For time never
wanted to any man to dye, neither I knew any man that ever failed of this way.
Seneca in an epistle declares that as a Romain woman lamented the death of a
child of hers, a philosopher said unto her: Woman why beewaylest thou thy
child? she answered I weep because he has lived.xxv. years, and I woold
he shoold have lived till fyfty. For amongst us mothers, we love our children
so heartily, that we never cease to beehold them, nor yet end to beewayl them.
Then the Philosopher said. Tell me I pray thee woman, why do thou not
complayn of the gods, because they created not thy son many years before
he was born: as well as thou complaynest that they have not let him live.l.
years? Thou weepest, that he is dead so soon: and thou do not lament that
he is borne so late. I tell thee true woman, that as thou do not lament for
the one, no more thou oughtst to be sorry for the other. For without the
determination of the gods, we can not shorten death: and much less lengthen
life. So Pliny said in an epistle, that the cheifest law which the gods have
geeuen to humayn nature was, that none shoold have perpetual life. For with
disordinat desire to live long, we shoold never rejoice to go out of this
pain. Two philosophers disputyng before the great Emperor Theodose, the one
said that it was good to procure death: and the other likewise said, it was a
necessary thing to hate life. The good Theodose taking him by the hand said.
All we mortalles are so extreem in hatyng, and loving: that under the color
to love, and hate life, we lead an evil life. For we suffer so many travels
for to preserve it, that sometimes it were much better to lose it. And further
he said, diverse vayn men are come into so great follies, that for fear of
death, they procure to hasten death. And having consideration to this, me
seems that we ought not greatly to love life, nor with desperation to seek
death. For the strong and valiant men, ought not to hate life so long as it
lasts: nor to be displeased with death, when he comes. All commended that
which Theodose spoke, as Paulus Diaconus says in his life. Let every man speak
what he will, and let the philosophers counsel what they list, in my poor
judgment, he alone shall receive death without pain: who long before is
prepared to receive the same. For sodayn death is not only bitter to him which
tastes it: but also it fears him that hates it. Lactantius said, that in
such sort man ought to live, as if from hence an hour after he shoold dye.

For those men which will have death before their eyes, it is impossible that
they geeue place to vain thoughts. In my oppinion, and also by the advise of
Apuleius, it is as much folly to fly from that which we cannot avoid: as to
desire that we cannot attain. And this is spoken for those, that woold fly
the vyage of death which is necessary: and desire to come again which is
impossible. Those that travel by long ways, if they want any thing, they borow
it of their company. If they have forgotten ought, they return to seek it at
their lodging, or else they write unto their friends a letter. But I am sorry that
if we once dye, they will not let us return again, we cannot speak, and they
will not agree we shall write: but such as they shall find us, so shall we
be judged. And that which is most fearful of all, the execucion and sentence
is geeue^ in one day. Let princes and great lords beeleeue me in this. Let
them not leave that undone till after their death: which they may do during
their life. And let them not trust in that they command: but in that whiles
they live they do. Let them not trust in ye woorks of an other: but in their
own good deeds. For in the end, one sigh shall be more worth, then all the
friends of the world. I counsel, pray, and exhort all wise and virtuous men, and
also my self with them, that in such sort we live, that at the hour of death,
we may say we live. For we cannot say that we live, when we live not well.
For all that time which without profit we shall live, shall be counted unto
us for nothing.

Of the death of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, and how there are few friends
which dare say the truth to sick men. Cap. xlix.
THe good Emperor Marcus Aurelius now being aged, not only for the great years
he had: but also for the great travels he had in the wars endured: It
chanced, that in the.xviii. year of his Empire, and.lxxii. years from the day
of his birth, and of the foundation of Rome.v. hundredth xliii. being in the
war of Pannony (which at this time is called Hungary) beeseeging a famous
city called Vendeliona, suddenly a disease of the palsy took him, which was
such, that he lost his life, and Rome her Prince, the best of life that ever
was born therein. Among the heathen princes some had more force then he, other
possessed more riches then he, others were as aduenturous as he, and some
have known as much as he: but none has been of so excellent and virtuous a
life, nor so modest as he. For his life being examined to the uttermost,
there are many princely virtues to follow, and few vices to reprove. The
occasion of his death was, that going one night about his camp, sodeinly the
disease of the palsy took him in his arm: so that from thence forward he
coold not put on his gown, nor draw his sword, and much less carry a staff.
The good emperor being so laden with years, and no less with cares, the sharp
winter approaching more and more, great abundance of water and snow fell about
the tenis: so that an other disease fell upon him, called Litargie, the which
thing much abated his courage, and in his host caused great sorrow. For he was
so beeloued of all, as if they had been his own children. After that he had
proved all medicines and remedies that coold be found, and all other things,
which unto so great and mighty princes were accustomed to be done, he
perceived in the end, that all remedy was past. And the reason hereof was,
because his sickness was exceeding vehement, and he him self very aged, ye air
unwholesome, and above al, because sorows and cares oppressed his heart. Without
doubt, greater is the disease that proceeds of sorrow, then that which
proceeds of the fever quartain. And thereof ensues, that more easily is he
cured, wc of corrupt humors is full: then he wc with profound thoughts is
oppressed. The emperor then being sick in his chamber, and in such sort that
he coold not exercise ye feats of arms: as his men ran out of their camp to
scirmidge, and the Hungarions in like manner to defend, the fight on both parts
was so cruel, through the great effution of blood, that neither the hungarion
had cause to rejoice, nor yet ye romayn to be merry. Understanding the evil
order of his, and specially that.v. of his captains were slain in the conflict,
and that he for his disease coold not be there in person: such sorows persed
his heart, that although he desired forthwith to have dyed, yet he remained
two days and three nights, without that he woold see light, or speak unto any
man of his. So that ye heat was much, the rest was small, the sighs were
continual, and the thirst very great: the meat little, and the sleep less,
and above all his face wrynkled, and his lips very black. Sometimes he cast up
his eyes, and another time he wrong his hands: always he was sylent, and
continually he sighed. His tongue was swollen, that he coold not spit: and his
eyes very hollow with weeping. So that it was a great pity, to see his death:
and no less compassion, to see the confusion of his palace, and the
hinderaunce of the war. Many valiant captains, many noble Romans, many
faithful servant, and many old friends, at all these heaviness were present.
But none of them durst speak to the Emperor Mark, partly for that they took
him to be so sage, that they knew not what counsel to geeue him: and partly
for that they were so sorrowful, that they coold not refrayn their heavy tears.
For the loving and true friends, in their life ought to be beeloued: and at
their death to be beewailed. Great compassion ought men to have of those which
dye, not for that we see them dye: but because there are none that tells
them what they ought to do. Princes and great lords are in greater peril when
they dye: then the Plebeyans. For the counsaylour dare not tell unto his Lord
at the hour of death, that which he knows: and much less he will tell him
how he ought to dye, and what things he ought to discharge whiles he is
alive. Many go to visit the sick, that I woold to god they went some other
where. And the cause hereof is, that they see the sick man's eyes hollow, the
flesh dried, the arms without flesh, ye color enflamed, the ague continual,
the pain great, the tongue swollen, nature consumed, and beesydes all this, the
house destroyed: and yet they say unto the sick man, be of good cheer, I
warrant you, you shall live. As young men naturally desire to live, and as death
to all old men is dreadful: so though they see them selves in that dystresse,
yet they refuse no medicine, as though there were great hope of life. And
thereof ensues oftentimes, that the miserable creatures depart the world,
without confessing unto god, and making restitutions unto men.

O if those which do this, knew what evil they do. For to take away my goods,
to trouble my person, to blemish my good name, to sclaunder my parentage, and
to reprove my life, these woorks are of cruel enemies: but to be occasion to
lose my soul, it is the work of the devil of hell. Certainly he is a
devil, which deceives the sick with flatteries: and that in steed to healp
him to dye well, puts him in vayn hope of long life.

Herein he that says it, wins little: and he that beeleeueth it,
aduentureth much. To mortal men it is more meet, to geeue counsels to reform
their consciences with the truth: then to hasard their houses with lies. With
our friends we are shameless in their life, and also bashful at their death.
The which ought not to be so. For if our fathers were not dead, and that we
did not daily see these that are present dye: me thinks it were a shame and
also a fear, to say to the sick that he alone shoold dye. But since thou
know as well as he, and he knows as well as thou, that all do travel in
this perilous iurney: what shame have thou to say unto thy friend, that he is
now at the last point? If the dead shoold now reuyue, how woold they complayn
of their friends? And this for no other cause, but for that they woold not geeue
them good counsel at their death. For if the sick man be my friend, and that I
see peradventure he will dye: why shall not I counsel him to prepare him self
to dye? Certainly oftentimes we see by experyence, that those which are
prepared, and are ready for to dye, do escape: and those which think to live
do perish. What shoold they do which go to vysit the sick? persuade them
that they make their testaments, that they confess their sins, that they
discharge their conscience, that they receive the Communion, and that they do
reconcile them selves to their enemies.

Certainly, all these things charge not the lance of death, nor cut not the
thread of life. I never saw blyndnes so blind, nor ignorance so ignorant, as
to be ashamed to counsel the sick, that they are bound to do when they are
whole. As we have said here above, Princes and great Lords, are those above
all other that live and dye most abusedly. And the cause is, that as their
servant have no hearts to persuade them when they are merry: so have they no
audacity to tell them truth, when they are in peril. For such servant care
little, so that their masters beequeath them any thing in their wills, whether
they dye well, or live evil.

O what misery, and pity is it, to see a Prince, a Lord, a gentleman, and a
rych person dye, if they have no faithful friend about them, to help them to
pass that pain? And not without a cause I say, that he ought to be a
faithful friend. For many in our life do gape after our goods, and few at our
deaths are sorry for our offenses. The wise and sage men, before nature
compels them to dye, of their own will ought to dye. That is to weete, that
before they see them selves in the pangues of death, they have their
consciences ready prepared. For if we count him a fool, which will pass the
sea without a ship: truly we will not count him wise, which takes his
death without any preparacion before. What loses a wise man to have his will
well ordained? in what adventure of honor is any man before death, to
reconsile him self to his enemies: and to those whom he has born hate and
malice? What loses he of his credit, who in his life time restores that,
which at his death they will command him to render? wherein may a man show him
self to be more wise, then when willingly he has discharged that, which
afterward by process they will take from him? O how many princes, and great
lords are there, which only not for spending one day about their testament,
have caused their children, and heirs, all the days of their life to be in
trauerse in the law? So that they supposing to have left their children welthy:
have not left them, but for atturneis and counselers of the law. The true and
unfeigned Christian, ought every morning so to dyspose his goods, and correct
his life: as if he shoold dye the same night. And at night in like manner he
ought so to commit him self to god, as if he hoped for no life until morning.
For to say the truth, to sustein life, there are infinite travels: but to meet
death, there is but one way. If they will credit my words, I woold counsel no
man in such estate to live: that for any thing in the world, he shoold undo
him self. The rich and the poor, the great and the small, the gentlemen and
the Plebeians, all say and swear, that of death they are exceeding fearful. To
whom I say and affirm, that he alone fears death, in whom we see amendment
of life. Princes and great lords, ought also to be perfect before they be
perfect, to end before they end, to dye before they dye, and to be mortified
before they be mortified. If they do this with them selves, they shall as
easily leave their life: as if they changed from one house to an other. For the
most part of men delight to talk with leisure, to drink with leisure, to eat with
leisure, and to sleep with leisure: but they dye in haste. Not without cause I
say they dye in haste, since we see the^ receive the sacrament of ye supper of
ye lord in haste, make their wills by force, and with speed to confess and
receive. So that they take it, and demand it so late, and so without reason:
that often times they have lost their senses, and are ready to geeue up the
spirit, when they bring it unto them.

What avails the ship master, after the ship is sonk? what do weapons
auayl, after the battle is lost? What avails pleasures after men are dead?
By that I have spoken, I will demand, what it avails the sick, being heavy
with sleep, and beereft of their senses, to call confessors, to whom they
confess their sins? Evil shall he be confessed, which has no
understanding to repent him self. What avails it to call the confessor, to
understand the secret of his conscience: when the sick man has lost his
speech? Let us not deceive our selves, saying in our age, we will amend
hereafter: and make restitution at our death. For in mine oppinion, it is not
the point of wise men, nor of good christians, to desire so much time to
offend: and they will never espy any to amend. Woold to god, that the third part
of time which men occupy in sin, were employed about the meditations of
death: and ye cares which they have to accomplish their fleshly lusts, were
spent in beewayling their filthy sins. I am very sorry at my heart, that they
so wickedly pass their life, in vices and pleasures as if there were no God,
to whom they shoold render account for their offenses. All worldlings willingly
do sin, upon hope only in age to amend, and at death to repent: but I woold
demand him, that in this hope sinned, what certeinty he has in age of
amendment, and what assurance he has to have long warning before he dye.
Since we see by experience, there are mo in number which dye young, then old:
it is no reason we shoold commit so many sins in one day, that we shoold
have cause to lament afterward all the rest of our life. And afterward to
beewail the sins of our long life, we desire no more but one space of an
hour. Considering the omnipotency of the divine mercy it suffiseth, ye and I
say, that the space of an hour is to much, to repent us of our wicked life: but
yet I woold counsel all, since the sinner for to repent takes but one hour,
that that be not the last hour. For the sighs and repentance, which proceed
from the bottom of the heart, penetrate ye high heavens: but those which come of
necessity, does not perse the seeling of the house. I allow and commend, that
those that visit the sick, do counsel them to examine their conscienses, to
receive the communion, to pray unto god, to forgeeue their enemiez, and to
recommend them selves to the devout prayers of the people, and to repent their
sins, finally I say, that it is very good to do all this: but yet I say it
is better, to have done it before. For the diligent and careful Pirate,
prepares for the tempest, when the sea is calm. He that deeply woold
consider, how little the goods of this life are to be esteemed: let him go to
see a rich man when he dies, and what he does in his bed. And he shall
find that the wife demands of the poor husband her dower, the daughter the
third part, the other the fifth, the child the pre-eminence of age, the son in
law his marriage, the physician his duity, the slave his liberty, the servants
their wages, the creditors their debts, and the woorst of all is, that none of
those yt ought to enherit his goods, will geeue him one glass of water. Those
that shall here or read this, ought to consider, that that which they have
seen done at the death of their neighbors: the same shall come to them, when
they shall be sick at the point of death. For so soon as the rych shuts his
eyes, forthwith there is great strife beetweene the children for his goods.
And this strife is not to unburden his soul: but which of them shall inherit
most of his possessions. In this case, I will not my pen travel any further,
since both rich and poor, daily see the experience hereof. And in things very
manifest, it suffyseth only for wise men to be put in memory, without wasting
any more time to persuade them. Now the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had a secretary
very wise, and virtuous, through whose hands the affairs of the Empire passed.
And when this secretary saw his lord, and master, so sick, and almost at the
hour of death, and that none of his parents nor friends durst speak unto him:
he plainly determined to do his duity, wherein he showed very well the
profound knowledge he had in wisdom, and the great good will he bare to his
lord. This secretary was called Panutius, the virtues and life of whom, Sextus
Cheronensis in the life of Marcus Aurelius declares.

Of the comfortable words, which the Secretary Panutius spoke to the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius at the hour of his death. Cap. l.
O My lord, and master, my tongue cannot keep silence, mine eyes cannot refrayn
from bitter tears, nor my heart leave from fetching sighs, ne yet reason can
use his duity. For my blood boyleth, my sinnews are dried, my pores be open,
my heart does faint, and my spirit is troubled. And the occasion of all this
is, to see that the wholesome counsels which thou geeuest to others: either thou
can not, or will not take for thy self. I see thee dye my lord, and I dye for
that I cannot remedy thee. For if the gods woold have granted me my request,
for the lengthning of thy life one day: I woold geeue willingly my whole life.
Whether the sorrow be true, or fained, it needs not I declare unto thee with
words, since thou may manyfestly discern it by my countenance. For my eyes
with tears are wet, and my heart with sighs is very heavy. I feel much the want
of thy company. I feel much the damage which (of thy death) to the whole
common wealth shall ensue. I feel much thy sorrow which in thy palace shall
remain, I feel much for that Rome this day is undone: but that which above al
things does most torment my heart, is to have seen thee live as wise, and now
to see thee dye as simple. Tell me I pray thee, my lord, why do men learn
the Greek tongue, travel to understand the hebrew, sweat in the latin, change so
many masters, turn so many books, and in study consume so much money and so
many years: if it were not to know how to pass life with honor, and take death
with patience? The end why men ought to study, is to learn to live well. For
there is no truer science in man, then to know how to order his life well. What
profits it me to know much, if thereby I take no profit? what profits me
to know strange languages, if I refrain not my tongue from other men's matters?
what profits it to study many books, if I study not but to begyle my friends?
what profits it to know the influence of ye stars, and the course of the
elements: if I cannot keep my self from vices? Finally I say, that it little
avails to be a master of the sage: if secretly he be reported to be a
follower of fools. The cheef of all philosophy consists to serve god, and not
to offend men. I ask thee, most noble prince, what avails it the Pilot to
know the art of sailing: and after in a tempest by negligence to perish? What
avails it the valiant captayn, to talk much of war: and afterward he
knows not how to geeue the battayl? What avails it the guide, to tell the
nearest way: and afterward in the midst to lose him self.

All this wc I have spoken, is said for thee my Lord. For what avails it that
thou being in health, shooldst sigh for death: since now when he does
approach, thou weepest because thou wooldst not leave life? One of the things
wherein the wise man shows his wisdom, is to know how to love, and how to
hate. For it is great lightness (I shoold rather say folly) to day to love him,
whom yesterday we hated: and to morrow to sclaunder him whom this day we
honored. What Prince so high, or what Plebeyan so base has there been, or in
the world shall ever be, the which has so little (as thou) regarded life: and
so hyghly commended death? What things have I written (being thy Secretary)
with my own hand, to diverse prouynces of the world: where thou speak so much
good of death, that sometimes you made me to hate life? What was it to see
that letter which thou wrotest to the noble Romayn Claudines wydow, comforting
her of the death of her husband, which dyed in ye wars? Wherein she
answered: That she thought her trouble comfort, to deserve that thou shooldst
write her such a letter.

What a pitiful and sauory letter have thou written to Antigonus, on the death
of thy child Verissimus thy son so much desired? Whose death thou tookest so,
that thou exceedest the limits of philosophy: but in ye end, with thy princely
virtues, thou did qualify thy woeful sorows. What sentences so profound, what
words so well couched did thou write in that book entytuled The remedy of
the sorrowful. the which thou did send from the war of Asia, to the
Senators of Rome: and that was to comfort them after a sore plague. And how
much profit has thy doctrine done since? with what new kind of consolation
have thou comforted Helius Fabatus the Sensour, when his son was drowned in
the river? where I do remember, that when we entered into his house, we found
him weeping: and when we went from thence, we left him laughing. I do
remember, that when thou wentst to visit Gneus Rusticus in his last disease,
thou spakest unto him so effectuously, that with the vehemence of thy words,
thou made the tears to run down his cheeks. And I demanding him the
occasions of his lamentacions, he said. The emperor my lord has told me so
much evils that I have won, and of so much good that I have lost, that if I
weep, I weep not for life which is short, but for death which is long. The
man whom above all thou have loved, was Torquatus, whom thou did obey as thy
father, and seruedst as thy master. This thy faithful friend being ready to
die, and desyring yet to live, thou sendst to offer sacrifices to the gods, not
for that they shoold grant him life: but that they shoold hasten his death.
Herewith I being astonished, thy nobleness to satisfy my ignorance, said unto
me in secret these words.

Marvel not Panutius, to see me offer sacrifyces to hasten my friends death:
and not to prolong his life. For there is nothing that the faithful friend
ought so much to desire to his true friend: as to see him rid from the travels
of this earth, and to enjoy the pleasures of heaven. Why think thou most
noble prince, that I reduce all these things to thy memory, but for to demand
thee how it is possible, that I which have hard thee speak so well of death,
do presently see thee so unwilling to leave life? since the gods command it,
thy age wills it, thy disease does cause it, thy feeble nature does permit
it, the sinful Rome does deserve it, and the fickle fortune agrees, that for
our great misery thou shooldst dye. Why therefore sighest thou so much for to
dye? The travels which of necessity must needs come, with stout heart ought to
be received. The cowardly heart falls before he is beaten down: but the
stout and valiant stomach in greatest peril, recouereth most strength. Thou
art one man, and not two, thou oughtst one death to the gods, and not two: why
will thou therefore being but one, pay for two? and for one only life, take
two deaths?

I mean that before thou endest life, thou dyest for pure sorrow. After that
thou have sailed, and in the sailing thou have passed such peril, when the
gods do render thee in the safe haven, once again thou will run in to ye
raging sea, where thou scapest the victory of life, and thou dyest with the
ambushements of death. Lxii. years have thou fought in the field, and never
turned thy back: and fear thou now being enclosed in the grave? have thou
not passed the pykes, and briars, wherein thou have been enclosed: and now thou
tremblest, being in the sure way? Thou know what dommage it is long to
live, and now thou doutest of the profit of death which ensues. It is now many
years, since death and thou have been at defiaunce, as mortal enemies: and now
to lay thy hands on thy weapons, thou flyest and turnest thy back. Lxii. years
are past, since thou were bent against fortune: and now thou closest thy eyes,
when thou oughtst over her to triumph. By that I have told thee I mean, that
since we do not see thee take death willyngly at this present: we do
suspect that thy life has not in times past been very good. For the man which
has no desire to appear before the gods: it is a token he is laden with
vices. What meanest thou, most noble prince, why weepest thou as an infant, and
complainest as a man in despair? If thou weepest because thou die, I
answer thee, that thou laughedst as much when thou liuedst. For of too much
laughing in ye life, proceeds much wayling at the death. Who has always for
his heritage, appropriated the places being in the common wealth? The
inconstancy of the mind, who shall be so hardy to make steady? I mean that all
are dead, all dye, and al shall dye: and among all will thou alone live? Will thou obtayn of the gods, that which makes them gods? That is to weete, that
they make thee immortal, as them selves? Will thou alone have by privilege,
that which the gods have by nature? My youth demands thy age what thing is
best, or to say better, which is less evil: to dye well, or to live evil. I
doubt that any man may attayn to the means to live well, according to the
continual and variable troubles which daily we have accustomed to carry
beetweene our hands, always suffering hunger, cold, thirst, care, displeasures,
temptacions, persecucions, evil fortunes, ouerthrows, and diseases.

This cannot be called life, but a long death: and with reason we will call
this life death, since a thousand times we hate life. If an ancient man did
make a show of his life, from time he is come out of the intrailes of his
mother, until the time he enters into the bowels of the earth, and that the
body woold declare all the sorows that he has passed, and the heart discover
all the ouerthrows of fortune, which he has suffered: I immagin the gods
woold marvel, and men woold wonder at the body which has endured so much, and
the heart which has so greatly dissembled.

I take the Greeks to be more wise, which weep when their children be
borne, and laugh when the aged dye: then the Romans which sing when the
children are borne, and weep when the old men dye. We have much reason to
laugh, when the old men dye, since they dye to laugh: and with greater reason
we ought to weep, when the children are borne, since they are borne to weep.

Pannatius the secretary continues his exhortation admonishing al men
willingly to accept death, and utterly to forsake the world and all his
vanities. Cap. li.
SIns life is now condemned for evil, there remains naught else, but to
approve death to be good. O if it pleased the immortal gods, that as I
oftentimes have hard the disputacions of this matter: so now that thou cooldst
therewith profit. But I am sorry that to the sage, and wise man, counsel
sometimes (or for the most part) wants. None ought to cleue so much to his
own opinion, but sometimes he shoold follow the counsel of the third parson.
For the man which in all things will follow his own advise, ought well to be
assured, that in all, or the most part, he shall err. O my lord Mark, since
thou art sage, lively of spirit, of great experience and ancient, did not
thou think, that as thou had buried many, so like wise some should bury
thee? What imaginacions were thine to think, that seeing the end of their days,
others should not see the end of thy years? Since thou die rych, honorably
accompanied, old, and above all, seeing thou die in the service of the common
wealth, why fear thou to enter into thy grave? Thou have always been a
friend as much to know things past: as those which were hid and kept secret.
Sins thou have proved what honors, and dishonors do deserve, riches and
poverty, prosperity and adversity, joy and sorrow, love and fear, vices and
pleasures: me seems that nothing remains to know, but that it is
necessary to know what death is. And also I swear unto thee (most noble lord)
yt thou shall learn more in one hour, what death is: then in a hundredth years
what life means. Since thou art good, and presumest to be good, and have
lived as good, is it not better that thou dye, and go with so many good: then
that thou escape, and live amongst so many evil? That thou feel death, I
marvel nothing at all, for thou art a man: but I do maruail that thou
dissemblest it not, since thou art discrete. Many things do the sage men
feel, which inwardly do oppress their heart: but outwardly they dissemble
them, for the more honor. If all the poison which in the sorrowful heart is
wrapped, were in small pieces in the feeble flesh scattered: then the walls
woold not suffice to rub, neither the nails to scratch us. What other thing
is death, but a trap or door where with to shut the shop, wherein all the
miseries of this woeful life are vendible? What wrong or prejudice do the gods
unto us, when they call us before them: but from an old decayed house, to
change us to a new builded palace? And what other thing is the grave, but a
strong fort, wherein we shut our selves from the assaults of life, and broils
of fortune? Truly, we ought to be more desirous of that we find in death,
then of that we leave in life. If Helia Fabricia thy wife do grieve thee, for
that thou leauest her young, do not care. For she presently has little care of
the peril, wherein thy life depends. And in the end, when she shall know of
thy death, she will be nothing grieved. Trouble not thy self for that she is
left widow. For young women (as she is) which are married with old men (as thou)
when their husbands dye: they have their eyes on that they can rob, and their
hearts on them whom they desire to mary. And speaking with due respect, when
with their eyes they outwardly seem most for to beewaile: then with their
hearts inwardly do they most rejoice. Deceive not thy self in thinking that the
empress thy wife is young, and that she shall find none other Emperor with whom
again she may mary. For such, and the like, will change the cloth of gold,
for gowns of skynnes. I mean, that they woold rather the young shepeheard in
the field: then the old emperor in his royal palace. If thou take sorrow
for the children whom thou leauest, I know not why thou shooldst do so? For
truly if it grieve thee now, for that thou dyest: they are more displeased,
for that thou lyuest. The son that desires not the death of his father, may
be counted the only Phoenix of this world, for if ye father be poor, he
wishes him dead for yt he is not maintained, and if he be rich, he
desires his death to enherit ye sooner. Sins therefore it is true (as in deed
it is) it seems not wisdom that they sing, and thou weep. If it grieve thee
to leave these goodly palaces, and these su^ptuous buildings, deceive not thy
self therein. For by ye god Jupiter I swear unto thee, that since that death
does finish thee, at ye end of.lxii. years: time shall consume these su^ptuous
buildings in less then xl. If it grieve thee to forsake the company of thy
friends, and neighbors, for them also take as little thought, sins for thee they
will not take any at all. For amongst the other compassions yt they ought to
have of the dead, this is true, that scarcely they are buried, but of their
friends and neighbors they are forgotten. If thou take great thought for that
thou will not dye, as the other emperors of Rome are dead: me seems that
thou oughtst also to cast this sorrow from thee. For thou know right well,
that Rome has accustomed to be so unthankful to those wc serve her: yt the
great Scipio also, woold not be buried therein. If it grieve thee to dye, to
leave so great a seignory, as to leave the empire: I can not think that such
vanity be in thy head. For temperat, and reposed men, when they escape from
semblable offices, do not think that they lose honor: but yt they be free, of
a troblesome charge. Therefore if none of al these things move thee to desire
life, what should let thee yt through thy gates enter not death? it greeueth
men to dye for one of these two things, either for the love of those they leave
beehynd them, or for the fear of that they hope. Sins therefore there is
nothing in this life worthy of love, nor any things in death why we shoold
fear: why do me^ fear to dye? According to ye heavy sighs you fetchest, ye
bitter tears thou she dest, and according also to the great pain thou show,
for my part I think: that the thing in thy thought most forgotten was, yt the
gods shoold command thee to pay this debt. For admit yt al think yt their life
shall end, yet no man thinks yt death will come so soon. For that men think
never to dye, they never beeginne their faults to amend: so that both life and
fault have end in the grave togethers. Know not thou (most noble prince) that
after the long night, comes ye moist morning? Do thou not know yt after
the moist morning, there comes yt clear sun? Know not thou, yt after the
clear sun, comes the cloudy element? Do thou not know, yt after the
dark mist, there comes extreme heat? And that after the heat, comes the
horrible thunders? and after the thunders, the sodeyn lightnings? and that
after the perilous lightnings, comes the terrible hayle? Finally I say, that
after the tempesteous and troublesome time, commonly comes clear and fair
weather. The order that time has, to make him self cruel, and gentill: the
self same ought men to have to live and dye. For after the infancy, comes
chyldhod, after chyldhod comes youth, after youth comes age, and after age,
comes ye fearful death: Finally after ye fearful death, comes ye sure
life. Oftentimes I have read, and of thee not seldom hard, yt the gods only
wc had no beginning, shall have also no endyng. Therefore me thinks (most
noble prince) that sage men ought not to desire to live long: For men which
desire to live much, either it is for that they have not felt the travails
past, because they have been fools: or for that they desire more time, to
geeue them selves to vices. Thou might not complayn of that, sins they have
not cut thee in the flower of the herb, nor taken thee green from ye tree, nor
cut in thee in the spring tide, and much less eat the eager, before thou were
ripe. By that I have spoken, I mean, if death had called thee when thy life was
sweetest: though thou had not had reason to have complained, yet thou might
have desired to have altered it. For it is a great grief, to say unto a young
man that he must dye, and forsake the world. What is this (my lord) now that
the wall is decayed ready to fall, the flower is withered, the grape does
rotte, the teeth are loose, the gown is worn, the lance is blunt the knife is
dull, and do thou desire to return into the world, as if thou had never
known the world? These lxii. years thou have lived in ye prison of this body,
and will thou, now ye iron fetters have rot thy legs, desire yet to length
thy days, in this so woeful prison? They yt will not be contented to live lx.
years and five in this death, or to dye in this life: will not desire to dye in
lx. thousand years. The Emperor Augustus octauian said. That after men had
lived.l. years, either of their own will they ought to dye: or else by force
they shoold cause them selves to be killed. For at that time, all those which
have had any humain felicity, are at the best. Those wc live above that age,
pass their days in grievous torments. As in the death of children, in ye loss
of goods, and importunity of son in laws, in mainteining processes, in
discharging debts, in sighing for that is past, in bewailing yt that is
present, in disse^bling injuries, in hearing woeful news, and in other infinite
trauails. So yt it were much better, to have their eyes shut in the grave: then
their hearts and bodies alive, to suffer so much in this miserable life. He
whom the gods take from this miserable life at ye end of 50. years, is quited
from al these miseries of life. For after that time he is not weak, but
crooked, he goes not, but rouleth, he stumbleth not but falls. O my lord
Mark, know thou not, yt by the same way whereby goes death, death comes?
Know not thou in like manner, that it is 52. years that life has fled from
death: and that there is an other time as much, that death goes seeking thy
life? and death going from Illiria where he left a great plague, and thou
departing from thy pallayce ye.ii. now have met in Hungary? know not thou,
that where thou leapedst out of thy mothers intrails to govern the land,
immediately death leaped out of his grave to seek thy life? Thou have always
presumed, not only to be honored: but also to be honorable, if it be so,
since thou honoredst the Imbassadours of Princes which did send them the more
for their profyt, then for thy service, why do thou not honor thy messenger,
whom the gods send more for thy profyt, then for their services? Do thou not
remember well, when Vulcane my son in law poisoned me, more for the
covetousness of my goods, then any desire he had of my life? thou lord did
come to comfort me in my chamber, and toldst me that the gods were cruel to
slay the young: and were pytiful to take the old from this world. And thou
saydst further these words. Comfort thee Panutius: For if thou were born to
dye, now thou die to live. Sins therefore (noble prince) that I tell thee
that which thou toldst me, and counsel thee the same which thou cou^sayledst
me: I render to thee that which thou have geeuen me. Finally, of these vines
I have gathered these clusters of grapes.

The answer of the emperor Marcus to Panutius his secretory, wherein he
declares that he took no thought to forsake the world: but all his sorrow was
to leave beehynd him an unhappy child to enheryt the Empire. Cap. lij.
PAnutius blessed be the milk thou have sucked in Dacia, the bread which thou
have eaten in Rome, the learning which thou have learned in Greece and the
bringing up which thou have had in my palace. For thou have served as a good
servant in life: and geeuest me counsayl as a trusty friend at death. I
command Commodus my son to recompense thy service, and I beseech the
immortal gods, that they acquit thy good counsayls. And not without good cause
I charge my son with ye one, and require the gods of the other. For the
payment of many services, one man alone may do: but to pay one good counsayl,
it is requisyt to have all the gods. The greatest good that a friend can do to
his friend, is in great and wayghty affairs, to geeue him good and wholesome
counsayl. And not without cause I say wholesome. For commonly it chances, that
those which think with their counsayl to remedy us: do put us oftentimes in
greatest perils. All the trauayles of life are hard: but that of death is the
most hard and terrible. Al are great, but this is the greatest. All are
perilous, but this is most perilous. All in death have end except the trauayl
of death, whereof we know no end. That which I say now, no man perfectly can
know: but only he which sees him self, as I see my self now at the point of
death. Certainly Panutius, thou have spoken unto me as a wise man: but for
that thou know not my grief, thou could not cure my disease, for my sore is
not there, where thou have laid the plaster. The fistula is not there where
thou have cut ye flesh. The opilation is not there, where thou have laid the
ointments. There were not the right vayns, where thou dydst let me blood. Thou
have not yet touched the wound, which is the cause of all my grief. I mean that
thou oughtst to have entered further with me, to have known my grief better.
The sighs which the heart fetches (I say those which come from the heart) let
not every man thynk which hears the^, that he can immediately understand them.
For as men can not remedy the anguishes of the spirit: so the gods likewise
woold not that they shoold know the secrets of the heart. Without fear or shame
many dare say, that they know the thought of others, wherein they show them
selves to be more fools, then wise. For since there are many things in me,
wherein I my self doubt: how can a stranger have any certain knowledge
therein? Thou accusest me Panutius, that I fear death greatly, the which I
deny: but to fear it as man, I do confess. For to deny that I fear not
death, shoold be to deny that I am not of flesh. We see by experience, that
the elephants do fear the Lion, the Bear the Elephant, the woolf the Bear,
the lamb the woolf, the ratte the catte, the catte the dog, and the dog the
man: finally the one and the other do fear for no other thing, but for fear
that one kylleth not the other. Then since brute beasts refuse death, the which
though they dye, fear not to fight with the furies, nor hope not to rest with
the gods: so much the more ought we to fear death, which dye in doubt,
whither the furies will tear us in pieces with their torments, or the gods
will receive us into their houses with joy. Think thou Panutius, that I do
not see well that my vine is gathered, and that it is not hyd unto me, that my
palace falls in decay? I know well, that I have not but the kirnel of the
raison, and the skin: and that I have not but one sygh of all my life, until
this time. There was great difference beetweene me and thee: and now there is
great difference beetwixt me and my self. For about the ensign, thou do
place the army. In the ryuers, thou castest thy nets, within the parks, thou
huntest the bulls. In the shadow thou take cold. By this I mean, that thou
talkest so much of death: because that thou art sure of thy life. O miserable
man that I am, for in short space, of all that in this life I have possessed:
with me I shall carry nothing, but only my wynding sheet. Alas now shall I
enter into the field, not where of the fierce beasts I shall be assaulted: but
of the hungry woorms devoured. Alas I see my self in that dystresse, from
whence my frayl flesh cannot escape. And if any hope remayn, it is in thee o
death. When I am sick, I woold not that he that is whole shoold comfort me.
When I am sorrowful, I woold not that he which is merry shoold comfort me.
When I am banished I woold not that he which is in prosperity shoold comfort
me. When I am at the hour of death, I woold not that he shoold comfort me,
which is not in some suspicion of life. But I woold that the poor shoold
comfort me in my poverty, the sorrowful in my sorows, the banyshed in my
banishment, and he which is in as great danger of his life, as I am now at
the point of death. For there is no counsel so healthful, nor true: as that
of the man which is in sorrow, when he counsayleth an other, which is likewise
tormented him self. If thou consyderest well this sentence, thou shall find
that I have spoken a thing very profound, wherein notwithstanding my tongue is
appeased. For in my oppinion evil shall he be comforted, which is weeping
with him, that continually laugheth. I say this to the end thou know, that I
know it: and that thou perceive that I perceive it. And because thou shall not
live deceived, as to my friend I will disclose the secret: and thou shall see,
that small is the sorrow which I have, in respect of the great, which I have
cause to have. For if reason had not stryued with sensuality, the sighs had
ended my life, and in a pond of tears, they had made my grave. The things
which in me thou have seen, which are to abhor meat, to banysh sleep, to
love care, to be annoyed with company, to take rest in sighs, and to take
pleasure in tears: may easily declare unto thee, what torment is in the sea of
my heart, when such tremblings do appear in ye earth of my body. Let us now
come to the purpose, and we shall see, why my body is without consolation, and
my heart so overcome with sorows: for my feelyng, greatly exceeds my
complaynyng, because the body is so delycat, that in scratchyng it, it
complayneth: and the heart is so stout and valiant, that though it be hurt,
yet it dyssembleth. O Panutius, I let thee weete, that the occasion why I take
death so grievously, is because I leave my son Commodus in this life: who
lives in this age most perilous for him, and no less dangerous for the
Empire. By the flowers are the fruits known, by the grapes the vines are
known, and by the face men are known: by the colt the horse is judged, and by
the infant, youth is known.

This I say by the Prince my son, for that he has been evil in my life, I
do ymagyn that he will be worse after my death. Since thou (as well as I)
know the evil conditions of my son, why do thou marvel at the thoughts
and sorows of the father? My son Commodus in years is young, and in
understanding younger. He has an evil inclynation, and yet he will not
enforce him self against the same, he governs him self by his own sense, and
in matters of wisdom he knows little: of that he shoold be ignorant, he
knows too much: and that which is woorst of all, he is of no man esteemed.
He knows nothing of things past, nor occupyeth him about any thing present.
Finally, for that which with mine eyes I have seen, I say, and that which with
in my heart I have suspected I judge: that shortly the person of my son
shallbee in hazard, and the memory of his father perysh. O how unkindly have
the Gods used them selves toward us, to command us to leave our honor in the
hands of our children? for it shoold suffice, that we shoold leave them our
goods: and that to our friends we shoold commyt our honor. But yet I am sorry,
for that they consume the goods in vices: and lose the honor, for to be
vicious. The gods being pityful as they are, since they geeue us the authoryty
to deuyde our goods: why do they not geeue us leave, to make our wills of the
honor? My sons name being Commodus, in the Romayn tongue, is as much to say,
as profyt: but as he is, we will be content to be without the little profyt,
which he may do to some, so that we may be excused of the great damage,
which he is lykely to do to all. For I suppose he will be the scourge of
men, and the wrath of Gods. He enters now into the pathway of youth, alone
without a guide. And for that he has to pass, by the high and dangerous
places: I fear lest he be lost, in the wood of vices. For the children of
Princes, and great Lords, for so much as they are brought up in lyberty, and
wantonness, do easily fall into vices, and voluptuousnes: and are most stubborn
to be wythdrawen from their folly. O Panutius, give attentive ear to that I
say unto thee. See thou not, that Commodus my son is at lyberty, is rych,
is young, and is alone? By the faith of a good man, I swear unto thee, that the
least of these wynds woold overthrow, not only a young tender ash: but also a
mighty strong oak. Riches, youth, pride, and lyberty, are four plagues which
poison the prince, replenysh the common wealth with filth, kill, the living,
and defame the dead. Let the old men beeleeue me, and the young men mark well
what I say, that where ye gods have geeuen many gyfts: it is necessary they
have many virtues to susteyn them. The gentle, the peaceable the cou^terfait,
the simple, and the fearful, do not trouble the common wealth: but those who^
nature has geeuen most gyfts. For as experience teaches us, with the fairest
weomen the stews are furnyshed, the most proper personages are unshamefast, the
most stout and valiant are murderers, the most subtle are thieves, and men of
clearest understanding, often times beecome most fools. I say and say again. I
affirm, and affirm again, I swear, and swear again, that if two men which are
adorned with natural gyfts, do want requisyt virtues: such have a knife in
their hands, wherewith they do strike and wound them selves, a fire on their
shoulders wherewith they burn them selves, a rope at their necks to hang them
selves, a dagger at their breast wherewyth they kill them selves, a thorn in
their foot wherewith they prick them selves, and stones whereat they stumble:
so that stumbling they fall, and falling they find them selves with death whom
they hate, and without life which so much they loved. Note well Panutius, note,
that the man which from his infancy has always the fear of the gods before
his eyes, and the shame of men, says troth to all, and lives in prejudice
to none: and to such a tree, though evil fortune do cleave, the flower of his
youth do wither, the leaves of their favors dry, they gather the fruits of
his travails, they cut the bough of his offices, they bow the highest of his
branches downwards, yet in the end, though of the winds he be beaten, he
shall never be overcome, O happy are those fathers, to whom the Gods have
geeuen quick children, wise, fair, able, light, and valiant: but all these
gifts are but means to make them vicious. And in such case, if the fathers
woold be governed by my counsayl, I woold rather desire that members shoold
want in them: then that vices shoold abound. Of the most fairest children which
are born in the Empire, my son Commodus the Prince is one. But I woold to the
immortal gods, that in face he resemble ye blackest of Ethiope: and in manners,
the greatest philosopher of Greece. For the glory of the father is not, nor
ought not to be, in that his child is fair of complexion, and handsome of
person: but that in his life he be very vpryght. We will not call him a
pytifull father, but a great enemy, who exalts forth his child, for that
he is fair: and does not correct him, though he be vicious. I durst say,
that the father which has a child endued with many goodly gyfts, and that he
does employ them all to vices: such a child ought not to be born in ye world,
and if perchance he were born, he ought immediately to be buried.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius concludes his matter, and shows that sundry
young princes for being vicious, have undone them selves, and impoueryshed
their Realms. Cap. liij.
O What great pyty is it, to see how the father buyeth his child of ye gods
with sighs, how the mother deliver them with pain, how they both nourish them
with travails, how they watch to susteyn them, how they labor to remedy them,
and afterward they have so rebelled, and be so vicious that the miserable
fathers oftentimes do dye not for age, but for the greeues wherewith their
children torment the^. I do remember, yt the prince Co^modus my son being
young, and I aged (as I am) with great payns we kept him from vices: but I fear,
yt after my death he will hate virtues. I remember many young princes, wc of his
age have enherited the^pire of Rome, who have been of so wicked a life: that
they have deserved to lose both honor, and life. I remember Dennis the famous
tyrant of Scicil, of whom is said, that as great reward he gave to those
that invented vices: as our mother Rome did to those wc conquered realms. Such
woork could not be but of a Tyrant, to take them for most famyliar, which are
most vicious. I remember four young princes, which governed the empire, but not
with such valyauntnes, as the great Alexander: that is to weete, Alexander,
Antiochus, Siluius, and Ptholomeus, to whom for their vanyty and lightness, as
they called Alexander the great, Emperor in Greece: so likewise do they call
these young men, tiraunts in Asia. Very happy was Alexander in life, and they
unhappy after his death. For all that which with glorious triumphs he wanne,
with vile vices they lost. So that Alexander divided between them four the
world, and afterward it came into the hands of mo then four hundredth. I do
remember, that king Antigonus little exteemed that, which cost his lord
Alexander much. He was so light in the beehauior of his person, and so defamed
in the affairs of the common wealth: that for mockry and contempt, in the
steed of a crown of gold, he bare a garland, in the steed of a scepter, he
carried neitels in his hand, and of this sort and manner he sat to judge among
his counsailours, and used to talk with strangers. This young prince does
offend me much, for ye lightness he committed: but much more I marueyl at the
gravity of the sages of Greece, wc suffered him. It is but meet he be
partaker of the pain, which condescended to the fault. I do remember
Calligulus the fowerth Emperor of Rome, who was so young and foolysh, that I
doubt of these two things, which was greatest in his time. That is to weete,
the dysobedyence which the people bear to their lord: or the hate which the
lord bear to his people. For that unhappy creature was so dysordered in his
manners, that if all the Romans had not watched to take life from him: he
woold have watched to take life from them. This Caligula ware a brooche of gold
in his cap, where in were written these words. Vtinam omnis populus vnam
precise ceruicem haberet, vt vno ictu omnes necarem. Which is to say: woold to
god all the people had but one neck, to the end I might kill them all at a
stroke. I remember the Emperor Tiberius, thadoptiue son of the good Caesar
Augustus, which was called Augustus, because he greatly augmented the empire.
But the good Emperor did not so much augment the state of his common wealth,
during his life: as Tiberius did dymynish it, after his death. The hate and
mallyce which the Romayn people bare to Tiberius in his life, was manyfestly
dyscouered after the time of his death. For the day that Tiberius dyed (or
better to say, when they killed him) the Romayn people made great processyons,
and the Senators offered great presents to the Temples, and the priests gave
great sacrifyces to their Gods: and all to ye end their Gods shoold not receive
the soul of this tiraunt amongst them, but that they woold send it to be kept
among the furies of hell. I remember Patrocles (second king of Corinthe)
inheryted the realm at two and twenty years of his age, who was so dysordered
of his flesh, so vndyscreete in his doings, so covetous of goods, and such a
coward of his person, that where his father had possessed the realm forty
years, the son did not possess it thyrty months. I remember Tarquine the
proud, who though among eight knyghts of Rome was the last, and comlyest of
gesture, valiant in arms, noblest of blood, and in geeuyng most lyberall: yet
he employed all his gyfts and graces which the Gods had geeuen him, evil. For
he employed his bewty to riot, and his forces to tyranny. For through the
treason, and vyllany, which he committed with the Romayn Lucretia, he did not
only lose the realm, and flying saved his life: but also for ever was
banyshed, and all his lynage likewise. I remember the cruel emperor Nero, who
lived, enherited, and dyed young: and not without a cause I say, that he lived,
and dyed young. For in him was graffed the stock of the noble and worthy Cesars:
and in him was renewed, the memory of those Tyraunts. To whom think thou
Panutius, this tiraunt woold have geeuen life, since he with his own hands
gave his mother her death? Tell me I pray thee, who think thou has made
that cursed heart, who slew his mother, out of whose womb he came? opened her
breasts, which gave him suck? shed the blood, whereof he was born? tore the
arms in wc he was carried? and saw the intrails, wherein he was formed? The
day yt the emperor Nero slew his mother, an orator said in ye senate.

Iure interficienda erat Agrippina que tale portentum peperit in populo romano.
Which is to say, justly deserved Agrippina to be put to death, which brought
forth so strange a monster amongst the Romayn people.

Thou oughtst not therefore to marueil (Panutius) at the novelties which thou
have seen in me: for in these three days that I have been troubled in my
mind, and altered in my understanding, all these things are offered unto me,
and from the botom of my heart I have digested them. For the careful men are
not blinded, but with their own ymaginacions. All these evil conditions which
these Princes had scattered amongst them (of whom I have spoken) do meet
togethers in my son Commodus.

For if they were young, he is young. If they were rych, he is rych. If they
were free, he is free. If they were bold, he is bold. If they were wild, he
is wild. If they were evil, certainly I do not think that he is good. For
we see many young princes, which have been well brought up, and well taught:
yet when they have inherited, and come to their lands, they beecome immediately
vicious, and dissolute. What hope have we of those, which from their infancy
are dissolute and evil inclined? of good wine, I have made often times strong
vinegar: but of pure vinegar, I have never seen good wine. This child keeps
me, beetwene the sails of fear, and the anchor of hope: hopyng he shall be
good, since I have taught him well, and fearing he shallbee evil, because his
mother Faustine has norished him evil. And that which is the woorst, yt the
young child of his own nature is inclined to al evil. I am moved to say this
much, for that I see his natural inclinacion increase: and that which was
taught him dimynish, for the which occasyon, I doubt that after my death, my
son shall return to that, wherein his mother has norished him: and not to
that, wherein I have taught him. O how happy had I been, if never I had had
child, for not to be bound to leave him thempire: for I woold chose then,
among the children of the good fathers: and woold not be bound to such a one,
whom the gods have geeuen me. One thing I ask thee Panutius, whom wooldst thou
call most fortunat? Vespasian, wc was natural father of Domitius, or Nerua, the
adopted father of the good Traiane? both those two ( Vespasian, and Nerua) were
good princes, but of children. Domitian was ye head of al mischief: and Traiane
was the mirror of al goodness. So yt Vespasian in that he had children, was
unhappy: and Nerua in that he had none, was most fortunat. One thing I will tell
thee Panutius, the which by thee considered, thou wylt little esteem life, and
shall lose the fear of death. I have lived lxii. years, wherein I have read
much, hard much, seen, desired, attained, possessed, suffered and I have much
reioysed my self. And in the end of all this, I see my self now to dye, and I
must want my pleasures, and my self also. Of all that I have had, possessed,
attained, and whereof I have enjoyed, I have only two things: to weete, pain
for that I have offended the gods, and sorrow for the time which I have wasted
in vices. There is great difference beetweene the rych and the poor in death,
and more in life. For the poor dies to rest, but if the rich dye it is to
their great pain. So that the gods take from the one, that which he had: and
puts the other in possession, of that he desired. Great care has the heart
to seek the goods, and they pass great troubles to heap up them togethers,
and great diligence must be had in keeping them, and also much wit to increase
them: but without comparison, it is greater grief to depart from them. O what
pain intolerable and grief it is to the wise man, seeing him self at the point
of death, to leave the swet of his famyly, the majesty of his empire, the honor
of his present, the love of his friends, the payment of his debts, the deserts
of his servant, and the memory of his predecessors, in the power of so evil
a child, the which neither deserves it, nor yet will deserve it. In their table
of our ancient laws, were written these words. We ordeyn and command, that
the father which shall be good according to the oppinion of all, may disheryt
his son, who according to the opinion of all is evil. The law said further.
The child which has dysobeyed his father, robbed any holy Temple, iniuryed any
wyddow, fled from any battle, and committed any treason to a stranger, that
he shoold be banished from Rome, and dysenherited from his fathers goods.
Truly the law was good, though by our offenses it be forgotten. If my breath
failed me not as it does fail me (for of troth I am greatly payned) I
woold declare unto thee how many Parthes, Medians, Egiptians, Assirians,
Caldeans, Indians, Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, have left their children
poor being able to have left them rych, for no other cause, but for that they
were vicious. And to the contrary, other being poor, have left them rych, for
that they were virtuous. By the immortal Gods I swear unto thee, that when
they came from the war of Parthia, and triumphed in Rome, and confirmed the
Empire to my son, if then these not not had not withstoode me, I had left
Commodus my son poor with his vices: and woold have made heir of all my
realms, some virtuous man. I let thee to weete Panutius, that five things
oppress my heart sore, to the which I woold rather see remedy my self, then to
command other to remedy it.

The first, for that in my life time I can not determyn the process, that the
virtuous wydow, Drusia has with the senate. Because since she is poor, and
deformed, there is no man that will geeue her justice. The second, because I
dye not in Rome. And this for none other cause, then that with the sound of the
trumpet shoold be proclaimed, that all those which have any quarrel, or debt
against me, and my famyly, should come thither to be paid, or satisfied of
their debts, and demands. The third, that as I made four tyraunts to be put
to execucion, which committed tyranny in Asia and Italy: so it grieved me that
I have not also punished certain Pirates, which roued on the seas. The fowerth,
for that I have not caused the Temple to be fynished which I did beegynne for
all the gods. For I might have said unto them after my death, that since for
all them I have made one house: it were not much that any of them shoold
receive one into his, which pass this life in the favor of gods, and without
the hatred of men. For dying after this sort, men shall susteyn our honors: and
the gods shall provide for our souls.

The fyfth, for that I leave in life for my only heir, Commodus the prince,
yet not so much for the destruction which shall come to my house: as for the
great damage which shall succeed in the common wealth. For the true princes
ought to take the domages of their persons light, and the domages of the common
wealth for the most grievous. O Panutius, let therefore this be the last word
which I will say unto thee, that is to weete, that the greatest good that the
Gods may geeue to the man that is not covetous, but virtuous, is to geeue him
good renown in life: and afterward a good heir at our death. Finally I say,
that if I have anything to do with the gods, I require, and beeseech them,
that if they should be offended, Rome slaundered, my renown defamed, and my
house demynished, for that my son be of an evil life: that they will take
from him life, before they geeue me death.

Of the words which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius spoke unto his son Commodus
at the hour of death, necessary for all young gentlemen to understand. Cap.
liiij.
SInce the disease of Marcus Aurelius was so extreme, that in every hour of
his life he was assaulted with death: after he had talked a long time with
Panutius his secretary, he commanded his son Commodus to be wakened, who as
a young man slept soundly in his bed. And being come before his presence, al
those which were there, were moved immediately with compassion, to see the eyes
of the father all swollen with weeping: and the eyes of the child, closed with
overmuch sleep. They could not waken the child, he was so careless: and they
could not cause the goodfather sleep, he took so great thought. All those
which were there, seeing how the father desired the good life of the son, and
how little the son wayed the death of his father: had compassion of the old
man, and bare hate to the wicked child. Then the good Emperor casting his
eyes on high, and directing his words to his son said. When thou were a
child, I told thy masters how they ought to bring thee up: and after that
thou dydst wax greater, I told thy governors how they shoold counsel thee:
And now will I tell thee, how thou with them which are few, and they with thee,
being one, ought to govern and maintayn the common wealth. If thou esteem
much that which I will say unto thee my son: know thou, that I will esteem it
much more that thou wilt beeleue me. For more easily do we old men, suffer
your iniuryes: then ye other young, do receive our counsels. Wisdom
wants to you for to beeleeue us, yet ye want not boldness to dishonor us.
And that which is woorst, the aged (in Rome) were wont to have a chayr of
wisdom, and sagenes: but now a days the young men count it a shame and folly.
The world at this day is so changed, from that it was wont to be in times
past: that all have the audacity to geeue counsel, and few have the wisdom
to receive it, so that they are a thowsaund, which sell counsels: and there
is not one, yt buyeth wisdom. I believe well my son, yt according to my fatal
destinies, and thy evil manners, little shall yt avail which I shall tell thee.
For since thou wooldst not credyt these words, which I spoke unto thee in my
life: I am sure that thou will little regard them after my death. But I do this
more to satisfy my desire, and to accomplish that which I owe unto the common
wealth: than for that I hope for any amendment of thy life. For there is no
grief that so much hurts a person, as when he him self is cause of his own
pain. If any man does me an injury, if I lay my hands upon him, or speak
injurious words unto him, my heart is forthwith satisfied: but if I do injury
to my self, I am he wc wrongeth, and am wro^ged, for that I have none on whom
I may revenge my wrong, and I vex and chafe with my self. If thou my son be
evil, after yt thou have enheryted the empire: my mother Rome will complain of
ye gods, which have geeuen thee so many evil inclinacions. She will co^playn of
Faustine thy mother which has brought thee up so wantonly, she will complayn
of thee wc have no will to resist vice: but she shall have no cause to
complayn of the old man thy father, who has not geeuen thee good counsels.
For if thou had beeleeued that, which I told thee: men woold rejoice to have
thee for their lord, and the gods to use thee as their minister. I cannot tell
my son if I be deceived, but I see thee so deprived of understanding, so
uncertain in thy words, so dissolute in thy manners, so unjust in justice, in
that thou desire so hardy, and in thy duty so negligent: that if thou change
and alter not thy manners, men will hate thee, and the gods will forsake thee. O
if thou knewst my son what thing it is to have men for enemies, and to be
forsaken of the gods, by the faith of a good man I swear unto thee, that thou
wooldst not only hate the seignory of Rome, but with thy hands also thou
wooldst destroy thy self. For men which have not the gods merciful, and the
men friendly, do eat the bread of grief, and drink ye tears of sorrow. I am sure
thy sorrow is not so great to see that the night does end my life: as is the
pleasure which thou have, to see that in short space thou shall be emperor of
Rome. And I do not marvel hereat. For where sensuality reigns, reason is
banished and constrained to fly. Many love diverse things, because of troth
they know them not: the which if they did know, without doubt they woold hate
them. Though men love in mockry, the gods and men hate us in earnest. In all
things we are so doubtful, and in all our woorks so dysordered, that at some
time our understanding is dull, and loses the edge: and an other time, it is
more sharp then it is necessary. Thereby I mean, that the good we will not
here, and much less we will learn it, but of the evil we know, more then
beehoueth us, or necessity requires. I will counsel thee my son by words,
that which in lxii. years I have learned by science and experience. And since
thou art as yet so young, it is reason that thou believe him which is aged. For
since we princes are the mirror of all, every man does beehold us, and we
other do not beehold ourselves. This day, or to morrow, thou shall enherit ye
Romain empire, and think that inheriting the same, thou shall be lord of the
world. Yet if thou knewst how many cares and perilles, commanding brings
with it, I swear unto thee, that thou wooldst rather chose to obey all, then
to command one. Thou think my son, that I leave thee a great lord, for to
leave thee the empire, which is not so. For all they have need but of thee,
and thou alone have need of all. Thou think that I leave thee much
treasure, leaving thee the great reuenews of the empire, the which also is as
little. For though a prince have treasures in abundance, yet if he want
friends, he has great want of tresures. Thou think also my son, that I
leave thee that thou be obeyed of all, and that none dare gayn say thee.

Truly it ought not to be so. For it is more meet for the prince (which
desires to preserve his life, and augment his honor) to be conformable to the
will of all: then to desire that all shoold be agreeable to him. For thou my
son, that know not what truth is, lies will not grieve thee. For as much as
thou know not what rest is, the broyls and mocions of the people shall not
vex thee. For that thou know not what friends mean, thou shall esteem it
little to have enemies. For if thou were pacient, reposed, true, and a loving
man: thou would not only refuse ye empire of Rome, but also ye wooldst curse
the father which woold leave thee such inheritance. I will thou know if thou
know it not, that in leaving thee the empire, I leave thee not riches, but
poverty: not rest, but travail: not peace, but war: not friends, but enemies:
not pleasures but displeasures: finally in place I leave thee, where always
thou shall have somewhat to beewayle. And though thou would, thou shall not
laugh. I advertise, admonish, and also exhort thee my son, to think that all
that which I leave thee, is vanity, lightness, and folly, and a disgised mockry.
And if thou beeleuest it is in mockry, from hensforth I know thou art deceived.
I have lived longer then thou, I have read more than thou, and with great pain
have gone further than thou. And sins that with all these aduertisements, in
the end I find my self mocked: hopest thou to live surely, and escape without
fraud or guyle? When thou shall think to have the empire in rest, then shall
there arise a province in Africa, or in Asia, the loss of the which should
come to a great inconvenience: and for to recover it, great charges would
ensue. When thou think to recover friends, then shall strange enemies invade
thee. So that in flattering, and rejoicing our friends, we can not keep them:
and in flying, and rejecting them, we can not defend our selves. When thou
shall think to be in gretest joy, then shall some care oppress thy heart. For
princes which have, and possess much the news which geeue them pleasure, are
very seldom: but the things which annoy them, come hourly. When thou shall
think to have liberty, to do what thou will: then shall thou be most
restrained.

For the good and well ordered princes, ought not to go whither their wanton
desires moves them: but where it is most lawful, and decent for the honor of
their estates. When thou shall think that none dare reprove thee, for that thou
art emperor, then oughtst ye most to beeware. For if they dare not threaten
evil princes with words, they have the hardines to sell them by treason. If
they dare not punish them, they dare murmour at them: and these which can not
be their friends, do procure to be their enemies: finally, if they lay not
hands on their persons, they let their tongue run at large to prate of their
renoune. When thou shall thynk to have satisfied thy servants, then will they
demand recompense for their services. For it is an old custom among
courtyers, to spend freely, and covet greedily. Therefore if thou do credit
these things, I know not who is so foolish, that for his enherytaunce desires
such sorrow. For admit that any man come to the empire, without comparison the
rest is more worth, which ye empire takes from him: then the pleasures which
it geeueth him? If the empire of Rome were as well corrected and ordered, as in
old time it was accustomed to be: though it were great pain to govern it,
yet it were more honor to keep it, but it is so rooted in vices, and so many
tira^ts are entered therein, that I woold tak the^ more wise to judge it a
mockry, then those which embrase it as an honor. If thou knewst what Rome is
worth, what Rome has, what Rome may, and what Rome is, I swear unto thee,
that thou would not labor much to be lord thereof. For though Rome with walls
be strongly compassed: yet of virtuous Citezins it is greatly unprovided. If
the inhabitants be great, the vices are without number. Finally I say, that ye
stones which are in the buyldings, in one day may be counted: but the evils
which are therein, in a.1000. years can not be declared. By the faith of a good
man I swear unto thee, my son, that when I beegan to reygne, in 3. years I
repaired the decayed walls that were of Rome fallen: and one only street to
live well, in xx. yers I could not refourme. The divine Plato said very well:
That much more ought the great cities to glorify, to have virtuous citezins:
then to have proud and sumptuous buildings. Beeware, beeware my son, that the
inconstancy of youth, and the liberty which you have to possess, and govern
the empire, cause thee not to undo thy self. For he is not counted free, with
in liberty is borne: but he that dies in liberty. O of how many I have red,
hard, and also seen which are borne slaves, and afterward have dyed free: and
this for that they were virtuous. And how many I have seen die slaves, being
bornfree only for being vicious: so that there liberty remains, where
noblenes is resident. Princes which have great realms, of necessity shall have
occasions to punish many excesses: wherefore it is requisite, that they be
courageous. And beeleue me my son, yt they ought not to take corrage upon
them, because they be mighty, and puissaunt: but because they are virtuous.
For to punish these excesses of others, ye good life is more requisite: then is
the great auctority of the empire. A virtuous prince ought to leave no vice
unpunished, for the good, to follow good, and the evil for fear of his
correction, dare not commit any offense in the common wealth. He that lives
like a wise man, is hardy to geeue punishment: but he that lives in fear,
dare not almost speak. For the man which dare be so hardy to punish an other,
for the self same fault for the which he deserves to be punished: of the
gods he is justly hated, and of men despised. Let princes take it for an
assured thing, that they shall never have the love of the people, the liberty of
the common wealth, the order of their house, the contentation of their friends,
the subjection of their enemies, and ye obedience of their people: but with
many tears shed on the earth, and with many prowesses done of his person. To a
virtuous prince, all do render: and against the vicious prince, all the earth
does rebel. If thou will be virtuous hear what thing virtue is. Virtue is a
castle which never is taken, a river wc is not passed over, a sea which is not
sailed, a fire that never is quenched, a tresure that never is wasted, an army
yt never is overthrown, a change which never wearieth, a spy wc always
returns, a sign which beegilesh no man, a way very straight, a friend that
succoureth al necessities, a surgion that immediately heals, and a renown
which never perishes. If thou knew, my son, what thing it is to be good,
thou would be the best of the world. For the more vicious a man is, so much
the more he is entangled in vices: and how much more a man is virtuous, so
much more to virtues he cleaves. If thou will be virtuous, thou shall do
service to the gods, thou shall geeue good renown to thy predecessors, and for
thy self thou shall prepare a perpetual memory. Thou shall do pleasures to
strangers, and get ye favor of thine own people. Finally, ye good will honor
thee with love: and the evil will serve thee with fear. In the histories of the
wars of the Charentines, I found ye renowned Pirrus (king of Epirotes) did
wear in a ring these words written. It is too little punishment for a vicious
man, to take his life from him: and it is too small a reward for a virtuous man,
to geeue him the seignory of the whole earth. Truly these words were worthy
of such a man. What thing can be beegon of a virtuous man, whereof we hope not
to see the end, and come to good proof? I am deceived, if I have not seen in
my days many me^, which were base borne, unfit for sciences, void of vices in
ye common wealth, poor of goods and unknown of birth, wc with all these base
conditions have learned so many virtues, that it seemed great rashness to beegin
them: and afterward for being virtuous only, they have found the effects such
as they thought it. By the immortal gods I swear unto thee, and so the god
Jupiter take me into his holy house and confirm thee my son in mine: if I
have not known a gardner and a potter in Rome, which for being virtuous, were
occasion to cast five rich senators out of the senate. And ye cause to make
the one to gain, and the other to loose, was that to ye one they would not pay
ye pots, and to ye other his appels For at that time more was he punished, wc
took an apple from a poor man, then he wc bet down a rich man's house. All
this I have told thee my son, because vice abaseth the hardy prince: and
virtue geeueth courage to the bashful. From.ii. things I have always kept my
self. That is to weete, not to strive against open justice, nor to contend
with a virtuous person.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius follows his purpose, and among other wholesome
counsels exhorts his son to keep wise and sage men about him, for to
geeue him counsel in all his affairs. Cap. lv.
HItherto I have spoken to thee in generally, but now I will speak unto the
particulerly, and by the immortal gods I conjure thee, that thou be very
attentive to that I will say: For talking to thee as an aged father it is
reason thou hear me as an obedient child. If thou will enjoy long life,
observe well my doctrine: For the gods will not condescend to thy hearts
desires, oneles thou receyuest my wholesome counsayles. The disobedience and
unfaithfulness, wc children have to their fathers, is al their undoing. For
oftentimes the gods do pardon the offenses, that are done unto them: and do
not pardon the disobediences wc the children bear to their fathers. I do not
require thee my son: that thou geeue me money, sins thou art poor. I do not
demand that thou travail, sins thou art tender. I do not demand ye
reuengement of mine enemies, since I have none. I do not demand that thou
serve me, sins I dye. I do not demand the empire, sins I leave it unto thee.
Only I do demand, that thou govern thy self well in the common wealth: and
that the memory of my house be not lost through thee. If thou esteem much
that I leave unto thee so many realms, I think it better to leave thee many
good counsayls, wherewith thou may preserve thy selue, sustain thy parson,
and maintain thine honor. For if thou have presumption not to profit with my
counsel, but to trust to thine own mind: before my flesh be eaten with
worms, thou shall be ouerco^e with thy enemies. My son, I have been young,
light, bold, unshamefast, proud envious, covetous an aduoulterer, furious, a
glutton, slouthful, and ambicious, and for that I have fallen into so great
excesses, therefore I geeue thee such good advise. For the man wc in his youth
has been very worldly, from him in age proceeds ripe counsel. That wc
until this time I have cou^sailed thee and that which to my death I will
counsel the. I desire that ons at the least you prove it: And if it do thee
harm, leave it, and if it do thee good, use it. For there is no medecin so
bitter, that the sick does refuse to take: if there by he think he may be
healed. I pray thee, I exhort thee, and I advise thee my son, that thy youth
beeleue mine age, thy ignorancy beeleue my knowledge, thy sleep beeleue my
watch, the dimnes of thy eyes, beeleue the clearnes of my sight, thy
imaginacio^ beeleue my virtue, and thy suspicion beeleue my experience. For
otherwise, one day thou shall see thy self in so^e distress, where small time
you shall have to repent, and none to find remedy. Thou may say unto me (my
son) that sins I have been young, I let thee to be young: and that when thou
shall be aged, thou will amend: I answer thee, that if thou will live as young:
yet at the least govern thy self as old. In a prince which governs his
common wealth well, mani myseries are dissembled of his parson. Even as for
mighty affairs, ripe cou^sayles are necessary: so to endure the troubles of
the empire, the person needs some recreacion. For the bow string wc always
is stretched, either it lengthneth, or it breaks. Whether princes be young or
old, there can be nothing more just then for the recreacio^ of them selves, to
seek some honest pastimes. And not without a cause I say that they be honest.
For sometimes they accompany with so dishonest persons, and so unthrifty: that:
they spend their goods, they loose their honor, and weary their persons more,
than if they were occupied in the affairs of the common wealth. For thy youth,
I leave thee children of great lords, with whom thou may past the time away.
And not without cause I have provided that with thee they have been brought up
from thy infancy. For after thou came to man's estate, enheriting my goods,
if perchance thou wooldst accompany thy self with young men, thou should find
them well learned. For thy wars, I leave thee valiant captains, though
(indeed) things of war are beegoon by wisdom: yet in the end, the issue
faleth out by fortune. For stuards of thy treasures, I leave thee faithful men.
And not without cause, I say they are faithful. For oftentimes greater are the
thieves wc are receyuers, and tresorers, then are they that do rob among the
people. I leave thee (my son) expert and ancient men, of whom thou may
take counsel, and with whom ye may co^municat thy trobles. For there can be
fourmed no honest thing in a prince, unless he has in his company ancient
men: for such geeue gravity to his parso^ and auctority to his palace. To
inue^t theaters, to fish ponds: to chase wild beasts in ye forests, to run
in ye fyelds, to let thy hawks fly, and to exercise weapons, al these things
we can deny thee, as to a young man, and ye being young, may rejoice thy self
in all these. Thou oughtst also to have respect, yt to ordeine armies, inue^t
wars, follow victories, accept truces, co^firm peace raise brutes, to make
laws, to promote ye one, and put down the others, to punish the evil, and
first to reward the good, the counsel of al these things ought to be taken,
of clear judgments, of persons of experience, and of white heads. Think
thou not, that it is possible to pass ye time with the young, and to counsel
with the old? The wise and discreet princes, for all things have time enough,
if they know well how to measure it. Be ware my son, that they note thee not
to use great extremities. For the end and occasion why I speak it, is because
thou should know (if thou know not) that it is as indecent a thing for a
prince, under the color of gravity, to be ruled and governed wholly by old
men: as under semblaunce of pastime, always to accompany him self with the
young. It is no general rule, that all young men are light, nor all old men sage.
And thou must according to my advise, in such case use it thus: if any old man
lose the gravity of his age, expulse him from the: if yt find any young men
sage, despise not their counsel. For the bees do draw more honey out of the
tender flowers: then of ye hard leaves. I do not condemn the aged, nor I do
commend the young, but it shall be well done, that always thou choose of both
the most virtuous. For of troth, there is no company in the world so evil
ordered, but yt there is mean to live with it, without any suspicion: so that
if the young are evil with folly, ye old are worse through covetousness. Ons
again I return to advertise thee (my son) that in no wise thou use
extremity. For if thou beeleeue none but young, they will corrupt thy manners
with lightness: and if you beeleeue none but ye old, they will deprave thy
justice through covetousness. What thing can be more monstrous, then yt the
prince which commands all, should suffer him to be commanded of one alone?
Beeleeue me son in this case, yt the governments of many, are seldom times
governed well by the head of one alone. The prince which has to rule and
govern many, ought to take the advice and counsel of many. It is a great
inconvenience, that thou being lord of many realms, should have but one
gate, wherein all do enter into, to do their business with thee. For if
perchance he which shall be thy familiar, be of his own nature good, and
be not mine enemy: yet I would be afraid of him, because he is a friend of
mine enemies. And though for hate they do me no evil: yet I am afraid yt for
ye love of an other, he will cease to do me good. I remember that in the
annalles of Pompeius, I found a little book of memoryes, wc the great Pompeius
bare about him, wherein were many things that he had read, and other good
counsayles, wc in diverse parts of the world he had learned: and among other
words, there were these. The governor of the common wealth, wc commits all the government to old men, deserves very little: and he that trusts al young,
is light. He that governs it by him self alone, is beeyonde him self: and
he wc by him self and others do govern it, is a wise prince. I know not
whither these sentences are of the same Pompeius, or that he gathered them out
of soome book, or that any philosopher had told him them, or some friend of
his had geeuen him them. I mean, that I had them written with his hands and
truly they deserved to be written in letters of gold. When thy affairs shall
be weighty, see thou dispatche them always by counsel. For when the
affairs be determined by the counsel of many, the fault shall be divided
among them all. Thou shall find it for a truth (my son) that if thou take
counsel of many, the one will tell the inconvenience, the other the peril,
other the fear the other the damage, the other the profit, and the other the
remedy, finally, they will so debate thy affairs, that plainly thou shall know
ye good and see the danger thereof. I advertise thee (my son) that when thou
takst counsel, you beehold with thy eyes ye inconvenience, as well as ye remedies
wc they shall offer unto thee. For ye true counsel consists not, to tell what
they ought to do, but to declare what thereof is like to succeed. When yt
shall enter prise (my son) great and weighty affairs, as much oughtst you to
regard ye little damages for to cut the^ of in time: as ye great mishaps, to
remedy them. For oftentimes it chances, that for the negligence of taking up
a gutter, ye whole house falls to the ground. Notwithstanding I tell thee
thou take counsayl. I mean not, that thou oughtst to be so curious, as for
every trifle to call thy counsel. For there are many things of such quality,
yt they would be immediately put in execution: and they do endomage
themselves, attending for counsel. That which by thine own aucthority thou
may dispatch with out the damage of the common wealth, refer it to no other
person: and here in thou shall be just, and shall do justice confourmable.
For considering that thy service depends only of them, the reward which they
ought to have, ought to depend only on thee. I remember, that when Marius ye
Co^sul came from the wars of Numidia, he divided all the treasour he
brought amongst his souldyers, not putting one jewel into the common treasour.
And when here of he was accused, for that he had not demanded license of
the senate: he answered them. It is not just I take counsel with others, for
to geeue recompense to those: which have not taken ye opinions of others, to
serve me. Thou shall find (my son) a kind of me^, which are very hard of
money, and exceeding prodigal of counsel. There are also diverse lenders,
which without demau^ding them, do offer to give it. With such like men, thou
shall have this counsel, never look thou for good counsel at that man,
whose counsel tends to the prejudice of another. For he offreth words to
thy service, and trauaileth thy business to his own profyt. As ye gods gave me
long life, of these things have I had great experience, wherein I let thee know,
that for the space of.xv years I was consul, Senator, Censor, Praetor,
Questor, Edil, and Tribune: and after all this, I have been.18. years emperor
of Rome, wherein al those wc have spoken most against me, touched the profit or
damage of another. The chief intencion of those wc follow the courts of Princes
are to procure to augment their houses. And if they cannot com to that, they
seek to dimynish ye of another, not for that any profit should follow unto them
thereof, be it never so little: but because man's malice is of such condition,
that it esteems the profit of another, his own damage. They ought to have
great compassion of the Prince, for the most that follow him, serve him not for
that they love him but for the gyfts and rewards wc they hope to have of him.
And this seems to be true, for the day that Princes shall cease to geeue
the^: the self same day beegyn they to hate him. So that such servant, we
cannot call friends of our persons: but covetous of our goods. That thou love
(my son) the one above ye other, thou may right well: but I aduertyse thee
that thou, nor they do make any semblaunce, in such sort that al do know it.
For if thou do otherwise: they will murmr at thee, and will all persecute
thee. He incurreth into no small peril, nor has no little trouble, which is
above al of the Prince beeloued. and of the people hated. For then he is
hated, and persecuted of all. And yet more damage ensues unto him, of the
enmyty of al: then does of the love of the prince alone, For sometimes (the
gods permitting it, and his beehauiour deserving it) the Prince does cease to
love him: and therewith his enemies beegyn to persecute him. From the time I
knew what meaned to govern a common weal, I have always determined, never to
keep man in my house one day, after I know him to be an enemy to the common
wealth. In the year of the foundation of Rome, 649. Lucius Lucullus the
Senator going to the wars against Mithridate, by chance found a tablet of
copper, in the city called Triganie, the which was at the gate of the king of
that prouynce. And on that same was engraven certain Caldean letters, the
which in effect said these words. The prince is not sage, who will put in
hazard the state of his common wealth, for the only commoditye of one alone:
For the service of one, cannot avail against the love of al. The prince is not
sage, ye for to enrich one alone, seeks to empouerish all: For it is a thing
intolerable, that the one do labor the fyelds, and the other do gather the
fruit.

The Prince is not just, which will satisfy the covetousness of one more then the
service of all: for there is mean to pay the services of the good, and there
is no riches to satisfy the covetousness of the evil. The Prince is a fool that
despyseth the counsel of all, and trusts in the opinyon of one. For though
there be in a great ship but one Pilot, yet it needs many Marryners. Bold
is the Prince, which to love one only, wylbee hated of al: for noble Princes
ought to think it much profyt to be beeloued, and much more displeasure to be
hated. These were the words which were written in that tablet, worthy of
eternal memory. And I will tell thee further in this case that Lucullus the
Senator sent on the one part the tablet of copper, where these words were: and
on the other part, the coffers where in he had brought the riches, to the end
the senate should choose one, and leave the other. The senate despysing the
riches and treasours, choose the tablet of counsayles.

The Emperor follows his matter and exhorts his son unto certain
particular things worthy to be engraued in the hearts of men. Cap. lvi.
Until now, I have spoken as a father to his son, that which touches thy
profit. Now I will tell thee what thou shall do after my death for my service.
And if thou will be the true son of thy father, ye things wc I have loved in
my life, shall be of thee esteemed after my death. do not rese^ble many
children, wc after their fathers have closed their eyes, do remember them no
more. For in such case, though in deed ye fathers be dead and buried: yet they
are always living, to complain to ye Gods of their children, Though it
seems not to be sclaunderous, yet it is more perilus, to contend with ye dead:
then to iniure ye living. And ye reason is for yt the living may revenge, and
are for to answer: but ye dead cannot make answer, and much less they can
be revenged. And in such case ye Gods do take their cause in protection: and
some times they execute such cruel punishment of those that live, yt rather
the^ they would endure it, they wysh to be dead. Thou oughtst to think (my
son) that I have beegot thee, I have nouryshed thee, I have taught thee, I
have trymmed thee, I have chastised thee, and I have exalted thee. And for this
consyderation, though by death I am absent, it is not reason yt thou ever
forget me. For the true, and not unthankful child, ought ye same day to bury
his father in his tender heart: when others have laid him in the hard grave. One
of the visible chastisements wc the gods geeue to men in this world is, that
the children obey not their fathers in their life. For the self same fathers
did not remember, their own fathers after their death. Let not young Princes
think, after they have inherited, after they see their father dead, and after
they are past correction of their masters, that al things ought to be done as
they the^ selves will it, for it will not be so. For if they want the favor of
the Gods, and have maledyction of their fathers: they live in trouble, and dye
in danger. I require naught else of thee (my son) but that such a father as I
have been to thee in my life, such a son thou be to me after my death. I
commend unto thee (my son) the veneracion of the gods, and this cheefely
above al thing. For the prince with makes account of the gods, need not to
fear any storm of fortune. Love the gods, and thou shall be beeloued. Serve
them, and thou shall be served. Fear them, and thou shall be feared. Honor
them, and thou shall be honored. Do their commau^dements and they will geeue
thee thy hearts desire. For the gods are so good, that they do not only
receive in account, that wc we do: but also that wc we desire to do. I
commend unto thee (my son) the reverence of the Temples, that is to weete,
that they be not in discord, that they be clean and renewed, that they
offer therein ye sacrifices accustomed. For we do not this honor, to ye
substance wherewith the temples are made: but to the Gods, to whom they are
consecrated. I commend unto thee the veneration of priests: and I pray thee,
though they be covetous, auaricious, dissolute, impatient, negligent, and
vicious: yet yt they be not dishonored. For to us others it apperteineth, not
to judge of the life they lead as me^: but we must consider, that they are
mediators beetwene the gods and us. Beehold my son, that to serve the gods,
honor the temples, and reverence the priests, it is not a thing voluntary, but
very necessary for Princes: For so long endured ye glory of the Greeks, as
they were worshippers of their Gods, and careful of their Temples. The vnhappi
realm of Catthage was nothing more cowardly, nor less rych, then that of the
Romans, but in the end, of the Romans, they were overcome, because they
were great lovers of their treasours, and little worshippers of their Temples. I
commend unto thee (my son) Helia thy stepe mother: and remember, though she
be not thy mother, yet she has been my wife. That wc to thy mother Faustine
thou oughtst for bringing thee into the world: the self same thou oughtst to
Helia, for the good entertainme^t which she has showed thee. And in deed,
often times I being offended with the she maintained thee, and caused me to
forget: so yt she by her good words did win again that, wc thou by thy
evil woorks did loose. Thou shall have my curse, if thou use her evil:
and thou shall fall into their of the gods, if yt agreest that other do not
use her well. For all the damage which she shall feel, shall not be, but for
the inconvenience of my death, and injury of thy person. For her dowrye I leave
her the tributes of Hostia, and the orchyardes of Vulcanus, which I have made
to be planted for her recreation. Be thou not so hardy to take them from her:
for in taking them from her, thou shall show thy wickedness, and in leaving
them her, thy obedyence, and in geeuing her more, thy bounty and liberalyty.
Remember (my son) yt she is a Roman woman young, and a wydow, and of the
house of Traiane my lord, and that she is thy mother adoptatiue, and my
natural wife: and above al, for that I leave her recommended unto thee, I
commend unto thee my son in laws, whom I will thou use as parents and
friends. And beeware, that thou be not of those wc are brethern in words, and
cousins in woorks. Be thou assured that I have willed so much good to my
daughters, that the best which were in all the countries, I have chosen for
their persons. And they have been so good, that if in geeuing them my
daughters, they were my son in laws: in love. I loved them as children. I
commend unto thee my Systers, and daughters, whom I leave thee al married: not
with strange kings, but with natural senators. So that al dwell in Rome where
they may do thee services: and thou may give them rewards and gifts. Thy
sisters have greatly inheryted the beauty of thy mother Faustine: and have
taken little nature of their father Mark. But I swear unto thee, that I have
geeuen them such husbands, and to their husbands, such and so profitable
counsels: that they would rather loose their life then agree to any thing
touching their dishonor. Use thy sisters in such sort that they be not out of
favor, for that their aged father is dead and that they beecome not proud, for
to see their brother Emperor. Women are of a very tender condition: for of
small occasion they do complain, and of less they wax proud. Thou shall
keep them and preserve them after my death, as I did in my life. For
otherwise, their conversation to the people shall be very noisome: and to thee
very importunate. I comend unto thee, Lipula thy youngest Sister wc is enclosed
with in the virgin, vestalles, who was daughter of thy mother Faustine, whom
so derely I have loved in life, and whose death I have beewailed until my
death. Every year I gave to thy sister, six thousand Sexterces for her
necessyties: and in deed I had married her also, if she had not fallen into
the fire, and burnt her face. For though she were my last, I loved her with
all my heart. All have esteemed her fall into ye fire for evil luck: but I do
count the evil luck for good fortune. For her face was not so burned with coals
as her renown suffered peril among evil tongs. I swear unto thee (my son)
that for the service of the gods, and for the renown of men: she is more sure
in ye Temple with the vestal Virgins, then ye art in the Senate with thy Senators.
I suppose now, that at the end of the journey, she shall find her self better
to be enclosed, then thou at liberty. I leave unto her (in the prouynce of
Lucania) every year six thousand sexterces. Travail to augme^t them for her,
and not to dymynish them. I commend unto thee Drusia the Romain wydow, who has
a process in ye Senate. For in ye times of the co^motions past her husband was
banished and proclaimed traitor. I have great pyety of so noble, and worthy a
widow: for it is now.iii. months since she has put up her complaint and for
ye great wars I could not show her justice. Thou shall find (my son) that
in.xxxv. years I have governed in Rome, I never agreed that any widow should
have any suit before me, above.viii. days. Be careful to favor, and
dispatch the orphans, and wydows. For the needy wydows, in what place so ever
they be, do encurre into great danger. Not wc out cause I advertise thee, yt
ye travail to dispatch the^ so sone as ye may: and to administer justice
unto the^. For through ye prolo^ging of beautiful wome^s suites, their honor
and credit is diminished. So yt their business being prolo^ged, they shall not
recover so much of their goods as they shall lose of their renowm. I co^me^d
unto thee (my son) my old servant, which with my long years, and my cruel
wars, with my great necessityes, with the combrance of my body, and my long
disease, have had great trouble: and as faithful servant, oftentimes to ease
me, have annoyed them selves. It is convenient since I have prevailed of their
life, that they should not loose by my death. Of one thing I assure thee, that
though my body remain with the worms in the grave: yet before the gods I
will remember them. And heerin thou shall show thy self to be a good child,
when thou shall recompense those wc have served thy father well. Al princes
which shall do justice, shall get enemies in the excucion thereof. And since it
is done by the hands of those, which are near him the more familiare they are
with the prince, the more are they hated of the people: al in generally do
love justice, but none do rejoice that they execute it in his house. And
therefore after the Prince ends his life, the people will take revenge of
those, which have been ministers thereof. It were great infamy to the empire,
offense to the gods, injury to me, unthankfulness to thee, having found the
arms of my servants, ready xviii. years, that thy gates should be shut
against them one day. Keep, keep these things (my son) in thy memory: and
since particulerly I do remember them at my death, consider how heartily I
loved them in my life.

The good Marcus Aurelius, Emperor of Rome, ends his purpose and life. And of
the last words which he spoke to his son Commodus, and of the table of
counsels which he gave him. Cap. lvii.
WHen the Emperor had ended his particular recommendacions, unto his son
Commodus, as the dawning of the day beegan to appear: so his eyes beegan to
close, his tongue to faulter, and his hands to tremble, as it does accustom to
those, which are at the point of death. The prince perceiving then little life
to remain, commanded his secretory Panutius to go to the coffer of his books,
and to bring one of the coffers before his presence: out of the which he
took a table of.iii. foot of breadth, and ii. of length, the wc was of Eban,
bordered al about with unicorn. And it was closed with.2. lyds, very fine of red
wood, wc they call rasing, of a tree where the Phoenix (as they say) breeds, wc
did grow in Arabia, And as there is but one only Phoenix, so in the world is
there but one only tree of that sort. On the uttermost part of the table, was
graven the God Jupiter, and on the other ye goddess Venus: and in the other
was drawn the God Mars, and the goddess Diana. In the uppermost part of ye
table was carved a bull: and in ye neythermost part was drawn a king. And they
said the paynter of so famous and renowned a woork, was called Apelles. The
Emperor taking the table in his hands, casting his eyes unto his son, said
these words. Thou see my son, how from the turmoyls of fortune I have
escaped, and how I into miserable destenies of death do enter, where by
experience I shall know what there is after this life. I mean not now to
blaspheme the gods: but to repent my sins. But I would willingly declare why
ye gods have created us, since there is such trouble in life, and such pain in
death. Not understanding why the gods have used so great cruelti with creatures,
I see it now, in that after.lxii. years I have sailed in ye danger and peril
of this life: now they command me to land, and harbor in ye grave of death.
Now approaches ye hour wherein ye band of matrimoni is losed, the thread of life
untwined, the key does lock, the sleep is wakened, my life does end, and I go
out of this troublesome pain. Remembering me of yt I have done in my life, I
desire no more to live: but for yt I know not whyther I am carried by death, I
fear and refuse his darts. Alas what shall I do, since ye gods tell me not
what I shall do? what cou^sail shall I take of any man, since no man will
accompany me in this journey? O what great disceite, o what manifest blindness
is this, to love one thing al ye days of his life, and to call nothing with us
after our death? Because I desired to be rych, they let me die poor. Because
I desired to live with company, they let me die alone. For such shortness of life,
I know not what he is yt will have a house, since the narow grave is our
certain mansio^ place? beeleeue me, my son, that many things past do grieve
me sore: but with nothing so much I am troubled, as to come so late to ye
knowledge of this life. For if I could perfectly beeleeue this, neither should
men have cause to reprove me, neither yet I now such occasion to lament me. O
how certain a thing is it, that men when they come to the point of death, do
promise the gods, that if they proroge their death, they will amend their life?
but notwithstanding, I am sorry that we see them delivered from death, without
any manner of amendment of life. They have obtained that, which of the gods they
have desired: and have not performed that, wc they have promised. They ought
assuredly to think, that in the sweetest time of their life, they shall be
constreyned to accept death. For admit that the punishment of ingrate persons
be deferred: yet therefore the fault is not pardoned. Be thou assured my
son, that I have seen enough, hard, felt, tasted, desired, possessed, eaten,
slept, spoken, and also lived enough. For vices geeue as great trouble, to
those which follow them much: as they do great desire, to those which never
proved them. I confess to the immortal Gods, that I have no desire to live:
yet I ensure thee, I would not dye. For life is so troublesome that it wears
us: and death is so doubtful, that it fears us. If the gods deferred my
death, I doubt whyther I should reform my life. And if I do not amend my
life, nor serve the Gods better, nor profit the common wealth more, and if that
every time I am sick, it should grieve me to die: I say it is much better for
me now to accept death, then, to wysh the lengthning of my life. I say the
life is so troublesome, so fyckle, so suspicious, so uncertain, and so
importunat (finally I say, it is a life whithout life) that he is an obstinat
fool, wc so much desires it. Come yt that may come: for finally, not
withstanding yt I have spoken, I willingly commit my self into the hands of ye
Gods, since of necessity I am thereunto constreined. For it proceeds not of a
little wisdom, to receive that willingly, which to do we are constrained of
necessity. I will not recommend my self to the priests, nor cause the oracles
to be visited, nor promise any thing to ye temples, nor offer sacrifices to
the gods, to the end they should warrant me from death, and restore me to
life: but I will demand, and require them, that if they have created me for
any good thing, I may not loose it for my evil life. So wise and sage are the
gods in that they say, so just and true in that they promise, that if they
geeue us not that which we others would: it is not for that they will not, but
because we deserve it not. For we are so evil, and worth so litel, and we
may do so little, that for many good woorks we deserve no meryt: and yet with
an evil work, we be made unworthy of al. Since therefore I have put my self
in to ye hands of the Gods, let them do with me what they will for their
service: for in the end, the woorst that they will do is much better then the
world will do. For all that the world has geeuen me, has been but mockry,
and deceyte: but that which the gods have geeuen me, I have governed, and
possessed without suspicion. For this last hour (my son) I have kept the
best, the most noble, and riches jewel that I have possessed in my life time.
And I do protest unto the immortal gods, that if as they do commau^d me to
dye, they would geeue me license to read in the grave: I would command it to
be buried with me. Thou shall know my son, that in the.x. year of my
Empire, a great war arose against the unruly people of Persia, where by evil
luck it was appointed for me, in person to geeue the battle: the which
won, and al their country destroyed, I returned by the old city of Thebes in
Aegipte, to see if I could find any antiquity of those in times past. In the
house of an Egiptian pryest, I found a litel table, which they hanged at the
gate of the kings palace the day of his coronatio^. And this poor pristes
told me, that that which was in this table, was written by a king of Egypt,
named Ptholomeus Arsasides. I beeseech the immortal Gods, my son, that such
be thy woorks, as the words of this table require. As emperor, I leave thee
heir of many realms: and as a father, I geeue thee this table of counsayles.
The words which the fathers do teach unto the children at the last hour, the
children ought to keep continually in their memory. Let this therefore be my
last word, with the Empire thou shall be feared through out all the world:
and with the counsayles of this table, thou shall be loved of al nations. This
talk being ended, and the table geeuen, the Emperor turned his eyes, lost his
senses, and for the space of a quarter of an hour lay languishing in extreme
pain, and within a while after yielded up the ghost. In this table wear
certain greek letters which were in meeter and in our tongue signify thus.

ON honors stall I do no tirant heave,
nor yet the poor suppress if he wear just
For riches rule I nould to pardon cleave,
For want of wealth nor follow rigours lust.
For naked love I never spent reward,
nor would correct for only enuies heat,
Of virtues imps I always had regard
and mischifs mates have plagd with torment great.
To others doom I never would commit
of open right the quarrel to decide
ne yet of doubtful strifes in trust of wit
The final end alone I would divide.
To them that sought for justice equal sway
her golden rule I never did deny
ne yet to such for whom desert would lay
Their sclender fautes might well be slipped by
To feel the grife that waued in my mind
With others smart I never could sustain
nor yet rewards my princely words would bind
When sweet delight had chifest joy to rain.
In high estate when most blind fortune smild
A reckles life I restles ran not on
nor yet when change those happy days beegyld
to cold despaier my quiet mind was gone.
By boiling heat of malice endeles fire
to vices train I cast no egre eye
ne yet for lust of pining welthes desire
Unlawful facts I rechles would apply.
The traitors breast I never could embrace
nor lend mine ears to swalow flattring talk
of vices slaves I wayed not the grace
nor left unsought good will in virtues walk.
Poor Irus band for that I did reliue
Whose needy state does stoop in Cresus swaie
the greatest gods whose heavenly warck does griue
the proudest crowns was aymy present state,
FINIS.
The fourth book of the Dyall of Princes Compyled by the right reverend father
in god, Antony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondogueto, preacher, Chronicler, and
counceller to Charles the fifth Emperor of Rome: Containing many instructions
and rules, for the favored of the Court, being once in favor, easily to keep
and continue them selves in favor still. Right necessary and profitable for all
princes, and noble men, and gentlemen courtiers that seek to continue them
selves in honor and estimacion.

The Epistle to the Reader.
WHat detracting tongues report of me and my first travel in the translation
of this Dyall, enlarging them at pleasure to woork my defame, disabling my
doing herein, by brute yt was no woork of mine, but the fruit of others
labor: I need not much force, since by daily proof we see, that ill disposed
mynds can never frame an honest tongue in head. For my object, and reproof of
this their sclaunderous and malignant speech, I can allege (courteous reader)
two principal causes, which thou reading and judging with indifferency, may
easily approve, if I shoold seem to gloss with thee. First, the baseness of my
style, the plain and humble words couched in the same, the mean, rude, and ill
contryued sentences laid before thee, togeether with the simple handelyng of
the whole: plainly shows to thee whence they are, and easily acquainteth thee
with the curious translator. Who protests to god, and confesses to the
world, that he more rashely then wisely plonged him self into so grave and
deep a matter, and whose young years and unskillful head, might both then and
now have excused his fond enterprise herein. For the second and last, I must
needs appeal to all the woorshipfull, and my beeloued compaignyons, and fellow
students of our house of Lyncolnes Inn at that time, from whence my poor
english Dyall took his light. To whose just and true reports (for thy
undoubted satisfaction, and discharge of my poor honesty) I refer thee, and
wholly yield me. These recyted causes, for purgacion of my suspected fame, as
also for established assurance of the like, and thy further doubt of me
hereafter, I thought good (gentle reader) to denounce unto thee. I might well
have spared this second and last labor of mine taken, in the reformacion and
correction of this Dyall, enlarging my self further once again, with the
translation of the late and new come favored courtier (and which I found
annexed to the Dyall for the fourth and last book) If my preceding travel
taken in the setting forth of the first three books, and the respect of mine
honesty in accomplyshing of the same, had not incyted me (unwilling) to
continue my first begone attempt, to bring the same to his perfyt and desired
end: which whole woork is now complete by this last book, entitled the
favored courtyer. Which first and last volume, wholly as yt lies, I prostrate
to the judgment of the grave and wise Reader, subiecting my self and yt, to
the reformation and correction of his learned head, whom I beeseech to judge of
me with favor and equity: and not with malice to persecute my same, and honest
intent, having for thy benefit, (to my little skill and knowledge) employed my
simple talent, crauyng no other guerdon of thee, but thy good report, and
courteous acceptaunce hereof. Which dooyng thou shall make me double bound to
thee. First, to be thankful for thy good will. Secondly, to be considerate
how hereafter I take upon me so great a charge. Thirdly, thou shall encourage
me to study to increase my talent.

Fourthly, and lastly, most freely to beestow thincrease thereof on thee, and
for the benefit of my country and common weal, whereto duty byndeth me:
Observing the sage and prudent saying of the renowned orator and famous Cicero:
with which I end, and thereto leave thee. Non nobis solum nati sumus, ortusque
nostri partem patria vendicat, partem parents, partem amici. In defense and
preservation whereof (good reader) we ought not alone to employ our whole
wits and able senses, but necessity enforcing us, to sacrifice our selves
also for benefit thereof. From my lord Norths house nere London the.10. day of
May. 1568.

Thine that accepts me. Th. North.

The prolog of this present woork shows what one true friend ought to do for
an other: Addressed to the right honorable the lord Fraunces Conos, great
commander of Lion.
THe famous Philosopher Plato, beesought of al his disciples to tell the^, why
he iornyed so often from Athens to Scicille, being the way he traveled (in
deed) very long, and the sea he passed very dangerous: answered them thus.
The cause that moves me to go from Athens to Scicille, is only to see
Phocion, a man iustinal that he does, and wise in all that he speaks: and
because he is my very friend, and enemy of Denis, I go also willingly to him,
to aid him in that I may, and to council him in all ye I know: and told them
further. I do you to weete my disciples, that a good philosopher, to visit and
help his friend, and to accompany with a good man, shoold think the journey
short, and no whit paynfull, though he shoold sulk the whole seas, and pace
the compase of the earth. Appolonius Thianeus departed from Rome, went through
all Asia, sailed over the great flud Nile, endured the bitter cold of mount
Caucasus, suffered the parching heat of the mountayns Riphei, passed the land
of Nassagera, and entered into the great India: And this long pilgrimage took
he upon him, in no other respect, but to see Hyarcus the philosopher, his
great and old friend. Agesilaus also among the Greeks accounted a worthy
Captayn, understanding that the king Hycarius had an other captayn (his very
friend) captyue: leaving all his own affairs apart, traueling through diverse
countries, went to the place where he was, and arrived there, presented him
self unto the king, and said thus to him. I humbly beeseech thee O puissant
king, thou deigne to pardon Minotus, my sole and only friend, and thy subject
now: for what thou shall do to him, make thy account thou have done it to me.
For in deed thou can never alone punish his body, but thou shall therewith
also crucify my heart.

King Herod after Augustus had overcome Mark Antony, came to Rome, and laying
his crown at ye Imperial feet, with stout courage spoke these words unto him.
Know thou (mighty Augustus) if thou know it not, that if Mark Antony had
beeleeued me, and not his accursed love Cleopatra, thou shooldst then have
proved how bitter an enemy I woold have been to thee, and he have found how
true a friend I was, and yet am to him. But he, as a man rather geeuen over to
the rule of a woman's will, then guyded by reasons skill, took of me but money
only, and of Cleopatra counsel. And proceeding further said: Lo here my
kingdom, my person, and royal crown laid at thy princely feet, all which I
freely offer to thee, to dispose of at thy will and pleasure, pleasing thee so
to accept it, but yet with this condition (inuict Augustus) that thou command
me not to here nor speak ill of Mark Antony my lord and friend, yea although
he were now dead. For know thou, sacred prince, that true friends, neither for
death ought to be had in obliuio^, nor for absens to be forsaken. Julius
Caesar last dictator and first emperor of Rome, did so entierly love Cornelius
Fabatus the consul, that traueling togethers through the alps of France and
being beenighted, far from any town or harber, save that only of a hollow
cave, which happily they lighted on: And Cornelius the consul even then not
well at ease, Julius Caesar left him the whole cave to thend he might be more
at rest, and he him self lay abroad in the cold and snow. By these goodly
examples we have resited, and by diverse others we coold resite, may be
considered, what faithful friendship ought to be beetwixt true and perfect
friends, and into how many dangers one friend ought to put him self for an
other. For it is not enough that one friend be sorry for the troubles of an
other, but he is bound (if need were) to go and dye joyfully with him. He
only deservedly may be counted a true friend, that unasked, and before he be
called, goes with his goods and person to help and relieve his friend. But in
this our iron age alas there is no such kind of amity as that we have spoken
of. More then this, that there is no friend will part with any thing of his to
relieve his friend, much less that takes care to favor him in his trobles: but
if there be any such that will help his friend, yt is even then when time
serves rather to pity and lament him, then to aid or succor him. It is a thing
worth the knowledge, that to make a true and perpetual friendship, we may not
offer to many persons, but according to Seneca his saying, who says. My friend
Lucillus, I council thee that thou be a true friend to one alone, and enemy to
none: for nombers of friends brings great encumbrance, which seems somewhat to
diminish friendship. For who that considers the liberty of the heart, it is
impossible that one shoold frame and agree with the conditions of many, and
much less that many shoold content them with the desiers and affections of
one. Tully and Salust were two famous orators amongst the Romans, and great
enemies beetwene them selves, and during this emulation beetweene them, Tully
had purchased all the Senators friendship, and Salust only had no other friend in
all Rome, but Mark Anthony alone. And so these two great Orators being one day
at words togeethers, Tully in great anger said to Salust: what force or power
art thou of, or what can thou do or attempt against me? since thou know
that in all Rome thou have but one only friend, Mark Antony, and I no enemy but
one, and that is he? To whom Salust answered. Thou gloriest (O Tully) that
thou have no mo but one only enemy, and afterward jests at me, that I have no
more friends but only one: but I hope in the immortal Gods, that this only
enemy thou have, shall be able enough utterly to undo thee: and this my sole
friend that I have, shall be sufficient to protect and defend me in all my
causes. And shortly after these words passed beetween them, Mark Antony showed
the friendship he bare to the one, and the enimity he had to the other, for
he caused Tully to be put to death, and raised Salust to great honor. A friend
may well impart to the other all his own, as bread, wine, money, time,
conversation, and such like, but he cannot notwithstanding geeue him part of
his heart, for that suffers it not to be parted nor divided, because it can
be geeuen but to one alone. This granted to be true, as needs it must
doubtless, that the heart can not be divided but only geeuen to one, then is it
of necessity, that he that will seek to have many friends, must needs repair
to the shambels to provide him of many hearts. Many vaunt them selves, and think
it a glory to have nombers of friends, but let such well consider to what use
that legendary of friends do serve them, they shall then easily find they stand
them in no other steed, but to eat, to drink, to walk, to babble, and to
murmr togeethers, and not one to help the other with their goods, favor, and
credit at their need, nor friendly to reprove them of their faults and vices,
which doubtless ought not to be so. For where true and perfect friendship
raygneth, neither I wish my friend, nor he with me shoold dissemble any fault
or vice. Ouide says in his book de art amandi, that the law of true and
unfeigned love is so straight, that no friendship but mine in thy heart shoold
herber, and in mine shoold lodge none others love but thine, for love is none
other thing but one heart living in two bodies, and two bodies obeying one heart.
In this world there is no treasure co^parable to a true and sure friend, sith to
a faith full friend a man may safely discover ye secrets of his heart, beewray
unto him his gryping greeues, trusting him with his honor, comitting to his
guyd and custody all his goods, he shall succor him in his misery, counsel
him in peril, rejoice at his prosperity, and mourn at his adversity: and in
fine I conclude, such a friend never werieth to serve him in his life, nor to
lament him after his death. I grant that gold and silver is good, kynsfolks
are good, and money is good, but true friends exceed them all without
comparison. For all these things cannot warrant us from necessity (if synister
fortune plunge us into it) but rather increase our torment and extremity: Also
they do not rejoice us, but rather heap further greefes upon us, neither do
they succor us, but rather each hour geeue us cause to complayn, much less do
they remember and advise us of that that is good, but still do deceive us, not
dyrectyng us the right way, but still bringing us out of our way, and when they
have lead us awry out of the high way, they bring us into desert woods, and
high and dangerous mountayns, whereof necessity we must fall down hedlong. A
true friend is no partaker of these conditions, but rather he is sorry for the
lest trouble that happens to his friend, he fears not, neither spares his
goods, nor the danger of his person, he cares not to take upon him any
painful journey, quarrels, or suits, nor yet to put his life in every hasard of
death. And yet that that is most of all to be esteemed is, that like as the
heart and bowels ever burn with pure and sincere love, so does he wish and
desire with gladsome mind, to bear the burden of all his friends mishaps, yea
more then yet spoken of. Alexander the great offered great presents to the
Philosopher Zenocrates, who woold not vouchsafe to receive them, much less to
beehold them. And being demanded of Alexander why he woold not receive them,
having poor kinsfolks and parents to beestow them on: he answered him thus.
Truly I have both brothers and sisters (O Alexander) yet I have no kinsman but
him that is my friend, and one only friend I have, who has no need of any gyfts
to be geeuen him. For the only cause why I choose him to be my sole and only
friend, was for that I ever saw him despise these worldly things. Truly the
sentence of this good philosopher Zenocrates is of no small efficacy, for him
that will aduysedly consider of it, since that not seeldom but many times it
happens, that the great troubles, the sundry dangers, and the continual
necessities and miseries we suffer in this vale of misery, have for the most
part proceeded from our parents, and afterward by our friends have been
mediated and redressed. Therefore since we have thought it good and necessary
to choose a friend, and that he be but one only, each man must be wise lest in
such choice he be deceived. For often times it happens, that those that take
little regard herein, grant their friendship to such one as is to covetous,
impacient, a great babbler, seditious, and presumptuous, and of such conditions
that sometime it shoold be less evil for us to have him our enemy, then to
account of him as of our dear friend. Him whom we will choose for our faithful
friend, amongst other manners and conditions he must chiefly and before all
be endued with these, that he be courteous of nature, faier spoken, hard and
stout to endure pain, pacient in troubles, sober in diet, moderate in his
words, grave and ripe in his counsels, and above all steadfast in friendship,
and faithful in secrets. And whom we shall find with these laudable virtues
and conditions adorned, him may we safely take and accept for our friend. But
if we see any of these parts wanting in him, we ought to shon him as from the
plague, knowing for certeinty, that the friendship of a feigned and fantastical
friend is much worse and perilous, then the enmity of a known and open enemy.
For to the hands of one we commit our heart, and faith: and from the deceipts
and treasons of the other, we defendour selves with our whole force and power.
Seneca writing to his dear and faithful friend Lucillus says unto him. I pray
thee (O Lucillus) that thou order and determyne thine affaiers by thaduise and
counsel of thy friend, but also I do remember thee, that first thou see well
what manner of friend thou have chosen thee, for there is no merchandise in the
world this day that men are so soon beegyled in, as they are in the choice of
friends. Therefore the grave sentence of Seneca wisely wayed, we shoold assent
with him in oppinion, that since no man byeth a horse but he first causes him
to be ridden, nor bread but first he sees and handles it, nor wine but he
tastes it, nor flesh but first he wayeth it, nor corn but he sees a
sample, nor house but that he does first value it, nor Instrument but first
he plays on it, and judges of his sound: yt is but reason he shoold be so
much the more circumspect before he choose his friend to examine his life and
condition, since all the other things we have spoken of may be put in diverse
houses and corners, but our friend we lodge and keep dearly in our proper
bowels. Those that write of the emperor Augustus say, that he was very
strange and scrupulous in accepting friends, but after he had once received
the^ into his friendship, he was very constant and circu^spect to keep them.
For he never had any friend, but first he had some proof and trial of him,
neither woold he ever after forsake him for any displeasure done to him.
Therefore yt shoold always be so, that true friends shoold bear one to an other
such love and affection that the one being in prosperity, should not have
occasion to complayn of him self in that he did not reliue his friends
necessity being in adversity: nor the other being poor and needy, shoold
grudge or lament for that his friend being rich and welthy, woold not succor
him with all that he might have done for him. For to say the truth, where
perfect frendshyp is, there ought no excuse to be made to do what possible is
the one for the other. The friendship of young men comes commonly, (or for the
most part at ye least) by being companyons in vice and folly: and such of
right ought rather to be called vacabonds, then once to deserve the name of
true friends. For that cannot be called true friendship, that is continued to
the preiudyce or derogation of virtue. Seneca writing again to Lucillus says
these words. I woold not have thee think, nor once mistrust, O my Lucillus,
that in all the Romayn empire I have any greater friend then thou: but with all
assure thy self, that our friendship is not so straight beetwene us, that I
woold take upon me at any time to do for thee otherwise then honesty shoold
lead me. For though the love I bear thee has made thee lord of my lyberty:
yet reason also has left me virtue free.

The aucthor proceeds on.
Applyeng that we have spoken to that we will now declare, I say I will not
acknowledge my self your servant, for so shoold I be compelled to fear you
more then love you: much less will I vaunt my self to be your kinsman, for so
I shoold importune and displease you: and I will not brag that heretofore we
have been of familier acquaintance, for that I woold not make any demonstration
I made so little account of you, and less then I am bound to do: neither will
I bost my self that I am at this present your famyliar and welbeeloued, for in
deed I shoold then show my self to be to bold and arrogant: but that that I
will confess shall be, that I love you as a friend, and you me as a kinsman, al
be it this friendship has succeeded dyuersly till now. For you being noble as
you are, have bountifully showed your friendship to me, in large and ample
gyfts: but I poor, and of base estate, have only made you sure of mine in
words. Plutarche in his Polytikes said: That it were far better to sell to
our friends our woorks and good deeds, (whether they were in prosperity,
adversity, or necessity) then to feed them with vayn flattering words for
nothing. Yet is it not so general a rule, but that sometimes it happens that
the high words on the one side are so profitable, and the woorks so few and
feeble on the other side, that one shall be better pleased and delighted with
hearing the sweet and courteous words of the one, then he shall be to be served
with the cold service and woorks of the other, of small profyt and value.
Plutarch also in his book De animalibus tells us, that Denis the tyrant
being one day at the table reasoning of diverse and sundry matters with
Chrisippus the philosopher, it chanced, that as he was at diner, one brought
him a present of certain sugar cakes, wherefore Chrisippus cesing his former
discourse fell to persuade Denis to fall to his cakes. To whom Denis answered,
on with your matter Chrisippus, and leave not of so: For my heart is better
contented with thy sweet and sugared words, then my tongue is pleased with the
delycate taste of these mountayn cakes. For as thou know, these cakes are
heavy of digestion, and do greatly annoy the stomach: but good words do
maruelously rejoice and comfort the heart. For this cause Alexander the great
had the poet Homer in greater veneration, being dead, then all the other that
were alive in his time: not for that Homer ever did him service, or that he
knew him, but only because of his learned books he wrote and compyled, and
for the grave sentences he found therein. And therefore he bare about him in
the day time the book of the famous deeds of Troy (called the Illiades)
hanged at his neck within his bosom: and in the night he laid it under his
bolster, at his beds head where he slept. In recompense therefore (sir) of
the many good turns I have received at your hands, I was also willing to
compyle and dedicate this my little treatise to you, the which I present you
with all my desires, my studyes, my watches, my swett, and my troubles, holding
my self fully satisfied for all the payns I have taken, so that this my simple
travel be grateful to you (to whom I offer yt) and to the publyke weal
profitable. Being well assured, if it please you to trust me and credyte my
writing, you shall manifestly know how freely I speak to you, and like a friend,
and not deceive you as a flatterer. For if the beeloued and favored of princes
chance to be cast out of favor, it is because every man flattereth him and
seeks to please him and no man goes about to tell him troth, nor that that
is for his honor, and fittest for him. Salust in his book of the wars of
Iugurtha says, that the high heroycall facts and noble deeds were of no less
glory to the historiographer that wrote them, then they were to the captayn
that did them. For it happens many times that the Captayn dying in the
battle he has woone, lives afterward notwythstandyng by the fame of his
noble attempt, and this proceeds not only of the valiant deeds of arms he
was seen do; but also for that we read of him in worthy authors which have
amply written thereof. We may well say therefore touching this matter, that
as well may we take him for a true friend, that geeueth good counsel: as he
which does us great pleasure, and service. For according to the oppinion of
the good Marcus Aurelius, who said to his secretary Panutius, that a man with
one pay, may make full satisfaccion and recompense of many pleasures and good
turns showed: but to requyte a good counsel, diverse thanks and infinite
services are requisite. If we will credit the ancient historiographers we
shall find it true, that the virtuous emperors, the fortunate kings, and the
valiant Captains, when they shoold enterprise to go conquer their enemies,
either they sought for some philosopher, or they choose some other honest
learned man, of whom they took council touching all their affayrs, before
they pressed any soldiers. Comparing the times past, with the times present, we
think (that have read some what) that the time past was as pure grayn, and this
now as chafe and straw: the one as ye time calm and still in the sea, and
this as wavering and tempesteous: that then the fine and pure metal, and this
now the dross thereof: The other the marie, and this the bones: the one the
clear day, and the other the dark night: For in these days in princes courts,
and noble men's houses, they glory more to have a scoffing knave or iester to
make them laugh, then they reckon of a grave and wise man to geeue them
counsel. Alexander the great in all his wars woold always be accompanied
with the wise Aristotle. Cyrus king of Persia, with the philosopher Chilo: King
Ptolomie with Pithinus the philosopher: Pirrhus king of Epyre, with Zatirus:
Augustus themperor with Symonides: Scipio thaffrican with Sophocles: Traian
themperor with Plutarche, and Antonius themperor with Gorgias: now all these
famous princes carried not with the^ so many learned philosophers, to fight in
battle with armed weapon in hand like other their soldiers, but only to use
their counsel and advice. So that the great battles they overthrew, and the
worthy victories they wanne, with the noble tryumphs done, was as much by the
grave counsel of these good and wise Philosophers, as by the force of their
army, and prowes of their Captayns. The greatest good turn and benefit one
friend can do for an other, is to know to geeue good counsel to his friend, in
his greatest need: and not without cause I say to know to geeue counsel. For
it happens often times, that those that thought to have geeuen us good remedy
by their counsel, (wanting in deed discrecion and judgment in the same) have
caused us to run into further dangers. And therefore Seneca being once
demanded of themperor Nero, what he thought of Scipio thaffrican, and Cato
the censor, answered him in this manner. I think it was as necessary that Cato
was born for ye common wealth, as Scipio for ye wars, for the good Cato with
his prudent counsel expelled vice out of the wealth public, and the other
with his noble courage and great armies did ever wythstand the force of the
enemies. According to the saying of Seneca, let us also say after him, that he
is very arrogant that presumes to geeue an other counsel, but with all we say
again: that if the counsel be found good he has geeuen to his friend in his
need and necessity, as much praise deserves he that gave it, as he that knew
how to take it. Now after thexample of the ancient philosophers, which went to
the wars not to fight, but only to geeue counsel, I will (sir) for those
things that pertayn to your service, and profit, take upon me the office of a
philosopher, and for the first doctrine of my philosophy I say, that if it
please you, to receive these counsels which my pen does write to you, at
this present, I promise you, and by the faith of a christian man I swear, that
they shall be such excellent helps to you, for the preservation of your credyt
and favor you are now in, as you may be enriched by the true and diligent
service of your servant. For if a man woold with an oath ask the truth of
Plato, Socrates, Pithagoras, Diogenes, Licurgus, Chilo, Pittachus, and of
Apolonius, and also of all the university and company of the other
philosophers, they woold swear and affirm that the felicity of man consists
not in great might, in great aucthority, and possessions: but only in deserving
much. For the honor, favor, and dignityes of this mortal life, are more to be
praised and had in veneratio^ when they are placed in a condign and worthy
person: then they are being possessed of an unworthy and graceles man,
allotted to him not by virtue, but by fortune. And therefore your aucthority
being great at this present, exalted thereto by gods divine will and
prouydence, and now in the highest degree of prosperity: I woold wish you my
good lord, less then any other courtier to trust to fortunes impery. For if
the earthquakes sooner bring to ground the proud and stately Palaces, then the
mean and low howses: if ofter fall on the highest mountayns, the dreadful
lightnings and tempests, then on the lowest hills: if among the greater
multitude of people the plagues be rifer, then amongst the fewer number: if
they use rather to spread their netts, and lay the byrdlyme on the green and
thickst bows, then on the dry and wythered sticks, to snare the sely byrds
withal: If always the stillest seas do foreshew to us a greater tempest
following: and if that long health be a watch unto a great and dangerous
sickness ensuyng: by this also I will infer, that those that are atchiued to
sublime estate and high degree are commonly more subject to fall, then those of
mean and baser sort. The emperor Augustus on a time demanded of the Poet
Virgill, that he woold teach him how he might conserve him self in thempire,
and always be acceptable to the public weal. To whom Virgill answered. I
think, O mighty Caesar, that to reign long in thempire, thou must consideratly
look into thy self, examining thy life and doings: and how much thou shall
see thy self excel and exceed all those (of thy empire) in dignity: So much
more must thou endeavor thy self to surmount all others, in virtue, and we
orthynes. For he is unworthy to rule a multitude, that is not chief himself
in all virtues. Those therefore that in court of princes bear office, and
aucthority, ought earnestly to desire and endeavor them selves to avoid the
fylthy sink of vice, and to seek the clear spring of virtue. For otherwise,
they shall be more defamed for one vice or defect found in them, then honored
for their office and authority they have.

The aucthor concludes.
According to the saying of the poet Virgill to the Emperor Augustus, I am also
of oppinion (my Lord) that you ought to be very circumspect and well advised,
in looking into your self who you are, what power you are of, what you are
worth, and what you possess: and dooyng thus, you shall find that among your
wise counselors you are the greatest, among the rich, among the best esteemed,
among the most fortunat, among your secretories, among the rulers, amongst all
those of your realm and subjects, you are ever ye greatest. And therefore as
you are greatst, and supreme above them all: so you ought the more to force to
be the most virtuous of them all. For else it were against all reason, being
the greatest, to be the least and most inferior of all. For truly none ought
to be praised for good, for yt he is of power, force, possessions, wealth,
much worth, in favor, of dignity, neither for any nobility that is in him, if
these natural gifts be not accompagnied with virtue and good woorks. The
ancient historiographers do highly commend the greatness of Alexander, the
knowledge of Ptholomie, the justice of Numa Pompilius, the clemency of Julius
Caesar, the patience of Augustus, the truth of Traian, the pity of Antonius,
the temperancy of Constantius, the continency of Scipio, and the humanity of
Theodosius: so that we may say these so great and noble princes have won
more honor by their virtues, then they have atchyued by tryumphant victories.
Albeeit a man be never so dishonest, vicious, and lascivious, and that he be
rooted in all ydlenes, let us say and avouch it for a truth, that it is
impossible (if he may return to look back on him self, and that he may call
to mind what manner of man he has been, what he is at this present, and to
what end he may come) but that the remembrance of his forepassed faults and
deeds, shoold be more grievous and yrksom to him, then the great delight his
body shoold take of the present pleasures. For neither the woorms in the vynes,
nor the locusts in the corn, nor the moths in the garments, nor the little
woorms in the wood are so hurtful and dommageable, as sins are of power to
make a man sorrowful. For to say truly, the pleasure we receive when we
commyt them is not so great, as is the displeasure we feel after we remember
them. The which I considering, my lord, yt causes me to look over mine old
memorials, to examyne my memory, to strengthen my judgment, and to seek a new
kind of study, to no other end, but to find out sweet words, diverse doctryns,
and strange historyes, by means whereof I might withdraw you from vayn and
worldly delights, to cause you to walk in the right path, and to affect things
virtuous and honest, though I have always known them as acceptable to you, as
they have been familier. For princes servant, the more they are busied with
affairs, the less they know them selves. And therefore great pain suffers
he, and with over venymous poison is he infected, that with others, and for
other occupyeth all his time, and for his own sowl health cannot spare a moment
of time. O what comfort and quiet were it unto my heart, if it were assured it
had taken the right way, in the doctrine which I write to you, and that I had
not erryd in the counsels I geeue you: so that in readyng my book you might
acquire profit thereby, and I of my travel therein reap my full contentation.
And to the end, my Lord, we may better express the matter, search the wound,
and stop the vayns, that we may leave no part uncured or dreggs of
infection, if heetherto I have used playnesse, I will now speak more plainly to
you, and yet as one friend uses to an other. And therefore may it please you to
accept these small written preposes in this book, among all the residue,
proceeding from the hands of one that rather desires ye health of your sowl,
then the gayn and satisfaction of your affects and desires.

All you that be princes familiers, and beeloued Courtiers: observe and retayn
with you these few precepts and counsels.
1 Never tell (my lord) to any all that you think. Show not all that you have.
Neither take all that you desire: Tell not all that you know.

Much less never do all that you may. For the right path way to bring the
favored courtier into his Princes disgrace, is to be addicted to his sensual
appetytes and vain humors, and not to be guyded with reason and discrecion.

2 Beware also you trust not, nor commit to the hasard of fortunes ticklenes
such things, as touch and conserve your parson, honor, goods and conscience.
For the wise courtier that lives in his princes grace, will not rashly put him
self in danger, in hope to save him self harmles, at all times when he
lists.

3 Although every man offer his service to you, and seem to be at your
commandment when you shall need him: yet I tell you (sir) I woold not wish
you had either need of them, or of me: For many of those line and curious
courtiers which are the first that offer them selves to draw on your side, and
to stand by you if need be, are commonly (at the very pinch) the first and
redyest to throw stones at our faces.

4 In other men's matters busy not your self to much: and in your own, strive
not with time, but take leisure. For living after this rule, you shall long
keep your self in the good and quiet estate you are in, and otherwise some
inconvenience might lightly fall upon you, that shoold make you remember what
you were wont to be.

5 The imminent peril and danger those are in, which are mounted to the top
of some high thing, or to the cliffe of some high and rocky mountayn, where
they have no other way to descend, but to fall, is much like to that of the
famyliars of Princes. And therefore my lord, I woold wysh you woold procure you
such faythfulll friends about you, that they having regard and care of your
person, shoold always hold you by the gown for falling. And not such as after
they had let you fall, woold then lend you their hands to help you up again.

6 All be it the things of the sowl shoold be preferred before all others of
this worldly life, yet nevertheless I will be content, so that you have as
great care and consideration of your conscience, as you have of your honor. All
which I was willing to tell you (sir) to the end you may better understand,
that those that are in estimation with the prince, though they may benefit by
time (in taking their time) yet time does never benefyt by them at all.

7 You must ever do good to your uttermost power, and never do dyspleasure to
any, though it lie in your power, and that you have just cause. For the tears
of the poor that are iniuryed, and the lamentable cries and playnts of the
oppressed, may possibly one day ascend to the presence of the tribunal seat
(where god shall sit in his majesty) demaundyng justice and vengeance against
you: and also come to the ears of the prince, to cause you to be hated of him
for ever.

8 Touching the favor you will show to any, either in offices, or other
benefits you will beestow on any man, take heed you always rather prefer
honest and true Christians, then your own near kynsmen or friends.

For a man may lawfully make his friend partaker of his goods, but not of his
conscience.

9 In your councels you geeue, in any wise be not to much affectioned in them,
neither scorn with those that contrary your oppinion. Be not proud and severe
to those you do command, neither do any thing without good aduyce and
consideration. For all beeit in princes courts every man does admire and
beehold the excellency and woorthynes of the person, yet are those always that
are most in favor of the Prince, more noted, regarded, and sooner accused then
others.

10 If you will not err in the counseils you shall geeue, nor fayl in those
things you enterprise: Embrace those that tell you the truth, and reject and
hate those, whom you know to be flatterers and dissemblers. For you shoold
rather desire to be admonished of the thing present, then counseled after the
damage received.

Although we suppose assuredly all these things above written are not lykely
to happen, nor come even so to pass as I have spoken: yet may yt please you
(sir) to remember they are not therefore impossible. For spiteful fortune
permits often times, that the sails which the lyghtnyng and boisterous
tempests could not break and tear in pieces, are afterward upon a soden,
(even in the sweet of the mornings sleep, each man taking his rest, leaving
the seas before in quiet calm) all to shyuered, and torn a sunder. He that
means to geeue another a blow also, the more he draws back his arm, with
greater force he strikes. And even so (neither more nor less) says fortune
with those, on whom for a time she smyleth. For the longer a man remains in
her love and favor, the more cruel and bitter she shows her self to him in
the end. And therefore I woold advise every wise and sage person, that when
fortune seems best of all to favor him, and to do most for him, that then he
should stand most in fear of her, and least trust her deceipts. Therefore
(Sir) make no small account of this my book, little though it be. For you
know, that doubtless (as experience teaches us) of greater price and value is a
little spark of a Dyamond, then a greater ballasse. It forces little that the
book be of small or great volume, sith thexcellency thereof consysteth not in
the number of leaves, more or less, but only in the good and grave sentences
that are amply written therein. For every author that writes, to make his
book of great price and show, ought to be brief in his words, and sweet and
pleasant in his matter he treats of, the better to satisfy ye mind of the
reader, and also not to be tedious to ye hearer. And (Sir) I speak not without
cause that you shoold not a little esteem this small treatise of mine, since
you are most assured, that with time al your things shall have end, your friends
shall leave you, your goods shall be divided, your self shall dye, your favor
and credyt shall dimynish, and those that succeed you, shall forget you, you
not knowing to whom your goods and patrimony shall come: and above all, you
shall not know what conditions your heirs and children shallbee of. But for
this I write in your Royal history and Chronicle of your lawdable virtues and
perfections, and for that also I serve you as I do with this my present woork,
the memory of you shall remain eternized to your Successors for ever. Chilo the
philosopher being demanded whether there were any thing in the world that
fortune had not power to bring to naught, answered in this sort. Two things
only there are, which neither time can consume, nor fortune distroy, and that
is: the renown of man written in books, and the verity that is hidden. For
allthough troth for a time lie interred, yet yt resurgeth again and receives
life, appearing manyfestly to all. And even so in like case the virtues we
find written of a man, do cause us at this present to have him in as great
veneration, as those had in his time that best knew him. Read therefore (Sir)
at times I beeseech you these wrytyngs of mine, allbeeit I fear me you can
scant borrow a moment of time with leisure once to look upon yt, being (as I
know you are) allways occupied in affairs of great importance, wherein me
thinks you shoold not so surcharge your self, but that you might for your
commodyty and recreacion of your spirits reserve some pryuat hours to your
self. For sage and wise men should not so burden them selves with care of
others toil, that they should not spend one hour of the day at the least (at
their pleasure) to look on their estate and condition. As recou^teth Suctonius
Tranquillus of Julius Caesar who notwythstandyng his quotydian wars he had,
never let slypt one day but that he read, or wrote some thing. So that being
in his Pauyllyon in the camp in the one hand he held his lance to assault his
enemy, and in the other the pen to write with all, with which he wrote his
worthy comentaries. The reasonable man therefore calling to mind the straight
account yt he must render of him self and of the time he has lost, shall
always be more careful that he lose not his time, then he shall be to keep
his treasure. For the well employed time is a mean and help to his salvation:
and the evil gotten good a cause of his eternal damnation. More over yet, what
toil and trauayl is it to the body of the man, and how much more peril to the
living soul, when he consumes his hole days and life in wordly broile: and
yet seely man he can not absent him self from that vile drudgery, till death
does sommon him to yield up his account of his lief and doings. And now to
conclude my prologue, I say this book is divided into two parts: yt is to
weete: in the first ten chapters is declared how the new come courtier shall
beehaue him self in the princes court to win favor and credit with the
prince: and the surplus of the woork treats, when he has atcheeued to his
princes favor, and acquired the credyt of a worthy courtier: how he shall then
continue the same to his further aduau^cement. And I doubt no whit, but that my
lords and gentlemen of court will take pleasure to read it, and namely such as
are princes familiars and beeloued of court shall mostly reap profyt thereby,
putting the good lessons and aduertisements they find heretofore written, in
execucion. For, to the young courtiers it shows them what they have to do:
and puts in remembrance also the old favored courtier (living in his
princes grace) of that he has to be circu^spect of. And finally I conclude
(sir) that of all the treasors, riches, gyfts, favors, prosperities, pleasures,
services, greatness, and power, that you have and possess in this mortal and
transitory life, and by ye faith of a christian I swear unto you also yt you
shall carry no more with you, then ye only time wc you have well and virtuously
employed, during this your pilgrimage.

The Argument of the book entitled the favored courtier, wheare the author
shows the intent of his woork, exhorting all men to read and study good and
virtuous books utterly reiectyng fables and vayn trifflyng stories of small
doctrine and erudicion.
AVlus Gelius in his book De noctibus atticis says, that after the death of
the great poet Homer, seven famous Cities of Greece were in great controversy
one with the other, each one of them affirmyng, that by reason the bones of the
said poet was theirs, and only apperteined to them, all seven taking their
oaths, that he was not only born, but also norished and brought up in every
one of them. And this they did, supposing that they never had so great honor in
any thing, but that this was far greater, to have educated so excellent and
rare a man as he was. Euripides also the philosopher, born and brought up in
Athens, trauayling in the realm of Macedonia, was suddenly stricken with death,
which woeful news no sooner came to the Athenians ears, (declared for a
troth) but with all expedicion they depeached an honorable imbasy, only to
entreat the Lacedaemonians to be contented to deliver them the bones of the
said philosopher, protesting to them, that if they woold franckly grant them,
they woold regratify that pleasure done them: and if they woold deny them, they
should assure them selves they woold come to demand them with sweord in hand.
King Demetrius held Rhodes beesyged long time (which at length he wanne by
force of arms) and the Rhodians being so stubborn that they would not yield
by composition, nor trust to his princely clemency, he commanded to strike of
all the Rhodians heads, and to raze the cyty to the hard foundacions. But when
he was let understand that there was even then in the cyty Prothogenes, a
philosopher and paynter, doutyng least in executyng others, he also unknown
might be put to the sweord, revoked his cruel sentence, and gave straight
commandment forthwith they should cease to spoil and deface the town
further, and also to stay the slaughter of the rest of the Rhodiens. The divine
Plato being in Athens, advertised that in the cyty of Damasco (in the realm
of Palestine) were certain books of great antiquity, which a philosopher born
of that country left beehynd him there: when he understood it to be true,
went thither immediately, led with the great desire he had to see them, and
purposely (if they did like him) afterward to buy them. And when he saw that
neither at his suit, nor at the requests of others he could obtein them, but
that he must buy them at a great price, Plato went and sold all his patrimony
to recover them: and his own not being sufficient, he was fayn to borrow upon
interest of the common treasory to help him. So that notwithstanding he was so
profound and rare a philosopher (as in deed he was) yet he woold sell all
that small substance he had, only to see (as he thought) some pretty new
thing more of philosophy. As Ptholomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, not
contented to be so wise in all sciences as he was, nor to have in his
library.8000. books as he had, nor to study at the least.4. hours in the
day, nor ordinaryly to dispute at his meals with philosophers, sent
nevertheless an imbassage of noble men to the Ebrews, to desire them they woold
be contented to send him some of the best learned and wisest men among them, to
teach him the Ebrew tongue, and to read to him the books of their laws. When
Alexander the great was born, his father king Phillippe wrote a notable letter
immediately to Aristottle, and among other matters he wrote there were these. I
do thee to weete, O greatest philosopher Aristotle (if thou know it not)
that Olimpias my wife is brought to bed of a son, for wc incessantly I geeue
the gods immortal thanks: not so much yt I have a son, as for that they have
geeuen him me in thy time. For I am assured he shall profit more with the
doctrine thou shall teach him: the^ he shall preuail with the kingdoms I shall
leave him after me. Now by the examples above recited, and by many more we
coold allege, we may easly consider, with what reverence and honor the ancient
kings used the learned and virtuous men of their time. And we may also more
plainly see it, sith then they held in greater price and estimacion the bones
of a dead philosopher, then they do now the doctrine of the best learned of
our time. And not without just occasion did these famous and heroycal princes
joy, to have at home in their houses, and abroad with them in the feeld, such
wise and learned men whilst they lived, and after they were dead to honor their
bones and carcases: and in doing this they erred not a jot. For who so ever
accompanies continually with grave and wise men, enjoys this benefit and
privilege before others, that he shall never be counted ignorant of any.
Therefore continuing still our first purpose, let us say, that who so ever will
profess the company of sober and wise men, yt can not otherwise be, but he
must maruelously profyt by their comapny. For being in their company they will
put all vain and dishonest thoughts from him, they will teach him to subdue and
resyst all sodein passions and motions moved of choler: by them they shall
win good friends, and learn also never to be troublesome or enemy to any,
they will make him forsake all sin and vice, declaring to him what good
woorks he shall follow, and what he shall most fly and eschew: they will let
him understand how he shall humble and beehaue him self in prosperity, and
they will also comfort him in his adversity, to keep him from all sorrow and
despair. For though a man be never so careful and circumspect, yet has he
always need of the council of an other in his affairs, if therefore such
person have not about him good virtuous, and sage men, how can it otherways be
but that he must stumble often, and fall down right on his face, having no man
to aid or help him. Paulus Diaconus says, that albeeit the Affricans were
wild and brutish people, yet had they withstandyng a law amongst them, that
the senators amongst them coold choose no other senator, if at the election
there were not present a philosopher. So it happened one day amongst the rest,
that of many philosophers they had in Carthage, amongst them was one named
Apolonius: Who ruled for the space of three score and two years all their senate
with great quiet, and to the contentacion of all the senators: which to show
them selves thankful to him, erected in the market place so many images of
him, as he had governed their common weal years, to the end the fame and
memory of him should be immortal: and yet they did dedycate to their famous
Anniball but only one image, and to this philosopher they set up above three
score. Alexander ye great when he was most bent to bluddy wars, went to see
and speak with Diogenes the philosoper, offering him great presents, and
discoursyng with him of diverse matters. So that we may justly say, this good
prince of him self took payns to seek out wise men to accompany him, electing
by others choice and advise all such, as he made his captayns to serve him in
the wars: It is manifest to all, that Dionisius the Siracusan was the
greatest tyrant in the world, and yet notwithstanding his tyranny, it is a
wonder to see the sage and wise men he had continually in his court with him:
and that, that makes us yet more to wonder of him is, that he had them not
about him to serve him, or to profyt one jot by their doctrine and council:
but only for his honor, and their profyt, which enforces me to say,
concurring with this example, that sith tyrants did glory to have about them
wise, and worthy men: much more shoold those rejoice, that in their woorks and
deeds are noble, and free hearted. And this they ought to do, not only to be
honored with them openly, but also to be helped with their doctrine and
councels secretly. And if to some this shoold seem a hard thing to follow, we
will say: that worthy men not being of ability and power to mainteyn such
wise men, ought yet at least to use to read at times, good and virtuous books.
For by readyng of books, they reap infynyt profyt, as for example, by readyng
as I say these good authors, the desire is satisfied, their judgment is
quickened idleness is put away, the heart is disburdened, the time is well
employed, and they lead their life virtuously, not being bound to render
account of so many faults, as in that time they might have committed. And to
conclude, it is so good an exercise, as it geeueth good examples to the
neyghbor, profyt to him self, and health to the soul. We see by experience,
after a man takes upon him once the study of holy scriptures, and that he
frames him self to be a divine, he will never wyllyngly thencefoorth deal
in other studies, and all because he will not forgo the great pleasure he
receives to read those holly sayyngs. And that causes, that we see so many
learned and wise men (for the more part) subject to diverse diseases, and full
of melancoly humors. For so sweet is the delight they take in their books,
that they forget and leave al other bodily pleasure: And therefore Plutarke
writes, that certain Philosophers being one day met at the lodgyng of Plato
to see him, and demau^dyng him what exercise he had at that time: Plato
answered them thus. Truly my brethern I let you know, that even now my only
exercise was to see what the great poet Homer said. And this he told them,
because they took him even then readyng of some of Homers books, and to say
truly, his answer was such, as they shoold all look for of him. For to read a
good book in effect is nothing else, but to hear a wise man speak. And if this
our judgment and advise seem good unto you, we would yet say more, that you
shoold profyt more to read one of these books, then you should to hear speak,
or to have conference with the author him self that made yt. For it is without
doubt, that all writers have more care and respect in that their pen does
write, then they have in yt their tongue does utter. And to the end you should
not thynk we can not prove that true that we have spoken, I do you to wit,
that every author that will write, to publysh his dooyng in prynt, to lay yt to
the show and judgment of the world, and that desires thereby to acquire honor
and fame, and to eternyse the memory of him, turns many books, conferreth
with other wise and learned men, addycteth him self wholly to his book
indeuoureth to understand well, often refuses sleep, meat and drynk, quyckneth
his spyrits, dooyng that he puts in writing exactly with long advise, and
consideracion: which he does not, when he does but only speak and utter
them, though often in deed (by reason of his great knowledge) in speech unawares
there falls out of his mouth, many goodly and wise sentences. And therefore
god has geeuen him a goodly gift that can read, and him much more that has a
desire to studdy, knowing how to choose the good books from the evil. For to
say the troth, there is not in this world any state or exercise more honorable,
and profitable then the study of good books. And we are much bound to those
that read, more to those that study, and much more to those that write any
thing, but mostly doubtless to those that make and compile goodly books, and
those of great and hye doctrine. For there are many vayn and fond books, that
rather deserve to be thrown in the fire, then once to be read or looked on.
For they do not only show us the way to mock the^, but also ye ready mean to
offend us, to see them occupy their brayns and best wits they have to write
foolish and vayn things, of no good subject or erudicion. And yt that is woorst
of al yet, they are occasion that diverse others spend as much time in readyng
their jests, and mockries, as they woold otherwise have employed in doctrine,
of great profyt and edifying, the which to excuse and defend their error, say
they did not write them for men to take profyt thereby, but only to delight
and please the readers, to pass the time away meryly. Whom we may rightly
answer thus: that the readyng of ill and vayn books can not be called a
pastime, but aptly a very loss of time. And therefore Aulus Gellius in the
fyfteenth of his book writes, that after the romans understood the orators
and poets of Rome did geeue them selves to write, vain, voluptuous, and
dishonest books, causing enterludes, and poetical commedies to be played,
they did not only banysh them from Rome, but also out of al ye parts of Italy.
For yt he seemed not the Romayn grauyty, neither was it decent for the weal
publyk, to suffer such naughty books among them, and much less to bear with
vicious and lascivious governors. And if the Romain paynyms left us this for
example, how much more ought we that are christians to continue and follow yt,
since they had no other books to read save only histories, and we now a days
have both histories and holy scriptures to read which were granted us by the
church, to the end by the one we might take some honest pleasure and
recreation, and with the other procure the health of our souls. O how far is
the common wealth now a days dygressed from ye we write and counsel, sense we
see plainly, that men occupy them selves at this present, in readyng a number
of books, the which only to name I am ashamed. And therefore said Aulus
Gellius in his forteenth book, that there was a certain philosopher wrote a
book of hye and eloquent style, but the subject very hard and dyffuse to
understand, the which Socrates and other philosophers hearing of, commaundid
immediately the book to be burned, and the author to be banyshed, by which
example we may well perceive, that in that so perfyt and reformed vniuersyty
they woold not only suffer any lascivious or vicious book, but also they
woold not bear with those, that were to hawty and vayn glorious in their
styles, and whose matter were not profitable and benefyciall to the publyk
weal. That man therefore that walloweth in idleness lap, and that vouchsafes
not to spend one hour of the day to read a grave sentence of some good book,
we may rather deservedly call him a brute beast, then a reasonable creature.
For every wise man ought to glory more of the knowledge he has, then of the
abundance of goods he possesses. And it can not be denied but that those
which read virtuous books, are ever had in better favor and estimacion then
others. For they learn to speak, they pass the time without trouble, they know
many pleasant things which they after tell to other, they have audacyty to
reprove others: and every man delyteth to hear them, and in what place or
company so ever they come, they are always reverenced and honored above others:
every man desires their knowledge and acquaintance, and are glad to ask them
council. And that, that is yet of greater credyt to them is, that they are not
few in number, that trusts them with their body and goods. And moreover I
say, that the wise and learned man which professes study, shall know very well
how to council his friend, and to comfort him self at all times when need does
serve, which the foolysh ignorant person can not do, for he can not only
tell how to comfort the afflycted in adversity, but also he can not help him
self in his own proper affairs, nor take council of him self what is best to
do. But retorning again to our purpose, we say, because we woold not be
reproved of that we rebuke others of, we have been very cyrcumspect and
advised, and taken great care and payns in our studdy, that al our books and
works we have publyshed and compiled, should be so exactly done, that the
readers might not find any ill doctrine, nor also any thing worthy reproof.
For the dishonest books made by lascivious persons do geeue (deservedly)
evident token to the readers to suspect the autors, and troubles the
judgments of those that geeue attentyue ear unto them. And therefore I
council, and admonish him that will enterprise and take upon him to be a
writer, and setter forth of books, that he be wise in his matter he
shows, and compe^dious in the words he writes: and not to be like to
diverse writers, whose woorks are of such a frase and style, as we shall read
many times to the midst of the book, ere we find one good and notable
sentence, so that a man may say, that all the fruit those reap for their pain,
watches, and trauayl, is no other, but only a mere toy and mockry, they
being derided of every man that sees their woorks. That author that
undertakes to write, and afterward prostrateth to common judgment the thing
he writes, may be assured that he sets his wits to great traueyl and
study, and hasardeth his honor to present peril. For the judgment of men
being varyable, and diverse (as they are in deed) many times they do meddle
and enter into judgment of those things, whereof they are not only not
capable to understand, but also less skylfull to read them. Now in the book
we have set out of ye dyal of princes, and in that other we have translated
of the life of the romayn emperors, and in this we have now set forth of the
favored courtier, the readers may be assured they shall find in the^ goodly and
grave sentences, whereby they may greatly profyt, and they shall not read any
words superfluous, to comber or weery them at all. For we did not once
license our pen to dare to write any word, that was not first waied in true
balance, and meat by just measure. And God can testify with us, that without
doubt we have had more pain to be brief in the words of our books we have
hitherto made, then we have had to gather out the invention and grave
sentences thereof. For to speak good words, and to have good matter and wise
purposes, is the poperty of one that naturally is modest, and grave in his
actions: but to write breefely, he must have a deep understanding. When at
the font of the printers foorme we first baptized the book of Marcus
Aurelius, we there entitled it the Dyal of princes, and this therefore that
we have now made and added to yt, we will call yt (for more breefenesse) the
favored courtier: which portendeth the whetstone and instructyon of a courtier.
For if they will vouchsafe to read, and take the fruitful counsels they find
written herein, they may assure them selves they shall awake out of the
vanyties they have long slept in, and shall also open their eyes, to see the
better that thing wherein they live so long deceived. And allbeeyt in deed
this present woork shows to you but a few contrived lines, yet god him self
does know, the payns we have taken herein has been exceedyng great, and this
for two causes: the one for that the matter is very strange and diverse from
others, the other, to thynk that assuredly it should be hated of those, that
want the taste of good discypline. And therefore we have taken great care, it
should come out of our hands well refoormed, and corrected: to the end that
courtiers might find out many sentences in yt profitable for the^, and not one
word to trouble them. Those noble men or gentlemen that will from henceforth
have their children brought up in princes courts, shall find in this kooke all
things they shall need to provide them of, those also that have been long
courtiers, shall find all that they ought to do in court, And such also as are
the best favored of princes, and carry greatest reputacion of honor with them,
shall find likewise excellent good counsels, by mean whereof they may always
maynteyn, and continue them selves, in the cheifest greatness of their credit
and favor: so that it may well be called a mitridatical electuary, recuering
and healing all malignaunt opilations. Of all the books I have hitherto
compyled, I have dedicated some of them to the Imperial majesty, and others to
those of best favor and credit with him: where ye readers may see, yt I rather
glory to be a satire, then a flatterer, for that in all my sentences they can
not find one cloked word, to enlarge and imbetter my credit and estate. But to
the contrary, they may read an infynyt number of others, where I do exhort
them to govern their persons discreetly and honorably, and to amend their lives
thencefoorth. When I imprinted the Dyal of princes, together with Marcus
Aurelius, and brought them to light, I wanted not backbyters and detracters
that beeganne forthwith to tear me in pieces, neither shall I want at this
present (as I beeleeue) such as will not spare with venomus tongues to poison
my woork. But like as then I little wayd their sclaunderous speeches of me,
even so much less do I now force what they can say against me, being
assured they shall find in the end, they have ill spoken of me, and my poor
woorks, proceedyng from them rather of a certain envy that gnaweth their heart,
then of any default they find in my doctrine: comforting my self yet in the
assurance I have, yt al their spite shall one day have an end, and my woorks
shall ever be found good and perdurable.

Here ends the Argument.
The fourth book of the Dyall of Princes, Compiled by the Lord Antony Gueuara,
Bishop of Mondogueto.
That it is more necessary for the courtyer (abydyng in court) to be of lively
spirit and audacity, then it is for the souldior, that goes to serve in the
wars. Cap. i.
PLutarch, Pliny, and Titus Liuius declare, that king Agiges one day requested
the oracle of Appollo to tell him, who was the happiest man in the world, to
whom answer was made that it was a man they called Aglaon, be known of the
gods, and unknown of men. This king Agiges making then search for this man
thorough all Greece, who was called Aglaon, found at length that it was a poor
gardyner dwelling in Archadia, who being of the age of three score years and
two, never went above a mile from his house, keepyng him self and his famyly
contynually with his only labor and tyllage of his gardeyn. Now all be it
there were in the world of better parentage and lynage then he, better
accompanied of servant and tenaunts, better provided of goods and riches,
higher in dygnyty, and of greater authoryty then he: yet for all this, was
this Aglaon the happyest of the world. And this was, for that he never haunted
Princes courts, neither by envy to be overthrown, nor yet by auaryce to be
overcome. For many times it chances to men, that when they would least geeue
them selves to acquayntaunce, then come they most to be known, and when they
make least account of them selves, then comes there an occasyon to make them
to be most reputed of. For they win more honor, that dispyse these goods,
honors, and riches of this world: then those do, that continually gape, and
seek after the same. And therefore we should more envy Aglaon with his little
gardeyn, then Alexander the great with his mighty Asia. For true contentacion
consysteth not in having abundance, but in being contented with that little
he has. Yt is a mockry, and woorthely he deserves to be laughed at, that
thinks contentacion lies in having much, or in being of great authoryty:
for such ways are redyer to make us stumble, yea and many times to fall down
right, then safly to assure us to go on our way.

The punishment that God gave to Cain for murderyng of his brother Abel was,
that his body contynually trembled, and he ever after wandered thorough the
world: so that he never found ground wheare he might enhabyt, nor house where
he might herber. And albeeit this malediction of Cain was the first that ever
god ordained, I durst affirm notwythstandyng that it remains as yet until
this present day amongst courtyers, sith we see them daily traueyle and run
into strange countries, daily chaungyng and seeking new lodgyngs. Which makes
me once again to say, yt Aglaon was counted happy, and for yt only he never
romed far from his house. For to say truly, there is no mysery comparable to
that of the courtier, that is bound daily to lie in others howses, having none
of his own to go too. And he only may be called happy, that puts not him
self in danger to serve others. Julius Caesar being councelled to wayt upon
the consul Silla, to the end that by seruyng or being about him he might do
him self great good, and yt might be very profitable to him, answered thus. I
swear by the immortal gods I will never serve any, on hope to be more
worth, and greater then I am. For this I am suer of, that where lyberty is
exiled, there might nor power can prevail.

He that forsakes his own country where he lived at ease, and in health,
and the place where he was known and beeloued, the neyghbors of whom he was
visyted, the friends of whom he was served, the parents of whom he was
honored, the goods wherewith he mayntayned him self, his wife and children (of
whom he had a thousand pleasures and consolations) and that comes to serve
and dye in the court: I can not say otherwise of him, but that he is a very
fool, or that he comes to do penance for some notable crime he has
committed. And therefore not without great cause was this name of court (which
in our tongue sygnyfyeth short) adhibited to the palace of princes, where all
things in deed are short, only envy and malice excepted, which continue long.
He only desires to be a courtier, that as yet has not tasted the sweetenes
and pleasure of his own house, nor has yet proved and seen the troubles and
payns of the court. For he yt knows them, sygheth when he is called to the
court, and weepeth when he is kept long there. I have studied in times past in
the universities, preached in the court, praying in relygion: and now I dwell
upon my byshopryck, teaching and Instructyng my dyocessans: but I dare say, of
all these four states recyted, there is none so straight, and paynfull, as is
to follow the court. If I studied at the vniuersyty, I did yt of free will to
be wyser: but only in the court I spent my time, to be more worth then I
was. But the greatest time I consumed in religyon, was to say my prayers, and
to beewayle my grievous sins. In the court I only gave my self to suspect my
neyghbor, and invented to buyld great castells of wynd (with thought) in the
air. And therefore I retorn once again to say, that it is a greater trouble to
beecome a courtier, then to be a relygious person. For in religion it
suffices to obey one: but in the court he must serve all. And in relygion
also they are appareled with less cost and charges, and to the greater
contentacion of the person, then they are in the court. For a poor gentleman
courtyer is bound to have more change and suits of apparel, then the falcon
feathers. The religious persons go allways to dynner, and find their meat on
the table ready prepared for them, without any thought taken of their part what
they shall have: but fine courtiers many times rise out of their bed, without
ever a penny in their purse. And allbeeit relygious persons all their life take
great payns in rysyng at mydnyght to serve god: yet have they great hope after
their death, of the heavenly rest and comfort: but poor courtyers, alas what
should I say, hard is their life, and more peryllous their death, into greater
danger truly puts he him self that beecommeth a courtyer, then did Nasica
when he was with the serpent, then king David with the Phylistiens, then the
Southsayers with Euah, then Hercules with Antheon, then Theseus with the
Minotawre, then king Menelaus with the wild bore, then Corebus with the
monster of the marysh, and then Perseus with the monsterous whale of the sea.
For every one of these valiant men were not afraid but of one: but the
miserable courtyer stands in fear of all. For what is he in court, yt
seeing his near kynsman or dearest friend, more in favor or credyt then him
self, or rycher then he, that wysheth not his friends death, or at the least
procures by all means he can, he shall not equal, nor go even with him in
credyt or reputacyon. One of the woorst things I consider and see in courtyers
is, that they lose much time, and profyt little: For the thing wherein they
spend their days, and beestow the nights for the more part is, to speak ill of
those that are their betters, or excel them in virtues: and to undo those
that are their equals and compaignyons: to flatter the beeloued, and among the
inferior sort to murmr one against an other, and allways to lament and sygh
for the times past.

And there is nothing that provoke courtyers more to complayn, then the daily
desire they have to see sundry and new alteracions of time. For they little way
the ruyn of ye common weal, so they may enlarge and exalt their own estates.
Also it is a thing of course in court, that the rejected and fauorlesse
couctyers shole togethers, murmuryng at their princes, and backbytyng their
councellers and officers, saying they undo the realm, and bring all to
naught. And all this presupposed, for that they are not in the like favor and
estimacion that they be in, which bears office and rule in the common weal.
And therefore when it comes in questyon for a courtyer to advance him self,
and to come in credyt in the court, one courtyer can scarsly ever trust an
other. On the other side, me thinks that the life of the court is not the very
life in deed, but rather an open penance. And therefore in my oppinion, we
should not reckon courtyers alive, but rather dead, buried in their life. For
then the courtier ever fyndeth him self panged with deaths extreme passions,
when he perceyueth an other to be preferred and called before him. Alas,
what great pyty it is to see a hapless and unfortunate courtier, for he seely
soul awaketh a thousand times in the night, tosseth from side to side of his
bed, sometime upright he lies, lamentyng his Iron hap, now he sigheth for
his native soil, and sorroweth then for his lost honor: so that in manner he
spends the whole night in watch and cares, imaginyng with him self all ways
he can, to come in credyt and favor again, that he may attain to wealth and
prefarment before others, wc makes me think, yt it is not a pain, but a
cruel torment: no service but tribut: and not once only, but ever: that the
body of the poor miserable courtier abides and that (in despyte of him) his
wretched heart does bear. By the law of the court, every courtyer is bound to
serve the king, to accompany the beeloued of court, to visit noble men, to wayt
upon those that are at the princes elbow, to geeue to the ushers, to present
the auditors, to entertaigne the wardens and captayns of the ports, to currey
favor with the herbingers, to flatter the treasorers, to trauayl and speak for
their friends, and to dyssemble amongst their enemies. What legs are able to
do all these things? what force sufficient to abide these brunts? what heart
able to endure them? and more over what purse great enough to supply all these
deuyses? I am of opinion there was never any so foolysh, nor merchant so
covetous, that has sold him self in any fair, or corst him self for any other
marchaundise, but only the unhappy courtier, who goes to the court to sell
his lyberty, for a little wynd and vayn smoke of the court. I grant that a
courtier may have in the court plenty of gold and silver, sumptuous apparel,
favor, credyt, and authority: yet with all this abundaunce ye can not deny me,
but he is as poor of lyberty, as rych of substance or credyt. And therefore
I dare boldly say this word again, that for one time the courtier has his
desire in court, a thousand times they will enforce him to accomplish others
desires, which neither please nor like him. Surely it comes of a base and
vile mind, and no less cowardly, for any man lightly to esteem his lyberty,
and fondly to embrace bondage and subjection, being at others commandment.
And if the courtier woold answer me to this, that though he serve, yet at
least he is in his princes favor. I woold reply thus, though he be in favor
with the prince, yet is he notwithstanding slave to all his other officers.
For if ye courtyer will sell his horse, his moyle, his cloak, his sweord, or
any other such like whatsoever he shall have ready money for all, saving for his
lyberty, which he lyberally bestows on all for nothing. So that he seems
to make more estimate of his sweord, or apparel he sells, then he does of
his lyberty which he geeueth. For a man is not bound to trauail at all, (to
make him self master of others) more then pleases him: but to recover lyberty,
or to mayntayn it, he is bound to dye a thousand deaths. I speak not these
things for that I have read them in my books, but because I have seen them
all with mine eyes: and not by science, but by experience: and I never knew
courtyer yet content in court, much less enjoying any jot of his lyberty,
which I so much esteem, that if al men were sufficient to know it, and knew
well how to use it, he woold never for any treasure on earth forgo yt, neither
for any gage lend yt, were it never so precious. Yet is there in court beesides
this an other kind of trouble I have not yet touched, and that is not small.
For often times thither comes of our friends which be strangers, whom of
necessyty, and for honesties sake, the courtier must lodge with him at home, ye
court being all ready full pestered. And this happens often in such a time,
when the poor courtier has neither lodging of his own, to lodge them in: nor
happily six pence in his purse to welcome them with all. I woold you woold tell
me also, what grief and sorrow the poor courtier feels at his heart, when
he lodges in a blind narrow lane, eats at a borrowed table, sleeps in a
hiered bed, his chamber having no door to it, yea and forth more part his
apparel and armor, even to the very sweord in gage. Then when any friend of his
comes out of the country to lie with him he being so poor, and also a
stranger in another man's house: how is it possible he shoold accept into his
company any others, and perhaps as nedie as he? Sometimes he were better, and
had rather bear his friends costs, and charges (being altogether unable) yea
and find him al his necessaries (what shift so ever he made) then he should
suffer his friend or stranger to come home to his house to know and see the
mysery he lives in. For more is the honest heart and good nature ashamed and
grieved to discover his mysery, then yt is to suffer and abide yt. Commonly the
courtier being alone is content with a little couch, one mattresse or quilt,
one flockbed, with one pillow, and one payr of sheets, with one couerlet, with
one frieng pan, one gridyerne, one spitt, one kettel one basen, with one
candelstick, and with one pott, which he can not do, if any stranger or
friend of his come to him, for then he must for his reputacion sake hang his
chamber, dress up his bed, and furnish yt better, and must also provide for a
thousand other such trifles he stands in need of. And if it fall out his
host and goodman of the house will not lend him these things, or that perhaps
he has them not (as it chances often) he shall be compelled to borow upon a
gage, or to hier of others: whereas if he were alone with his own people, he
would right well be contented with his small ordinary. And when a stranger
comes to seee him, he must be at greater cost and charges: so that he shall
spend more at one dinner, or supper, then he had done before in three days.
And therefore dowtles the courtiers are at more charges with their friends yt come
to see them, then they are with them selves. For the honorable and worthy
courtiers had rather fast an other time, the^ to show him self at this pinch
needy and hard, and to be mocked of his acquaintance. O, how many men are
there in the world that spend in one day all that they have traueled to get
togethers in many? not for yt they esteem not their goods, and desire not to
keep then: but only for a little vain glory, to get the^ ye name of a free
hearted and liberal man, dealing honestly among his friends. Also as great is ye
troble to ye poor courtier when ye court remoueth often from place to place. For
the^ he must trusse up his bagage, lode ye moyls, and hier carts to carry yt,
afterward pray the cofferer to pay him, the harbingers to prepare him a
lodging, and then he must first send one of his men to see if the lodging be
meet for him: furthermore courtiers have occasion oftymes to be angry with
the carters and muletters, for loding to much or to little, and for coming too
late to the lodging, and many times also they must tide at noone days, and in
the greatist heat and somtymes in rain, dew, tempest, or in other ill
weather (what so ever yt be) for that the carters and cariers will not lose
their iorny. And admit that all this may be easily carried, is it therefore
reasonable, or meet, the poor courtier should spend at one vyage or removing
of the court, all the profit and spare he has made in sir months before?
And what shall we say also, of the stuff and moueables that the poor courtier
of necessity must buy in every place where the court remains, as chaiers,
tables, forms, stools, water potts, platters, disshes, and other small
trasshery that would cost more the carriage, then the buyng of them a new. and
to conclude, al things pertaining to court are paynfull, unpleasant, and
chargeable for the poor courtier. For if he should carry always with him, al
such things as be necessary, and that he should need: in carriage they are
broken or mard, or being left beehind, they are in hasard to be stolen or
lost. For he that will be a continual courtier, must be of a bold and stowt
courage. For he shalbeee forced howerly to leave of his own desiers, to
please and content others, changing and shifting to diverse places and
strange lodgings, and ofttymes, of servants and new family, daily increasing
his charge and expense. And truly if that which is gotten and gained in court
be worth much: much more does that exceed that is spent in court, and these
expenses are rather lauishe, then moderat: disordered, then well spent, for in
effect courtiers spend more, with strangers they receive into their lodgings,
then they do with their ordinary servants they keep. Albeeit that, that
courtiers lose and leave beehind them at every removing of the court be but of
small account or importance, yet is it notwithstanding both grief, and
displeasure to them. For in deed there is no house so richly furnished, and
replenished with moueables, but that the lord or master of the house will chase
to see a disshe or glass broken, or spoiled. Yet there is an other discomodity
in removing of the court, for some courtiers there are that be so poor, that
for want they can hardli follow the court, and others also that are rych, are
compelled to bear many of their charges with whom they are in company with by
the way: and some of those are so rude, and ill brought up, that they had
rather bear their charge al their iourny, then once again to have them in
their company. But a godsname what shall we say yet of the wretched courtier
whose coffers, and horse are arrested at his departing for his debts? Truly I
ly not, for once I saw a courtiers moyle sold for her prouinder she had
eaten, and that money not sufficient to pay the host: the courtier remaining yet
detter of an overplus, the poor man was stripped even of his cappe and gloves
for satisfaction of the rest. Also there is an other sort of needy courtiers,
so troblesome, and importune, that they never cease to troble their friends, to
borow money of their acquayntance, soome to find themselves, soome to apparel
them selves, others to pay their dets, others to play, and others to geeue
presents so that at the removing day, when they have nothing wherewith to pay
nor content their crediters, then are they sued in law, and arrested in their
lodging, and the credyters many times are not satisfied with their goods, but
take execution also of their bodies, laying them in fast prison, till they be
paid and satisfied of their whole dett. O what a folly may be thought in
those, that cannot moderat their expenses according to their ability? For to
say uprightly, he should cut his garments according to his cloth, and measure
his expenses with his revenues, and not followyng his affection and desire. For
the gentleman, or courtier, in the end has not the mean nor commodity to
spend as the contry man has, that lives at home at ease in his contry, and
spe^deth such commodityes as he brings into his house, but the courtier
consumes in court not his own alone, but also that of others. And therefore in
court or else where, let every wise man be diligent to bring his affairs to
end: but yet let him so moderate and use his expenses, as he shall not need,
nor be driven to morgage and gage that he has. For he that feasteth, and
rowteth with others purse of that that is lent him, cannot choose but in the
end he must break, and deceive his crediters. Therefore all worthy men that
love their honor, and fear reproach, ought rather to suffer honger, cold,
thirst, care, pain and sorrow: then to be had in the check roll, of riotous
and prodigal spenders, trustles of their promise, and suspected of their
words. There is yet an other great troble in the court of princes, and that is
the exceeding derth of vittels, the unreasonable want of howses, and the great
price of horses, for many times they spend more for straw, and litter for their
horse, then they do in other places for hey, otes, and bread. And further if
the courtier be a poor gentillman, and that he would feast and bancket his
friends or companions, he shall spend at one dinner or supper so much that he
shall be constrained to fast a hole week after. Therefore if the courtier will be
well used in following of the court, he must not only know, and speak too, but
also love, and inuit at times the bouchers, vittlers, fruterers, keepers, and
softers, Fishmongers, and poulterers, and other purueiers of the same, of who^e
he shall always have as much need of his provision, as he shall have of the
judges, to show him Justice when he shall need it. For meat, bread, wine,
wood hey, otes, and straw, are como^ly very dear in court: For few of al
these things are to be bought in court, but of others infinite things to be
sold, to profit and gain the poor courtiers, that else had no shyft to live.
And yet is there a little more trouble in court, and that is, that continually
letters are sent to the courtier from his friends, to obtain of the prince or
his counsel his dispatch in his private affairs, or for his servants or
tenants, or other his friends. And many times these suits are so ill welcome to
the courtier, that he had rather have pleasured his friend with a piece of
money, then they should have laid upon him so weighty a matter. And beesides
this there is yet an other troble, that the bringet of the letter must needs
ly at the courtiers house attending his dispatch, so that the courtier delaiyng
his friends business, augmenteth his grief, and keeping the messenger there,
increases his charge. And if perchanse his business be not dispatched, and the
suit obtained, those that wrote to him will not think he left it of, for that
be would not do it or take pains therein: but for that he wanted favor and
credit, or at least were very negligent in following their cause. And that that
vexes them thoroughly yet is, that their parents and friends ween (which are in
the contry far from court) that this courtier has all the courtiers at his
commandment, that he may say, and do what he will there. And therefore his
friends, when they have occasion to imploie him in court, and that they write to
him touching their affairs, and that he has now taken upon him the charge
and burden of the same, seeing him self after unable to discharge that he
has enterprised, and can not as he would satisfy his friends expectacion:
then he faleth to despair, and wissheth he had been dead when he first
took upon him this matter, and that he made them beeleeue he could go
thorough with that they had committed to him, being impossible for him, having
small credit and estimation amongst the nobility and councellers.

Therefore I would never council him that has brethern, friends, or other
near kynsfolks in court, to go seek them out there, albeeyt they had matters
of great weight and importance, on hope to be dispatched the sooner by their
credit, favor, and suit: and for this cause, for that in court there is ever
more privy malice, and Envy then in other places: wherefore they can not be
revenged one of the other, but must tarry a time, and then when they see
opportunity, they set in foot to overthrow, and secretly to put back their
enemies suit. Now lo, these things, and other infinite plagues do light on
these poor unfortunate courtiers, incredible happily to any but the old and
experienced courtier. If the old and wise courtier would count all the favors
and mischances, the derth and abundance, the frendships and enmities, the
contentation and displeasures, and the honor and infamy he has endured in the
court, I beeleeue assuredly we should not be a little sorry for that body that
had suffryd so much, but much more for that heart that had abidden al those
storms and broyls. When the courtier sees that he is not hard of the prince,
nor spoken to of the beloved and favored of the court, and that the tresorer
does not dispatch him, and ye coferer keep back his wages, it is a misery to
see him, and on the other side a pleasure and pastime to here what he says,
cursing the wretched life of this world. And even then in his heat and rage he
teareth and blasphemeth god, and swears accursedly, that thenceforth he will
forsake the vain abuses of court, and leave also the trompries of ye deceitful
world, auowing to enclose him self in precinct of religious wales, and to take
upon him also religious habit. Alas if I fetched as mani sighs for my sins,
as courtiers do for their mishaps and disgraces: what a number would they come
to? For a courtier, incontinent that he feels him self sick, that he is
alone, and rejected of his friends in court, he beecometh so heavy and
pensive, that with his deep sighs he priceth the heavens on hye: and with his
flowing tears he moysteth the earth beelowe: So that a man might more easily
number the trobles of the stowt and harby Hercules, then those which the
courtier daily suffers. And beesides those many we have recited, yet
further, these also we can recite, that their servants rob them, their
purseberers consume their money, iesters and counterfeit knaves ly ever upon
their reward, woomen pick their purses, and strompets and bawds spoil them of
all. But what shall I say more to you. If the poor courtier be full of
feathers, every man plumes him: but if he want whings, there is no man hasty
to plume him: and to conclude, in princes court you shall find no such trade of
life, whereby you may satisfy every man. For if the courtier speak litel, they
will say he is but a fool, and if he be to large of tongue, they will say he
is a glorious fool, if he be free in expenses, they will say he is a
prodigal fool, if he be scarce of his purse, they will say he is a
covetous miser, if he be alone, and solitary at home, they will account him
an hypocrite: and if he visit others often, they will say he is a bold and
troblesome man, if he have any train of men following on him, they will say
he is a proud man: and if he go without company, that he is poor, and
miserable. So that of court, this may rightly be said. That it is a very
theather, wheare one mocketh and grinneth at an other, and yet in the end they
(al in manner) find them selves scorned and deceived. Now discursing also of
sleep, does the courtier alweys sleep as much as he will? no suer, but as much
as he may. And touching his meat, has he always that he lyketh? no truly:
but he is forced to be contented with that he has. And as for his apparel,
is he clothed according to his wise no no: but according to others fancies. O
unhappy courtier, that spendith the most part of his miserable life, in coming
his head, washing his beard, wearing fair and brave hose, varnishing his sword
and dagger, blacking his boots, providing him of clokes, bying him cappes,
furring him gowns, and sitting him self with other small and needful
trifles: wasting in them all his own goods, and that of his friends. I am not
of that mind and opinion that others are, that say there are none in so great
liberty as courtiers be, which should not be said, and much less credited,
since we see by daily proof: if they be in service, they are as sclaues. If
they be not in service with the king, or other nobleman, they live in poor
estate. Now let every man say what he will: wheare poverty reigns, there
liberty can have no place. And there is nothing in ye world herer, the^ that
we buy with entreaty and not with many. And therefore we must confess, that
princes courts are meeter to exercise the youth, then for the aged to live
there without rest. For young men have more hardines, to away with the pains
and trobles of the court: then they have years, to seek the greefes and
displeasures they receive thereby. Now go to the court that list, procure
office and auctority that will: for hither to I never met or spoke with man that
was contentid with the court. For if he be crept in favor he fears every
hour to fall, and lose his credit, if ever he be once out of favor, and in
disgrase, he dispayreth he shall never return again into favor, and if he
that goes to the sea commits him self first to god before he take
ship: much more ought he to do yt that goes to dwell in court: For in the
sea, of a C, ships there do not perish te^ne: but in ye court, of a.1000.
courtiers, there comes not three in favor.

Of courtiers brawles and quarells with the harbingers for ill lodging. Cap. ii.
AFter Lucullus the roman his return from Asia, in an oration he made before
the senate, he said thus: I swear unto you by ye Imortal gods (fathers
conscript) that in all this my journey I felt no pain, nor troble, nether for
the conduct and government of mine army, nor for the rebellion of the people,
nor for the absence of my friends, nor for the war of ye enemies, nether for
the long time, nor yet for the peril of my life. For all these things are
incident to soldiors and men of war, and common to rulers in peace. But if you
be desirous to know what was my troble, and that that grieved me most, yt was
on the remembrance of the quiet rest I had at home. For as you know right well
(sacred senate) during ye time a man lodges in other men's howses he is never
at liberty. And this word of Lucullus me thinks every courtier might well
apply to him self, for that he is always bound to do service to the master
of the house wheare he lodges, yea although he receive a 1000. injuries of
him, yet therefore it is not lawful for him to anger or displease him in any
thing. Therefore in very il and unlucky hour is the courtier arrived, when he
must take his journey in stead of rest, travail for quietness, mysery for
abundance, bondage for liberty, and pain for pleasor, and albeeit courtiers
abide many pains and trobles, yet this me thinks is the greatist, and lest
tolerable, when they must be lodged: resoning of the pains, displeasures,
fortunes, and mishappes that me^ suffer, litell is that my pen does write
heerin, and much less that my tongue does speak in comparison of that the
woeful heart does bide. O how many things are there, that are felt even as the
very bottom of the heart, and yet dare not the tongue once utter them? Truly how
poor a house so ever the courtier has in the contry, he should more esteem
yt, then the best lodging that ever he met with in court, or else wheare. For
at home, he does and comaundeth all that he will: But in an other man's house,
he must take that is geeue^ him. A pilgrim or traueler shall come into a
city, wheare he shall see fair and goodly churches; stately buyldinges, rich
gates, high walls, pauid streates, large market places, provision enough,
abundance of vittells, and nombers of strangers, and when he has seen all
this, he does so little esteem of the^, that to return again to his poor
home, he trauelleth though it be all the night. And therefore we should not
wonder at those, that do not greatly stray from their house, and that are but
seldom in many places: but we might well have him in suspicion, that
continually wandreth through strange contries and howses. For notwithstanding
the great wonders he sees, and the great conversation of amity that he has
or can find, yet in ye end they are only the eyes that are fed with the sight
of others things, and not the heart that is contented with his own, and also
to see in princes courts great treasure and riches brings us commonly more
grief then delight. And ye more his eye is fed with view of the fair dames
of court and princely pomp thereof, the greater sorrow assaulteth his heart, he
may not still enjoy ye same. And therefore ye Renoumed Focion, ye Athenian
captain, answered once certain men yt said there were to be sold in ye
markett place of Athens goodly stones, and rich Ieweles woorthi ye sight,
howbeeit hard to be bought, being held at so hie a price by ye merchant that
sold the^. From my first youth (said this philosopher) I made an oath: never to
go see any city, onles it were to conquer yt, and yield yt subject to me: nor
to go see Jewels, that I could not buy. The great emperor Traian was much
commended, for that he never took toy in his head to go see any thing, but for
one of these three causes, to weete: either to imitate that he saw, to bye yt,
or else clearly to conquer yt. O worthy words of Focion, and Traian, and very
meet to be noted and retained. Now to speak more particularly of the trobles
daily heaped on their necks that follow court, and that are to be lodged in
diverse places, and strange howses, I say: that if ye poor courtier do depart
at night from the court to repair to his lodging, he fyndeth often times the
host of his house, and other his guestes at home, already in their beds, and
fast asleep: so that it happens sometimes, he is feign to go seek his bed in
an other place for that night. And also if he should rise early in the morning
to follow his matters, or to wait upon his lord our master, his host perhaps
and his howsehold are not yet awake, nor slurring to open him the door. And
further if his host be angry and displeased, and out of time: who shall let
him to lock his doors, the day once shutt in? and who should compel him to
open his doors before broad day? Truly it is a great happ to be well lodged
about the court, and much more to meet with an honest host. For it happens
often, that the great pleasure and contentacion we receive, being lodged in a
faier lodging is lightly taken from us, by the hard entreaty and straight
usage of the host of the same, And in this is apparent, the vanity, fondnes,
and lightness of some courtiers, that rather desire, and seek for a fair and
pleasant lodging: then for a good, and profitable. The ambition of the courtier
is now grown to so great a soly, that he desires rather a fair lodging for
his pleasure, then a comodious or profitable for his family. For admit the
harbinger do geeue them a good and comodious lodging, if yt be not sightly to
the eye, and stand comodiously, they can not like of yt by no means. So that
to content them, the fouriers must needs provide them of a fair lodging to the
eye, though litel handsome to lodge in: and yet somtymes they will hard and
sca^t be pleased with that. And if the courtier be of reputacio^, and
beeloued in court, I pray you what pain and troble shall the poor harbinger
have to content his mind, and to continue in his favor? For beefor master
courtier wilbee resolved which of the.ii. lodgings he will take, the fair and
most honorable, or the mean and most profitable, he bleedeth at the nose for
anger, and his heart beats and leapes a thousand times in his body. For his
person would have the good, and comodious lodging: and his folly, the pleasant,
and fair. I never saw dead man complain of his grave, nor courtier content
with his lodging. For if they geeue him a hall, he will say it wants a
chimny, if they geeue him a chamber, he will say yt lacks an inner chamber,
if they geeue him a kitchen, he will say it is to low, and smoky, and that yt
wants a larder, if they geeue him a stable, that it wants a spence or
storehowse, if they geeue him the best: and cheifest parts of the house, yet
he says he wants small and litell houses of office, and if he have
access to the well, he must also have the comodity of the base court. And in
fine, if they geeue him a low paued hall, to cool and refreshe him in summer,
he will also have a high boorded chamber for the winter, and possible he shall
not have so many rooms at home in his own house, as he will demand in his
lodging abroad. And therefore many things suffers the courtier in his own
house, that he will not bear with all in an inn or an other man's house. And it
may be also, that the harbingers have provided them of a fair and goodly
lodging, wheare he shall comaund, both master, Stuff, and al other things in
the house, and yet the courtier shall mislike of it, fynding fault it is to
far from the court, and reputeth yt half a dishonor and impayr of his
credit to be lodged so far of, since others that are beeloued, and in favor
in court in deed, lie hard adioining to the court, or at the least not far
of. For this is an old said troth, the nearest lodged to ye court como^ly ye
best esteemed of the prince. I have seen many courtiers offer large gifts, and
rewards, to entreat the harbingers to lodge the^ near ye court: but I never
saw any that desired to be lodged near ye church, and this comes, for yt
they rather glory to be right courtiers, the^ good christians. And therefore
Blondus recites in his book De declinatione imperii yt a gretian called
Narsetes, (a captain of Justinian ye great) was wo^t to say often, that he
never remembered he went to ye sea, nor e^tred into ye palace, nor beega^ any
battle, nor cou^celed of wars nor mounted a horse back, but that first he
went to the church and seruid god. And therefore by the doings and saiyngs of
Narsetes we may gather that every good man ought rather to incline to be a
good christien, the^ to geeue him self to arms and chiualry to be a right
courtier. It happens many times, that after the courtier be come to his
lodging, he lyketh of yt well, and is well pleased with all: but when he has
been in others lodgins, and has looked upon them, straight way he falls out
of liking of his own, and thinks him self il lodged to others. And this
misliking grows not of his ill lodging, but of an inward malice and spite
he has, to see his enemy preferred to a better then his own. For such is the
secret hate, and envy, in princes court, (a thing common to courtiers) that they
disdain not only to thank the harbingers for their care taken of them, in
placing them in good lodgings: but they must also complain, and speak ill of
them, for the good lodgings they have geeuen to their adversaries, and
compaignions, better then that of theirs. There is also a foul disorder in
court among the harbingers, in appointing lodgings: and litell modesty beesides
in courtiers in asking them. For such there are, that many times, nether they,
nor their parents have any such lodgings at home in their own howses, as they
will demand only for their horskeepers, and servants. But the great pain of
the court is yet, that such nouels as come newly to court, they say they are of
great estimation in the contry, rich, and of an ancient house, and his father
of great authority and estimation, and when the troth is known, his fathers
authority and first estimation was, of good laborers, and husbandmen, their only
rents and revenues consisting in that they gat, by the daily swet and labor of
their persons: and their power and ability, in the rents of an other man's
goods: and their liberty, in service and subjection of those that gave them
wages, and hired them by the day. And I would to god their blood were not
tainted with some other notable blot. There is a plague also in the court,
which always dureeth, and never leaves court, and that is: that those that
are always least worth, and of least calling, do presume and take upon them
most, and also are woorst to please of al others. And this they do (their
power being small) that they would supply that in words and countenance,
which they want in deeds and effects. I ly, if I saw not once in the county of
Aragone, a gentilma^ that hired a whole house, wheare him self and his famely
were very well lodged and comodiously: and after that I remembered I met with
him in Castilla, wheare he could not content him self with the change of
eight howses, beesides his first he was appointed to: and the occasion was,
for that in Aragon he paid for that house he had, and for these he paid
nothing. So of others purse every man coueteth to show his magnificence, and
to declare his follyes: but when they deffray their own charge, they are hard
as flynt, and go as near to work as may be. It is very true, that if there
be any disorder and troble to be lodged in the court, it comes also for the
most part of the harbingers, without whom the courtiers could never be well
lodged, although the prince had commanded they should be lodged, near him.
Albeeit in the court a man may easiy exempte him self from the princes council,
and justice of the same, having no suits there, and from the council and
affairs of wars being no captain: From the sinode of the spiritualty,
being no ecclesiastical person: and from that of the Indians, going to no
Magicians: from the conuention of marcha^ts, keeping safely their merchandise:
and from ye correction of the lord high marshal of ye court, not being foolish
and insole^t: yet nevertheless there is no courtier (be he never so high or
great in favor) yt can avoid him self from ye harbingers authority, but he
must needs come under his lee, being in their power to dispose ye lodgis as
they think good: to lodge the^ honorably or meanly, to please or displease
the^, to lodge or dislodge them. And if the courtier happen at any time to
quarrel or fall out wc the^: I warrant him he shall be remembered of ye harbingers
in his lodging, and possibly a horskeeper, (yea perhapps his enemy) shall be
better lodged then he, or else he may seek his lodging in the streats where
he shall. For all other iniuryes or offenses done in court, whatsoever, the
courtier may easily redress them by Justice, but for those he receives of
the harbinger, he must take them quietly, and be contented with them. For
otherwise we should not only offend them, but iniure our selves, and make
them to provide us of no lodging: so heerby we should utterly be dislodged,
and unprovided. And therefore they do bear with many things in that office,
which they would not do in any other office: as for example. Those kind of
officers must be much made of, of others well intreted, accompanied, feasted,
flattered, followed, yea and many times served and waited upon. I mean in
serving their turn, anointing their hands, and always inritching their gloves
with some piece of gold and silver, and alas, the seely courtier that has not
such sovereign ointment in his box, to cure these above recited sores, but
only to serve his own turn: if he be not his kynseman, or near allied, let
him yet at least get acquaynted with him, and make him his friend, an esye thing
to bring to pass, if he do not vex him nor geeue him thwart language, and
somtymes he must inuit him to dinner and supper. For in ye court there is no
goodness gotten, neither by ye king, by ye beloved, by the noble men, by the
honorable of his council, treasorers, nor yet by the harbingers, but in
suffering them, and doing them always good and acceptable service. And if
percase the harbingers wrong you, and do you displeasure, or that they should
say you were troblesome and importunat: yet be you wife to bear with them in
any case, and seem not to here them. For what loses the courtier, if he
bare now and then with a few crooked words at the harbingers hands? mary by
forbearing them, he happily comes to be lodged the better. Suppose the
courtier be not always lodged to his mind and desire, should he imediatly
complain of them or murmur at them? no suer, he should but so doing show
him self of small education. For what skylleth yt though among many pounds of
good meat, the boucher sometime myngle a morsel of liver, longes, or lights
of the beast. And therefore a man should not blame the poor harbingers so much
as they does. For they are not commanded of the king to buyld new lodgings,
but such as they are, to divide them amongst the train of his court: So that
they lodge courtiers in such as they find, and not in those they would, adding
thereto yt they have regard to their estates and demerits, and not to ye
affections and wills of ye persons they lodge. For it were more reason, they
should appoint ye greatist and best lodgings, to ye noblest personages and ye
oldest servants of court, then to the late and new come ^ourtier: whose youth
can better away with an ill nights lodging, the^ ye gray hears of ye old
courtier. Otherwise, ye service of ye old courtier that has spent his young
years in princes court (to ye great pain and troble of their persons) and in
his service, should for gwerdon beee paid with ingratitude, if he should not
be preferred to ye best comodious lodging for his ease and also ye first to
be advanced by the prince before ye young seruiture. Now if it be honest and
reasonable that ye harbinger have great consideration to ye merits of him that
he lodges, even so it is fit the courtier should way the press of the court,
and incomodious place wheare the harbingers are constrained to lodge them:
knowing that to day the court remoueth to such a place where there are happily
six thousand houses: and to morrow perhaps there are not a thousand, therefore
if in such a place he find but narrow fustien to make him a dublet: let him
take patiens till such time they remove to an other place, where they shall
find broad cloth enough, to make them large clokes.

How the courtier should entreat his host or master of the house where he
lies. Cap. iii.
THe good and civil courtier must also entreat his host well where he lies:
for else if he come in to his lodging braling and thretning, it may be, that
besides he he will keep his heart and good cheer secret from him, he will
not not also open his chamber doors to him. There are in the court such hare
brains, and indiscreet persons, that have so litell regard and respect to
their honest hosts, that they do nothing in their lodgings, but revel and
keep il rule, and do even what they list, as though the house were theirs to
command, and not given them only for lodging. Whereof springs two exceeding
evils, the one that they offend god: and the other that the prince is also ill
served. For the house is not geeuen them to command, but only appointed for
them to lodge in. We read in the life of the emperor Seuerus that he
ordained in Rome, that if the owner of the house did entreat his gest and
stranger ill, or that he did him hurt or displeasure, the stranger should
accuse him before the justice, but in no wise brawle nor quarrel with him in
his own house. Plutarke in his politikes also resiteth, that in the temples of
the gods, in the realm of Dace, there was no liberty or safty for malefactors,
save in their own proper howses, which served them for their only refuge and
inviolable assurance, for they thought that within the entry and gates of the
same, none other but the lords and masters of the house might pretend any
jurisdiction or seignory. Now if among the Daces no officer or justice could
lay hold or punish any man, so long as he kept his house: me thinks it is
against all reason, and humanity, that the courtier should once offer his host
an injurious or unseemly word. Plato being one day reproved of his friends,
for that he would not rebuke his host Denis the Siracusan, who at the first
received him very courteously, and afterward used him ill, answered the^ thus.
My friends, to be angry with fools that show us pleasure, to take revenge of
children whom we have brought up, to beat a woman with whom we must be
familiar, and to brave and braule with those in whose howses we are lodged,
nether the philosophers of Greece ought to council him, nor the noble heart
once to think to do yt. I can not deny, but that there are some hosts very
rude and uncivil, that it is in manner an impossible thing to bring him to any
honesty or ciuility. Howbeeit notwithstanding I would wish the noble and worthy
courtier to take in jest, all the wrongs and injuries done or said to him by
his host, or at the least to seem as though he hard them not all: otherwise,
from that day the courtier falls out with him, he may even withal think
presently to depart his house, and to seek him a new lodging: for he can
never be quiet in his lodging, where the goodman of the house and he cannot
agree. And where so ever the fine courtier shall lodge, let him never stick at
the charges of a lock to his chamber door a hatch to the window, a degree
or.ii. to the stairs, a rope for the well, a harth to the chimny, nor for a
casement to the wyndowe, for these are but trifles, and they cost little, though
he leave the^ to the house: yet with those trifles he byndeth his host, and
makes him beeholding to him. Also he may not forget sometime to send home
cates to his host, and to inuit him to dinner to him: and likewise if his host
did present him with any thing, he must accept it in very good part, and thank
him much for yt. For other while, by small presents, great frendshipp is
obtained. The discreet courtier must also forbid his pages and servants to
come into his hosts gardeyn, to spoil his fruit, or to gather his flowers, to
steal his hens, or to break any thing of his: That they pull not up the
pauements of the house, paynt his walls with coals or chalk, that they rob
not his done house, nor make any noise to steal his coneys, to break his
glass windows, and to hurt or mar any thing about his house: For if many
times they refuse to lodge strangers in their howses, it is, not for want of
lodging, or that the masters should comber them: but for the displesures, and
shrewd turns they receive by their pages and servants daily. Yt shall chance
many times that a cittezin that has a fair new house, goodly whyt walls,
and trimly painted, shall have a courtier come to lodge in his house, that
shall have such a train with him of servants, young children and their neuews,
which are so foolish, proud and so rechles, that they break the forms, throw
down tables, paint and beedawb ye walls, beat down doors, run thorough
the feelings, steal the byrds, and do a thousand other mischefes and unhappy
turns, so that the poor owner of the house had rather lodge an other time
Egiptians and beggars: then such rude and harmefull courtiers. And therefore I
have seen in the court, by reso^ of the servants disorder and ill rule, the
masters commonly ill lodged, lodgings denied them, or after they had them to be
quite taken from them. One of the necessariest things a courtier should have,
is to keep quiet and well conditioned servants: otherwise it is to be thought
(as in deed the common saying is) the house to be ill governed, where the
family and servants are so ill conditioned and disordered. And touching this
matter Aulus Gellius De noctibus atticis says, yt when Cornelius Gracchus was
returned to Rome, after he had been co^sul a great while in the Isles Baleares,
he said these words before all the senate. You know (fathers conscript) I
have been chief Justice, and consul, xiii. years. during all which time I
swear to you by the imortal gods, that to my knowledge I never did wrong to
any man, nether any servant of mine displeasure to any, nor done any thing
that was not lawful to be done in the house where I lay. Phalaris the
tyrant when he received any displeasure of the Agrigentines, he caused his
servants to lodge in their howses with them, for the one and the other were so
wicked, so unthrifty, such quarellers, and brawlers, that he could not work
them a greater spyght nor displeasure, then to lodge them here and there in
their howses. There be also in the court some courtiers, that are esteemed of
every man to be of so evil beehauiour and demeanor, their servants and
famyly of such lewd and nawghty condicyons, that their hosts are thoroughly
resoluyd, either not to receive them into their howses, or if they be compelled
to yt, to absent the^ selves for the time of their being there: rather then to
suffer such iniuryes and wrongs, as they are suer they must take at their
hands. The courtier must consider that sometimes he has need of a bottel of
water to drink, a broom to swepe his chamber, a platter or dish to serve him
withal, of a table cloth and napkins, and of a towell for his hands and his
face, of a stool to sit on and of soome kettle for the kytchin: and in such
case, he should charge his servant courteously to ask these things of his
host, and not to take them parforce and unasked. Every man desiereth to be
master in his own house, and be he brother, cosen, or friend, he will not
suffer him to bear as much rule in his own house, as him self. So that he
will be less offended, with the hurt and loss of those things that he has
lent, and were gently asked him: then with those, which unknowing to him, by
force, and against his will they have taken from him, yea though they bring
them afterward hole and sound again. And this our liberty is so much set by,
that we shall see sometimes a man for his pleasure, play and lose a.c.
Crowns of gold, and say never a word: and on the other side, if one break
the least glass in his house, he will cry, and rage to the heavens. I
remember when I was a courtier, and went to visit an other courtier a friend of
mine, that was sick in his lodging, I fell a chiding and rebuking the host, for
that I found him exclaymyng and criyng out of the pages, which plaiyng at the
bal had broken him a little lamp of glass, and he answered me thus. I cry
not (sir) for the loss of my lamp which is a halfpeny matter, nor for the oil
that they spylt worth a farthing, but only for the liberty they rob me of,
and for the small account they make of me. The good and wise courtier may not
be to familiar with his host his wief, nor suffer his servants to be busy
with the mayds of the house, more then to speak to them for their necessaries,
for in this case, they should less hurt the master of the house, to ransake
and spoil his house, and all that he had in yt: then to take from him his
honor and good name. To cast the bedds on the flower, to break the doors and
windows, to vnpaue the stones, to paint and black the walls, or to make any
noise in the house, are all of them things: yet sometimes tolerable though not
honest nor civil: but to take his wief, and to abuse her, it is nether lawful
nor possible to dissemble yt, much less to suffer it. For it were too much
shame, and reproach to the husband to abide yt, and high treason and crime
abominable for the courtier to do yt. Now since men are frail, and that
they can not, nor will not subdue their passions and filthy motions of the
flesh, there wants not notwithstanding women in princes courts, whose love
and frendships they may easily embrace: which though they were al commanded to
avoid the court, and ye vierge of ye court, yet it could not be chose^, but
some might secretly continue still in court to enterteine the courtly courtiers.
For if in the court there be kept a table of play.ii. months only in the
year, all the year long beesides they find the streats full stored of common
woomen. when the year is most plentiful and fruitful of all things, yet still
there lacks soome provision of vittailes in the court: but of such women
there is never no want but rather to many. And therefore we have not said
without great reason, that it were to much treason and dishonesty for the
courtier to fall in love with his hostess: for in doing yt, he should do
her husband too much wrong, disfame the wife, and offend his friends and
neighbors, and utterly undo him self. For Suetonius Tranquillus resyteth that
Julius Caesar caused a Captayn of his to be beeheaded only for sclaundering and
defaming of his hostess, the which he did not, tarying for the complaint of
her husband, nor ye accusation of any other. And ye Emperor Aurelianus seeing
one of his men at a window one day pulling his hostess by ye sleeue, caused
his hand to be stricken of immediately, although both his hostess and he swear
he did it but in jest, and to no other intent. Plutarch in his book De
matrimonio says, that there was a law among the Licaoniens, that if any
stranger did but only talk with his hostess, his tongue shoold be cut out of
his head, and if he had passed further, that he shoold then lose his head.
Macrobius also in his Saturnaller recites, that amongst ye Romans it was
reputed a great infamy, if any man came, and praised the beawty and manners of
the mistress of the house where he lodged, for in praising her, he let them
understand he knew her, and knowing her he spoke to her, and speaking to her,
he opened his heart to her, and this doing, he plainly defamed her, and made
her to be euel reported of. Aulus Gelius writes that the like punishment was
geeuen to him that had carnal participacion with any vestall virgin, the self
same was also executed on him that procured any infamy to his hostess where
he lay.

Which punishment was, either to be cut in the mids, and quartered in four
parts, or else to be stoned to death alive. The good courtier must also have an
other great regard, and that is, to comaund his servants to look well to his
ryding apparel, and such as are lent him of courtiers to wear otherwhile, to
see that it be kept clean and well brusshed, and above all safely delivered
where it was borrowed, For commonly the horskeepers have their horses lowsing
clothes and their masters footecloth more nete and clenly, then the grooms
and pages of the chamber have his apparel: and this proceeds of their great
sloth and negligence. And truly this passes the bounds of shamefast degree,
yea and comes much to charge the courtiers conscience, the small account he
has, so to let his garments and apparel, and other his mouables to be
spoiled and lost. And this happens very often by the negligence of their pages
and servant, which now throws them about the chambers, dragges them upon
the grownd, now sweeps the house with the^, now they are full of dust, then
tattered and torn in pieces, here their hose seam rent, there their shoes
broken: so that if a poor man come afterward to buy them to sell again, it
will rather pity those that see them, then geeue them any courage to buy them.
Wherefore the courtier ought not to be so careless, but rather to think upon
his own things and to have an eye unto them: For if he go once a day to his
stable to see his horses how they are kept and looked to, he may likewise take
an other day in the week when he may find leisure to see his wardroppe, how
his apparel lies. But what paciens must a poor man take, that lends his
implements and apparel to the courtiers? that never lays them abroad a
sunning, to beat out the dust of them, nor never layth them in water, to wash
and white them, be they never so fowl. And al be it the beds and other
implements lent to the courtier, be not of any great value, yet it is not fit
they shoold be thrown at their tail and kept filthyly: For as charely and
dayntily does a poor laboring and husband man keep his woollen couerlet, and
sets as much by it, as does the jolly courtier by his quilt or couerpane of
silk. And it chances often times also, that though at a need the poor man's
bed costeth him less money, then the rich man's bed costeth him, yet does it
serve him better, then the rich and costly bed serves the gentleman or
nobleman. And this to be true, we see it by experience, that ye poor
husbandman or citizen slepeth commonly more quietly, and at his ease, in his
poor bed and cabean with his sheets of tow: then does the lord or rich
courtier, lying in his hanged chamber, and bed of silk, wrapped in his fynest
holland shetes, who still sigheth and co^playneth. And finally we conclude,
that then when ye court remoueth, and that ye courtier departs from his
lodging where he lay, he must with all curtesy thank the good man and good
wife of ye house for his good lodging, and courteous intertainment he has had
of them, and must not stick also to geeue them somewhat for a remembrance of
him, and beesides, geeue certain rewards among the maids and men servants of
the house according to their ability, that he may recompense them for that is
past, and win their favor for that is to come.

What the courtier must do to win the Princes favor. Cap. iiij.
DIodorus Siculus says, that the honor and reverence the Egiptians used
ordinarily to their Princes was so great, that they seemed rather to woorship
them, then to serve them; for they coold never speak to them, but they must
first have license geeuen them. When it happened any subject of Egypt to have a
suit to their prince, or to put up a supplication to the^, kneeling to them
they said these words. Sovereign lord and mighty prince, if it may stand with
your highness favor and pleasure, I will boldly speak: if not, I will presume no
further, but hold my peace. And the self reverence and custom had toward god
Moses, Aaron, Thobias, David, Solomon, and other fathers of Egypt, making like
intercession when they spoke with god, saying. Domine mi rex, Si inueni gratiam
in oculis tuis, loquar ad dominum meum. O my lord and king, if I have found
favor in thy sight, I will speak unto thee: if not, I will keep perpetual
silence. For there is no service ill, when yt is grateful and acceptable to
him, to whom it is done: as to the contrary none good, when it pleases not ye
party that is served. For if he yt serves, be not in his masters favor he
serves, he may well take pains to his vndooyng, without further hope of his
good will or recompense. Wherefore touching that I have said, I infer, that
he that goes to dwell and abide in the court, must above all indeuer him self
all he can to obtayn the princes favor, and obtaining it, he must study to
keep him in his favor. For it shoold little prevail the courtier to be
beeloued of all others, and of the prince only to be mislyked. And therefore
Alcamidas the Grecian, being once advertised by a friend of his, that the
Athenians did greatly thirst for his death, and the Thebans desired his life:
he answered him thus. If those of Athens thirst for my death, and them of
Thebes likewise desyring my life, I can but be sorry and lament. How be it
yet, if King Phillip my sovereign lord and master hold me still in his grace
and favor, and repute me for one of his beeloued, I care not if all Greece
hate and dysloue me, yea and lie in wayt for me.

In deed it is a great thing to get into the princes favor, but when he has
gotten it, doubtless it is a harder matter to know how to keep it. For to make
them love us, and to win their favor, we must do a thousand manner of
seruyces: but to cause them to hate and dislyke of us, the least dyspleasure in
the world suffyseth. And therefore the pain and trouble of him that is in favor
in the court is great, if he once offend, or be in displeasure.

For albeeit the prince do pardon him his fault, yet he never after returns
into his favor again. So that to conclude, he that once only incurreth his
indignation, he may make just reckening never after, or marvelous hardly to
be received again into favor. Therefore says the divine Plato in his books
De republica: that to be a king and to reign, to serve and to be in favor,
to fight and to overcome, are three impossible things, which neither by man's
knowledge, nor by any diligence can be obtained: only remaining in the hands
and disposing of fickle fortune, which does diuyde and geeue them where it
pleases her, and to whom she favors best.

And truly Plato had reason in his saying, for to serve, and to be beeloued,
is rather happ and good fortune, then industry or diligence. Since we see often
times that in the court of princes, those that have served but three years
only, shall be sooner preferred and advanced, then such one as has served
perhaps.xx. or.xxx. years, or possible al his life time. And further he
shall be both displaced, and put out of service, by means of the other. And this
proceeds not through his long and faithful service he has done, but only by
reason of the good hap that follows him. Although Plato tells, that to get
realms and seignories, to overcome battles, and to be favored and beeloued of
princes, be things granted to us rather by hasard, and fortune, then by
force, of good woorks, and laudable acts, or by long toylyng in painful
service: yet the noble and stout heart therefore shoold not cesse at any time to
enterprise, and manfully to execute in every occasion presented to him, to
achyue to fame and honor: neither for any pain and labor to lose the hope to
obteyn his pretensed purpose. For men so^etymes lose many things, rather
through timorousnes, and want of audacitie, then for that they lack good hap or
fortune. To see in the court of princes some to be richer, more honored, more
noble, more esteemed, better beeloued, more waited upon, better served, and
better welcome then others, and more feared then others: we may by these
tokens know, that fortune has not used to reward those with such favors and
preferrements, which live at home ydlely, and much less courtiers, who live in
court with all pleasure and delicacy, wherewith they are never weryed.

Let no man be so fond to think, that fortune is so bountiful and liberal,
that for his authority, or only thought, she wilbee once moved to lift him out
of misery, to exalt him to higher place and dignity, without some secret and
private respect had to his virtue. For when she many times upon a sodein
raises any to high and great estate, it comes by the merits of him that is
exalted, or through the displeasure of him that is thrown down: in whose rome
she has placed an other in favor with her. As we read of Julius Emilius, for
a time high in favor, and afterward in great disgrace with the emperor
Constantius, in whose place and rome succeeded afterward an other named
Alexander, who being one day reproved by some of his friends of ingratitude
toward them, (that said they were causers and furderers of his honor and
preferrement) answered them in this manner. Masters, if I am comen into such
favor with themperor, my good and gracious lord, succeeding in the place of
Emilius, truly it was more by reason of his deserved fall, then by your
obtained means or requests: Fortune and his heavy destiny having so willed and
ordained it, more to overthrow and displace him of his room and credit he was
in, then to advance and prefer me to the same. The which I say, to advise
the citizen and gentleman that goes to the court to be a courtier, to thend
he be not fickle headed, and light of beelief, to think that immediately he
shall come to such aucthority, that he may easily comaund all that he will:
neither that he shoold so much despair, and be hopeles, but that by time (in
serving well) he might come to be in as great favor, as any other about the
prince. We see daily such change and alterations in the common weal, and
fortune to turn her unstable wheel so often, that many times ye administration
of ye common weal is in his hands and rule, of whom before they made little or
none account. And therefore I say to you, and again return to tell you, that
the courtier yt seeks to come into his princes favor, and to be beeloued of
him, and that coueteth to be well reputed of in court must endeavor him self to
be very honest, and as near as may be fautles of life: and true and faithful
in his charge or office he takes upon him. For the good oppinion that men
have of a man, is ever the first degree to attain to the princes favor. For
there is no man in the world, of whatsoever state or condition he be, so
vicious and lascivious, but at the least he desires to have an honest and
virtuous man in his house: so that a man may say, that the good and godly life
is the redyest mean and way (where ever the person be) to bring him soonest
into the princes favor, and to make him to be beeloued generally. Wherefore
Phalaris the tyrant, writing to an emulator of his, said these words unto
him. I confess thou art an honest man, but thou wilt not deny me also, that
al those thou keep in thy house, be wicked persons and of ill life: a thing
which in my house thou shall find all contrary. For although I am a tyrant, at
least yet I love, that no ill disposed person eat bread in my house: So that
though I am laden with many vices, yet am I accompanied also with many wise and
learned men. The divine Plato came from Greece into Scicilia, only to see
Dionisius the Siracusan, and not Plato him self alone, but also diverse other
philosophers in company with him: whom he did not only honor and entreat well,
but also saw they wanted nothing fit or necessary for them. Many times
Dyonisius was wont to say these words. I am captain of the Rhodians, sith I
defend them from the Affricans: and king of the Affricans, because I govern
them: and friend of the Italians, because I offend them not: and father of the
philosophers, because I help to relieve them in all their necessities: and the
Scicilians call me a tyrant, because they see I leave not to punish them, and
keep them under. By these two examples we may gather, that the tyrants being
friends to virtuous and honest men, much more and of necessity ought the good
and just princes to be. Also the courtier must take great heed he be not
arrogant, and a liar, a flatterer, and dissembler: for those, and such like
faults, are rather woodz and by paths, vttlerly to lose a man: then a plain
hie way to bring him into favor and credit. And although by chance there have
been some, that with all these faults have notwithstanding crept into favor:
yet we will show them a hundred, that only for those vices have been cast out
of favor and credit both. For commonly, all those that by the favor of wicked
princes beeginne to be great, and of some honor, and that study by all
dishonest and unlawful means to continue and keep them selves in credit,
and: favor Albeeit for a time we see them reign and flourish in prosperity:
yet that lasts not long, nether is it perpetual, but a time comes again,
when we see them fall, and quite cast of, to their great shame and utter
undoing. There are many that knows and understands the princes court but
meanly, or not at all, which beeleue, that for being well spoken, and being
careful and diligent in their buysines and affairs, they should the sooner for
that come in favor and credit before others: but in the end their hope and
imagination is nothing, not answering any thing their desire: for as there are
in court many green heads, and graceles couertures, which are of no
reputacion, nor any thing set by, nether deserving to be well thought of: So
are there many wise heads and beeloued courtiers greatly esteemed and reputed
of. And this for their own good demerits, and by means also of the others
wicked abuse and disorder. Suetonius tranquillus recites, that Scilla the
consul, being mortal enemy of the Marians, (of which faction was also Julius
Caesar) said: that from Cesars infancy his wisdom made him more to be feared
and wondered at: then ever his stout and valiant courage he showed. Plutarke
writing to Traian said. I assure thee (Sovereign prince) I do more esteem
and honor thy parson, then I do care for all thy empire beesyds. For I have
seen thee do a thousand good things to deserve yt, but I never saw thee once
desirous to have yt. And suer in my opinion I think there is no better alchemye
in court, to grow to sodeyne wealth, and to acquire the princes favor: the^
that the same of his good life should rather resound his praise to the prince,
thereby to make him known unto him: then the respect of his noble house or
progenye.

That courtier also that craves his princes grace, must take heed in any wise
he be not consorte or companion with rash and hasty persons, whose unstable
heads mislike of every state, still deprauing all others virtues.

Such fellow mates, and compagnions, the wise courtier must in any case refuse
to be conversant with. I must advise him also he beeware he be not rash of
speech, nor that he speak ill of any man: For it is a right kind of treso^ to
detrect and backbyte our friends, and much more the prince, to whom we wholly
owe our duty and allegiance. And therefore the wise and virtuous courtier must
fly from this company as far as he can, that are possessed with such vain
humors, and passions of mind: For such kind of me^, will never council us to
sarue well, nor to beeware of liberal speaking, but will rather infect us, and
bring us to their naughty vain humor, and make us to be demed as bad as them
selves (though we be not so) only for keeping them company. Like as in commonweals there are seditious heads, wc move and stir the poor commons to
rebellion: even so in princes courts there are the like factious heads, that
seek to win good will of courtiers, and so to stir up their mynds also to
tumult and sedition: which, because they have no way to come up, and grow in
favor, do detract and speak ill of those, that are in favor and authority. One
of these abiects, and inferior sort, shall go to ye house of an other, (in
like disgrace and discredit that him self is in,) and there these companions
shall open their throtes against the prince, and his court saying, the king
cares not for his subjects, talking of the high minds and countenances of the
beeloued and favored of court, of the affections of the counsel, of the
parciality and enmyty of the court, of the want of munition for wars, and of
the fall and decay of the common wealth: and thus with theys lewd and uncomely
discorses, they spend the long and doleful nights of winter season, and there
withal also the long and whot sunny days of summers time. Adrian the emperor
being once informed, that there met and assembled togethers daily, at the
house of one Lucius Turbon, a number of the seditious and factious sort of
Rome, which were offended with him, and conspired against him: to prevent them
of insurrection, proclaimed presently through Rome and enacted yt for a law,
that all courtiers that assembled there, should lose their heads, and all the
Romans should be banished. All this we have spoken, to banish vice from
princes courts if yt may be: for now a days, as there are many houses of
ordinary tables, and nombers of disyng houses for all manner of play: so is
there also in the court, beesides the groom porters, other chambers where they
meet to murmr at each man's doings. And as there are some that say, gowe let
us go to such a man's house, and there we shall find play enowgh, and good
fellowshipp to pass the time away as we will: even so these others say, gow,
we will go to such a chamber, and there we shall meet with our compaignions
and good fellows, wheare we may talk liberally and at our pleasure, without
check or control of any. Infamous be that house, wheare there is no other
exercise, but play and riot: and accursed be that, wheare they can not occupy
them selves, but in defamyng and backbiting their breethern and neighbors. For
to conclude, it were less euel to play and lose their money, then to robb and
spoil his neyghbor of his good name. Now to get into the princes favor, it
helps much to consider, wherein the prince takethe chief delyght, and whereto
he is best affected: whether to music, hunting, fliyng, riding of horses, or
fishing, running, or leaping, or any other actiuity what so ever it be. And
his affect and desire once known, and observed: he must geeue him self wholly
to love that the prince loves, and to follow that that he follows. And as
princes commonly are geeuen to their wills, to leeke soome pastymes better then
others: so do they show them selves more favorable and gracious to soome of
their servants, then others: and rather to those whom only they see conform
and agreeable with their affections, then to such as are alwey most dilygent
and paynefull about them, to do them the best service they can. The curious
courtier may account him self happy, if he can frame him self to comend that
the prince allows, and likewise to dissalow of that the prince mislyketh: and
though perhaps he were many times of the contrary opinyon, he may well
think and beeleeue to him self what he lyketh best, but in no case to utter
that he thinks, nor to make any countenance to the contrary. The emperor
Aurelius never drank other then redd wine, and because he was infourmed that
Torquatus the Roman, for his sake did not only refrain from drinkyng white
wine, but did also plant all his vynes with red grapes, he made him censor of
Rome, and gave him the ward of the gate Salaria in the said city. In eating
and drinking, in hunting, and tilting, in peace, and in war, in youthful
sportes, and grave matters, the wise courtier must alweyes follow the steps
and will of the prince, and imitate him in the same the best he can. And if yt
be beneficial for the courtier to have the princes favor and to be esteemed
of him: let him in no wise enterprise to talk too much to him. For by
continual frequenting the prince yt can not otherwise fall out, but he shall
both troble him, and be thought a proud, arrogant, and an importunat fool of
him. And if the courtier has no grave and weyghty matters to move the prince
in, to what purpose does he seem to molest and importune the king? We say
in weighty matters to communicate with him. For to talk with the prince, and
to troble his ears with tryfles and matters of small moment, he should be
reputed of the hearers a rash man, and of the king him self a witless fool.
Let us consider a little what is fit for the courtier to do, and what
beecometh him best, and whether it be lawful for him to conferr with the
prince, and then we shall come to know, if yt be decent for him to speak often
to the prince. Therefore to go to the king to speak ill of any man, I think no
wise man will offer to do yt: and if it be to geeue him secret intelligence
of any thing, he must first dout whether the king will beeleeue him or no:
and to think to counsel him, it is a token of a light head: and to presume to
sleyt with the prince, and to beemery with him, to pass the time away, let
every man beeware he run not into that error, nor that he once prease to
do it. To send to reprove a prince, I know not what he is that would be so
foolish hardy once ^o dare to open his lips against him: and to flatter him,
if the prince be wise, he will understand him: and if he find him once, it
is enough to turn the flatterer to great displeasure, yea and to put him
quite out of favor wish him. And therefore to live in suerty and avoid these
dangers, me thinks it is best to speak but seldom to him. Lucullus was a
great friend to Seneca and was also gouerner of Sicilia, and demanding one day
of Seneca what he might do that might be acceptable to the emperor Nero his
lord and master, Seneca answered him thus. If thou desire to be acceptable to
princes, do them many services, and geeue them few words. And so like wise
the divine Plato said in his books De repub. that those that have to move the
prince in any thing, in any case be brief: for in dilating to much, they
should both comber the prince, and make him also not geeue attentive ear,
nether could he have leisure to hear them, nor pacyens to tarry them. And he
said further. Those matters and subjects they treat with princes in, and that
are used to be told them, ought to be grave, and sententious: either tendyng
to comodyty of the weal publyke, to his honor or profit, or to the service of
the king, to whom he speaks. These counsels and aduertysements of Plato
and Seneca (in my poor opinion) deserve to be noted and had in memory: And
notwithstanding all that I have spoken, I say yet further to you, that there is
nothing disposes ye prince better to love and favor his servants, then to see
them diligent in service, and slow in speaking. For to reward him that only
seeks it by means of his tongue and by words, it is in our free wills to do
it: but to recompense him that by his diligent service only craves a good
turn and not in words, we are in conscience bound to yt: And hereof
springs the vulgar proverb: The good service is demand sufficient, though
the tongue be silent.

What manners and gestures beecome the courtier when he speaks to the prince.
Cap. v.
WHen the courtier determines to speak to the prince, he must first show
him self unto him with great reverence, before he come at him, and if the
king be set, he must knele to him upon one knee, with his cappe in his left
hand, holding yet nether to far nor to near his body, but rather downwards
toward his knee, with a good grace and comely fashion, not to lustely, nor to
much boldly, but with a set shamefast gravity, putting him self on the left
hand of the prince to speak with him, whether he be sitting or standing. For
placing our selves on the left hand, we leave the king on the right, as duty
wills us: For the right hand beelongeth ever to the best person. Plutarke
says, that in the bankets the kings of Persia made, they sat him, whom they
loved, and made most account of, cheek by cheek, and on the left hand of the
prince, where the heart lies: saying, that those whom they loved with their
heart, should be set down also on that side the heart lay, and in no other
place. Blondus says to the contrary, that the Romans did honor the right
hand so much, that when ye Emperor entered ted into the senate, no man durst ever
put him self on his right hand. And he says more over, that if a young man
were perchanse found sitting on the right hand of an old man, or the servant on
the upper hand of his master, the son on the right hand of his father, or any
page, prentise or serving man, on the upper hand of a burgeis or cytesin: they
were no less punished by Justice for that fault and offense, then if they had
done any notable crime or delicte. Who so ever will speak to the prince, must
speak with a soft voice and not to hastily. For if he speak to loud, those
that stand by shall hear what he says to the king: and in speaking to fast,
the king shall not easily understand what he says. And he must alsoere he
speak to the prince premeditate long before what he will say to him, and put
into him good words and aptly placed: for wise men are more careful what
words their tongues should utter, then what their hands should do. There is
great difference beetwixt speaking well, and doing well: for in the end the
hand can but strike and offend: but the tongue can both offend and defame. Even
when ye courtier is telling his tale to ye prince, let him be advised in all
his actions and gestures, and that he play not with his cappe from one hand to
an other, much less that he beehold ye prince to earnestly in the face. For
in the one he shoold be taken for a fool, and esteemed in the other for a
simple courtier. He must take great heed also that he spitt not, coffe, nor
hawk, when he speaks to him, and if it be so he be constrained by nature
to it: then let him hold down his head, or at least turn at one side that he
breath not in the kings face. Pliny writing to Fabatus says, that the kings
of India never suffered any man (in speaking to them) to approach so near them,
that their breath might come to their face. And they had reason to do it, to
avoid strong and unsavory breths, growing rather of the indisposition of the
stomak, or of the putrefaction of the lungs, or of the corruption of the brayn.
And if the courtier have to speak with the king after dinner or supper, let him
beeware he eat no garlyke, nor onyons, nor drink wine without water. For if
he savor of garlyk or onyons, the king may think he lacks discretion to
come with those sents to his presence: or if his breath were strong of wine,
that he were a drunkard. He must be very circumspect also that when he
speaks to the king, he speak not with his head, as well as with his tongue,
nor that he play not with his hands, nor his feet, nor yt he stroke his
beard, nor wynk with his eyes: for such fond countenaunces, and gestures, do
rather beecome a fool or iester, then a civil or honest courtier.

And in his discourse with the Prince, that he exceed not in superfluous
words, more then shall only be needful and touching his matter, and not to
seem in his presence to deprave or detract any man. He may honestly allege,
(and that without reproach) the service he has done him: but not to lay
before him others faults and imperfections. For at such a time it is not
lawful for him to speak ill of any man, but only to communicate with him of
his own affayrs. And he may not go so far also, as to remember him with too
great affection, the blood spent by his ancestors in his service, nor the
great acts of his parents: for this only word said to ye prince, I did this,
better pleases and lyketh the Prince, then to tell him a hundred other words
of that that his predecessors had done. It pertayneth only to women, and they
may justly crave recompense of the prince for the lives of their husbands lost
in the princes wars: but the valiant, and worthy courtier, ought not to
demand recompense, but for that he only has done, by persyng lance, and
bloody sword. He must beeware also that he show no countenance to the king
of insatisfaccion, neither to be passioned in casting his service in the
princes teeth, saying all others have been recompensed save only him, whom the
Prince has clean forgotten. For princes will not that we only serve them, but
that we also (at their wills and pleasures) tarry for recompense, and not to
have it when we gape, or are importune for yt. Howbeeit it is lawful
notwithstanding, humbly and lowly, without cholor or passion, to put the Prince
in remembrance of all that we have done for him, and of the long time we
have spent in seruyng him. Also the curious courtier shall not show him self to
dyslike at all of the prince, neither by heaping of many words, to induce him
to bear him the better good will. For men's hearts are so prone to ill, that for
one only unpleasant or overthwart word spoken to them, they lightly forgeat a
thousand seruyces done them.

Socrates being one day demanded what he thought of ye princes of Greece,
answered. There is no other difference beetwene the names and properties of
the gods, and that of princes, but that the Gods were immortal, and these
mortal. For these mortal princes use in manner the like aucthority here in
earth, that the gods immortal do in heaven above. Saying further also, that I
always was, am, and wilbee of that mind, that my mother Greece remayn a common
weal. But since it is determined to be governed by princely monarchy, I wish
them in all, and for all, to acknowledge their obedyence and allegiance to
their king and sovereign. For when they woold otherwise use it, they may be
assured they shall not only go against mortal princes, but also against the
eternal god. Suetonius Tranquillus says, that Titus the emperor being
advertised that the consuls woold kill him, and vsurp his empire, answered
thus wisely. Even as without the divine will and providence I coold never have
possessed the imperial crown, so without their permission and sufferaunce, it
lies in no man's power to deprive me of it.

For to us men it pertains only to keep the imperial iurisdiccion, and to
the gods alone to geeue and defend it: Which we have spoken, to thend no man
presume to be revenged of his prince, neither in word nor deed: for to speak
ill of him, we shoold rather purchase us their high indignation and
displeasure, then procure us any cause or suggestion to be revenged of him.
Let the good courtier be also aduysed, that in talking with the prince he be
not to obstinate, to contend with the prince, or any other in the princes
presence: For this name of arrogant, and self willed, beecommeth not the person
of a wise courtier. For we know that in sport, and argument every man desires
to overcome, how tryfling so ever the matter be.

And therefore we read in the life of the emperor Seuerus, that Publius the
consul iested one day with Fabritius his compagnion, and told him he was in
love. Whom Fabritius answered: I confess it is a fault to be in love, but
yet it is a greater fault for thee to be so obstinate as thou art. For love
proceeds of wit and discretion: but obstinacy, comes of folly and great
ygnoraunce. If perchance the king ask the courtiers opinion in those matters
they discoursed, if he know his opinion to agree with the princes, let him
tell it him hardely: but if it be contrary, let him hold his peace, and not
contend against him, framyng some honest excuse to concele his oppinon. But if
perhaps the king were obstinate, and bent to his oppinion in any thing, and
that through his self will and obstinacy, he woold do any thing unreasonable,
or prejudicial to his common wealth, and that great detryment might come
thereby: yet for all this, in such case the beeloued courtier shoold not at
that instant be to plain with him, to let him understand his error, neither
yet shoold he suffer him altogeether to pass his way untouched, but in some
fine manner and proper words (as may beecome the place best) to geeue him to
understand the troth. But to use it with more discretion, he shall not need
before them all to open his whole mind, but to keep his oppynion secret,
expecting a more apter time, when the king shall be apart in his privy
chamber, and then frankly to tell him his hole mind, with all humylity and
reverence, and to show him the plain troth, without keeping any one thing from
his knowledge. For otherwise in tellyng the king openly, he shoold make him
ashamed: and in dyssemblyng his fault also privily, he shoold not be
admonished of his error committed. Now therefore let our conclusion be, that
the courtier that proceeds in his matters, rather with oppinion and obstinacy,
then discretion and judgment: shall never be in favor with the Prince, nor
yet beeloued in the court. For it is as necessary for the courtier, that will
seek the favor of the prince and love of the court, to impose his tongue to
silence: as it is to dyspose his body to all manner of service. I know there are
some such rash, indiscreet, and arrogant fools, that as much do bost and
rejoice to have spoken indiscreetly to the king, and without respect of his
princely majesty: as if they had done some marvelous thankful service, with
whom truly no man ought to be greatly offended, for such fond bostes and
vaunts as they make, and much less also with that that happens to them
afterward. The courtier also must be well aduysed, that albeeit the king for
his pleasure do privily play with his hands, or jest with his tongue with the
courtier, and that he take great pleasure in it: yet that he in no case
presume to do the like, (yea though he were assured the kings majesty woold
take it well:) but let him modestly beehaue him self, and show by his words
and countenance that he thinks the prince does honor him, in pleasing his
majesty to use those pastymes and pleasant deuyses, with so unworthy a person
as he is. For the prince may lawfully play, and sport him self with his lords
and gentlemen: but so may not they again with him. For so doing, they might
be counted very fond and light. With a man's compagnions and coequals it is
lawful for every man to be merry and play with all. But with the prince, let
no man so hardy once presume further, more then to serve, honor, and obey him.
So that the wise courtier, must endeavor him self always to come in favor by
his wisdom, and courtly beehauiour, in matters of weight and importance: and
by great modesty and gravity, in things of sport and pass time. Therefore
Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that Alcibiades, amongst the Greeks a
worthy captayn, and a man of his own nature disposed to much mirth and
pleasure, being asked once by some of his familiar friends why he never
laughed in theaters, bankers, and other common plays where he was, answered
them thus. Where others eat, I fast: where others take pain and play, I rest
me and am quiet: where other speak I am silent: where they laugh, I am
courteous, and jest not. For wise men are never known but among fools, and
light persons. When ye courtier shall understand, or here tell of pleasant
things to be laughed at, let him in any case (if he can) fly from those great
laughters and foolries? that he be not perhaps moved too much with such toys,
to laugh to loud, to clap his hands, or to do other gestures of the body, or
admirations to vehement, accompanied rather with a rude and barbarous manner of
beehauiour, then with a civil and modest noblenes. For over great and
excessive laughter was never engendered of wisdom, neither shall he ever be
counted wise of others that uses it. There are also an other sort of courtiers
that speak so coldly, and laugh so dryly, and with so ill a grace, that it were
more pleasure to see them weep, then to laugh. Also to nouel or to tell tales
to delyght others, and to make them laugh, you must be as brief as you can,
that you weary not, and comber not the auditory: pleasant and not biting nor
odyous. Else it chances often times, that wanting any of these conditions, from
jesting they come many times to good earnest. Elius Spartianus in the life of
the Emperor Seuerus says that the said Emperor had in his court a pleasant
fool, and he seeing the fool one day in his domps and cogitacions, asked him
what he ayled to be so sadd? The fool made answer. I am deuysing with
myself what I shoold do to make thee merry. And I swear to thee (my lord
Seuerus) that for as much as I way thy life dear, possible I study more in ye
nights for the tales I shall tell thee in the morrow after, then do thy
Senators touching that they must decree on the next day. And I tell thee
further (my lord Seuerus) that to be pleasant and delighting to the prince,
he must neither be a very fool, nor altogeether wise. But though he be a
fool, yet he must smatter somewhat of a wise man: and if he be wise, he
must take a little of the fool for his pleasure. And by these examples we may
gather, that the courtier must needs have a certain modesty and comely grace,
as well in speaking, as he must have a soft and sweet voice in singing. There
are also some in court, that spare not to go to noble men's bords to repast,
which being in deed, the unseemly grace it self, yet in their words and
talk at the board they woold seem to have a marvelous good grace, wherein they
are often deceived. For if at times the Lords and gentlemen laugh at them, it is
not for any pleasure they take in their talk, but for the ill grace, and uncomely
gestures they use in their talk. In the bankets and feasts courtyers make some
times in the summer, there are very often such men in their company, that if the
wine they drank took their condition, yt shoold be drunk either colder, or
whotter then it is.

How the Courtier shoold beehaue him self to know, and to visit the noble men
and gentlemen, that be great with the Prince and continuing still in court.
Cap. vi.
THe courtier that comes newly to the court to serve there, must immediately
learn to know those that are in aucthority, and favor in the court, and that
are the princes officers. For if he do otherwise, neither shoold he be
acquainted with any noble man or gentleman, or any other of the princes
servant, neither woold they also geeue him place, or let him in when he
woold. For we be not conversant with him we know not, and not being
conversant with him, we trust him not, and distrusting him, we commit no
secrets to him: So that he that will come in favor in the court, must make him
self known, and be friend to all in general. And he must take heed that he
begin not to suddenly to be a busy suter in his own private affairs, or for
his friend, for so he shall be soon reputed for a busy soliciter, rather then a
wise courtier. Therefore he that will purchase favor and credit in the court,
must not be to careful to prefer men's causes, and to entermedle in many
matters. For the nature of princes is, rather to commit their affairs in the
hands and trust of grave and reposed men, then to busy and importunate
soliters. The courtier also may not be negligent to visyt the prelates,
gentelmen, and the favored of the court, nor to make any difference beetween
the one and the other: and not only to vysyt their parents and friends, but his
enemies also. For the good courtier ought to endeavor him self the best he can
to accept all those for his friends at least, that he can not have for parents
and kinsfolks. For amongst good and virtuous courtiers, there should never be
such bloody hate, that they should therefore leave one to company with an
other, and to be courteous one to another. Those that be of base mind, do
show their cankred hearts by forbearing to speak, but those that be of noble
blood and valiant courage, beegynne first to fight, ere they leave to speak
togethers. There is also an other sort of courtiers, which being sometimes at
the table of noble men, or else where when they hear of some quarrel or private
dyspleasure, they show them selves in offer like fyerce lions, but if
afterward their help be craved in any thing, and that they must needs stand
by their friend and draw on his side: then they show them selves as still as
lambs, and gentle enough to be entreated. Amongst others the new come courtier
has to be acquainted withal, he must learn to know those the prince
favors, and loves best, on whom he must attend and wayt upon, and do all
the service he can, without grudge and disdaigne. For there is no king, but
far of on him, has an other king, that still contrarieth his mind, and
preuenteth him of his intent and pleasure: And ever near unto him some, whom
he loves and favors, that may dispose of the prince as he lysteth.
Plutarke writing to Traian said these words. I have (O Traian) great pytty on
thee, for the first day thou tookest upon thee the Imperial crown of the
Romayn Empire, of a free man thou thraldst thy self to bondage. For only you
other princes have authority to geeue lyberty to all others, but never to grant
it to your selves, saying more over, that under the color of royal lyberty,
you shall remayn more subject, then your own subjects that ere obey you. For if
you command many in their houses, also one alone after commands you in
your own court. Now although many commanded the prince, or that he would
follow the counsel but of a few, or that he loved one above an other, or that
he consented one alone should govern him, thee good courtyer need not once
open his mouth to reason of the matter. For so it might easily fall out, he
should beegynne out of hand to feel in the court, of what importance yt were
to enter into such discourse of the prince, and afterward to go home to his
own house, to end yt with bitter tears. First to purchase the high indygnation
of the prince, secondly to be dysdeigned of the court, thirdly to be cast
quyte out of favor, fourthly to be exyled and banished the verge of the court,
and fyftly and lastly to end the rest of his woeful days in vile and miserable
place. Now if it be hard to compass to get into the princes favor, I thynk yt
no very ill counsel yt at least he seek to be in favor with him that is in
the princes favor. For often times there comes as much displeasure to us, being
ill willed of those ye prince does esteem and favor: as there does by ye
princes own indygnacion, that reigns over us. For that we talk of princes,
comes not all to his ears (and but seldom) unless the matter be
sclaunderous and offensive to his majesty. But to the contrary, we no sooner
speak of those that be in favor, and beeloued of the prince, but they are not
only with speed advertised what was spoken of them: but they further dyuine
what we thought of them. Therefore my friend courtier, sith it lies not in
thee to diminish or impair his credit, that is in favor with ye prince, and
beeloued in ye court: neither to displace his matters and suyts he takes in
hand, and yt thou have no authority to reform and govern the common weal, nor
to redress and amend the wrongs and injuries received, I would wish thee to
follow my counsel. If thou spy the fauts and imperfections of the court, that
thou rather suffer and abide them, in keepyng them secret: the^ to seem to
reprove them openly, when thou see princes the^ selves contented to dissemble
and cover them privily. It is therefore the sounder counsel, to follow and
serve those that are in favor and credit, then to pursue them in word or
deed. And therefore ye courtier must be very choice with whom he is
familiar, to whom he speaks, whom he trusts, who hears him, and of whom
he receives all his intellygence. For there is great difference beetweene the
words that are spoken, and the intent and meaning with which they were spoken.
For the bowels and intrails of courtiers are so damnable, and their hearts so
crooked, and diuerted from the right path way of bounty and goodness, that the
new and ignorant courtier shall think him self much profited by their aduices,
and admonitions, when in deed they shall but deceive him: and shall think he
was well counseled, when he shall find him self the most deceived in the
world, and in greater anger then before. There are some also so little
contented with ye prince, and so ill recompensed for their saruice, that they
are not only not his friends, but they practyse secretly to purchase him more
enemies. And when the courtier sees, that he that is in favor and credyt,
does in deed styck close with him unfeignedly, what need he care then,
though all the rest be his enemies. And the good courtier must consider, that
he goes not to the court to revenge iniuryes, but only to purchase honor and
profyt. To whom also I geeue counsel, that he be not enemy to him that is in
favor, nor friend to his enemy: and yet it shall be best for him to be friend
to all, and enemy to none, if he can possible. Who so ever desires to be
well thought of in the court, and to be beeloued of courtyers, it is better
for him to suffer injuries done him, then he him self to be a procurer of
them to others. And for the injuries, detractyons, and mutynyngs that they
shall raise against the favored of the court, no man ought to trust any other
person then him self: sith that for the most part whom they do trust, (when
he shall have need of the good report, and credit of him that is in favor
with the prince, thinkyng to do him a piece of great saruice) he shall not
care to unfold to him even the bottom of his friends secrets, which were
committed to him in great secresy. He must also consider that he can not
possibly in a short time grow in favor with the prince, nor come also to be
accepted for a friend of him that is in favor about the prince: but the sooner
to hasten his good fortune, he must acquaint him self thoroughly with the
officers and servants of the beeloued, and do them a thousand pleasures daily,
as well in courteous words, as in seruyng their turns also with money or jewels,
presenting them ever with some pretty small token from them, to have them in mind,
and to remember them to their masters. For the true order of this disorder, is
in effect to be rather friend to their servants, then familiar or beeloued with
their masters, that are in so great favor: he must also be informed, which of
his servants (that is in estimacion with the prince) is in best credit with his
master, and him he must seek to make his friend above al other his fellows.
For even as the prince has a servant whom he loves, that leads him
altogether: even so likewise has the favored courtier, a servant about him, yt
commands him. There is no will so free and lyberal, neither any lord so high
and absolute, nor judge so upright a iusticer, but in ye end he geeueth more
trust and credit to one, then to an other. And hereof proceeds most commonly,
that we love not those we ought to love, but those whom we fansy most. Now
therefore following our intent, touching the visitacion of courtiers, he must
lay watch, and consider well to procure knowledge, first, if any such noble men,
or other his friends, (which he has devotion to visyt) be occupied, or
withdrawn to their bed cha^bers, for some private busynes of theirs, for if it
were so, they woold rather think he came to trouble them, the^ to visit them.
And therefore he that is wise (in visiting his friends) may not be too
importune upon them to prease into their bed chamber, neither to be too
tedious and unpleasant in his words. There are some so solitary, yt woold
never be vysyted, and others that desires to be visited every day, others
there be yt woold the visitacion shoold be short, others that take such
pleasure to hear a long discourse, that he woold his tale shoold never be
ended. So that the courtier must look into the natures of men, and so to frame
his visitacions, according to the conditions of their mind: and to remember his
visitations to great, and grave men, be not so often and daily, that they be
troublesome to him: nor so seldom, that they may think them strangers, and
that they had forgotten him. That only deserves the name of a true visitacion,
where the person visyted may not be troubled with importunacy, nor the visyter
may dymynish any part of his credyt and estimacion, and also that he prejudice
not his own commodyty in his affairs. I speak it for some that are so
troublesome in their visytacions, and so foolish and tedious in their words,
not knowing how to make an end, that we may better call them troublesome,
envious, and impudent, then honest vysiters, and faithful friends. And
therefore we should leave them so contented we vysyt, that they shoold rather
be angry to leave our company, then that they should complayn of our
importunity: geeuing them rather occasyon to meet us with a pleasant
countenance, when we enter into their house, then to make them hyde them
selves, or fly from us, when they see us, and to say they are not within. And
me thinks in deed where we have not great and straight friendship, or else
some affairs of great importance that touches us much, it should be
sufficient to vysyt our friends and acquaintance, once in a month: and where
they would see us more oftener, let us carry till they complayn, and find fault,
and send to us to let us understand it, and not that we be so ready to come
to offer and present our selves unto them, unless the necessity of our cause
do urge us. There are some persons so indiscreet in being vysited, that when
others come to see them, either they make the gates to be shut upon them,
or they cause their servants to say they are not within, or else they get them
out at the backdore, or they fayn that they are a little a^rafed, only to avoid
and fly from these troublesome and babbling visyters* So that they had rather
see a seriant enter into his house to arrest them for debt, then to be cumbred
with these loathsome and pratyng vysyters. Also yt is not fyt to go see their
friends at unlawful hours, as about dynner or supper time: for those that are
vysyted, will rather thynk they come to dyne or suppe with them, then of
curtesy and good will to see them. It happens sometimes, that many are brave
and rytch in apparel, that keep but a poor and mean ordynary at their table,
sparyng from their mouth to lay yt upon their backs: and therefore they are
very loath, and offended, that any of their friends or famylyars should take them
at meals to judge of them: for they thynk yt less pain to fast from meat
secretly, then that their scarcety should openly be discovered. Also the laws
of honesty, and ciuylity, do not permit any man to enter into the house, hall,
or chamber of an other, without knockyng, or calling first at the door. For
that only pryuyledge to come into the house suddenly, and speak never a word,
beelongeth to the husband or masters of the house. Also it is not good to go
see his friend when he is at play, for if he be a loser, it can not be but
he will chafe and be in choler (in his mind) with his friend, to come then to
trouble him, and to let him of his play: And if happily he were a wynner before
his friend came to see him, and afterward chance to be a loser again: he
will lay thoccasyon of his loss upon his friend that came of good will to see
him, and say that he turned his good luck away from him, and that he came but
to trouble him, taking it rather for an offense and injury done him, then for
any good love or duty showed him. If our friend in like manner whom we go to
vysyt, come out of his chamber to receive us, not byddyng us come into the
camber, nor to sit down, but standing to talk with us without any other
curtesy or enterteynment, we may easily perceive by this his manner of
interteynment that he geeueth us good and honest leave to depart when we
will. The wise, and fine courtyer, will as easily find and understand him by
his signs, as he will do sometimes by his words. Also the courtier must
take great heed that inseemyng to use curtesy, he happen not to make some
foolish countenance in pulling of his cap, in making curtesy, coming into the
hall, or taking a stool to sit down, lest he be therefore marked and mocked of
the standers by, or noted for proud or presu^ptuous, for to stay or let at
these triffles, a man rather gets the name of a glorious, light, and proud:
then of a grave and sober man. All things touching conscience, ciuility, and
honor, the good courtier should always have in memory, and before his eyes,
when he shall discourse with his lord, or vysyt his friend. And for the first
beeginning of his discourse, and talk with him (after they are set down
togethers) he must ask him how his body does, and whether all his house be
meery and in good health: for yt is the thing that we must first procure for
our own private commodity, and secondly desire yt for our friends. Also in the
courtyers vysitacions he may not be too curious or inquisytiue of news,
nether over beesy to tell news: for after his friend were once advertised of the
troth, it might be lightly, he woold thank him for his coming and comend him
for his curtesy: and notwtstanding blame him for his news, and count him a
liar. And if it happen we find the party whom we visyt, sad, comfortles, and
in some necessity, although he were not our friend, yet for that he is a
chrystyan, we ought to comfort him in words, and to seek also to help and
relieve him with some what. Licurgus in his laws he made ordained, that it
should not be lawful for any man to come to see a prisoner, but he should
held to deliver him: nor any poor man, but he shoold relieve him: nor any
sick or diseased parson, but he should help and comfort him to his able power.
And truly me thinks Licurgus had great reason to make this law, since we see
that in experience, that a man's mind, for one only thing that is geeuen him,
is better contented and satisfied: then with a thousand words that they can
speak to him. And if his house whom they go to vysyt, and where he dwells,
be his own inheritance, and fee simple, or that he has it by lease or
purchase, or that he buylt it out of the ground, or if he have repaired or
new coated yt, the courtier must pray him to let him see yt, and when he has
seen yt he must greatly commend it to him: for all mortal men have this
common fault and humor, that we must be praised of our doings and not
reproved for our faults. Further if they vysyt any sick person, they must
remember they speak but little to him, and that softly, and pleasant matters:
for otherwise yt should seem (and they will also beeleeue) he came to see him,
rather to aggrauat his sickness more, then to comfort him. We must ever make
short visytacions, not only with the sick and dyseased, but the whole and
sound. And then the good courtier must take his leave of them, when he is even
in his most pleasant discourse, to thend they may entreat him to tarry longer:
and not to tarry till they seem to license him by outward signs and
ceremonies: and he that shall go visyt an other, let him take heed he be
not so long, and tedious in his talk, that the parson whom he visyteth do
rise before him. For it were too plain a token he were weery of his company
and long tariyng, sith he rose before him to geeue him occasion to depart. If
his wife whom he visits, be not a sister or kynswomen of the courtiers yt
visyts him, or that they be not of very familyar acquaintance togethers, he
should not once seem to ask for her, much less to desire to see her. For as
Scipio says, a man should not trust any to see his wife, nor to prove his
sweord. It is also a custom used among courtiers, yt when they go to any man's
house to see him, before they light of on their horse, they send to know
whether he be within or no. And when the courtier takes his leave of him he
has visyted, he must not suffer the gentilman to bring him out of his chamber
to accompany him, much less to come down the staiers with him: which if he
use in this manner, the other shallbee bound to thank him for his coming, and
shall commend him for his ciuility. And if it happen when we go to vysyt some
noble man, or other beeloued of ye court at his lodging, and yt at our coming
he is ready to come out of his house to ride abroad in the fields to take air,
or to ride to ye court to solicyte some of his affairs, or to ride abroad into
the town for his pleasure, the dylygent courtyer must willyngly accompany him,
and offer him all the service he can: and so he shall deserve double thanks of
him, the one for his coming, and the other for his gentle offer and company. To
visyt the princes servants, it is not ye manner (for that they are always
occupied in the princes service) neither shall they have such time of leisure as
other have. And because they have no time comodious to see the^ at home at
their own houses, yet at the least the good courtier must needs accompany them
at times when they go abroad. For there is more reason the esteemed courtier
should make more of him that accompanies him, then of ye other that is too
importunat and toublesome to him.

Of the good countenance and modesty the courtier should have, in beehauyng
him self at the prince or noble man's table in the time of his meal. Cap. vii.
THose that are abiding still in princes court, must in any case go seldom, or
not at al, abroad to others tables, but always to keep their own. For that
courtier that runs from table to table, to eat of there is cost, to have his
meat free, is not so sparing of his purse, as he is too prodygall and lavish
of his good reputacion. Therefore Eschines the philosopher being demanded one
day, what a man should do to be counted good, he answered thus. To beecome
a parfyt Greek, he must go to the church willingly, and of good devotion,
and to the wars of necessity: but to feasts and bankets, neither of will, nor
of necessity, unless it be to do them honor and pleasure that do inuit
thee. Suetonius Tranquillus writes, that themperor Augustus prohibyted in
Rome, that no man should conuite each other, to feast, or banquet with an other,
but if his friend woold do him ye honor to come to his feast, that then he
should send him home to his house, of that meat he should have had at the
feast and banquet with them at their houses. And when he was asked of certain
of his friends what he meant to make this law: he gave them this answer. The
cause that moved me, good friends, to forbid plays, and bankets in Rome was:
because in play, no man can keep him self from swearing, and terrible
blaspheming the name of god: and in bankets every man is geeuen to detect and
defame his neighbor. Cicero reconteth of Cato the Censor, that he lying in his
death bed, at the mercy of god, should say these words. Four things I
remember I have done in my life, wherein I have rather showed my self a
voluptuous and negligent Barbarian, then a wise and good Romain citisin, for
the wc I find my self sore grieved.

The first is this. For that I spent a whole day and forgot to serve the gods,
and did not profyt my common weal in any thing, wc I should never have done.
For it is as great a dishonor for a philosopher to be counted an idle and
neglygent person: as it is for a noble heart, to be counted a rank coward.

The second is for that safly I might once have gone by land, and perilously I
hasarded my self upon the water. A thing wc I shoold well have let alone. For
never no wise man should ever have put him self into peril, onles yt were only
for the service of the gods, for the increase of his honor, or for the defense
of his country.

The third is, yt I opened once a great secret, and matter of importance to a
woman, wc I ought less to have done then all the rest. For in grave matters,
and things of counsel, there is no woman capable to geeue counsel, and much
less to take it, and least of all to keep it secret.

The fowerth was, that an other time I was contented to be overcome by a friend
of mine that earnestly inuyted me to his house to dinner, and thereupon I went
with him, wc I shoold not have done. For to say the troth, there was never
famous nor worthy person that went to eat in an other man's house, but yt he
diminished his liberty, hasardyng also his grauyty and reputacion to the rumor
and brute of others. The wc words being so wisely spoken by the prudent Cato,
were well worthy to be noted and carried away, and so much the more, yt being
now drawing to his last home, and even in his last breathing hour he only
spoke of these four things and no more, whereof, although he were a Romain,
yet he showed to us a repenting mind. But woe is me, yt albeeit I bear the
name of a christian, yea and that I am so in deed, yet in that last day when
nature sommons me, I fear me, and beeleeue assuredly I shall have cause to
repent me of more then four things. Now by these things heretofore recyted
we may easily conjecture, that albeeit we are contented to be entreated and
requested in many things, yet in this only to go to others tables to feast.
and in strange houses we shoold not be entreated, but rather compelled and
against our wills. And where the courtier is forced by importunancy to accept
the bidding, without offering him self before, he deserves as great thanks of
the bidder for his coming, as the other did in bidding him. For if it should
not be so, it should seem rather a dynner for strangers that travels by the
way, then for noble men and gentelmen that comes from the court. For that day
the courtier grants to dine with any man, the same day he byndeth him self
to be beeholding to him that bids him: for although he come to him of good
will, yet to acquit his curtesy done him, he is bound of necessity. Also it
is a small reputacion (and worthy great reproach) that a courtier make his
boste he has eaten at all the tables and officers boords in the court, and yt
no man can say he has once been at dinner or supper with him at his own house.
And truly I remember I knew once a courtier yt might dispe^d above two
hundredth ducats by year, who told me, and assured me he never bought stick
of wood to warm him with in his chamber, nor pot to sees his meat in, neither
spyt to roast with all, nor that ever he had any cater for his provision, save
only yt he had made a register of many noble men's boords, amongst who^ he
equally divided his dyners and suppers. By means whereof he saved al his
charges, save only his men's board wages. But what vileness or discurtesy coold
equal the misery and shame of this careless courtier? Suer not that of ye
meanest and poorest slave of the world, ye lives only by his hyer: no it
deserves not to be compared unto it. For to what end desire we the goods of
this world, but yt by them we may be honored, relieve our parents and
kinsmen, and thereby also win us new friends? what state or condition so ever
he be of, yt has enough and abundance, we are not bound to esteem ye more
of him for that, nor to do him the more honor, but only for that he spends
it well, and woorshipfully, and for his honor, if he be honorable. And this we
speak of gentleman as of cytisyn. And he that in court makes profession to
dine at other men's tables, I dare undertake if they dine betimes on ye holly
day, he will rather lose saruice in the morning, then dinner at noone. And if
any friend come to lie with these sort of courtiers, and that he be but newly
come to the court, straight ways he will have him with him to dinner, and bring
him to salute ye gentleman where he dines that day, saying that he was bold
to bring his kinsman and friend with him to salute him, and all this is not so
much to bring him acquainted with him, as it is to spare his meat at home for
both. And yet they have an other knack of court fyner the^ this. They flatter
ye pages and servants, because they should ever geeue the^ of the best wine at
ye table, and with certain familiar noddes and sweet words they entertain the
lords, shewers, and caruers, and make much of them, yt they should set before
them full dyshes and of ye best and deintiest meat. There are also some of
these courtiers that to be well waited upon at the table, and to make them his
friends, do sometimes present the steward with a velvet cap, the shewers with a
pair of washed or perfume gloves, the pages with a sweord girdel, and the
butlers or cooberd keepers with some other pretty reward or devise. And it
chances often times in noble men's houses that there are so many gests to dyne
and sup with him daily, that many times the board will not hold the^ al by a
great number: wc when they once perceive, to see how quickly and with what
speed the courtiers take their places to set them down and to be suer of a
room, it is a world to see it. But oh I woold to god they were so happy and
dilygent to go to the church and hear a sermon, as they are busy to get them
stools to sit at the table. And if perhaps a courtier come late, and yt the
table be all ready full, and the lurch out, yet he will not be ashamed to
eat his meat nevertheless. For albeeit he can not be placed at his ease yet he
is so bold and shameless, that rather then fail he will sit of half a buttock,
or beehynd one at the table. I remember I saw once at a noble man's board three
courtiers set upon one stool, like the four sons of Amon, and when I
rebuked them for it, and told them it was a shame for them, they answered me
merely again, that they did it not for that there wanted stools, but to prove
if need were if one stool woold bear them three. Such may well be called
greedy gluttons, and shameless prowlers, without respect or honesty, that when
they are dead, would be buried in the highest place of the church: and when
they are alive, little force at whose table they sit, or how they sit, litel
regarding their honor or estate. Truly for him that is poor and needy, to
seek his meat and drink where he may come by it best it is but meet: but for
the gorgeous courtyer, be decked with gold, be buttoned and be iewelled,
ietting in his veluets and silks, to beg and seek his dinner daily at every
man's board, being nobly and honorably enterteined of the prince, and able to
bear his countenance: what reproach, defame, and dishonor is it to him? He
that uses daily to run to other men's tables, is often times forced to sit
lowest at ye board upon a broken stool, and to be served with a rusty knyfe,
to eat in foul dishes, and to drink for a change whot water, and wine more
then half full of water, and to eat hoar bread, and that yt of all others yet
is worst of all, every one of the servants looks over ye shoulders on him, and
are angry with him in their mynds. Truly he that with these conditions goes
abroad to seek his dinner, were better in my opinion to fast with bread and
water at home, then to fill his belly abroad. But such men's reward, that haunts
men's houses in this manner, is this in the end, that ye noble men to whose
houses they come to, are offended with them, the stewards of the house murmr
at them, the pages and servants mocks them, and laughs the^ to scorn, the
tasters and cup bearers chafe with them in their mynds, the cubberd keepers
wonder at them, ye clarks of the kychyn thinks them importunat and shameless
creatures. Wherefore it follows (who soever will observe it) yt so soon as
the servants see him once come into the dyning chamber, some of them hydes ye
stool where he woold sit down, others set before him the woorst meat of the
board and the filthiest dishes they have, and therefore he yt may have at home
at his house his poor little pyttance well dressed, a fair white table cloth, a
bright knife, new and white bread, wood and candel in the winter, and other
necessaries: if he like better to go from table to table, from kychyn to
kychyn, and from one buttery to an other, I will suppose he does it for great
spare and hardness, or for want of honesty and good manners. Now he that keeps
an ordinary house, and remayns always at home, may dine if it be in the somer
season, in his shyrt if he list, he may sit when he will, and where it
please him, he drinks his wine fresh, and has the flies driven from his table
with the ventola, he disdaigneth the court and noble men's boords, keeping his
own as frank and as sparing as he list, and no man to gayn say him: yea and
after meat he is at lyberty to sit still, and take his ease, or to walk abroad
in the shade as he will. And in winter if perhaps he be were, he straight
shifts him, and changes all his clothes, gets him a furred night gown on the
back of him, and a pair of warm slyppers to heat his cold feet with all, he
eats his meat warm and smoking whot, and takes yt he likes best, he drinks
white wine, red wine or claret wine as he thinks good, and need never to care
for them that beehold him. And therefore so great privileges as those be of
lyberty, the courtier should never refuse to buy them for his money, much less
for the gayn of a meals meat he should leave to enjoy them. But if the
courtier will needs determyn to vysyt noble men's boords, he must be very
ware, yt in coming to a noble man's table, he do not so much commend his fare
and ordinary, that he complayn of other men 3 tables where he has fed. For
it is a kind of treason to defame and sclauader those, whose houses they are
wont to visyt often. And when he is set at the table, the courtier must beehaue
him self modestly, he must eat temperatly, and fynely, he must delay his wine
with water, and speak but little: so that those that are present can not but
praise him for his temperancy and sober diet, but also for his wisdom and
moderat speech. To feed mannerly is to be understand, not to blow his nose in
his napkyn, nor to lean his arms upon the table, not to eat to leave nothing
in the dysh, not to find faults with the cooks, saying the meat is not enough,
or not well dressed. For yt were a great shame for the courtier to be noted of
the wayters, to be a belly gut and to be counted a gross feeder. There are
some also that make them selves so familiar and homly in the house, that they
are not contented with that is served them in the dysh, but shamefully they pluck
that to them that is left in other dyshes, so that they are esteemed for
Iesters, no less sawsy and malepert in their order, then insatiable in their
beastly eating. The good courtier must also take heed he lay not his arms to
fair on the table, nor that he make any noise with his teeth or his tongue,
nor smack with his mouth when he eats, and that he drink not with both his
hands on the cup, nor cast his eyes too much upon the best dishes, that he
know, nor tear his bread with his teeth, that he lick not his fyngers, nor
adoone eating before others, nor to have too greedy an appetite to the meat or
sauce he eats, and that in drynkyng he gulp not with his throat. For such
manner of feedyng, rather beecommeth an alehouse, then a noble man's table. And
although the courtyer can not go over all the dyshes that comes to the board,
yet at least let him prove a little of every one, and then he must praise the
good cookry and fine dressyng of them al. For commonly the noble men and
gentlemen that inuit any to their board, take it discourteously, and are ashamed
if the inuyted praise not their meat and drink they geeue them, and not only
the noble men are ashamed of yt, but also the other officers that have the
charge to see yt well dressed, and in good order. Always he that eats at an
other man's table, to do as he ought, shoold praise the woorthines of him that
bad him (yea though perhaps he made a lie) and commend the great care and
diligence of his officers in furnishing his table with so good meats, and in
setting on yt forth in so good order. I say not without a cause that sometime
a praise with a lie may well stand togethers, sense we see some noble men's
tables so sclender furnyshed, and that his ordinary should seem rather a
preparatiue supper and diet for a sick man that means to take physic in the
next morning, then an ordynary, or dinner for Easter day. And therefore I say,
that of right the lords and masters are pleased, when they here their officers
and servants commendid. For they choose most commonly such a steward, as they
knew to be wise, and courteous of nature: a treasorer, true and faithful: a
purueier, expert and diligent: a butler, hasty and melancony: the groom of his
chamber, paynfull and trusty: his secretary, wise and secret: his chappleyn
simple, and his cook fine and curious. For many think it more glory to have an
excellent cook in their house, then to have a valiant captayn, to keep a
strong piece, or hold. They are contented in court that noble men's chappleins
be rather simple then over wise, or well learned. For if he read but little,
he has the sooner say service, and therewith also is more fyt to drudge and
do service about the house. Now therefore continuing our beegoonne purpose, the
courtier that eats at other men's tables, must see he drink little, and that
his wine be well delayed with water. For wine tempered with water, brings
two commodityes: the one, it makes him sober that drinks it, and shall not be
ouerseen: the other, he shall not dystemper him self, that the wayters have any
occasyon to laugh at him. If yt should hap sometimes that he found the wine
well watered before, that yt had stood a pawlyng long, or that yt were some
what sharp or sower, or that the water were to whot: the good courtier shoold
not therefore immedyatly complain and find fault at the table, for so he
shoold shame the servants, and make them angry with him, and also displease
their master. Truly it is a grief to suffer yt, to see that he that has
nothing at home in his own house, either to eat or drynk, will yet look to be
well used at an other man's house, and is never satisfied. I speak yt for
certain indiscreet courtiers, and wanting judgment, that being at any man's
board, (without any shame) dare dispraise the cooks, and speak ill of them, if
perhaps the taste of their porage and meat myslyke them, and that it be not
good, and according to their appetit: and of the butlers, if the wine be not
cold and fresh: of those that weight above, if every thing they call for, be
not done at a beck and quickly: of the stewards of the house, if they be not
served immediately: and of the boys and pages, if they geeue them not drink
sodeinly: of the caruers, if they carue them not to their lyking: and also with
the clarks of the kychyn, if they see them not served with meat enough, that
there be enough lest upon the table. So that the noble men's officers (for the
more part) have more trouble and displeasure, by the discontentacion of those
that come to their masters table, then they have by the evil words their
masters speaks to them. And for this respect therefore no man ought to be so
bold as once to open his lyps to complayn of any want in an other man's house,
as if they serve him with claret wine, rather then with white: or with white,
then claret. For a right and parfect courtier, shoold not set his appetit in ye
taste nor variety of wynes, or meats in an others house. I grant that it is
very fit, and lawful for young courtiers, to run well, to leap far, to
throw the bar of Iron, to dance well, to ride a horse well to manedge and
geeue him his carere well, and to turn well, to handle his weapon well, and to
break a staff well, and otherwise to help him self with all manner of weapons:
but for one to defye an other in drinking, it shoold be a great sacrilege of
the courtier. The Scithiens, as ratifieth Trogus Pompeius, were so sober and
modest in eating and drinking at their meats, that it was a foul fault among
them to break wynd, or belch. And therefore now a days we find few Scithiens,
but many drinkers, which depart from the feast so full freight, as immediately
when they are come home, they unload their charged stomach, and lay open all that they have eaten and dronken. Wherefore he yt uses to drink clean, and
pure water, is at more liberty, then those that drink wine simply, without
compou^d. For excessive drinking of wine, does not alonly troble and distemper
the brain and judgment of the drinker: but further discovers to you, great
and horrible vices. Therefore yet touching our matter, I say once again, that it
is a fond dispute, and argument, to prove which of the wines were best,
pleasant, and most swetest, and which is oldest or newest, sharp or hard, soft
or sweet, clearest or darkest, or of best taste or quickest savor. For to judge
of the taste of wynes, and to know the goodness and perfection of it, rather (to
say truly) beelongeth to a Tauerner or vintner, then rightly to an honest
courtier. And it is fitter, and more decent also for him, to talk of arms and
chivalry, then to deal in discourse of Bacchus feasts. What a mockry, and
foolish nicety is it of him, that not only drinks water alone, but also cannot
drink it in that cup, where there has been wine filled before. He shall also
be very circumspect that is bidden to a strangers house, that he drink not
so deep at a draught, that he leave nothing in the cup, neither that he
drink so long as he has breath, and the water stand in his eyes again. For
the grave and sober courtier shoold never drink, till he might no more, nor
till there were none left. Also when he is at the table, he shoold not enter
in argument and dispute with any, neither shoold he be obstinat in oppinion,
and much less use filthy or uncomely talk: and he must also bridle nature
much, that he cry not out in laughyng as some do. For like as yt sounds to
his reproach, to be noted a glutton, and drunkerd: it is in like case far
worse, to be accounted a fool, and a iester.

Also it preuayleth little that a courtier be moderate, and honest in eating,
if he be dishonest, and insolent in his talk. For many times it happens at
noble men's boords, that they take more pleasure in some, then in other some:
not to see them eat and drink well, but to hear them tell lies, and to be
pleasant at the board. Therefore as we have said, the wise courtyer shoold
praise and commend all that he sees served at an other man's table, and it is
not lawful for him to dislyke or dispraise it. And further because he is
fedd at an other man's charge, he must of necessity take all in worth that is
geeuen him, and set before him, and not to look to have that that he
desires. And when there is any question moved at the table of the best and
most delicat dishes, and of the fynest cooks, and of ye new kinds of broths
and sawces, and from whence the fattest capons come, it shall not be fit for
ye wise courtier to say in that al yt he knows and understands. For how
much honor it is for him to be able to talk in martial feats, or chiualry: so
much more dishonor and reproach it is to him, to be skillful in dressing of
meats, and all to fill the belly. I remember that being one day at a bishops
board, I hard a knight make great bost and vaunt, that he coold make vii.
manner of fricasies, iiii. kinds of pyes, xii. sorts of sawces, and x. of fruit
tarts, and xii. diverse ways to dress eggs: but to hear him tell these things
was not to be accounted of so much, as the gestures and countenance he made
in telling them. For he did lively show with his hands the present making of
them, the eating of them, and the right tasting of them with his tongue. And
because it happens many times that in some noble man's house there is not
like fare and entertainment that an other has, the cyuill courtier shoold not
be so dishonest, as to make report he leaves that noble man's table, to go
to an others that is better served. For the worthy courtier shoold not haunt
that table where he fares best, but where he fyndeth him self best welcome,
and esteemed. Ah how many noble men and knyghts sons are there, that spare
not to go to any man's board for his meat and drink, yea though it fall out
they be their fathers enemies: and they do it not in respect to reconcile
them, and their fathers togeethers, but rather for a good meals meat, or more
aptly to say, to fill their bellyes with dainties.

What company the courtier shoold keep, and how he shoold apparel him self.
Cap. viij.
THe wise Courtier, both in court and out of court, and in all places where he
comes, must take great regard he accompany with none, but with wise, and
virtuous men. For if he do not, he can not win nor acquire such honor by
his well doing, as he shall lose his credit, by keeping ill company. And
therefore he shall enforce him self always to be in the presens and company
of virtuous and noble men, and shall confer with the most grave, wise, and
honest gentlemen of the court: For using this way, he shall bynd them to him,
by reason of his daily access to them: and he shall purchase him self a good
oppinion of them, besides the good example he shall leave to others to tread
his steps, and follow his coorse. For what is more true, then when a young
gentleman comes newly to the court, you shall see immediately a company of
other young fools, a company of amarous squires, light and idle persons, a
company of troublesome iesters, and covetous praters, besides other young fry in
court, that when they know a new come courtier (namely being of great living)
They will seek to attend upon him, and trayn him to the luer of their affects
and manner, bringing him to like of their qualities and conditions. Wherefore
conningly to shake of the rout of these needy greedy retayners, he must
altogether feed them with fair words, and show them good countenance, and
yet notwithstanding seek by all policy he can to fly their fellowship and
company. Noble men's sons knights sons, and gentleme^s sons, may not think
their friends sends the^ to ye court, to learn new vices, and wicked
practices, but to win them new friends, and obtain the acquaintance of noble
men whose credit and estimation, with the prince may honor and countenance
them, and by their virtues and means, may after a time be brought into the
princes favor also, and daily to rise in credit and reputation amongst others.
Therefore such fathers as will send their children to the court, onles they do
first admonish them well how they ought to beehaue them selves, ere that they
recomend them to to the charge and oversight of some dear and especial friend
of theirs, that will reprove them of their faults when they do amiss. I say
they were better to lay irons on there feet, and send them to. Bedlem or such
other like house where madd men be kept. For if they be bound there in irons,
it is but to bring them to their wits again, and to make them wise: but to
send them to the court lose, and at lyberty without guide, it is the next way
to make them fools, and worse then mad men, assuring you, no greater danger
nor injury can be done to a young man, the^ to be sent to the court, and not
committed to the charge of some one that should take care of him, and look
straightly to him. For otherwise, it were impossible he should be there many
days, but he must needs run into exces and foul disorder, by means whereof
he should utterly cast him self away, and heap upon their parents heads
(continual curses, and greefes, during their lives. And therefore their
fathers) supposing after they have once placed their sons in the court, that
they should no more carke nor care for them, nor reckon to instruct them to be
wise and vrrtuous) find when they come home to them again, that they are laden
with vices, ill complexioned, worse aparelled, their clothes al tottered and
torn, having vainly and fondly spent and played away their money, and worst of
al forsaken their masters, leaving them displeasid with their saruice. And of
these I would admonish the young courtier, because he must of necessity
accompaigny with other young men, that in no case he acquaynte him self with
vicious and ill disposed persons, but with the honest, wise, and courteous:
amongst whom he shall put upon him a certain grave and stayed modesty,
fitting him self only to there companies, being also apt and disposed to all
honest and virtuous exercices, decent for a right gentilman, and virtuous
courtier, shunning with his best policy, the light, foolish, and vain toys
of others. And yet notwithstanding these, my intent and meaning is not to seem
to persuade or teach him to beecome an hippocrite, but only to be courteous,
honest, and well beeloued of other young gentlemen: winning this reputation
withal, to be esteemed for the most virtuous and honestist among them,
gallant and lively in his disportes and pastimes, of few words, and small
conversation amongst bosters and backbyters, or other wicked and naughty
persons: not to be sad among those that are merry, nor dumme among, those yt
talk wisely, and of grave matters: nor to believe he should be accounted a
trim courtier, to take his book in his hands to pray, when others will take
the ball to play, or go about some other honest recreation or pastime for
exercise of the body. For so doing, they would rather take him for a fool and
an Ippocrite, then for a virtuous and honest young man.

Being good reason the child should use the pleasures and pastimes of a child,
young men, disportes and acts of youth: and old men also grave and wise
recreacions fyt for them. For in the end do the best we can, we can not fly
the motions of the flesh, wherein we are borne into this world. These young
gentilmen courtiers must take heed that they become not troblesome,
importunate, nor quarelers, that they be no filchers liers, vacabonds, and
sclaunderers, nor any way geeuen to vice. As for other things, I would not
seem to take from them their pastyme and pleasure, but that they may use them
at their own pleasure. And in all other things lawful and irreprouable,
observing time and hours convenient, and therewithal to accompaigny them
selves with their fellows and compaignions. Also the young courtier that comes
newly to the court, must of necessity be very well apparelled, according to
his degree and calling, and his servants that follow him well appointed. For in
court men regard not only the house and family he comes of, but mark also
his apparel and servants that follow him. And I mislike one thing very much,
that about the court they do rather honor and reverence a man brave and
sumptuous in apparel being vicious, then they do a man that is grave, wise,
and virtuous. And yet nevertheless the courtier may assure him self of this,
that few will esteem of him, either for yt he is virtuous or nobly borne, if
he be not al so sumptuously apparelled and well accompanied, for then only
will every man account and esteem of him. Wherefore I durst take upon me to
swear, if yt were possible to take oath of our bodies, that they would swear
they needed them not, much less desire so large compassed gowns, that every
puff of wynd might swell them as the sails of a ship, nether so long that
trailyng on the ground they gather dust, and cast it into our eyes. Howbeeit I
think now adays these fine men wear then large and wide, and women long with
traynes upon the ground: because in the court and else where, no man makes
reckning of him that spends but orderly, and only upon necessaries to go
clenly withal: but him they set by, that is prodigal, excessive and
superfluous. And who that in his doings and apparel is moderate, and
proceeds wisely: they hold him in court for a miserable and covetous man: and
contrarily, he that is prodigal and lavish in expense, him they count a noble
and worthy person. Albeeit the courtier come of a noble house, and that he be
young of years, rich, and welthy, yet would I like better he should use
rather a certain mean and measure in his apparel (wering that that is comely
and gentilman like) then others of most cost and worship. For like as they
would count him a fool for wering that he could not pay for: So they likewise
would think him simple, if he ware not that that become him, and that he
might easily come by. His apparel should be agreeable with his years, that is
to say, on the holly days some more richer and brauer then on the woorkydayes:
and in the winter of the whottest furrs: in the somer light garments of satin
and damask: and to ride with, some others of lesser price and more durable. For
as the wisdom of man is known by his speaking: so is his dyscretyon decerned
by his apparel. Let not the poor courtyer studdy to wear or deuyse any new
or strange fashioned garment, for if he be of that humor, he shall quickly
undo him self, and geeue others occasion also to follow his light and vain
invention. There are now adays found out so many strange ways to dress meat,
and so many fasshions and paterns of apparel, that now they have universities
of taylers and cooks. What more greater vanity and lightness can there be then
this? that they will not suffer the mothers gowns to be made fyt for their
daughters: saying that they are old and out of fashion, and that they use now a
new kind of apparel and attire far from the old manner. And not withstanding
these gowns be it in manner new, good, hole, clean, rich, and well made, and
without weme, yet their daughters must needs have new gowns at their
mariadge. So that we may aptly say, that a new folly, seeks always a new
gown, namely when they are light persons, without wit and discretion. And I
pray you is it not a goodly sight in ye court, to see a foolish courtier wear
a demie cappe, scant to cover his crown of his head, to have his bearde
marquizottyd, a payr of parfumed gloves on his hands, his shoes cut after the
best fasshion, a litel cutted cape, his hose fair pulled out, his dublet
sleues bravely cut and pinct, his rapier and his dagger guilted by his side:
and then on the other side the pestilens of penny he has in his purse to
bless him with, and beesides he is deep in the marchaunts book for all
those things he has taken up of credit of him.

Their nagges foot clothes would not be so litell and narrow, that should
seem a friars hoode, nether so great and large as the foot clothes of
bisshops moyles. Also the courtier must see that his footecloth be good and
hole, clean, and without spot, not tattered and seame rent. This we speak
because there are soome miserable courtiers that have their foot clothes
thread bare, broken and seame rent, foul and durty narro and all dug full of
holes with their spurs. And therefore no man deseruith to be called a right
courtier, onles he be fine and nete in his apparel he wears, and also
courteous and civil in his words and enterteinment. And yet touching ye rest
of the furniture of their horse, or gelding, their harnes and trappers must be
kept black and clean, and they must look that the reins of the bridel be
not broken nor unsown, wc I speak not without cause: for there are a number
of courtiers that at primero will not stick to set up a jest of a.100. or.200.
crowns, and yet will think much to geeue their poor horskeepers twelve pence
to by them a payr of raynes. And truly the courtier (in my judgment) that is
content to tie his hose with vntagged points, to see his fire smoke when he
should warm him, to ride with broken reins, and to cut his meat at the table
with a rusty knife, I would think him base borne, and rudely brought up. When
the courtier will ride his horse, let him look ever before he take his back,
that he have all his furniture fyt for him, his main and tail fynely comed,
his styrrops bright glistering, his stirrup leathers strong, and his sadell
well stuffed, and above all let him sit upright in his seat, and carry his
boddy even, swaruing of nether side, holding his legs still and keep his
stirrope. For this name to be called Chiuallier (signifies in our tongue a
rider of a horse) came first because he could ride and manedge his horse well,
And when he would stir his legs to spur his horse, let him beeware he
stoop not forwards with his boddy, and when he does spur his horse, let
him not spur him low but hye in the flanckes, and whether he will run or
stand still with his horse, let him always have his eye upon ye raines, that
in no case the raines, go out of his hand. And in geeuing his horse a carere,
let him not writh his body, nor be to busy in beating or spurring his horse
often. For in his carrire, to know when to spur him, when to geeue him head,
or to pull him back again, and to stop him, I have seen many take yt upon
them, but few in deed that ever were skillfull and could do yt well. Now the
courtyer being mounted on horse or moile, without his rapier by his side,
seems rather a physician that goth to visit his sick pacients, then a
gentilman of the court that for his pleasure and disport rides abroad through
the streates.

And if he were by chance intreatid by some noble man to accompany him or to
ride beehind him of pleasure through the streates, every honest courtier ought
not only to do it, but unasked to be ready to offer him self to wait upon
him and go with him willingly. And let the fine courtier beeware, that in
geeuing his hand to a gentilwoman he be not gloued, and if she be a
horsback, that he talk with her bare headed, to do her the more honor, and
if she ride beehind him, and they chance to discourse togethers, let him
never look back upon her to beehold her, for that is a rude manner and a token
of ill education. And one common courtesy there is among courtyers, that when
they are in talk with ladies and gentilwomen and enterteining of them, they
suffer them to do with them what they will, to reign over them, and to be
ouercomed in argument of them, and they hold yt good manner to do them
service, when they have any occasion offered to serve them. And when he shall
accompany any gentylwoman to go a visitation with her, or to walk abroad for
their pleasure through the streates, he must ride fair and softly, and if she
should happen to keep him so long in talk till she should light, the good
courtier must bear yt courteously, and make a good countenance as though it
grieved him nothing, sith we know very well, that when women beeginne once to
talk, it is impossible for them to make an end, onles they be overtaken with
night, or prevented by some other accident. He that wilbee a courtier, must
wear his shoes black and clean, his hose straight to his legs, and his
garments without plight or wrincle, his sword fair varnished, his sherts
fynely wrought, and his capp standing with a good grace. For the chefest thing
of court is, that noble me^ be rich in apparel, and the right courtyers fine
and cleanly. It is not decent for a man to wear his slippers so long that the
cork be seen, nor his garments till they be torn, nor furre til yt be
bare before, nor shertes till they be worn out, nor his cappe till the
turffe be greasy, nor his coat till yt be threde bare, nor his girdell till
yt be half broken. For the courtier may not only wear his garments to
content himself, but also to like others that shall beehold yt. And after that
he is once determined to go to the court, he must suppose to go thither well
apparrelled, else they will not suer account him to be a right courtier. For in
this case, excuse of poverty may not be alleged, for they will think them
rather miserable, then poor courtiers. The good courtier may not spare in
court, to spend afterward at home: but he must pinche at home to be liberal
afterward in the court.

And yet once again I return to recite, that for a courtier to come into the
princes favor, he may not any way be sparing or miserable, but rather
honestly liberal, and bountiful. For seeldome times concur these two things
together, to be miserable, and yet with his mysery to attain to the princes
favor. I remember I saw a friend of mine once in the court were a ierkin faced
at the collar with martyrns, and they were all bare and greasy, and there was a
certain portugal in the court (a pleasant compaignion) that came to this
gentleman, and asked him properly, what fair Furrs they were he ware about his
neck: and this gentillman auswered him martirns: marterns sir says the
portingall, me thinks they are rather like furrs of Ashwednesday, then of
Shrouetewsday. And finely this portingall compared Mardi (that is tewsday) to
his martrin surrs: and so likewise his martrin furs to Mardi. And sure he
had great reason not to praise them, but greatly to rebuke him for them. For it
had been more for his honor and worshipp, to have had the collar of his ierking
lined with fair new white lamine, then with those old, stale, durty and swety
marterns. The brooches that our courtier must were in his capp must be very
rich, and excelently wrought, and his devise or word that he will have about
yt such, that though every man may read yt, yet few shall understand what yt
means. For such devises are ever lightly grounded of vain and fond toys, and
therefore they should be so much more secret and obscure. For suer the fault is
great enough in a man to deuiseyt, though he do not beewray yt. Also his
servants that waits upon him must needs go handsomely apparelled, and syne and
nete in their apparel. For it is small honor for the master to be well
apparellyd, if he let his servants go beggarly. There are many courtiers that
have their men following on them with threede bare clokes, torn coats, foul
shertes, broken hose, and rent shoos. So that these poor seruingmen, if ^or
one month they were that their master gives them, for three other months
after they were their own proper flesh. It is no wise man's part, but a mere
folly to keep a greater train then he is able. For that courtier that has
always many servants waiting on him, and they going tottered and torn, having
no good thing to put on their backs, (or at least that they have is but mean
and simple) shall sooner win the name of a broker, that prefarreth other men to
saruice, then of a master that keeps servants him self. The good courtier
must geeue unto all his servants that serve him, either apparel, or wages: for
that servant that serves only in house for bare meat and drink, shall never
serve truly while he does serve. And therefore let the courtier look well to
yt, that he enterteigne no man into his saruice, but that first he agree with
bim for standing wages: onles yt be that he be some neuew, or kynsman, or
some of his dear friends: else in the end, if he be a noble man (unless he do
so) he shall find that at the years end he shall spend him more, than if he
gave him ordinary wages, and beesids they will not be contented with him,
although yt be to his greater charge. Also let him consider well, if yt happen
that (when he has need of servants to wayre upon him) some brother or
neighbors child be offerid to him, whether he shall receive him or no. For
after he has him in his house, either he shallbee compelled to bear with his
faults, and disorders he shall do, or else desirous to rebuke and reform him,
or to send him home again, he shall but win anger and displeasure of his
father, or his proper kinsfolks. Suerly such courtiers as take those kind of
men into their service, have a great deal of pain and troble with them. And
truly it is too great a cruelty, that the courtier should be driven to bear
the dishonesty of his man ye serves him, when his own father could not away
with his conditions. Some fathers there are so blinded, and sotted with
fatherly affection, and difficulte besides to please, that they are not
contented that the courtier has received their son into his saruice, and
that he entreat him as if he were his own kynsman: but further they would
have the courtier his master bear withal his dishonesty and lewdnes: and if
they ran not frame the young man to their mind as they would have them, yet at
lest they would have his master to pity him, for that he is but young and has
no knowledge, and for a while to winck at all his faults, in hope of a better
amendment.

The courtier may not only see that his men be well in apparel, but he must
provide also that they have meat enough to put in their bellyes. For the
servants that are starued for meat, are wont to do small service, and besyds
that to complain much. Let him beware also he do not take into his saruice
any lewd persons busy bodies, and unquiet men, cutpurses, Ruffians, quarellers
or hooremongers: if he find that he have any such in his house, let him turn
him out of saruice straight: for by keeping such mates in his house, his house
shall never be well ordered, there shall ever be quarelling and swering
amongst them, and besyds that, the neighbors and common people shallbee
offended. Let the good courtier forsee that he have no cards nor dyce in his
house to occupy the servants. For these thriftles servants that are geeuen to
play, begin first to play, and afterward they learn to steal. Let the
courtier be well advised also when he chideth with his servants that he be
not too loud; that his voice may be hard abroad, as all the hosts and
Inkeepers are. For in being too loud he should be more dishonored, then
blamed, for the ill words he geeueth his man. Let him take heed also that he
do not call his servants dronkards, thieves, villeins, Jews, nor other such
like names of reproach. For these and such other like vncourteus words are of
small correction, and yet they bring displeasure and disdaigne enough. And if
the courtier can not geeue bountifully, and pleasure his officers and servants
that are about him, yet at least (how so ever the world go) let him not be
behynd with them in paiyng them their whole wages due to them: for so yt might
lightly happen, that the servants would begin to make complaynts of him, and
that unhappily in the end he might come to die with mysery in his enemies hands.

There is no enemy in the world so cruel, nor so much to be feared, as the
servant that is not contented with his master, for as he is the thief of the
house, so knows he very well what piece of his masters harnes is wanting for
his boddy to set on him, when he would in that place have an arrow for his
token. Therefore soon so as yt comes to the courtyers ears that any of his
servants complaigne of him, either let him geeue him all that he would have, or
put him out of his house imediatly. For if he do yt not, let him be assured
that that servant will never leave till he have him put in discord with his
friends, and defame with others. And above all things we have spoken of yet,
the courtier must chiefly look what his man is he trusts with his honor:
for in this case many are wont not only to be deceived, but also many times
scorned. And there are many that will put their goods into the hands and trust
of a man, but their honor, and things of gretest weight and importance, they
will sooner commit to the trust of a young foolish, and simple page, then of a
wise and stayed man. And therefore how much more his business is of weight and
importance, so much less should yt be reveled to the secrecy of a boy. And if
he do otherwise, I can assure him he shall sooner be spoken of of every man,
then he shall have his buysines dispatched. The courtier must also have his
chamber well hanged, and fynely kept, and clean, and his house and famyly all
in good order, and every man quiet. For the cleanes of the house, and ciuility
of the servants, are a great token and witness of the nobility of the master. In
the courtyers chamber wheare he lies, the bed must first of all be made, and
the cloth before the door let down, the chamber swept, the hangings and other
stuff that is there in good order, with some parfumes or other sweet odours,
so that it should laugh upon a man that comes into yt: for there are some in
the court so filthy and so il furnished of hangings and other stuff, that if
any man come to see their chambers, they seem rather sheep coats, then
courtiers chambers.

Of the wise manner the courtier should have to serve and honor the ladies and
gentil women, and also to satisfy and please the ushers and porters of the
kings house. Cap. ix.
LEt the good courtier be always circumspect that he seek not any favor at
the Justices hands, but that that is lawful. For if either he be denied, he
shall return with shame: or being granted, he shall leave his conscience to
gage. In suits and controversies between men of relygion in the spiritual
court, let him in no case deal. For at the first show they seem very easy to
the Judge, but when they come to vnripping of the matter, to judge of them,
then they are matters of great charge and conscience.

There were many towers in Iherusalem, to any of which the devil might have
brought Ihesus christ to have persuaded and tempted him to have thrown him
self down: howbeit he would not bring him but to the pinnacle of the church,
to let us under stand thereby, that he took more pleasure in one sin done
in the church, or of holy persons then of ten committed in the world, and
of wordlings. And notwithstanding the courtier do not see that the reason is
of his side that is recomended to him, he need never pass for that, to
entreat for him, or to charge his own proper conscience: as for example. If
any man entreat him to speak to ye judge, or to write him a letter. For many
times we see ye Judges make much more account of one only word or letter from
him that is in favor and estimation with ye prince, the^ they will of ye
religion and Justice of an other man. And alweyes write in this form. Right
worshipful or honorable, ye letters of favor that shall be requested of you.
etc. that by those words the judge may know, that for yt they were requested
and beesought and not that yt should seem you write for affection, for doing
otherwise, that that you shall write to him to satisfy others in, he will think
that you do it, because either for reason or duty he should perform your
letters. The like consideration and modesty a good prince should have in that
he does command: the like and self same should the esteemed and favored of
the court observe in his requests he makes. For many times the requests of
the beeloued in court are with more celerity performed, then the comissions of
the prince are accomplished. Let the courtier always have in his mind also,
that if he meet with any nobleman or Knight by the way, he do in any
condition return with him, and keep him compaigny, although the nobleman or
Knight strive with him, not to have him go back with him, yet let him not
suffer him self to be overcome, to let all men know, that notwithstanding the
noble man or Knight pass him in degree or apparel, yet he shall not exceed
him in curtesy and ciuility. This compaigny is to be understood to be
offered the knight when he rydeth in to the city of pleasure, and not wha^ he
goth alone, and shows by his forehead an unpleasant countenance trobled in
his mind. Yet the courtyer nevertheless must offer him self to accompaigne
him, which if he do accept, he may not then importune or withstand him to
do yt: For wheare he should think to be accounted courteous, they would
repute him a troblesom man. When the courtier shall accompaigny any noble man
of the court, let him not then seem to contend with other courtiers for place,
and honor in his presence, who should be before, or behynd an other. For this
strife coming to the noble man's ears whom they accompaginy, it might easily
happen, that that compaigne, that came to wait upon him, and to do him honor
and service, should then seem to dishonor and offend him. Little knows he
what honor means, when in these trifles he seeks it. For the wise and
courteous courtier, has not only to seek honor with them, with whom he
rydeth cheek by cheek: but also with those that are beeloued of the prince.
Now when the noble man is accompaignyed and that he is come hard by the court,
you courtyers, be ready to light of your horse quickly before him, and when
he shall likewise take his horse again, be as ready to take your horse back
before him. For doing thus, you shall be nere about him when he lights of on
his horse, and afterward help him when he mounteth on his horse again. If
perhapps at the coming in of a chamber, the lords servants want consideration,
or that they remember not to hold open the cloth over the door, the good and
dilygent courtyer should suddenly put him self before him, to lift and hold
yt up. For many times yt is as great an honor for a courtier to be accounted
one of good manner and bringing up in the court, as out of the court it is to
be reputed a great and famous captain in wars. And seence the courtier is
determined to accompaigne some noble man to the court, he is also bound by
the laws of the court to wait upon him home again, which if he do, the
noble man shall be more beeholding to him for the attendance he has geeuen
upon him, then for his compaigne to ride with him. If any came to speak with
the courtier that were equal with him in degree or meaner of calling or
condition then him self, yt is one of the first and cheifest points of
ciuility and good manner, not to suffer him to open his lips to speak to him,
before he have his cappe on his head, for one to talk commonly with the other
with his cappe in his hand, is of great authority and reverence, as from the
duty of the subject to the prince, or that of the servant to the master. The
good courtier must ever speak again to him that speaks to him, do him
reverence that does him reuerens, put of his cappe to him that puts of his,
and this he must do without any respect that he is his friend or foe. For in
the effects of good manner, no man ought to be so much an enemy, that the
enmity should break the bounds of curtesy and humanity. It is rather fyt for
common persons, then for courtlike gentlemen, in so mean things to show their
e^mitt. For to say truly, the good courtier should not show the enmity of his
heart, by putting on or pulling of his cappe, but by taking sword in hand to
revenge his quarrel. And if the courtier were in the church, court, or in the
chapel of the prince, and set, and an other gentilman happily comes in the
same place wheare he is, he must do him the curtesy to geeue him his place
and seat and to pray him to sit down, yea and if there were no other place
fyt for ye gentilma^ to sit in, and that of courtesy also he would not offer
him that injury to accept yt: yet at the least let the courtier do what he
may to make him take a piece of his stool, that parting with him his seat,
the other may also come to part with him his heart. If those that were set hard
by the courtier beegonne to talk in secret togethers, he should rise from
thence, or go a litell aside from them. For in the court they will say he is
ill taught and brought up, and wants ciuility and good manners that will seem
to harken to any bodies tale or secrets. The courtiers must have frendshipp
also with the porters to open him the court gates that are kept fast cheyned
in, that they be contented to suffer their moyle or foot cloth nagge to enter
into the utter court. And the like must be practiced with the gentlemen
ushers of the chamber, and captain of the guard, to whom he must do a
thousand pleasures that they may respect his person, and let him come in when
he will. And the next way to win this frendshipp, and to contynew them
friends and to be welcome of them, is to feast them otherwhile, sometime with
a dinner, some time with a bancket, but especially not to sail them of a new
years gift on neweyears day, what trifle or present so ever it be. That
courtier that is not acquainted with the ushers, and does them no pleasures,
may be well assured that those above in the hall, will make him tarry in the
utter court: and those that stand at the gate of the cheyne, they will make him
light in the myer. With the ushers of the privy chamber, he must needs deal
honorably withal as to come and see them somtymes, and to do them much honor,
in giuyng them some fair jewel or presentyng them with a gown or coat
cloth of silk or velvet. And thus he shallbee assured they will not only let
him into the privy chamber, but they will also procure him to speak with the
prince even at his best leisure. To make the yemen of the guard also that
makes gentlemen geeue place, and stand alofe of from the prince, yet can not
be but very profitable for the courtier to have them his friends. For many
times they may help us to a fit place to talk with the King. yt is such a
troble and charge to get to speak with the prince, that if we have not great
frendshipp with these we have spoken of, and that we do them some pleasures
before we come to the court, they will shut the doors against us, and we
shall come home ashamed of our selves. For a courtier to be acquainted with
the ladies and gentlemen of the court, it is rather of pleasure then of
necessity, albeeit it be true, that the young courtier that serves not some
lady or dame in court shall be rather blamed of his shamefastnes and cowardly
heart, then approved for his modesty and gravity. In deed for a young gentilman
that is rich, noble, and free hearted, it is an honest and comely enterteinment
to be come some ladies servant of the court: But for him that is poor, living
in disgrace, and out of favor, let him utterly fly the love of courtly dames,
and slick to the poor frendshippe of devout nonnes. For the property of
courtly mystresses is to empty their servants purses, and ye manner of religious
nonnes to beg always of him that visites her. The courtier that offerith him
self to serve any lady a or gentilwoma^ in court does bynd him self to a
straight religion: For some times he must kneel by her of one knee, sometimes
he must stand upon his feet before her, and always he must have his cappe
in his hand, and he may not speak to her unless she command him first, and
if she ask any thing of him, he is bound to geeue yt her straight if he
can, and though she frown upon him, yet he may not be angry with her, so
that the courtier must needs employ his hole person, and goods, in serving of
her that he loves. For the courtier that is married, sure it is not fyt for him
to love any other woman then his wife, nether is it honest for the woman to be
seruid with any married courtier. For these manner of loves are to no other end,
but for him to be merry with her, and for her to get somewhat of him. Let the
courtier be very wise that he do not love and serve such a gentil woman,
whom he can not obtain to his wife, for otherwise it should be a great
grief to him, and a more shame, to see an other before his eyes enjoy her and
eat of that fruit, which he had to his great cost and charges made now a
fruitful orchard. And if it happen that his mistress whom he sarueth be
nobly borne, very fair of complexion, pleasant of condition, of good grace and
beehauiour in her conversation, very wise and fine in her doings: he may be
well assured he shall never forget this grief and sorrow, and so much more if
he did love her withal his heart and unfeignedly. There is great difference
beetwene that we lose, and that we have: For if the heart lament for the loss
of that we have: yt beewayleth bitterly to lose that we love. Also the
courtier must be advised that he tell not to any that his wife has told him,
or any thing that has passed secretly beetweene them: For women are of such a
quality, that for any thing they do, they would never hear of yt again
willingly, and those secrets that an other comits to them of trust, they can
never keep them secret. There is a law common beetwen women and their lovers:
For if they go abroad, their lovers must attend upon their persons: and if they
buy any thing in the streate as they go, they are bound to pay for yt: And if
they be to late abroad, they must provide the^ of torches to bring them home
with, and when the court remoueth from place to place, theyrs is the chardge to
defraud their expenses by the way: and if any do them injury, they are bound
to revenge their quarrel: if they fall syck, they must do them a thousand
pleasures and saruices: if any challenge be made in court of tilt, torney, or
barriers, they must be the first and best mounted and armed above others (if
they may possible) withal not forgetting their Ladies colors and devise,
offering them selves nobly to perform the challenge, geeuing them to
understand, that for their sakes, they nether fear to adventure their lives,
nor spare for any chardge to do them all honor and service. With out dout we
may speak yt truly, that he puts him self to great peril and danger
(what so ever he be) that serves women. But when the wise courtier is now
become a servant to any lady in court, he must beware in any case he
enterteigne or serve any other then his mistress: For if he did otherwise,
he should raise a mortal hate and discord between those women: by reason
whereof many sclaunders and broils might ensue. It is a natural thing to all
women, that to hate any man, a hundred will come to agree in one opinyon: but
to love him you shall not find two of one mind. The good courtier must covet
the best he can to be always at the making ready of the King, and at his
meat, and for two causes: The one for that he may be ready to do him
saruice, and the other, for that at such a time they shall have an apt time to
treat with the prince in any thing he will, if he have any occasion of
business with him. And when the king is either at his meat, or that he be
putting on his apparel, let the good courtier be circumspect he come not to
near the table where he sits, nor that he touch the kings apparel he
wears on. For no man ought once presume to be so hardy to meddle with his
meat, or his apparel, unless he be shewer, or chamberlayne.

And if in this time of repast, or making him ready, there were present any
iesters or fools, that said or did any thing to make them laugh: The good
courtier must take heed that he laugh not to loud, as in such cases many are
wont to do. For in such a case the prince would be better plesed at the
modesty of the courtier, then at the knavery or folly of the fool.

The honest courtier must not have a fool his friend nor his enemy: for to make
him his friend, he is to dishonest, and too be his enemy, he is to vile and
cowardly. I wish the courtier not to be angry with him, what so ever he
does: for many times yt happens, that the frendshipp of a wise man does not
so much benefit or pleasure: as the enmity and displeasure of one of these
fools does hurt. And if he will geeue them any thing (as he must needs)
let him beeware he geeue him not occasyon to condemn his conscience, and that
he stop their mouths: For the courtier that is a christyan, should geeue
as much more to the poor to pray to god for him, as he should geeue to others
to speak well of him to the King.

When the King sneyses, and that the courtyer be present, he must straight
put of his capp, and bow him self in manner to the ground, but for all that
he must take heed he say not christ help you, or god bless you, or such
other like. For to do do any manner of curtesy or honor, is only pertynent to
courtiers: But to say christ help, or god bless you, is the country manner.
And if the King by chance should have any hear, or feather, or flee upon his
clothes, or any other filthy thing about him: none but the chamberlein only
should take it away, and none other courtier should once presume to take any
thing from his back, or to touch his garment, nether any other person, unless it
were in case to defend him. When the King is set at the table, the courtier may
not come into the kitchen, nor much less lean upon the surueying boorde. For
though he did yt perhaps but to see the order of the survey and service of the
prince: yet yt may be suspected of some, he meant some worser matter, and
thereby they should judge ill of him. If the prince have a felicity in hawking,
the courtier must endeavor him self to keep a cast or two of good fawlcons:
and if in hu^ting, then he must have good greyhounds. And when he is eather a
hawking or hu^ting with ye king, he must seek to serve him so diligently that
day, that he may both find him game to sport with, and procure for him self
also favor at the princes hand. Many times princes are so earnest of their
game, and so desirous to kill that they hunt, that they are wont boldly to
chase the beasts they hunt, and pursue them so, that oftymes they lose the
sight of all the rest. In such a case the good courtier must ever have his eyes
upon him, and rather seek to follow the king, then to take pleasure in hunting
of other beasts. For in that case yt shallbee a better hunting for him, to
find out the king, and to be with him: then he should take pleasure in being
alone with the heart. Yt may happen lightly, that the King gallopping his horse
upon the rockye stones, he might stumble at such a stone, as both the king and
his horse should come to the ground: and at that time it could not be but very
profitable for the courtier to be present. For yt might so happen, that by
means of the princes fall, (he being ready to help him) he might thenceforth
beeginne to grow in favor and credit with the prince. The most part of those
that delyght to go a hunting, are wont commonly to eat their meat greedely,
and drink out of measure, and beesids to shoute and make a wonderful noise as
they were out of their wits: which things the grave and wise courtier should
not do: for they are rather fit for vacabonds, and Idle persons, that sets
not by their honesty: then they are for the honest courtier, that only desires
and indeuoureth by modest and wise be hauiour to beecome great, and in favor.

Of the great pains and trobles the courtier has that is toild in suits of
law, and how he must suffer, and beehaue him self with the judges. Cap. x.
THere are in the court also diverse kynds of men, that be not courtiers, and
princes servants, but only are courtiers of necessity, by reason of suits they
have with the council. And these manner of courtyers have as much need of
council, as of help: for he that has his goods in hasard, has also his
life in ieopardy.

To speak of the diverse and subtle ways of suffering, it is no matter worthy to
be written with black ynk, but only with lively blood. For in deed if every
one of these suitors, were forced to abide for his faith and believe those
pains, troubles, and sorows, that he does to recover his goods: as much
cruelty as tortures shoold Vagliadoti, and Grauata have, as ever had Rome in
times past. In my oppinion, I think it a hell to continue a long suter. And
surely we may believe, yea and swear to, that the martirs executed in old time
in the primitive church (which were many in number) did not suffer so much,
neither felt such grief to lose their life, as does now a days an honest man
to see him self deprived of all his faculties. It is a great trouble and charge
to recover any thing, but in the end of these two effects, a wise man suffers
and feels more the displeasures he receives, then he does the goods he
spends. And in my judgment to strive and contend is nothing else, but to
bring matter to the heart to sigh and lament, to the eyes to weep, to the feet
to go, to the tongue to complain, to the hands to spend, to entreat his friends
to favor his cause, and to command his servant to be careful and diligent,
and his body to labor continually. He that understands not the conditions of
contention I will let him know they are these. Of a rych man, beecome poor: of
a merry man, to be made melancholy: of a free man, a bond man: of a liberal
man, a covetous man: of a quiet man, an unquiet person: and of a hateful, a
desperate person. How is it otherwise possible, but the haples suter must
beecome desperate? seeing the judge look upon him with frowning cheer, his
goods to be demanded of him wrongfully, and that now it is so long a time he
has not been at home, and knows not yet whether sentence shall be geeuen
with him or against him, and besides all this, that the poor man in his
lingering suite has spent so much, that he has not left him six pence in his
purse. If any of these troubles be enough to bring a man to his end, much more
shall they be to make the poor man desperate, and weary of his life. So diverse
are theffects, and success seen in matters of suite, that many times there is
no wit able to direct them, nor goods to bring them to end. Nay we may boldly
and truly say, that the laws are so many, and diffuse of them selves, and men's
judgments so simple to understand them, that at this day there is no suite in
the world so clear, but there is found an other law to put that in doubt, and
make it void. And therefore the good and ill of the suter, consists not so
much in the reason he has, as in the law which the Judge chooses to geeue
judgment of. It is well that the suter believe and think that he has right,
but the cheifest thing of importance is, that the judge also desire yt he have
his right. For that Judge that favors my cause, and desires to do me
justice, he will labor and study to seek out some law, that shall serve my
turn to restore me again to my right. To contend, is so profound a science,
that neither Socrates to the Athenians, nor Solon to the Greeks, nor Numa
Pompilius to the Romans, nor Prometheus to ye Egiptians, nor Licurgus to the
Lacedaemonians, nor Plato to his disciples, nor Apolonius to the poets of
Nemsis, nor Hiarcus to the Indians, coold ever tech it them, and much less
coold they tell how to find any way to write it in their books of common
wealth. The cause why these famous men did not find it, was because this
science coold not be learned by studying of diverse books, nor by traueling
through diverse countries, but only by framing great suites and processes, and
by infinite charge and expense of money. Happy, yea truly most happy were
those ages, in which they neither knew, nor coold tell, what strife or
contentionment. For in deed from that time hitherto, the world has fallen to
decay, and cheefely since men have grown to quarrel and contend each other with
his neighbor.

Plato was wont to say, that in that common weal where there were found many
Physicians, it was also an euydent token that there were many vicyous people:
and likewise we may say that in the city where there are many suitors, it is to
be thought it folowes also, that there are many ill disposed people. That only
may be called a blessed and fortunat common weal, where men live quietly, and
have not to do with Justices nor judges. For it is a true rule, when
physicians are much freque^ted, and judges much occupied, that amongst that
people there is little health, and less quiet. But to return to the troubles
of our suitors, I say that the disciples of the famous Philosopher Socrates were
not bound to be sylent in Athens above two years, but the unfortunate suitors
were bound to hold their peace ten years if their suits did continue so long.
For albeeit the Judge do them open injury, yet they may not seem to complayn,
but rather say he thinks he has done him the best justice in the world.
And if for his mishapp, or plague of his offenses, he woold not so approve and
speak them, let him be assured the Judge will perceive it by his countenance,
and afterward let him know it by his judgment. Some suitors say they are
great sinners, and I say they are saints. For of the seven dedly sins that
are committed, only of three they are but to be accused. For in the other
iiii. (although they woold) they do not geeue him time nor leave to offend.
How can the suter ever offend in Pride, since he must poor man go from house
to house with his capp in his hand, and all humility to solicit his cause? How
can he ever offend in Avarice, sith he has not many times a penny in his
purse to by him his dyuer, nor to pay for the infinite draughts and coppyes
proceeding out of the Chauncery? How can he offend in Sloth and ydlenes, since
he consumes the long nights only in sighs and complaynts, and the whole day
in trotting and trudging up and down? How can he offend in Gluttony since he
woold be content to have only to suffyse nature, and not to desire pyes, nor
breakfastes, nor to lay the table every day? That sin they most easily and
commonly offend in, is Ire, and in deed I never saw suter pacie^t: and
although he be angry, we may not marvel at yt a whit. For if ever once in
the end of half a year he happen to have any thing that pleases him, I dare
be bound every week after he shall not want infinite troubles to torment and
vex him. These men also offend much in envy, for in deed there is no man that
pleades but is envious, and this proceeds many times to see an other man, by
favor dispatched of his suit, that has not continued only two months in court
a suter: and of his that has continued above two years since yt began, not a
word spoken. They offend also in the sin of backbyting, and murmuryng
against their neyghbors. For they never cease complaining of the partiality of
the Judges, of the slouthfulnes and tymorousnes of his Counselor, that pleades
his cause at the bar: of the little consideration of ye attorney, of the
payments of the notary, and of the small courtesies (or rather rudenes) of the
officers of the Judge.

So that it may well be said, that to strive in law, and to murmr, are nere
kinsfolks togeethers. The Egiptians were in time past plaged only with ten
plagues, but these miserable and woeful suitors are daily plaged with a thousand
torments. And the difference beetwixt their plague and these, is that the
Egiptians came from the divine prouydence, and these (of our poor suitors) from
the invention of man's malice. And it is not without cause we say that it is
man's invention, and not divine. For to frame inditements, to geene delays to
the party, to allege accions, to deny the demand, to accept ye proof, to
examine witnesses, to take out process, to note the declaration, to prolong the
cause, alleging well, or proving ill, to refuse the judge for suspect, to make
intercession to take out the copy of the plea, and to call upon it again with
a 1500. dudles: Surely all these are things that neither god commands in the
old testament, neither Ihesus Christ our savior does allow in his holy
Gospel. The writings of Egypt, although they were to the great loss and
detriment of ye seignory of the Egiptians, yet were they nevertheless very
profitable for the liberty of the Egiptians. But the miserable playntifes are
yet in an other greater extremity. for notwithstanding the plagues and miseries
the poor wretches suffer daily, yet do they leave their souls buried in the
courts of Chauncery, and cannot notwithstanding have their goods at liberty.
And if the plague of the Egiptians was by ryuers of blood, froggs, horse flies,
death of cattle, tempests, leprosy, locusts, mists, flies, and by the death of
the first borne children: The plague of the plaintifes is to serve the
presidents to bear with the auditors, to entreat the notaries, to make much of
their clarks, to please the counselors, to follow their heels that must open
their cause, to pray the ushers, to borow money, to go from house to house to
solicit their attorneys, all these things are easy to tell, but very hard to
suffer: For after they are once proved and tried by experience, they are
enough to make a wise man contented, rather to lose a piece of his right, then
to seek to recover it by any such extremity. For he may be well assured,
that he shall never want fair countenance, sugared words, and large
promyses: but for good doings it is a marvelous wonder if ever they meet
togeethers. And therefore before all other things it is necessary he pray to
God for his own health and preservation, and next to him, for the preseruacion
and long continuance of the Judge, if he will obteyn his suite. Therefore I
advise him that has not the Judge for his friend, to beeware (as from the
devil) he do not commence any suite before him. For to dispatch him the
better, either he will find the means to make his case very dark, or at least
he will prolong his suite as long as it please. It skilleth not much whether
the judges be old, or young men, for both with the one and the other the poor
playntife has enough to do. If they be old men a man shall travel long ere
he will hear his cause. If they be young men, he shall wayt long also ere
he can inform them of the very points of his case. An other great
discommodity yet follows these old Judges, that being ever sickly and of weak
nature, they never have strength nor time in manner to examyn their cases. And
as those that have lost now a great piece of their memory, only trusting in
forepassed expenses, they presume to dispatch their suits as lightly (without
further looking into them, or thoroughly examining them) as if they had already
advisedly studied them. And peradventure their case is of such importance,
that if they had looked upon it very well, they coold scantly have told what
to have said in it. And I woold not that when my case shoold be determined,
and judgment geeuen upon my matter, that the Judge shoold benefit him self
only, with that he had seen or read before. For although experience be a
great help for the Judge, to geeue the better Judgment upon the matter, yet
notwithstanding he is to study a new to understand the merits of the cause.

It is also a great trouble, and dangerous, for a man to practice with new
Judges, and to putt their matters into their hands, who only were called to the
place of a Judge, being thought learned and fit for yt, and so brought to
rule as a magistrate. For many times these young Judges, and new physicians
although they want not possibly knowledge, yet they may lack a great deal of
practyse and experience: which is cause that the one sort makes many lose
their lives before they come to rise infame: and the other undo many a man,
in making him spend all that ever he has.

There is yet besides an other apparaunt danger, to have to do with these new
and young experienced judges, for when they come to sit newly in judgment, with
their other brethren the Judges, having the law in their mouth to serve all
turns, they do but only desire and study to win fame and reputation amongst
men, and thereby to be the better reputed of his brethren. And for this cause
only when they are assembled together in place of justice to geeue judgment of
the plees laid before them, they do then only enlarge them selves, in
alleging many and diverse oppinions of great learned men, and book cases: So
that the heerers of them may rather think they have studied to show their
eloquence and learning, then to open the decision and judgment of the cases
they have before them.

And for fynall resolution I say, that touching plees and suits. I am of
oppinion, they shoold neither trust the experience of the old Judge, nor the
learning and knowledge of the young. But rather I reckon that man wise, that
seeks by little and little to grow to an honest end and agreement with his
adversary, and that taryeth not many years to have a long, yea (and possible)
an uncertain end. Also I woold exhort the poor pleyntyfe, not to be over
curious to understand the qualityes of the Judge, as a man woold say. If he
be old, or young, if he be learned or priuileged, if he be well studied or
but little, if he be a man of few or many words, if he be affected or
passioned, tractable or self willed, for possibly being to inquisitiue to
demand of any of these things, it might happen though he did it vnwarrs, yet
he shoold find them afterward all heaped togeethers in ye parson of ye Judge,
to his hynderance and damage in decydyng his cause. The wise suter shoold not
only not seek to be inquisitiue of ye Judge or his conditions, but also if
any man woold seem to tell him of him, he shoold geeue no ear to him at all.
For if it come to the judges ears he inquireth after his manner of living, and
condition, he will not only be angry with him in his mind, but wilbee also
unwilling to geeue judgment in his favor. The poor suter shall also meet with
terrible judges, severe, intractable, collerick, incommunicable, and
inexorable, and yet for all this he may not look upon his nature, nor
condition, but only regard his good conscience. For what need he care if the
Judge be of severe and sharp condition, as long as he may be assertained he
is of good conscience. It is as needful for the upright, and good Judge, to
have a good and pure conscience: as it is to have a skylfull head, and
judgment in the laws. For if he have this without the other, he may offend
in mallyce: and if he have that without the other, he may offend also in
ygnoraunce. And if the suter come to speak with the Judge, and he by chance
find him a sleep, he must tarry till he awake, and if then he will not, or
he cannot geeue ear unto him, he must be contented. And if he caused his
man to say he were not within (notwythstanding the suter saw him) he must
dissemble yt, yea if the servant geeue him an ill answer, he must take it
in good woorthe: For the ware and politic suter must not be offended at any
thing that is done or said to him, till he see the diffinitiue sentence geeuen
with him or against him.

It is a marvelous trouble also to the suter to choose his Counselor. For many
times he shall choose one that shall want both law and conscience. And some
others shall choose one that though on the one side he lack not law, yet on
the other he shall be without both soul and conscience. And this is apparently
seen, that sometime for the gayn of twenty nobles he shall as willingly deny
the troth, and go against his own conscience, as at an other time he will
seek to mayntain Justice. It is true there are many other counselors also
that are both wise and learned, and yet notwithstanding they know the law, they
can by no means frame it to his clyents case, wanting deuyse and conueyaunce to
ioyn them togeether. And so yt happens many times, that to compare it to his
clyants case, he conueyth him so unfitly, as of a plain case it was before,
it is now made altogeether a fold of infinite doubts. I grant it is a great
furtheraunce to the clyants, to have a good and wise counselor, but it is a
great deal more for their profit, if they can geeue a sound and profound
judgment of his case. For yt is not enough for the counselor to be able to
expound the law, but it is beehouefull for him to apply yt to his purpose and
to apt it to time and place, according to the necessity of his cause. I have
known counselors my self, that in their chayers and readyngs in their halles,
have seemed Egles, they have flowen so high in their doctrine and
interpretations: but afterward at ye bar where they plead, and in the face
of the court, where they shoold best show them selves, there they have proved
them selves very capons. And the only cause of this is, because they have
gotten by force of long travel and continual study, a knowledge to know to
moote, and read ordinaryly their book cases in their chayers, by common
practyse, and putting of them each to other.

But when they are taken out of that common trade and high beaten way, and
brought to a little path way strayghted to a counselors room at the bar, to
plead his clyants strange and unknown case (much contrary to their book
cases before recyted) then stripped of their common knowledge, and easy seat in
chayer, they stand now naked on their feet before the judgment seat, like
senceles creatures void of reason and experyence. But now to supply these
imperfeccions of our raw counselors, and to further also our Clyents cause the
better: we will that the Clyent be liberal, and bountiful to his
counselor, (thereby the better to whet his wytt and to make him also take
payns to study his case thoroughly) being true, that the counselor geeueth
law, as he has reward. And that the counselor also be careful of his
Clyants cause, and to go through with that he takes upon him, and truly to
deserve that he takes of every man. For else they will say (and who can blame
the poor souls) they are better takers, then good dispatchers: A foul blott
to so great a virtue. But well, we will compare them to their brothers the
physicians, who deal with their sick pacients, as the lawiers with their poor
clyants. For if you geeue him not a piece of gold or two in his hand, at each
time of his visitation, to restore the languishing body: he cares as little
for the preservation of his health, whether he live or dye: as the lawier
does for his claynts case, whether it go with him or against him. More over
my pen cease not to write of the great troubles, displeasures, journeys,
expenses, and travels, that the poor suitors have with their counselors daily
(as with their atturneys, Soliciters, clarks, officers, registers, and sealers)
for want of matters to write on: but only for that they are so odious matters,
and so foul examples, that they deserve rather to be remedied then written.
Therefore leaving this law discurse, and returning again to the pryuate
affaiers of the courtier, abiding still in court, I say: That the courtier must
learn to know the noble men and cheef officers of the Prince. As the lord
chaunceller, The lord Treasorer, The lord marshall, The lord Steward, The lord
Chamberlain, The lord Privy seal, The Treasorer, The Controller, The master of
the horse, The vice Chamberlayn, the Secretary, the captayn of the guard, and
the Coferer. And he need not force to wey their stock and family, whether they
were rich or poor, humble or proud, stout or fearful, nor regard their
qualities and complexions, much less their persons, save only their aucthority
and office they have. And to say truly it cannot be chosen, but we must come
before these Judges and officers sometimes to beseech and pray them, now for
our own private causes, then for the mysrule and offense of our servant, and
also for the importunancy of our friends in their matters, to labor them for
justice and favor. And for this cause me thinks it is a wise part of the
courtier to get into favor with the counsel, and other officers of Justice,
and to obtain their good wills with continual attendaunce of them, in doing
them service at a need, and also to entertayn them wythsome small presents to
continue their favor.

First before we beeginne to trouble them, we must be acquainted with them,
vysit them, and present them with somewhat: For indeed it is a cold and unfit
thing to crave favor at a Judges hands, whom we never knew, nor did any
service to.

The wise courtyer must beeware also not to importune the noble men and his
friends so much, yt for every tryflyng thing he woould have them go to the
judges, to solicit and entreat for him, which I speak, because I know there
are some such indiscreat persons, that daily do importune the judges so much,
and for such trifles, that afterward with shame they are repulsed, and denied,
in matters of great weight and importance. And there are some also that
solicit their matter with gravity, and others with importunyty, to whom I
wyllbee so bold to say, and tell them of it also, that importunacy shows the
simplicity of the suter, and gravity, the honesty of the worthy knyghts and
gentleman courtier. It is but well done and meet for the courtier that is a
suter, to be diligent to solicit his cause, and to follow yt thoroughly, but
yet without troubling or importuning too often the judges. For if once the judges
know him for an importunate and cumbersome suter, they will not only not speak
with him when he comes, but also they will not let him come in at the gate
when they see him coming to them. And if he happen to go home to the judges
house, and that he tell his tale to him standing, let him not in no wise care
to sit down, and that his words he speak to him be few, and his memorial
he geeues him brief. For obseruyng this order he shall at that time be
easily, yea willingly and courteously hard of him, and shall make him think
that hereafter also he will use the like order with him. When he sees that
the judge is troubled, and that his head is occupied, let him in no case at
that present offer to trouble him, or to speak to him in his matter. For admit
he were contented to hear you quyetly (though half unwilling) and to suffer
you to tell your tale, yet is it impossyble he should wholly understand your
case, his head being otherwise occupied. And it is needful also to show you,
that though the judge seem to be a little melancony, or collerick, yet the
suyter need not let for that to speak to him, to open his case, yea and to
seek to hold in with him still: For many times we see the melancony and ill
disposed natures, appeased and overcome with the courteous and gentle
conversation. I remember touching this matter, I went once to the court, to
solicit the judge, to pray him to dispatch my friends matter, and that he
might have justice. And took my friend with me. And the judge answered us
both, that withal his heart he would dispatch him, and swear and swear again
to him that he should have justice, and that with right good will he woould
keep his right all he could. Nay sir said my friend to him whom the case
touched, I thank you sir very much that you will dispatch me quickly, but
wheare you say that you have a great desire to keep my right and justice, I
utterly appeal from that sentence. For I come not sir, and if it please you,
to follow your heels and to wait upon you to solicit my cause, to the end you
should keep my right, and deteigne if from me: but that you shoold geeue yt
to me. For I promis you this sir, if you once geeue it me, I mean never to
trouble your woorship hereafter with the keeping of it again, but will discharge
you quite. And now after al these things we have spoken, I conclude yt who so
ever curses his enemy, and seeks revenge of an injury done him, let him not
desire to see him poor and miserable, neither hated nor ill willed of any
other, dead nor banished, but let him only beeseech god to plague him with
some ill suit. For a man cannot devise to take a greater revenge of his enemy,
the^ to see him entangled in a vile suit to follow the court, or to attend in
chauncery.

The auctor changes his matter, and speaks to the beeloued of the court,
admonishyng them to be pacient in their troubles, and that they be not
partial in thaffaires of the common weal. Cap. xi.
THe courtier shall do well and wisely, (and cheefely if he be noble, and
beeloued to pass over the injuries done him, and to bear them pacyently, and
never to geeue any words to any that shall offend him. For the officers of
princes can by no other means so well assuer their offices and authority they
have, as by dooyng good continually to some, and to suffer others, no way
making any countenance of displeasure for the injuries done him by others.
And if yt happen (as many times yt does) that a follower and hanger on of the
court, (having spent all that he has, and driven now to seek a new banck)
chance to speak dyshonest words, and frame great quarells against the kings
officers: in this case the courtier, and wise offycer, should never answer him
with anger and displeasure, and much less speak to him in choler. For a man
of honor, and respect, wyllbee more grieved with a dishonest word that is
spoken against him, then he wilbee for the denial of that he asks. Those
that are beeloued, and beelyked of princes above all other things ought to be
very pacient, courteous and gentle in all things. For all that the followers of
the court, and suitors, can not obteyn in the court, let them not lay the fault
to the prince that denied yt them, but only to the favored of the prince, and
those about him, for that they never moved yt to the kings majesty: nor once
thought of the matter, as the poor suitors supposed they had. The payns and
troubles of court are infynyt and insupportable. For how quiet so ever the
courtier be, they will trouble and molest him, if he be pacyent, they
willbee impacyent and in storms, saying that such a man spoke ill of him, and
seeks contynually to defame him. Which things we will the courtyer hear with
paciens, and dissemble with wisdom. For the wise courtyer should not be
angry for the ill words they speak of him, but only for the vile and wicked
acts they do to him. Let not the courtyer and beelyked of the prince be
deceived, in thynkyng that dooyng for this man, and for that man, and in
showing them favor: that for all he can bynd or stay their tongues that they
speak not ill of him, and their hearts that they hate them not extremely. For
the enemy receives not so much pleasure of that the courtyer geeueth him, as
he does greef and dyspleasure, for that that is beehynd yet in the courtiers
hands to geeue him. Now in the palace of princes it is a natural thing, for
each man to desire to aspire, and to creep into the princes favor, to be able
to do much, and to be more worth then others, and to command also: and as
there are many that desire it, so are they very few in number that by their
virtues and demeryts obteyn that favor. It is a thing most suer and undoubted,
that one alone enjoying his princes grace and favor, shall be hated in manner of
the most part of the people. The more they be rych, noble, and of great power,
that are beeloued and accepted of princes, so much the more ought they to be
circumspect, and to live in fear and doubt of such disgraces and mysfortunes
that may happen to them, sith every man's eye is upon them, and that they are
enuyed for that they can do much, and desire also to take from them that
authority and credit they have, and to spoil them of such treasure as they
possess, or have gotten by the princes favor. And in this case the beelyked of
the court must not trust in the pleasures he has done them, neither in the
favor he has showed them, much less in the feigned frendshyp they seem to
bear him, and that he thinks he has gotten of them, neither must he must
to much his friends, neighbors, and kynsfolks, no nor his own brethren: But let
him be assured, that all those that are not in like favor and estimation that
he is, (be he of what degree or parentage he willbee, yea and as near a
kynne as may be) they will all be in that his very mortal foes. Authoryty to
command, being the cheef and highest point of honor, and whereto every man
seeks to aspire, and which was cause that Pompey beecame the deadly enemy of
Julius Caesar his father in law, Absalon of David his natural father, Romulus
of his brother Remus, Allexander of Darius, who showed him self to fore a
father in love in bryngyng on him up, and Mark Antony of Augustus Caesar his
great friend. So that I say, yt may well be said, that after dysdaigne and
cankered Ire have once possessed the delycat breast of man, only concerning honor
and commandment, it is never thencefoorth recured of that infested sore,
neither by gyfts and promises, and much less by prayers and requests. It is
true the accepted of the prince may well be free from all thirst and hunger,
cold and heet, wars, plague, and poverty, and from all other calamytyes and
troubles of this our wretched life, but he shall never be free from
detractions of venomous and wicked tongues, and from spyghtfull and enuyous
persons. For no less is envy joined to favor, then is thirst to a burning
ague. In this case yt is impossible but that the courtier should receive many
times displeasure and disgraces in the court, but not to geeue ear to these
detracters, and ill speakers of men. To remedy these things, the courtier must
needs seem to let them know by his looks and aunswers, that he is more
offended with them, that come and tell him these lewd tales: then with those that
indeed did truly report the^ of him. This counsel would I geeue ye courtier,
yt what ill so ever he hears spoken of him, I woold wish him not seem to
know it, and much less to be a^gry with al, nor once to give a dishonest word
to ye reporters thereof. For his choler over past, the euel words he has
spoken to them in his anger may tourn him to more displeasure, then he has
done him hurt that caused him speak these words. And therefore surely to
bridel the tongue, is rather a divine then humayn virtue: and cheefely in that
instant, when the heart, is mastered and subdued with cholorick passions. For
afterward yt happens many times, that being quiet again in our mynds, we
are sorry for that we have spoken in our anger, yea against them that have
angered us. If the courtier should way every word that is spoken against him,
and esteem every thing that is done to him, he should purchase him self a
continual and sorrowful life, yea and out of measure a troblesome and
unpleasant, sith princes courts are ever full of serpent tongues, and venomous
hearts, and that it lies not in man's power to let, that the hearts of men hate
us not, and that their tongues speak not ill of us, I would advise the courtier
to take all the ill that is spoken of him, in sport and mirth, and not in
anger. Seneca said (and that wisely spoken) that there is no greater revenge to
punish an injurious word, then to seem to laugh at yt. For it is a thing more
natural and proper to weomen, then men to desire to take revenge of words,
with the like words again: sith the noble heart that esteem his honor, must
not have his hands in his tongue, but his tongue in his hands. O how many have
we seen, both out of court and in court, the wc for no other respect but to
revenge one only seely word, yt touched them not much, would put the^ selves,
their goods, and fame in peril: and yet in the end had not that revenge
neither they desired, but rather redoubled it gaynst them selves, in losyng
their fond and vayn attempt. Therefore to conclude those that wylbee great in
favor and estimacion in the princes court, and those also that are now in favor
and credit with the prince, and that desire to continue and persevere in his
favor still, must not make account of any words spoken to him, or offenses
done him: for all that are in favor have need to suffer, and no occasion to
revenge. Till this present day I never saw any that received any hurt or
detriment by being pacient: but being impacient I have seen numbers cast
them selves away, you must also know, that in all places, wheare troop and
company of people be, there is always ever discord and diversities in
oppynions and judgments of men. So that it happens many times in a common
weal, yea and yt meets sometimes in one house, that all shallbee of one
blood and kynred, yet in pryuat wills and affections mortal enemies. And
therefore, suer yt is a thing worthy to be noted, and no less to be wondered
at, to see the father with the sons, the uncles with the neuews, the
graundfathers with the children, the son in laws with their father in laws,
and brothers with their brothers, and systers, the one to be as far
different from the other as white and black, and as much friends as the dog
and the catte. And all this is caused only, for that they are rather wedded to
a self will and oppinion they have, then they are addicted to love and affect
that that nature byndeth them to. We see also many young courtiers, that though
they be virtuous and noble (having inherited and succeeded in nobility of
blood their ancestors) by means whereof they are honored and reverenced: and
possessyng also the greatness, and abundance of their goods, and riches (which
makes them wealthy, and mayntayns them honorably) enjoying the noble parentage
for which they are regarded, having many friends and servant that do them
great service and pleasure. And all in respect of their noble auncetors: and
yet notwithstanding all these great things we have spoken, they follow their
own inventions and imaginations, which their auncetors knowing would have fled:
and hate and myslyke that, that they doubtless being alive woold have followed.
And therefore it is rather a token of lightness then of good will, for one to
leave to help and relieve his own friends and kynsfolks, to succor and do good
to strangers, or others, whom he never knew, nor can tell what they are. For
I assure you, that one of the greatst losses and myshaps that can come to a
noble house, is to have new frendshyp, and partialyty, with strangers and men
unknown. That gentelman that geeueth him self to follow such one as pleases
his fantasy best, and that leaves to lean to those whom his ancestors
heretofore both loved and lyked: shall see those old friends not only leave and
forsake him, but clean geeue him over to his will, and shortly after shall find
his substance and faculty consume and wast away, beesydes, the honor of his
house to be brought to utter decay and oblyuion. And this we have spoken,
only to advise the princes officers, and such as have credyt and aucthority,
that they do not with favor support and aid any partial sect, namely that
that concerns the state and body of common weal. For the esteemed of the
prince, more easly, and with less occasion do undo them selves, and lose the
credyt they have woone: by reason of their partialities, and factions they
mayntayn, then they do for the daily benefyts and suyts they importune the
prince in. Wherefore the servant and officers of the kings house, although
they be in good favor with the prince, and that it please him to like well of
them, yet they may not so hardyly support any to do hurt to others, and so
absolutely, as if they were the lords and princes them selves. For albeeyt yt
pleases the king to call them to honor, and to enrych them with goods and
possessions, yet the king can not, nor will not like that they shallbee
suborners of factions, and quarells, amongst their subjects in the common
wealth. And yet nevertheless it happens many times, that those that see them
selves only in favor above others, will presume to do vyolence and wrong to
others, trustyng to their great credyt and favor they are in, that that shall
suffice to cloak and hide any fault they shall commyt, which they never ought
to think nor yet for any respect in the world to do. For such vnhaply might
be the crime they commyt, that although it be in the princes power to do
great things for them, yet he could not at that time with his honor excuse
their offense, nor seem to protect the^ in their lewdnes, without great murmur
and discontentacion of his subjects. I know very well, that in court the
minds, affections, and oppynions of courtiers are so diverse, and va^iable,
that notwithstanding the beloved of the prince endeavor him self al he can
possible to please and content every man in court, yet of all impossibylities
it is a thing most impossyble ever to attayn to it, to win all men's good
wylles. Nevertheless he must so trimly and wisely beehaue him self in all his
doings, that those at least, whom he can not with all his policy and devise
make his friends have not yet any just occasion geeuen them to be his enemies.
I see there is no mean, no reason, no devise or pollycy of man, favor nor
dilygence, that can defend the honored and esteemed of court from detraction
and envy. Therefore I will boldly geeue him this advise with him that in
matters of justice and other public affairs he bear him self so upright,
that notwithstanding they repine at his authority and credit: yet that they have
no cause offered to complayn of him. The courtier is forced to complayn when
his own familiar companions and fellow servants of the prince, in his matters
of contention or quarrel step beetween them, not to part them, but rather to
the contrary to contend with them and join in demand of that they strive for:
which the lucles courtier is very apt to know, although he dare not discover
yt, For many times he supposes yt less evil to suffer the persecucion of
the enemy, then to fall into the disgrace of the beeloued and esteemed about
the prince. For ye reputed of the prince commonly think they do much for the
common weal in bearing and favoring some, and in punishing and persecuting
others. For those of great authority, professing honor and reputacio^, and that
fear shame: would rather them selves to be defamed and rejected, then to see
their enemies advanced, or preferred to the favor of the prince or of them
that be in favor and credit with the prince. And the beeliked or officers of
the prince may not think, that the favor they geeue to one against an other,
can be kept secret, and that it cannot come to light: for in so doing they are
deceived. For in deed there is no thing so manifest or known in the common
weal, then the doings and practices of those that are in favor and authority,
yea even to the very words they speak. Those that are aggreeued, and have to
complayn of some injury done them, or also those that are even the familiars
of the favored, and that do but aspire daily to grow in greater credit with
their prince then others, do not see any thing said or done to others, yt are
in better credit then them selves: (be it in eating, drinking, watching,
sleeping, in play, being quiet or buysy,) but they sodeinly go and report it,
and tell it to some other that is in favor, to enter and to increase always
into greater favor and trust with them. If there happen any discention or enmity
amongst the people in the common weal, or realm, the esteemed of the court
must beeware in any case they put in their hand: and if they do at all, that
it be but to pacify them, and to make the^ good friends again, and not to
discover them worse then they were before. For if he do otherwise, all
these quarrels in the end shall cease, (they being reconciled togethers, and now
made parfet friends) and to him they will all show them selves open enemies. And
therefore it beehooueth the favored of princes to be have them seleus so
wisely toward them that are at discord and variaunce togethers, that both the
one side and the other shoold be glad and well pleased, to make him arbitrer
beetweene them to decide both their causes: without any suspicion that they
have of him (be it never so litel) of parciality of either part. The same day
that the favored of the court shall take upon him to bear any private
affection to any of the common weal, and that he rather lean to one party or
to an other: the self same day and hour he shall put in great hasard his
person, and not without great danger to lose his goods) together with the
favor and credit of his prince. And the secret enemies he has (through the
envy they bear him) should suffice him, yea rather to much, by reason of his
favor and credit) without seeking any new enemies, for that he says or does.
Such as are great with the prince, and ye fly the passions affections, and
partialities, of the common weal may be assured they shallbee beeloued,
served, and honored of all: but if they shall do the contrary, they may trust
to yt likewise, yt their enemies will be revenged of them, because they did
pursue them: And their friends also will complayn of them, because they did not
favor their cause as they ought. Therefore let not the beelyked thynk, if he
dare beeleeue me, that by having only the favor of the person of the prince,
it is enough for him to govern and rule the whole realm at his pleasure. For
although yt can not be denied, that to have so great a friend as the person of
a king, it is a great advantage and commodity, and that he may do much: yet
we must grant also, that many enemies, are able to hurt us, and do us great
injury. And therefore my advise should be, that every wise man, having one a
friend: should be ware to have an other enemy.

That the officers and beeloued of the court shoold be very dyligent, and
careful in the dispatch of the affairs of the prince and common weal, and in
correcting and reforming their servants, they shoold also be very circumspect
and aduysed. Cap. xii.
SVrely it is a great servitude and trouble to live in court contynually, but
it is a far greater when it is enforced of necessity (by reason of suytes and
troubles) and yet greatest and most intolerable, when they can not obteyn a
short and breef dispatch according to their desire. For weying well the manner
and conditions of the court, that suitor may reckon him self happily
dispatched, every time yt he is quicly dispatched, although his dispatch be
not according to his mind. And I speak it not without a cause, that he may
reckon him self well dispatched when he has his answer. For without
comparyson it is less ill of both, for the poor suyter that attends on the
court, to be presently denied his suyt, then to continue him long with delays
as they do now a days, the more is the pity. If the poor suitors (tgat go
to the court) did know certainly that the delay made in their suyts were for no
other occasion, but for to dispatch them well, according to their desire:
although it were not so reasonable, yet were yt tolerable the payns and
trouble that they abide. But if the poor miserable and wretched creatures have
great trouble in traversing the law, and abiding their orders: obteyning it
nevertheless in the end with great labor and toil, yea and contrary to their
expectacion: have they not yet matter enough trow ye to complayn of? yes suer,
enough to make them despair. What so ever he be therefore that goes to the
court to be a suyter for any matter of import, let him determyn and think with
him self he shall not obteyn his suyt even as he woold have it. For if he
shall feed him self with certain promises, made in private (a thing common to
courtiers, to promis much, and perform nothing) and with other vayn and
foolish thoughts: the great hope he shall conceive of their smokes of court,
must needs geeue him afterward occasion to despair when he sees ye promis
unperformed. The court is a sea so deep, a pilgrimage so uncertain, yt there
we daily see naught else, but lambs swymme with safty in ye deepest chanel, and
elephants drown in the shalowest foord. To go sue, to serve, to trauayl, and to
solicit in the court of princes, may aptly be likened and compared to those
that put in many rych jewels to the lottery in open market: in wc it happens
very often, that he that has put in a.100. lottes shall not happen perhaps of
one, and an other that only has put in one, fortune shall so favor him, that
he shall ever after be made a rych man. The like we may say to him that has
lived so long in court, that he has not only got him a beard, but it is also
now beecome a gray beard: and yet in all this long time of his service he has
not gotten him any certainty, or stay of living to live honesty withal, to
mayntayn his aged years in quiet: and he may well say, that all the lottes
have been unfortunate to him which he put in adventure. It is true, that to be
called a good and virtuous man, it suffyceth to have a sharp wit and good
head: but to beecome rych, he must only have good fortune. And this is
plainly seen in the court, that some in four months will grow great like a
Melone, and some other in forty years will never bear but little fruit, like a
palm tree. We have told you all these things to this end, only to remember
those that go to the court of princes to follow any suyt, or to continue a
courtier still, that in any case they carry a purse with them full of money, and
a heart armed with paciens. O what pyty is it every way to see him that is a
suter in the court, to be long haled with a tedious suit, and in the end not
to obteyn any part of his desire, without a little pleasyng wynd of court. For
if he will have his suit go forward, and take good success, and have it
speedely granted, he must first buy it of god with bitter tears, and
afterward of the king with humble intercession, of the secretaryes with
promysses, and of the ushers with presents, and of the beeloued and in
authority with infynit service: So that to conclude, far greater is the reward
they crave, then the value, of the favor or benefyt they beestow. If I have
discoursed to you sufficiently what the unlucky suitors have done and do: you
shall further know what they think and do imagyn, as it falls out true. The
seely souls they pass the nights in watch, devising continually, not in what
church the next day they may hear divine service, but only what means they
may procure to come to the speech of the favored of the court, to speak one
word unto them. The poor suter (unskillful of courtly practice) believes,
that when he has once exhibited a bill or memorial of his suyt to the
master of requests, or that he has spoken a word or two to any one in favor
with the prince, that straight without further delay he shallbee dispatched of
his suit, and that he shall not need to sue any more. But alas they are
deceived, and prevented of their expectacion. For the unhappy suter shall be no
sooner out of his sight, but they presently forget all that has been said to
them, yea and peradventure his mind so occupied, that his byll of memorial is
also torn in pieces, and his suyt and bill committed to flying air.
Thaffaires of the wars are done by force and necessity, and those of friends
by good will, but those of the miserable suyters of the court, by money or
great importunity. So that it follows that hardly any man obteyneth the end
of his suyt (be his right never so good) without great dyligence and paynfull
toil. And many times the poor suter of the court departs from his own
house, and goes to the court, on hope and deliberacyon to be dispatched in
two months: and afterward the poor miserable man shall spend above six
months there without dispatche. But all this is nothing to the greese and
displeasure he shall felt in the end, if with better judgment he measure and
consider, the pleasure and felicity he might have had at home, with the
troubles and displeasures he abides in the court. For making account with his
purse, he shall perhaps find all his money spent, ere his suyt in manner be
begoon. I told you but of a little wonder, to tell you that al his ill
consisted in the empting of the purse. For in deed I shoold have said better,
and more truly, tellyng you that he had sold his nagge, laid his sweord in
gage, baratted his cote and cloak, and of two shirts he brought, the one he
sold: so that the seely man has no more left to chop, nor sell. And yet more
over me thinks I tell you little, If I show you not also, that after he has
consumed all his money he brought in his purse, sold, chopped, and laid to
gage all the apparel that he had, he is notwithstanding all this enforced
for debt to gage to his host all that that remayns behynd, to satisfy him for
his lodging. So that when he comes home to his house, he may say truly,
that he comes home weary, ashamed, consumed, and all that he has at gage.
He that determines to be a suter at the court, is wont before he go from
home, to make account what he will spend every day ordynaryly: but what he
shall spend extraordinaryly, against his will, that he never reckens of. And
therefore I woold counsel him for the best, if he put ten crowns in his
purse for ordinary charges, let him also put ten more for extraordinary. For
it is impossible he should ever keep an order and measure, in so great a
disorder. For many times courtiers are compelled for their honor and
reputacions sake, to inuit their hosts and owners of the lodging where they
lie: and beesides the great charges they are at that way, yet come there
vnbydden to dinner and supper a company of iesters, players of enterludes,
mynstrells, and musicians, or other pleasant companions whom he can not refuse
and turn away for honesties sake, but must needs make them eat and drink
beesides the reward they look for. So that when he has made his account of
ten or xx. shillings charges for his dinner or supper, let him look in his
purse, and he shall find these mates have picked up in rewards as much, as ye
hole charges of his dinner or supper besides. More over they are daily visited
of their friends and kinsfolks, and vitells are so dear and of so excessive
price, that to make their provision at the best hand, they must send out posts
and lackeis into all parts to be their purueiers. And yet are they further
recharged that many times their servants rob them of all their money and
run their way when they have done, and sometimes they must new array them
selves, al with things ye courtier (in respect of his estimacion) is bound to do
thoroughly, and with the best manner, or else to sequester and banish him self from
court and courtiers life. It is true that a poor gentelman or other suitor
(that of necessity must follow ye court) knows very well the cause that
moves him to be a courtier, and attend on the court, but yet he shall not
know what his charge and expense wilbee about the suyt. If he have any favor
or credit in the court, he may happily obteyn a quick and ready dispatch, and
so perhaps save some part of his money in his purse he determined to spend:
without which he shall not only be enforced to borrow, but to send a new
messenger to his house for more money. O (the more is ye pyty) how many have I
seen in princes courts spend til that ever they brought to the court to follow
their suyt, and yet could not be dispatched in any thing he came for, save
that in steed of their money they consumed, they have purchased them great
troubles and displeasures, bewayling their lost time, and vayn expense. And it
is to be considered also, that if it be a great dyfyculty to speak to the
prince in our matter, to the presedent of the counsel, to the master of the
requests, and to the privy counsel, to the marshals of ye house, to ye
treasorers, to ye cofferers, to the fouriers and to the favored of ye court, it
is far greater and more trouble to enterteigne, and content their servants
and officers. For I dare assure you, you shall sooner and more easly win the
love of ye master, then you shall obtein the favor and good will of the
setuant. Princes are contented if we obey them: the favored of the court if
we serve them: but ye servants are never contented, nor in quiet, if they see
we do not worship them and entreat the^. And surely I will tell you a true
tale, and will not lie a word to you. In those days when I my self was also a
courtier in the court of princes, it stood me upon many times rather to
trouble ye masters, then to pray the servants. If perhaps (for penance of his
sins) the suter show him self importunat in his affairs, and that he
presume to dare say to him some nipping or unpleasant word, let him be well
assured he will not be revenged on him, to hurt him with sweord or lance: but
only in holding back his pen, to delay him in his dispatch. For I remember,
that once being but a poor priest, I was entreated by the procter of a
province to say him a douzen of masses for a great noble man (and in great
favor in the court) that had his matter in his hands, and he coniured me very
earnestly that I should not say them for the health and salvation of his soul,
but only that god would inspire him and put into his mind to dispatch him
quickly of his buysines. Therefore as we have spoken of the one, it is reason
we should also speak of the other. And therefore I say that there are some of
these officers and clerks of Judges, Magistrates, counselors, secretaries,
treasorers, marshals, fouriers, and other officers also of the court that are
so wise, and men of such honesty, and ciuility, that the dyscurtesyes and
wrongs sometimes their lord and masters do to us, they do the best they can
either to take them from us quite, or at the least to lessen or dymynish them.
For the contrary also, others there are so proud, and shameless, such tatlers,
and vile persons, and so unconscionable with all: of whom as it is a great
pleasure for us to see that they write, and to hear that they can speak so
well, and promise so liberally, only to win your money, and pick your
purse: so it is a great spite to us, and more shame, reproach, and infamy for
them, when afterward we see the contrary effects of their fair words, and
feigned promises, where with they feed us continually. And addyng thereto also
we see many times that such a young courtier, in less then four years that he
has remained in service with a noble man, or other officer of the kings in ye
court, has gotten by his practice and policy a fair moyle of great price,
with her harnes all gilt, his cofers well sylled, his tent for the feelde with
feeld bed and other furniture to it, his carpets on his table, his clothes of
tapestry over his doors his gowns richly furred for the winter, and those of
satin and damask and taffeta for the summer: and yet notwithstanding all this
glory, he may possible keep a curtesan for his pleasure and maintayn her. Al
which things considered and put together, it is impossible he should do it by
the gains of his pen or service, but only by dishonest means, and robbing
of his master. I saw once in my presens a poor suter, offer the clark of a
Secretary eight Rialls of silver for to dispach him of his suyt, and he
refused them flatly, and would none of them by no means, notwithstanding the
poor man turned him up the bottom of his purse, and showed him that he had
but only four rialls left to bring him home withal. So ye poor man came to
me, and entreated me to speak to this clark for him, to persuade him to take
his money he offered him, and to dispatch him, since he had no more left then
he showed him.

And I did so. And this woorshipfull clerk made me this dishonest answer. Sir,
behold my face and complexion, and you shall find that it is all of gold, and
not of silver. For I swear to you by our blessed lady of Lancet, that yt is
more then two years that I received for reward of my payns no other but gold,
and not silver laid in my hands. It can not be but that servant ye vauntes him
self to have a face of gold, will one day put his masters face in ye mire. Now
albeit we see the kings officers and others peradventure under them to ride on
their nagges with their foot clothes, to be brave in apparel, to be rich in
jewels, and happily to have a hundredth crowns in his purse, we should not
marvel of it at all: but if we have cause to think any thing ill in them, it
is for that many times they play away more money fondly, the^ woold serve any
other man to spend in all his necessaries. That officer or clerk that has not
above a hundredth crowns in his purse, and that in a night plays away two
hundredth crowns, what judgment shall a man geeue of him? but that either he
deceyueth others in his office, or he steals and pilfreth from his master
or lord, or else he exacteth upon the poor suitors, and racks them withal
extreamyty, without conscience and honesty, and that he will have yt on them
even with plain brawlyng? Yea and though these good felows be liberal in play
(as you have hard) yet I warraunt you they are not spare of diet neither, but
if they call their friends at a time to their table in the hall, or else bid their
curtesans to some gardein, you may be assured they want no deynty meats, nor
delycat wines to please their lyking lust: yea peradventure with more copy, and
better meat and drink then their masters or lords have any. Hear could I mate
them with like companions to them selves, ye marchaunts prentices, wc for their
lavish expense, their excessive play, their lusty banketing and feasting,
otherwhile their secret friends in gardens and blind tauerns, come not behynd
them at al in delicacy of fare, and in suptuous expense, but rather go before,
and leave them far behynd. And how think you, can these foul ryots and
disorders be born by any likelihood of the prentices own abylity? nay suer of
the masters cost (as best able) whose purse paieth for yt good cheer, though
he good man fare at home but thynly. But well, sense it touches not our
matter, I will retorn again where I left. All these things notwithstanding, they
are dishonest, are sometimes tolerable and to be born, so yt with these faults
they would be diligent to dispatch men, and easly to talk withal. But alas for
pyty, we see that for all these complaints they hear, and for all the requests
and entreaty that may be made to them, they will never take pen in hand
before the poor suter take his hand out of his purse, that they may feel him
a little. We have spoken al these things, to admonish, remember, and to beseech
the favored of the prince, and other their officers, that neither them selves
nor their servants under them, be long and slow in dispatchyng such things as
they have in charge, and cheefely of poor and miserable suitors. For if we
consider the qualities and conditions of men, we see that to many suitors yt
were less detriment and more profyt, to be answered quyckly (though they
were denied) then dyspatched slowly (and to have it granted) to their great
charge and long trouble. Truly me thinks it is a great secret of god to know,
why all those that are suyters in the court of princes, and those also whom we
sue to are all mortal: And all the suyts yt we labor for, seem (yea to say
more truly) are immortal. And hereof we see a daily experyence, that the
suyters dye, and their suyts live for ever, being never determined. O
excellent art, and fine devise of suyt that courtiers are wont to use, that
are grateful to princes, as for familyar example. They find a way to put in a
thousand manner of lets to hinder and delay the suyts, because that when by
tract of time they have more then half dyspayred the hopeles suyters, they
then, to revive them again, and to make their honor seem the greater, dispatch
them even in a moment without let or delay, and to the suitors whole
contentation. It is good reason the prince have a regard of the things he
geeues, and to whom he graunts them, and like wise of the time and place. For
in receiving favor or a good turn at the princes hand, they sometimes make
more account and estimate of the lyberalyty, and bountyfull mind of the prince,
then they do of the gyfts them selves. Suer it is a good thing, and laudable,
for those that are contynually about the person of the prince, that they be
easy to be spoken wythall, pacyent to hear, wise in aunswering, of good fame
in their life, and ready to dispatch and do good. For being otherwise, they
may be assured they shall show the mark and white for their enemies to shoot
their persyng shaft at, and shall geeue the suyters also cause to complayn and
speak ill of them. And therefore to cuite them short, I counsel them, that in
those things they are besought, that they be not too hard to be entreated:
and in that they are requested, that they be never too strange, nor drawyng
back, much less covetous, and in those things that are geeuen them, they be
never unthankful: and with those that they are conuersaunt, that they be very
well advised and considered: and those things whereof they are advertised, that
they endeavor them selves to keep yt in mind and memory, and never to forget
yt. And if they shall do otherwise, let them assure them selves, and trust
unto yt, that if they in time of suit shall shut the doors against the poor
suyters, that the common people also will never open their hearts once to serve
or love them. Princes servant should so govern them selves, that though there
were found some ill persons that despised them, for that they might do much,
and were of great authority: yet that there might be many others also honest,
that shoold praise and commend them for the great good they do. That man that
is enuyed, dispraysed, defamed, disloued, and ill thought of of al, should
think it lesser ill to dye honestly, then to live with shame and in disgrace of
every man. For to say truly, me thynks no man could live a more bitter and
hard life, although he abode many sorows, the^ to see him disliked generally
of ye whole common weal. It is an honest and natural thing for men to endeavor
them selves by all dilligence and industry to get much, but it should be far
better, and much more worth, to procure them selves good will. For in effect
nothing does more satisfy and glad the heart, and makes it more quiet, then to
think that he is beloved, and well accepted of all. It is a most certain rule,
that the foes and enemies of the favored courtiers never ioyn in friendship with
others, but with those whom they know to be full of passions and quarrels like
the^ selves. Of which detractors if any one happen at times to go to the house
of the honored of the court, upon any occasion of suit, and that they cannot
presently speak with him: they will not say I warrant you that he was busy,
and coold not speak with him, but that he was so proud and so haughty that he
woold not once hear nor see them. We are so wylling and forward in wishing
well, and so self willed and obstinate in hating, that upon a very light
occasion many times we love those we love, and with a much less occasion we
defame and speak ill of those we hate. Therefore the favored of princes shall
do great service to God, and much profitt to the common weal, if they geeue
order to dispatch all suitors (high or low) speedely: Since it is to the king
only that they impute the denial of their suites, but for the delay and
prolongation of them, they only lay it to the charge of the favored and
beeloued of princes. And those that are great with the Prince, may not excuse
them selves by reason of the nombers of matters they have in their hands. For
if he be alone, and that it lie in his hands only to dyspatch all, and that
he is not able to satisfy them all, yt cannot be but that some one of his
friends will advertise the king that he cannot do all, and how the people
complain, and the poor suitors find them selves agreeued, which purchase him
great enemies and ill willers, by reason the common wealth is so altered. So
that he shall not tarry long, but the Prince understanding of these
complaynts, will ioyn a companion with him to ease him of some part of his
pain. And therefore the good Princes shoold admonish, and warn the officers
well (whom they take to help to dispatch matters) that they be wise and
learned men, and of good life, and that they be not too partial in their
doings, nor too sharp and rough in their aunswers. For many times there happen
more troubles and sinister chances to Princes and noble men, for the
discourteous language of their officers and deputyes, then for any ill that they
them selves do commit. And therefore those that are in favor and auctority
with ye prince, must of necessity foresee to choose under them such persons, to
whom they geeue the care and charge of their affayrs and busynes, to dispatch
men's matters and suyts, that they be liberal of condition, pleasant in their
conversation, courteous in aunswers, true in their wrytings, easy and dyligent
in their dispatches, very honest and modest in that they geeue or take, and
sincere and perfitt in all their other virtues if it be possible: So that they
may ever be more careful to get friends for their masters, then money. For
like as the life of the master of the ship consists, and depends in the
only guide and judgment of the Pilot, and the conscience of the judge in his
constitute, the goods of the merchant in his factor, and the victory of the
prince in his Captayn: Even so likewise does the honor of the favored consist
in those he has chosen officers under him for the dispatch of men's affairs.
And although the servant of the beelyked be no partaker with his master of
his favor with the prince, yet is he a coadiutor to him to support his credit
and favor; and many times also a ready mean utterly to undo his master and to
dishonor him for ever. The like watch and care the good bishop has over his
flock, to preach unto them the Gospel of Ihesus Christ: the self same ought
the magistrates and higher powers have to their officers that are under them, in
taking heed that they be not slow and negligent in dispatching such business as
they have in charge, that they be not dishonest of life, presumptuous in
demanding, and false in their writing. For the least of these faults suffiseth
utterly to undo the servant, and also to defame the master. And therefore so
soon as the beloved of the court have any suspicion in the world, or ynkling
(be it never so little) that his servant is grown to be proud, dishonest,
and of a naughty conscience; he ought not only immediately to correct him for
it: but to put him out of his service forthwith, and to turn his coat over his
ears. Otherwise they will murmr so much at the servant that does all these
faults, as at the master that will not see them, and suffers them. Therefore
the reputed of court must first see, and peruse over the writings and doings
of their servant and secretaries, before they dispatch them out of their
hands, and to moderat their gayn with reason that is due to them. Otherwise
their enemies might justly say, that they keep not such under them to dispatch
poor men that sue to their masters, but rather to spoil and rob them. And
therefore they were better augment their wages they geeue those officers and
servant, then to confent or dissemble with their theft. For so doing, the
servant can never rise in wealth, but the master must needs diminish in
honor. It may happen many times yt the esteemed of the court shall be so
occupied in thaffairs of the comonweal, yt he cannot (though he woold) give
audiens to the suitors. But when they are thus occupied that they cannot in
deed, they must then command their servant and officers, that they
courteously entreat them, and hear them, and not check or rebuke them, and call
them importunat suitors. For it is no reason, yt for dispatch of their business,
the poor souls shoold be laden with injurious words.

That the derelings of the court beware they be not proud, and high minded,
For lightly they never fall but through this wicked vice. Chap. xiii.
WE read that Hieroboham succeeded his father in xii. realms that were his,
although they were but small realms. Who being requested and exhorted by the
grave aged men of his realm, to be courteous and temperat, and not gredy, nor
auaricious in recovering the tribuis and subsidies the other realms gave him,
and merciful and pitiful in punishing the offenses committed, answered them
thus. My father beat you only with simple whips, but I will not scurge you with
whips, but plague you with scorpio^s: for my little finger is greter tha^ was his
whole arm. Which happened very ill to him, yt for to chastise ye proud and
arrogant words he spoke to the^, and to punish him for his wicked doi^gs and
enormities co^itted, they afterward revolted against him, and took from
him.xi. of his realms, and al his fre^dz forsook hi^: so yt as he augme^ted i^
greatness of his fyngers, he diminished as much in his realms and riches. So
great was ye pride likewise of king Pharao, yt not contented yt god had pardoned
him his sins, and with the ten plagues that he had sent him, did yet
notwithstanding resist and pursue the people of Israel. Wherefore the sea,
(that was made a plain passage and high way, for the sauegard of the children
of Israel his enemies) was prepared a sepulture for him and his. Pompey the
great also being in Asia, when it was told him that he shoold leuy his power,
and prepare his men to be in redines to resist ye battle ye Julius Caesar came
to geeue him: with a great fury he stamped his foot upon the ground, and
proudly spoke these words. Next to the gods I fear no man, no not all mortal
men, although they all were bent against me, my power being so great, that I
am able to destroy Julius Caesar, and all his power coming against me. And not
only the realms of Asia shall fight for me, but also I will command the
ground that I tread on to rise against him. But what was the fattal end of
Pompeies pride? His captains lost the battle, his children their Realms and
seignories, and he in fine his head, Rome her liberty, and his friends their
lives. Themperor Domitian also was so vicious in his doings, and so proud in
his thoughts, that he openly commanded the governors and magistrates of his
realm in all their edicts and proclamations to say these words. Domitian our
god, and our prince commands that this thing be done. But lo the fynall
end of his pride, in taking upon him the name of a god, by consent and
counsel of his wicked wife Domitia, he had seven deadly wounds geeuen him in
his bed with a dagger. And thus woefully he ended his glorious life. Plutarch
recounteth also that king Demetrius was the proudest prince that ever reigned.
For he was not contented to see him self served of al men like a great and
mighty prince as he was, but he made them also honor him as a god. And he
woold not suffer any strange imbassatours to come into his presence, but they
shoold be appareled like priests. Aman was also very familier with the king
Assuerus, and although all those of his realm did him great service, and that
strangers had him in great veneration and did honor him maruelously, yet was
there a glorious Mardocheus, that woold never do him reverence, nor once put
of his capp to him: by reason whereof this Aman that was in so great favor,
commanded a gybbet of fyfty yards high to be set up for Mardocheus, whom he
woold have hanged on that gibbet, to be revenged on him for the injury he had
done him. But the divine will of God was such, and Fortune did permit it, that
on the same galloes Aman thought to have putt Mardocheus to death, on the self
same himself was hanged.

Themistocles and Aristides were two famous men among the Greeks, and because
they were both great Princes and Philosophers, and had in great reputation of
all those that knew them, there was such a secret emulation and ambition
between them, the one to reign over the other, that both aspyring each to
command other, there followed great disorders and oppressions of the subjects
of their commonweal. Wherefore Themistocles moved with pity and compassion of
so great a tyrant, which for their sakes their commonweal endured, one day in
the market place before all his people with a loud voice spoke these words,

Know you, O you people of Athens, that if you do not lay hands on my
exceeding presumption, and on the ouergreat ambition of Aristides, that our
gods wilbee offended, the temples will fall down to the hard foundation, our
treasures wilbee consumed, our selves destroyed, and our commonweals brought
to utter ruyn and decay. Therefore once again good people I say, bridle, bridle
these our inordinat and unspeakable affections beetymes, lest the rayns laid on
our necks we run to far. O golden words of a prince, and worthy
eternal fame. Lucanus also when he woold reprove the presumption and pride of
the Romayn princes, said, that Pompei the great coold never abide to have any
for his compagnion or equal with him within Rome: And Julius Caesar also woold
never suffer that there shoold be any greater in the world then him self. And
therefore to discourse a little of this abominable and horrible vice of pride,
we have not without great reason laid before you these approved examples,
before we begin to reprove it. For in all things thexamples we show you
are wont to move us more, then the reasons we seem to tell you of. For that
that I have seen, for that I have read, and for that that I have hard say also
of others, I am most assured and resolved thereof, that by the only cause of
this wicked sin of pride, proceeds the ruyn and utter decay of all our
greatest things and affairs of our life, for by all other sins a man may in
deed descend and declyne from his degree and state of honor and estimacion,
but by this only sin, he cannot chose, but he must fall down flat to the
grownd. They find out the midst and center of the earth, the depth of the
sea, and the highest tops of Riphei mountains, the end of the great mount
Caucasus, and the beginning of the great fludd Nile: and only the little heart
of man, touching desire to rule and command, can never find end. Thinsatiable
covetousness is such, that it cannot be contented with the things we have, but
only with those we repute of less price. Likewise ambition and pride to
command cannot be contained within bounds, but only by obeying. For never no
vice can have end, if he that has it does not leave it, and banish it from
him. After Alexander the great had conquered all Asia, and had subdued the
great India, he was one day reproved of the great Philosopher Anacharses, who
told him these words. Since thou art now, O Alexander, lord of all the earth,
why do thou weary thy self so much in thy affairs, as no pain seems
troublesome to thee? To whom Alexander answered. Thou have told me many times
Anacharses, that besides this world there are also three others. And if it be
so (as thou say) how great a reproach and infamy were it to me, that being
three other worlds, I shoold be lord but only of one. Therefore I do daily
sacrifyce to the gods, that though they take me out of the life of this world,
yet at least that they will not deny me of so glorious a conquest. I confess
that the Scriptures excepted, I have no words so ryfe in memory as these,
whereby may easily be perceived, that to quiet and content a proud heart, the
seignory of ye whole world is not yet sufficient, and how ended the pride of
this glorious prince? even thus. He that hoped to co^quer and be lord of the
three other worlds, did not rule this one only above.iii. years. We may boldly
say this, and swear it, and may also plainly prove it to any that desire to see
it, yt he wants both wit and knowledge, that takes upon him to be proud,
and presumptuous. For the more he looks into him self, and considers and
reconsidereth his state and calling, and what he is, he shall find in him a
thousand occasions fit to humble him, but never a one only to make him proud
and haughty. How great, rych, mighty, noble, and worthy so ever the parson
be, every time that we happen to see him, and that we have no acquayntaunce
of him. And that we desire to know what he is, we do not ask of what
element, of what sea, of what fire, of what planet, of what clymat, of what
sun, of what moon, nor of what aier, but only of what country he is of,
and where he was borne. For we are all of the earth, we live in the earth,
and in thend we have to turn into the earth, as to our natural thing. If the
planets and the beasts coold help us with the instrument and benefit of the
tongue, they woold take from us the occasions of vayn glory. For the stars
woold say, that they were created in the firmament, the Sun in the heavens,
the birds in the air, the Salamaunder in the fire, and the fysh in the water:
but only the unhappy man was made of earth, and created in the earth. So that
in that respect, we cannot glory to have other kinsfolk nearer to us, then are
ye woormes, the flies, and horseflyes. If a man did consider well what he
were, he woold assertain us that the fire burns him, water drownes him, the
earth wearies him, the air troubles him, the heat greeues him, the cold hurts
him, and the day is troublesome to him, the night sorrowful, hunger and thirst
makes him suffer, meat and drink filles him, his enemies daily follow him, and
his friends forget him. So that the time a man has to live in this wretched
world, cannot be counted a life, but rather a long death. The first day we
see one borne, the self same we may make rekening that he begins to dye:
and although that parson lived amongst us a hundredth years after in this world,
we shoold not say therefore that he lived along time, but only that he
tarried a great time to dye. Therefore that parson that has his life tied to so
many trybutes, I can not deuyse or think with my self why, or wherefore he
shoold be proud. But now returning again to our purpose, let us say, and
exhort the servant and familiers of princes, that they take heed they be
not proud and presumptuous. For it seeldom happens, that the favored of kings
and princes fall out of favor and credit for that they have, or can do much,
nor for that they crave and desire much: but for that they are to bold, and
presume to much. For in the court of kings and Princes there is nothing more
hurtful and less profitable, then pride and presumption. For often times the
ouerweening of the courtier, and the foolysh vain pride and reputacion he
has of him self, brings him to be in the princes disgrace, and makes the
people also to be offended and angry with him. For till this day we never
saw, nor hard tell of any that ever got into the princes favor and credit, for
that he was proud and high minded: but only for that he has showed himself
an humble, obedient, courteous, loving, and a faithful servant. I woold be of
this mind, that the courtier that sees he is received into favor in the
princes court, shoold ever wax better in serving well, then grow worse in
presuming to much. And I dare boldly say and affirm, that it is a mere point
of folly, by his pride and rashenesse to lose all that good in one day, that by
great good fortune he has attained to in many years. And though that the
favored courtier (subject possible to his fantastical humor) be sometimes
overcome with cholor, carnal desire, drawn with auaryce, and addicted to the
gorge, enuenomed with envy, plunged insloth and ydlenes, or some other vice and
imperfection, it shall not skill much, neither be any great wonder, since all
mankind is subject to those passions: and neither the prince, nor the common
weal, will reckon much of that. For of all these faults and vices there can
come no greater hurt to him, save only that that the common people woold
murmr against him. But his pride and pecokes glory once known and espied,
every man casts his eyes upon him to beehold his princely gate, and curses
him in word and deed. Therefore let a man be in as great favor as he can
deuyse to be, as worthy, noble, rich, and of as great power and aucthority
as he desires to be: I never saw any ill in all my life, if with all these
virtues he were proud and high minded, but in thend he was persecuted of
many, and hated and enuyed of all. For those that are in greatest favor about
the prince, have secret enemies enough to hinder their credit, although they
do not purchase them new, to accuse them of their pride and presumption. And
as we are taught by experience, ye burning coal cannot long be kept alive,
without it be covered with the whot ymbers. Even so I mean, that the favor of
the prince cannot be long maintained, without good bringing up, and civil
manners, gentle conversation, and familiarity. The great me^ of auctority about
the prince run estsones into great and many dangers: and this happens,
because they woold not be reproved in any thing what so ever they do, much
less here any word that shoold displease them, neither can they abide to be
told of their faults, much less suffer to be corrected for them. Nether do
they suffer willyngly to be counseled in any thing, be it never of so great
weight and importance, neither woold they have any compaygnion with them in
favor and credit with the Prince, but they desire to be both on the right hand
of the prince, and of the left: still they only woold be the favored of the
prince, and none other: aspiring to govern them in all their doings, and to
be thought and reputed the sole and only rulers of the affairs of the prince,
and his common weal, and to be believed in all things of the prince, and to
be obeyed also of the common people. Those therefore that are continually resient
in the court of princes, and that have the cheifest rooms and offices of
auctority in the court, let them well consider, and keep in memory this one
word that I will tell them. And that is this. That the first day that they
take upon them to be superinte^de^ts and governors of the common weal, even
in the self same day they shall come to put in hasard their honor, favor, and
credit, how great so ever it be. For with great difficulty are the lest things
the prince himself commands, executed or done in his realm or common weal:
and therefore may the favored of the court see, how much more hard it is for
him to rule, (as sole and absolute lord) the affairs of the realm, and to be
obeyed in the common weal: since the king him self cannot do it by his regal
auctority. And therefore the less he shall desire to meddle with thaffairs of
the people, the more shall he live in quiet and contented. For naturally the
common people are so unstable and uncertain in their doings, unthankful of
benefits received, and so ungrateful of a good turn done them: that the
beloved of the court or any other person in favor with the prince can ever do
any thing for the people, (be it never so well) but they will speak ill, and
mislyke of him, and find fault with some of his doings. It is impossible that
those that will command many things in the court of princes shoold alwais do
their things so, but they shoold sometime tread awry. And admit their faults
be but light, and of small moment, yet they may be assured there wilbee enough
that will both open them to the common weal, and tell them also secretly to the
prince alone. For those that seek to deuorce the favored of the court from the
prince, do not complayn or find fault for that they are more in favor with the
prince tha^ others, but they will show they take it in ill part, they have more
aucthority, and command more then others in the comonweal. Saying that by mean
of their place and authority, and under color of good zeal to minister Justice,
they geeue commonly foul and injurious words, far unfit for the aucthority
of the person, and woorthynes of the place. So that it cannot be otherwise
chosen, but that continuing this disorder, they must needs make the king
suspect them, and besides that bring a great discord betwixt the king and those
that he favors, and make him meruelously offended with them. For in thend,
princes woold alwais be served, and obeyed, but not ruled, and commanded. And
yt is a most true saying. Over much familiarity bredeth contempt, wc although
yt may be borne between men of like degree and equality, yet is it not
tolerable between the prince and the beliked of the prince. But rather every
day, hour, and moment that the favored courtier enters into the princes
palace, or into his privy chamber, he ought ever to do it with as great
curtesy, reverence, humility, and honor, and in speaking to the king, as if he
had never spoken with him, nor seen him. So that he shoold let all men see,
that though it please the kings majesty to make of him, and to accept him into
his favor, yet that he leave not to serve him, and do him that duity that all
other servants do, and are bound to do. The suerest and most certain way to
maintain those that are sublimed, and exalted in the court of princes, and to
raise and bring those to auctority that are low and of base condition, is: that
the esteemed repute him self ever a servant, and that the servant never vaunt
nor bost him self to be favored or esteemed. The familiers of princes ought
ever to be ware that there come no complaints of them to the princes ears. For
as a drop of water, by time and continual fall comes to perce the hardest
stone: so it might happen that the nombers of complaints, might be occasion
for the prince to wtdraw his favor and love from the courtier again. If his
only seruyces were sufficient to induce ye prince to favor and love him: so the
number of his subjects complaints against him, were occasion enough to make him
mislike him, and put him out of favor clean, changing his love and favor, to
hate and discredit it. For it a certain thing, that when the prince does look
well into his own doings, he had rather be beloved of all, then served of
one alone. The honored of the court may not regard so much the honor and credit
he is called to by his prince, as ye baseness and poverty he was in, when it
pleased the king to like of him, and that he came first acquainted with the
king. For if he did otherwise, it might happen, that like as fortune had
brought him to that high estate he had: So pride might overthrow him again,
and bring him as low as he was before. For I shoold have said more truly a
great deal, saying that it woold have made him fall down right, being the
right property of fortune, to suffer the baser sort (whom she had called to
honor) only to return them to their mean estate and call, they were of at the
first, and never to leave the favored of ye prince, and men of auctority (nor
never satisfied) till she have thrown them down hedlong into extreme misery,
never to rise again. Agathocles (first the son of a Potter, and afterward
made king of Scicillia) whilst he lived, he ever used this manner, that in
his tresory or jewel house, yea and also at his table, amongst all his cupps
and dishes of gold and silver, he had some also of earth amongst them: and
being asked the occasion, why in so great a treasure, and mass of gold and
silver he had so vile a thing as earth, answered thus. I drink in golden
cupps and eat in earthen dishes, to geeue thanks to ye gods, which of a potters
son that I was, brought me to this royal state of a mighty king. And I do
it also to have evermore cause to be humble, and to fly pride. For it is an
easier thing, and more lyker for a king to become a potter, then for a potter
to attayn to the greatness and state of a king. These words of Agathocles were
ever worthy to be noted and had in memory, since we see plainly, that to
geeue a man a fall, a little stone suffices to make us stumble and fall to the
ground: but to raise us up again, we must needs help us with power of hands
and feet. It may well be, that this brave courtier and favored of the court
before he came to this degree of honor, was but of a mean house, and basely
borne, and besides that esteemed of few, for his nobility of blood: of an
unknown country, of poor parentage, of small substance, and no better nor
otherwise favored of fortune in his birth or lynage. of all which things he
has no cause to be ashamed, but rather to glory, and praise god. For he
shall ever be more esteemed in the court, and well thought of, to remember
from whence he came, and to regard his first estate: then he shall, if he
wax glorious, and high minded, by reason of the favor he is in at this present
utterly forgetting his first rising. Titus Liuius recites that ye renowned
Romayn Quintus Cincinatus, before he came to be made captain of Rome, he was
taken out of ye feelds a laboring man, plowing and tilling ye ground. And this
so noble person, being occupied in great affairs of ye common weal, either in
provisions, or munitio^, or in expeditions of war, was wont to sygh before
all the captains, and say. Alas, who coold tell me now any news, how my
beefes do in my graunge, my sheep in the mountains, and whether my servant
have provided them of hay and pasture to keep them the next year? Surely it is
to be thought, that who so ever speaks these words with his mouth, must
needs have little pride in his heart. And undoubtedly he proved his words
true, and showed that he spoke as he thought, and in good earnest, without
intent of jest: since afterward he returned home again, to follow the plough,
to plant his vynes, and to see his own things governed, leui^g behind him a
perpetual testimony of his noble and worthy doings. And his common weal also
greatly enryched by his famous acts. Saul was king of Israel, and taken for a
god, and was anointed of Samuel his father a poor husba^dman of ye country,
and he from his youth brought up in that trade to hold ye plough: and yet when
he was king, he never disdeined to plough his ground, to sow his otes, and to
drive his beasts, now to pasture them home again. So that the good king did
glory this day to hold the plough, and to morrow to fight with his sword. When
fortune therefore shows her self enemy to any, and that from great dignity
and high call, she overthrows him, and brings him to low and mean estate:
it is then that he has good cause to complain of fortunes cruelty, and to
bewail his wretched happ, ashamed to see his lothsom misery. But when she
woorketh contrarily, and from mean estate brings him to great honor and credit,
that must needs be great honor and glory to him. Therefore I say let them
beware, beware, that bear rule and aucthority in the court, that they be not
proud, glorious and high minded, neither otherwise detected of any kind of
vice, though the be never so much in favor and estimation. Since fortune
shows most her spite against the proud, and disdainful heart, rather then to
the humble and meek. To stopp the enemies mouth, there can be found no better
means, then for the derlyng of the court not to be too proud and presumptuous,
since no man is found so mad or foolish in the same, as once to dare to say, I
accuse this man, because he is in favor and estimation: but he may boldly do
it, when he sees in deed that he is a proud glorious fool. If we see the
favored of the court offended one with the other, we will say it is but heat,
if we see him eat to much, we will say it is but of a good stomach. If he
rise late, we will excuse him, and say it was late ere he went to bed, and
that he was weary with watching. If he play often, we will say he does it for
pastime: if he be careful in keeping that he has together; that he is wise
and pollytike: if he speak much, that he is a pleasant man and geeuen to be
merry: if he speak little, that he is wise and modest: if he spend much, that
he is liberal and bountiful: but if he be glorious and proud, what shall a
man say on him, and with what honest mean can we excuse him? Surely let others
look, For I know not. Truly for all other faults and errors of men, they may
honestly be excused, save only that of pride. For though many times we commit
other offenses, it is but through frailty: but if we offend in pride, it
comes of a great folly, and want of discretion. And for the contrary, the
lowly and courteous condition of ye courtier, do not only depresse and resist
the detractions and murmurings of their enemies, but does enforce them against
their wills to say well of the^. For god does suffer many times that the
perverse nature and condition of one, is subdued and overcome, by ye good and
gentle usage of an other. Therefore the beloved of court shoold take great
heed, that they show not them selves proud in their words, and much less in
their ceremonies wc they use in the court: as in going up ye stairs, in entering
in at the doors, in taking the stool to sit down, and also in putting of his
cap. And though perhaps he that shall read these our aduertisments, will thynk
them rather precepts for children, then for men: yet I will answer him
nevertheless, that they are very necessary for those that are in favor in the
court, and for all other courtiers, without the use of which he may happily
noorish a venomous Serpent in his breast. And therefore not without great reason
we have spoken that we have, that of too little heed taking, sometimes there
may follow great trouble to the favored courtier. For many times they murmr
more against him, in not putting of his capp, when he is courteously saluted:
then they do, if they deny their favor when they are requested. If one
courtier leave to do courtesy to an other, they say he does yt not for that
he bears him ill will: but for want of bringing up. But if he be great
with the king, then they say it is not for want of good manner, but for that he
is too proud. To say truly, it is an unhappy life, the life of ye beloved in
the court, since they attribute all their faults and errors to folly: although
they committed them rather through negligence, and want of foresight, then of
pretensed malice, or ill will, as it is taken and thought. Gneus Flaccus a
noble Romayn, going in company with other Romans to visit a sick man, and
coming also an other romain to see the same sick person likewise, and being no
place commodious in the chaumber where the last might sit down, neither any
stool left to sit down upon: they say, he rose of on his stool, and gave
him place that came last. The which humanity and curtesy was afterward
published among all the Romans, and after also greatly praised of the writers.
And the Romans also, being very true, grave, curious, and worthy of great
faith and credit in all that they wrote, it is to be credited, that that act
of curtesy was much noted and esteemed, since they woold write it in the most
noble and heroycall acts of their common weal. When the favored courtier is
accompanied with knights and gentlemen of the court, that brings him to the
court, and it happen any to go up the degrees before him, he shoold not pass
for that, much less show any token that he made any rekening of it. For to
say troth, it is no great matter for him to go up before him on the degrees
of stone, since he went before all on the degrees of favor. What matter is it
to the favored or officer of the court, to see an other enter in at the staier
door before him, if afterward when they shall come where the king is, he
shall go into the privy chamber, as one that in deed is in favor and beloved,
and the other shall stand without like a sheep? And to conclude I say, if I were
in the number of those that are thus belyked, and favored of the king, I woold
in the kings chamber use my favor and credit, and abrod, all curtesy and
ciuility.

That it is not fit for courtiers to be too covetous, if they mean to keep
them selves out of many troubles and dangers. Cap. xiiii.
AVlus Gelius and Pliny render true testimony in their writings, that the
honesty of the Romans was so great in their eating, and their modesty in their
mainteining of them selves such, that they did not suffer any romain citezen to
have any more houses then one to dwell in, nor but one gown to put on his back,
one horse to ride upon, not above two yoke of oxen to till his land. Titus
Liuius, Macrobius, Cicero, Plutarch, Salust, Lucan, Seneca, Aulus Gelius,
Herodian, Eutropius, Trebellius, Vulpitius, and all the other romayn writers
do never cease to praise the ancient romain poverty, saying the common wealth
of Rome never lost one iott of her greatness, and honor, during the time that
they went abroad to conquer other realms and dominions: but only since they
began to geather treasor together. Licurgus the Philosopher (who afterward was
king of the Lacedaemonians) ordained in his laws he made, that no neighbor
shoold have any more goods then an other: but that all houses, lands, vynes,
and possessions, gold, silver, apparel, mouables, and generally all other
things what soever, shoold be indifferently holden among them to the common
utility of all. And being asked, why he woold not consent the common weal
shoold have her own private commodities and particulers, answered thus: The
payns and travels men endure in this mortal life, and the great troubles and
disorders that come daily to the common weal, chance not so much for that men
have need of living to maintain them selves with all, but for that they do
desire to leave to their heirs and successors. And therefore I have appointed
every thing in common among subjects, because that during their lives they
might have honestly to maintain them selves with all, and that they shoold leave
any thing to dispose by will after their deaths. Herodotus says also, that it
was decreed by thinhabitans of the Isles Baleares, that they shoold suffer none
to come into their country to bring them any gold, silver, silk, jewels, or
precious stones. And this served them to great profit. For by means of this
law, for ye space of.iiii. C. years that they had wars with the Romans, the
Carthagians, ye French and ye Spaniares, never any of these nations once
stirred to go about to conquer their land, being assured that they had
neither gold, nor silver, to rob or convey from them. Promotheus that was the
first that gave laws to the Egiptians, did not prohibit gold nor silver in
Egypt (as those of the Isles Baleares did in their territories) neither did he
also command that all thing shoold be common, as Licurgus: but only commanded,
that none in all his kingdom shoold be so hardy once to gather any mass or
quantity of gold or silver together, and to hoard it up. And this he did upon
great penalties: for as he said, avarice is not showed in buylding of fair
houses, neither in having rich moueables, but in assembling and gathering
together great treasure, and laying it up in their coffers. And Plutarche in
his book De consolatione says also, that if a rich man dyed among the
Rhodians, leaving behind him one only son and no more suruyuing him, they
woold not suffer that he shoold be sole heir of all that his father left:
but they left him an honest heritage, and living, so his state and call, and to
mary him well withal, and the rest of all his sethers goods they dissipated
among the poor and orphans. The Lydians, that neither were Greeks nor
Romans, but right barbarous people, had a law in their common weal, yt every
man shoold be bound to bring up his children, but not to be at tharges in
bestowing them in marriage: So yt the son or daughter yt were now of age to
mary, they gave them nothing to their marriage, more then they had gotten with
their labor. And those yt will exactly consider this lawdable custom, shall find
that it is rather a law of true philosophers, then a custom of barbarous
people. Since thereby ye children were enforced to labor for their living, and
the parents also were exempted from al manner of covetousness or avarice, to heap
up gold and silver, and to enrich them selves. Numa Pompilius second king of
the romans, and establisher of their laws and decrees, in ye law of the seven
tables wc he made, he left them order only, wc way the Romans might rule
their common weal in tranquillity: and put in no clause nor chapter yt they
shoold make their wills, whereby their children might inherit their fathers
goods. And therefore being asked why he permitted (in his laws) every man to
get as much goods as he coold, and not to dispose them by will, nor leave them
to their heirs: He answered, because we see, yt albeeit there are some
children that are unhappy, vicious, and abominable, yet are there few fathers
notwtstanding this, that will deprive and disherit them of their goods at their
death, only to leave them to any other heir: and therefore for this cause I
have commanded, that all the goods that remain after the death of the owner of
the^, shoold be given to the common weal, as sole heir and successor of them:
to thend that if their children shoold become honest and virtuous, they shoold
then be distributed to them: if they were wicked and unhappy, that they shoold
never be owners of them, to hurt and offend the good. Macrobius in his book De
somno Scipionis says, that there was in the old time an old and ancient law
amongst the Tuscans duly observed, and kept, and afterward taken up of the
Romans: that in every place, where so ever it were, (in town or village)
within their territories, on new years day every man shoold present him self
before the judge or magistrate of the place he was in, to geeue him account
of his manner of life, and now he maintained himself, and in this examinatio^s
they did accustom to punish him that lived ydlely, and with knavery and
deceit maintained them selves: as minstrels, ruffyans, dycers, carders, and
iuglers: coggers, foysters, cosiners of men, and sylching knaves, with other
loytering vacabo^ds and rogues, that live of others swett and toil, without any
pain or labor they take upon them to deserve that they eat. I woold to god (if
it were his will) yt this Tuscan law were observed of christians: then we
shoold see how few they be in number, that geeue them selves to any faculty or
science, or other trade, to live by their own travel and industry: and how
many and infinite a number they be that live in idle sort. The divine Plato in
his Timee says, that although an idle man be more occasion of many troubles
and inconveniences in a common weal, then a covetous man, yet is it not alwais
greater: for the idle man, and that gladly takes his ease, does but desire to
have to eat: but ye covetous man does not only desire to eat, but to be rich
and have money enough.

All the eloquence and pleasant speech that the Orators studied in their
orations, the lawyers in their law, and the famous philosophers in their
doctrine and teaching, was for no other cause, but to admonish and persuade
those of the common weal, to take very good heed in choosing of their
governors, that they were not covetous and ambitious in thadministration of
their publyke affairs. Laertius recyteth also, that a Rhodian jesting with
Eschines the philosopher said unto him. By the immortal gods I swear to thee O
Eschines, that I pity thee to see thee so poor, to whom he answered. By the
same immortal gods I swear to thee again, I have compassion on thee, to see
thee so rytch. Sith riches bring but pain and trouble to get them, great care
to keep them, displeasure to spend them, peril to hoard them, and occasion of
great dangers and inconuenyences to defend them: and that that greeueth me
most, is, that where thou keep thy treasure fast locked up, there also thy
heart is buried. Surely Eschines words seemed rather spoken of a christian,
then of a philosopher. In saying, that where a man's treasure is, there is also
his heart. For there is no covetous man, but daily he thinks upon his hid
treasure: but he never calls to mind his sins he has committed. Co^paring
therefore those things we have spoken, with those things we will speak, I say:
that yt becomes ye favored of princes to know, yt it is less seemly for the^
to be covetous then others: For ye gretnes of their favor ought not to be
showed only in being rich, but also in being noble and worthy Plutark shows,
that Denis the Siracusan coming one day into the chamber of the prince his
son, and fyndyng gryat riches of gold and silver that he had geeuen him, he
spoke very angerly to him and said, thou had been far fytter for a
merchant of Capua, then to be as thou art the kings son of Scicilla sith
thou have a wit to gather, but not to spend. Which is not fyt, nor lawful for
thee, if thou wylt succeed me after my time in my kingdom. And therefore I
do remember thee, that kingdoms and high estates are not maynteyned with
keepyng of riches, but only with geeuing, and honorably bestowyng them well.
And to this purpose also recyteth Plutarke, that Ptholomeus Philadelphus was
demanded, why he was so slow, and with so great difficulty received the
services of others: and was so liberal and noble in geeuing, and grauntyng
favors: he answered. I will not get reputacion amongst the gods, nor good
renown amongst men for being rych, but only I will be praised and esteemed
for making of others, rych, and having under me rich subjects. These words
that Tholomee said to a friend of his, and those that Denis spoke to his son
me thynks the beloved of the court should not only be contented to read
them, but to seek to keep them still in mind, sith by them we may manifestly
see, yt riches are ever more profitable for a man that owes them, and geeueth
them bountifully: then to have them, and with covetousness to hoord and lock
them up in their coffers. And the favored of princes should not be enuyed, for
the goods that they can get by their favor and credit, but only for the good
that thereby they may do to their friends and kynsfolk. For they are those that
with others goods, make the people slaves to the^. What greater nobility can
there be in this world, then to make others noble? what greater riches, then
to make others rich? and what more lyberty, then to make others free? The glory
yt the princes, and those that they esteem and have in their savor ought to
have, should not consist in getting together much goods, but in winnyng many
servant and friends. Great are the privileges that the noble and lyberall men
have, for their children are obedient to them, their neyghbors love them, their
friends do accompaigne them, their servant serve them faithfully, strangers
vysyt them, and the enemies they have, dare not speak against them: for
although they spite at their greatness and favor, yet they dare not once
presume to rebuke or reprove their lyberalyty. Phalaris the Agrigentine, Denis
the Siracusan, Catelyne the Romayn, and Iugurth the Numidian: These four
famous tyraunts did not mayntayn their states and roial kingdoms with the
virtues they had, by only but force and ample gifts they gave. So that we may
well say, that in ye world there is no stone so phylosophicall, nor hand so
liberal as treasor and riches: sith that in geeuing it, good men become great,
and tyra^ts thereby are supported. I would those yt are princes familiars woold
note well this word, that is, that great favor joined with much covetousness is a
thing impossible to continue long in any. For if he mean to keep him self in
favor, he must needs fly avarice: and if he will needs stick to avarice, he
must of necessity lose his favor. There is no better means for him that seeks
the princes favor, to get into favor: then to serve him dilygently, and to
trouble him seldomly. The kings officer that serves him in his house, must
endeavor to make the king know yt he serves him more for the love he bears
him, then for any gayn or profyt he hops at his hands. For in doing so, ye
king will not only with his favor and benefits bestowed on him, treat and handle
him as one he loves and makes account of, but also love him as if he were
his own son. It is most just, ye beloved of the prince, love and honor ye
prince with al his heart, sense he loves him, and needs not. Those yt are
beloved, made of, and favored in princes courts, should make great account of
yt, and therefore they shayld serve willingly. For the love we bear to
princes, comes commonly rather of the necessity we have of them, then of our
own proper wills. But the love of princes to us, comes of mere good will,
and not of necessity. If any man do company me, speak to me, and serve me:
yt is only in that respect that I ever geeue him, and for that he hops I
will geeue him in time to come. And to such a man I might truly say, he rather
flaterith then loves me. The esteemed of the court must note if it please
the^, that though the prince have others about him, who^ he favors and
loves as well as him self, yt he be not therefore offended nor displeased a
whit. For else all those he sees accepted into favor with ye prince, he woold
make the^ his enemies, and because they may avoid this inco^uenie^ce, they must
take it in very good part. For albeit ye prince geeue his favor to one alone,
yet he imparteth his gifts to diverse. Those that newly begun to rise in ye
court, and to do much: may not even upon a soden show them selves to be rich,
but only study daily to increase in favor. For every time that the courtier
does assure me he does not diminish in favor, I will be bound to him he
shall never be poor. The way they must observe in the court to be great, and
to be able to do is this: That is, to visit often, to suffer, to present to
persevere, to be beloved, and to continue in the princes favor: Which I assure
you, is a great secret, and right alchimyne of court, sodeinly to rise in
favor, and to be rich, and al in short time. By this I infer, that the wise
man ever desires first to be in favor, before he covet to be rich: but the
fool and Idiot desires first to be rich, and then in favor last. Not few but
many we have seen in princes courts, wc though fortune in short time has
exalted to ye first degree of riches and made the^ chief in favor, yet wtin
short space after, she has made the^ also lose their riches, and fall from ye
top of their honor. It is most certain, yt if one have enemies in the court,
only for that he is infauor, he shall have as many more, if being in favor,
he be also rich. For we are al of so ill a condition, in things that touch
our particular profyt, that all that we see geeuen to others, we think
sodeinly taken away from our selves. We have heretofore said, yt it is not fit
for the courtier, and those yt are in favor, to command for his profit all that
he list, neither al those yt he may. And we now at this present also advise
them to take heed, yt they do not accept and take all that is offered and
presented, although they may lawfully do it. For if he be not wise in
co^mau^ding, and moderatin taking, a day might come yt he should see himself in
such extremity, yt he should be enforced to call his friends not to counsel
him, but rather to help and succor him. It is true, yt it is a natural thing
for a courtier that has 20. crowns in his purse, to desire sodeinly to
multiply it to a.100. from a.100. to.200. from 200. to a.1000. from a.1000. to
2000. and from.2000. to 10000. So yt this poor wretched creature is so blinded
in covetousness, yt he knowth not, nor feels not, yt as this auar ce
continually increases and augmenteth in him, so his life daily diminishes and
decreaseth, beesides that that every man mocks and scorns him, that thinks
the true co^tentacion consists in commanding of many, and in the faculty of
possessing much riches. For to say truly it is not so, but rather disordinat
riches troubles and greeueth the true contentacion of men, and awaketh ever in
them daily a more appetite of covetousness. We have seen many courtiers rich
and beloved, but none in deed that ever was contented, or wearied with
commanding, but rather his life should fail him then covetousness. O how many
have I seen in the court, whose legs nor feet have been able to carry them,
nor their body strong enough to stand alone, nor their hands able to write, nor
their sight has served them to see to read, nor their teeth to speak, neither
their jaws to eat, nor their ears to hear, nor their memory to travail in
any suyt or matter, and yet have not their tongue failed them to require
presents and gifts of the prince, neither deep and fine wit, to practice in
court for his most avail and vantage. So incurable is the disease and plague
of avarice, that he that is sick of that infirmity, can not be healed neither
with poverty, nor yet be remedied with riches. Sense this contagious malady
and apparent danger is now so commonly known, and that it is crept into
courtiers, and such as are in high favor and great authority by reason of this
vile sin of avarice, I would counsel him rather to apply him self to be
well thought of, and esteemed, then to endeavor to have enough. Albeit Queen
Semiramis was wife to king Belius, and mother of king Ninus, and although by
nature she was made a woman, yet had she a heart never other wise but valiant
and noble. For after she was wyddow, she made her self lord by force of arms
of the great India, and conquered all Asia, and in her life time caused a
goodly tomb to be made wheare she would life after her death, and about the
wc she caused to be graven in golden letters these words.

Who longs to swell with mass of shining gold,
and craves to catch such wealth as few possessed:
This stately tomb let him in haste unfold,
where endless hopes of hateful coin do rest.
Many days and kings reigns past before any durst open this sepulker, until
the coming of the great Cyrus, who commanded it to be opened. And being
reported to him by those that had the charge to seek the treasure, that they
had sought to the bottomless pyt and wolrds end, but treasure they coold find
none, nor any other thing, save a stone wherein were graven these words.

Ah haples knight, whose high distraughted mind
by follies play abused was so ^ych:
that secret tombs the care as could not bynd,
but thou would reaue them up for to be rich.
Plutarke and also Herodotus which have both written this history of Semiramis
do show and affirm, yt Queen Semiramis got great honor by this gest, and king
Cyrus great shame and dishonor. If courtiers that are rych, think and believe
that for yt they have money enough and at their will, yt therefore they should
be far from al troubles and miseries, they are far deceived. For if ye
poor soul toil and hale his body to get him only that yt he needs, much
more does ye rich man torment and burn his heart, til he be resolved wc way to
spend yt superfluous he has. Ihesu what a thing is it to see a rich man how
he tormenteth him self night and day, imagyning and devising with him self
whether he shall with that money yt is left, buy leases, mills, or houses,
a^nuities, vines, or cloth, lands, teneme^ts, or pastures: or some thing in
fee: or whether he shall e^rich his son with ye thirdes or fifts, and after al
these vain thoughts, gods will is to stryke him with death sodeinly, not only
before he have determined how he should lay out or spend this money, but also
before he have made his will. I have many times told it to my friends, yea and
preached it to them in the pulpit, and written yt also in my books, that it is
far greater trouble to spend the goods of this world well, and as they ought
to be spent: then it is to get them. For they are gotten with swet, and spent
with cares. He that has no more then he needs, it is he yt knows well
how to part from them, and to spend the^: but he yt has abunda^s and more
then needeful, does never resolve what he should do. Whereof follows many
times, that those wc in his life time were enemies to him, shall happen to be
heirs after his death of all the goods and money he has. It is a most suer
and certain custom among mortal men, yt commonly those yt are rych men (while
they are alive) spend more money vaynly in things they would not, and that they
have no pleasure in, and where in they would least lay it out: and after their
death they leave the most part of their inheritance to those, whom they loved
least. For it happens many times, that the son which he loved woorst,
inheryteth his goods, and that son which he loved best, and made most of,
remains poor. Therefore contynuyng still our matter I say, that I know not
the cause why the favored of the court desire to be so rych, covetous, and
insatiable, sith they alone have to get the goods where afterward to spend
them, they have need of the counsel and advise of many. Let not those also
that are in favor with the prince, make too great a show openly of their riches,
but if they have abundance, let them keep it secret. For if their lurking
enemies know not what they have, the woorst they can do, they can but murmur:
but if they see it once, they will never linne til they have accused him. To
see a courtier buyld sumptuous houses, to furnish them with wonderful and
rich hangyngs, to use excess and prodigality in their meats, to have their
cubberds maruellously decked with cups, and pots of gold and silver, to see
infinite presents brought into his house, and to be greedy of money in taking,
and to have a great trayn of servants to wait upon them: al these are things
not only to make them murmur and repine at, but also when time and place
serves, to condemn and accuse them, to the prince. And this were but little
to murmur at them, and accuse them, so that they did not defame them, and
diminish their honor and reputacion. For they tell yt abroad afterward, either
that they are corrupted with presents, or that they do rob and steal from
the prince their master. And therefore I return once again to admonish them,
and specially the officer of the court, that they shall not need, neither is
it requisite they make any ostentacion of their riches, if they be wise at
least. For besides that every body will murmur against him, they will not spare
to bring it to the princes ears quyckly, so that by mysfortune yt might happen
to him, that the king would do that with his servant the hunter does often
with his beasts he takes, that many times he cheerisheth him and geeueth him
meat to eat, not to bring him up, but to fat him, and kill him for his own
eating.

That the favored of the court shoold not trust too much to their favor and
credyt they have, nor to the great prosperity of their life, a worthy chapter
and full of good doctrine. Cap. xv.
WHat reputacion Paul the apostle had amongst the christians, the like had the
great Cato the judge, among ye Romans, who in ye progression of his life
proceeded so honestly, and in the government of the public weal was so just,
that he deserved that this Epitaphe should be written upon his palace gate.

O Cato great, whose everlasting fame
Amid the earth still lives with honor dew,
was nere none, could the oppress with shame
for judgment wrong, whereby the giltles rue.
Was nere none, durst press to thee with suyts,
or fill thy hands with bribes, or flatter thee
whereby thou should not show the worthy fruits
of justice zeal, as judges all shoold be.
Among all the noble and renowned Romans, he only would never suffer stature
or Image of his, to be set up in ye high Capitol. Whereat diverse marueling,
and imagynyng dyuersly what was his meaning, he being one day in the senate
said to them these words openly. I will they shall seek the good woorks I
have done, by which I did deserve that my Image should be erected in the
Capitol: then to geeue them cause to go search and inquier what lynage I was
of, and what was my life, with intent to pull down my Image. For yt happens
many times, that those whom inconstant fortune from mean and low estate has
raised to high degree and step of honor, do become afterward by the same
occasion rather defamed, then praised. For there are many that are reverenced,
and honored openly, by reason of their honor and dignity they have at this
present, of whom they make a iestyng stock afterward when they see them fall.
Lucan says, that Pompeius woold say many times, when he would speak of these
worldly things, my friends, I can tell you a true thing, whereby you may know
the little occasion we have to trust humayn felycityes. Example you may see in
me, which attained to the Romayn Empire, without any hope I had ever to come
unto yt: and afterward also not mystrusting any thing, even sodeinly it was
taken from me, and I depryued of yt. Lucius Seneca being banyshed from Rome,
wrote a letter to his mother Albuina, in which he did both comfort her, and
him self, and wrote thus. O my dear mother Albuina, I never in all my life
believed or trusted unstable fortune, although there have been many peaces and
leagues made betwyxt her and our house. For if at a time the trayteresse
consented that for a space I should be quiet and at rest, she did it not of
good will she had to leave to pursue me, but to geeue me a more cloked
security. For when she sees we think our selves assured, then with al her
force and fury she gives us the assault, as if she came to assault ye
enemies camp. And I tell thee further yet (good mother) yt all the good she
wrought in me, and the honor she heaped on me, and all the faculties and
abundance of riches she brought to my house, she told me she gave me
them freely, but I always answered her I did accept them in way of impressed,
and not of gift. Her promises therefore she offered me, ye honor she laid
upon me, and ye riches she gave me, she laid the^ up in such a corner of my
house, yt either by day or by night she might at her pleasure when she would
take them al from me, without yt she should trouble at al therefore my
judgment, or yt she should sorrow my heart awhit. And because thou shooldst
know how I did esteem of fortune, I tell thee, yt I ever thought it good never
to let any thing come wtin me, nor into my heart, but only near unto me: and
so I was contented to esteem it, and keep it under good safty, but not that I
therefore applied and gave all my affection and mind to yt: I was glad to have
fortune my friend, but if I lost her, I was never sorry for her. Finally I
conclude, that when she came to assault me and to rob my house, she might
well convey all that was put in the arc, but not that she could ever carry
away ye least sigh of my heart. They say yt king Phillip father of Alexander the
great being advertised of three great victories happened in sundry places to
his army, kneeled down on both his knees, and holding his hands up to ye
heavens said. O cruel fortune, O merciful gods, O my good luck, I beseech you
most humbly, that after so great a glory and victory as this, you have hitherto
geeuen me: you will moderate your correction and punishment, which after this
I look for that you will geeue me, that you punish me with pyty, and not with
utter destruction and ruyn. And yet he added this further to his words. Not
without cause I conjure thee O fortune, and do beeseech you immortal gods,
that you will punish me favorably, but not to undo me: because I am assured,
that overmuch felicity and prosperyty of this life, is no more but a prediction
and presage of a great calamity and ill ensuyng hap. Truly all the examples
above recited are worthy to be noted, and to be kept always before the eyes
of our mind, since by them we come to know, that in the prosperity of this our
thrawled life there is little to hope for, and much to be afraid of. It is true
we are very frail by nature, since we are borne frail, we live frayl, and
daily we fall into a thousand fraylties: but yet notwithstanding we are not
so frayl, but we may if we will resist vice. And all this comes only,
because one sort of people follows an other, but one reason seeldome follows
an other. If we fall, if we stomble, if we be sick, if we break our face,
are we suer (that serving as we do ye world) that the world will recure and
remedy us? No sure, it is not so. For the remedy the world is wont to geeue to
our troubles, is ever notwithstanding greater trouble then the first, So that
they are like to searing yrons, that burn ye flesh and heal not the wound. For
the world is full of guile and disceyt, and subtle to deciue, but very slow to
geeue us remedy. And this we see plainly. For if it persuade us to revenge any
injury received, it does it only in revenging of that, to make us receive a
thousand other injuries. And if sometimes we think we receive some comfort of
the world, of our payns and troubles of ye body, it afterward over lodeth our
mynds, with a sea of thoughts and cogitacions: So that this accursed and
flattering world makes us believe, and persuades us the right and perfyt way,
and in the end we are cast unawares into the nets of all wickedness, privily
laid to snare us. How great so ever a man be in favor with the king, how noble
of blood, how fine of wit, and how ware so ever he be, let every man be
assured that practices in the world, he shall in the end be deceived by him.
For he costeth us very dear, and we sell our selves to him good cheap. I
told you but little, to tell you we sold our selves good cheap, for I should
have said better, in saying we have geeuen our selves in pray wholly to him,
without receiving any other recompense. And in deed they are very few, and
rare, that have any reward of him: and infinite are they that serve him, without
any other recompense, more then a foolish and vayn hope. O traiterous world, in
how short a time do thou receive us, and afterward with a glimse of an eye
sodeinly do put us from thee, thou gladdest and make us sorofull, thou
call us to honor and abasest us, thou punishest us, and do us a thousand
pleasures. And finally I say thou do make us so vile, and poysonest us with
thy vile labors, that without thee, we are yet ever with thee: and yt that
greeues us woorst of all is, that having the thief in the house, we go out
of the house to geeue him place, and make him owner. When the world knows one
once that is proud and presumptuous, he procures him honor: to another that
is covetous, riches, to an other that is a glutton, good meats: to an other
that is carnal, the commodity of women: to an other that is idle, quiet and
ease: and all this does the traterous world, to the end that after as fysh
whom he has fed, he may lose the net of sin upon us to catch us in. If we
would resist the first temptacions ye world offers us, it is impossyble he
durst so many times assault us. For to say truly by our small resistaunce,
increases his over great audacity. I woold these lovers of this world woold
but tell me a little, what reward or what hope they can hope of him, why they
should suffer so many incombers broiles and troubles as they do. To think the
world can geeue us perpetual life, it is a mockry, and extreme madness to hope
of it. For we see when life is most dear to us, and that we are lothest to
leave the world, then ariueth death in an unhappy hour to swallow us up, and
to deprive us of all this worldly felicity. To hope that the world will geeue
us assured mirth, this is also a madness. For the days excepted we must lament,
and the due hours allotted out to co^plain, alas we shall see a small surplus
of time left, to laugh and be meery. I can say no more, but exhort every man
to look well about him what he does, and that he be advised what he
thinks. For when we thynk, and believe we have made peace with fortune,
even then is she in battle against us. And I do assuredly believe, that that
I now prepare my self to speak even presently, shall be read of many, but
observed of few: and that is, that I have seen those come out of their own
propre houses, moorning and lamenting that had spent and consumed all their
time in laughing and making good cheer, and serving this miserable world.
Which is but only a geeuer of al euels, a ruyn of the good, a heap of sin, a
tyrant of virtues, a traitor of peace and war, a sweet water of errors, a
river of vices, a persecutor of the virtuous, a comb of lies, a deviser of
novelties, a grave of the ignorant, a cloak of the wicked, an oven of lechery,
and finally a Caribdis, where all good and noble hearts do perish, and a right
Silla, where all noble desires and thoughts are cast away togeethers. For it is
most certain, that this worldling, that is not content with this world, and
that leaves his first state, and that takes upon him a new manner of life,
and changes from house to house, and country to country: he shall never
notwithstanding content him self, nor quiet his mind. And the cause hereof is,
that if a worldling depart out of his house, never to come again into it: there
are yet at hand immediately other ten licentious persons, that do but watch
to enter into his house. Speaking more particulerly I say, that in the court of
princes they account them happy, and fortunat, that be in favor with the
prince, yt have great affairs in court, that be rich and of power, that be
served and honored of every man, and that take place and go before every man.
So that it may be said, that the common people do not call those fortunat,
that deserve to be fortunate: but only those that have enough. But the
ancient philosophers were not of this mind, and much less are the wise men
and virtuous men at this day: For we see that in the court of princes many
rather lack favor, then life: and others lack both favor, and life togethers:
and others not only their life and favor, but also all their goods and
faculties. So that, all that that their favor and credit have geeuen them in
many years and by sundry greefes and troubles, they come afterward to lose
them even upon a sodeyn, and in short time. I grant notwithstanding that it
is a great honor, profyt, and furtheraunce, for the courtier to be in his
princes favor, but nevertheless he cannot deny me, but that it is a dangerous
thing also. For naturally a great famyliarity, brings also a great envy with
yt, sith the beloved of the prince is commonly ill willed of the common weal.
And that, that is yet most dangerous is, that to obtayn the savor of his
prince, he must so behave him self, yt his service must be more rare, better,
and exquysite, then all others: and otherwise, to fall in disgrace, and to make
the prince forget all the good service he has done him his whole life time,
he need but the least displeasure and fault he can commit. Eusenides was
maruelously beloved with Tolomey, who after fortune had exalted and brought him
to honor, and that he was grown to great wealth, said one day to Cuspides the
philosopher these words. O my friend Cuspides tell me I pray thee, of thy
faith, is there any cause in me to be sad, sith fortune has placed me in so
great autoryty and honor, as she can devise to do, and that the kynk Tolomey
my lord has now no more to geeue me, he has already been so bountyfull to
me? To whom the philosopher answered, saying. O Eusenides, if thou were a
philosopher, as thou art a beeloued servant, thou would tell me an other
tale, then that thou tellest me now. For although king Tolomey has no more to
geeue thee, know not thou that spyghtfull fortune has power to take away
from thee many things? For the noble heart feels more grief, and
displeasure, to come down one staire, or step, then to clymme up a hundred. Not
many days after these words passed between Cuspides, and Eusenides, yt
happened that one day King Tolomey found Eusenides talkyng with aleman or
curtesan of his wc he loved dearly, whereat he was so much offended, yt he
made her straight drink a cup of poison, and caused him to be hanged before
his own gates. The emperor Seuerus had one in so great favor and credit which
was called Plautius, and he loved him so extremely, and trusted him so much,
that he never read letter, but Plautius must read it, and he never granted
commissyon or license to any man, but it must pass under Plautius seal:
neither did he ever grant any thing, but at the request of Plautius, nor did
make wars or peace, without the counsel and advice of Plautius. The matter
fell out so, that Plautius entering one night into the emperors chamber armed
with a privy cote, his ill hap was such, that a little of his breast before was
open, whereby was spyed the mayle, which Bahhian seeing, being the emperors
eldest son said unto him these words. Tell me Plautius, do those that are
the beloved of princes use to come into their bed chamber at these hours,
armed with Iron coat? I swear to thee by the Immortal gods, and let them so
preserve me in the succession of the Empire, that sith thou come armed with
Iron, thou shall also dye with Iron. Which presently took place. For before
he went out of the chamber, they struck of his head. The Emperor Comodus (that
was son of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius) had a servant called Cleander,
a wise and grave man, old, and very pollytyck: but with all a little covetous.
This Cleander was often times requested of the pretoryne compaigny, that is to
say of the whole band of soldiers, that he woold command they might be
paid their pay dew to them: and to persuade him the better to pay it, they
showed him a bill signed from the Emperor, to which bill he answered. That ye
emperor had nothing to do in the matter. For although he were lord of Rome,
yet had he not to deal in the affairs of the common weal. These
discourteous, and unseemly words related to the emperor Comodus, and
perceiving the small obedyence and respect of duty that Cleander showed to him,
he commanded forth with he should be slain to his great shame, and that
all his goods should be confiscat. Alcimenides was a great renoumed king among
thee Greeks, as Plutark writes of him, and he favored one Pannonius entierly
well, to whom only he did not commit his person, his trust, but also the whole
affairs and doings of ye the common weal, and he might dispose of the goods
of the king, at his will and pleasure, without leave or license. So that all the
subjects found, they had more benefit in serving of Pannonius then in pleasyng
of the King. Therefore the king and the beloved Pannonius playing at the balle
togethers, they came to contend upon a chase, and the one said it was thus,
the other said it was contrary, and as they were in this contention, the king
commanded presently those of his guard, that in the very place of the chase
where Pannonius denied, they should strike of his head. Constantius the Emperor
also had one whom he lyked very well, and made much of, called Hortentius, wc
in deed might well be counted a princes derling, for he did not only rule
the affairs of the common weal, of the palace, of wars, his goods, and
person of the emperor: but also he was ever placed above all the Imbassatours
at his table. And when the emperor went in progress, or any other iorny, he
ever had him to his bedfellow. Thus things being in this state, I tell you, it
happened that one day a page geeuing the emperor drink in a glass, the glass
by myshap fell out of the pages hand and brake in pieces, whereat ye emperor
was not a little displeased and offended. And even in this evil and unhappy
hour came Hortentius to the King to present him certain bylles to sign of
hasty dyspatch (which was a very unapt time chosen) and the emperor contented
yet to sign yt, could neither the first nor the second time, because the pen
was ill fauordly made, and the ink so thyck that yt would not write: which made
the king so angry, that even presently for anger he commanded Hortensius head
to be stricken of. But to the end we may come to the knowledge of many things
in few words, I will show you how Alexander the great slew in his choler his
dear accounted Cratherus, and Pirrhus King of the Epirotes, Fabatus his
secretory. The Emperor Bitillion his greatest friend Cincinatus. Domitian the
emperor, Rufus of his chamber. Adrian the Emperor his only favored Ampromae,
Dioclesian his friend Patritius, whom he loved as him self, and always called
him friend and compaignion. Diadumeus, Pamphilion his great treasorer. For whose
death he was so sorrowful, that he would have made him self away, because
he caused him to be so cruelly slain. All these above named, and infynyt
others also, some were masters, some lords, some kings, and some of great
authority and favor about princes, by whose tragical histories and examples we
may plainly see, that they did not only lose their goods, favor and credit,
but also upon very light occasions were put to death by sweord. Therefore
mortal men should put no trust in worldly things, sith that of little occasion
they become soon great, and of much less they sodeinly fall, and come to
worse estate then before. And therefore king Demetrius askyng one day
Euripides ye philosopher, what he thought of humayn debility, and of the
shortness of this life answered. Me thinks O King Demetrius, that there is
nothing certain nor suer in this unstable life: sith all men living, and al
things also that serves them, endure daily some clipse: and hereunto replied
suddenly Demetrius and said. O my good Euripides, thou had said better that
all things vegitiue, and sensitive, and each other living thing does not only
feel the eclipses efforce, and change from day to day, but from hour to
hour, and minute to minute. Meaning king Demetrius by these words he spoke,
that there is nothing so stable in this world, be it of what state or condition
yt will be, but in a twyinkling of an eye, is ready to run into a thousand
dangers and perils: and albeit we be all subject (of what state or degree so
ever we be) to sundry and diverse thrales, and mishaps, yet none are so near
neighbors to them, as those that are in highest authority, and greatest favor
with princes. For there are many that shoots to hit down the white of their
favor, but few that (being down) will once put it up again and restore yt to
his place. For to live a contented life, a man had need to want nothing:
neither to have any occasion to trouble him. But ye things that trouble us in
this vale of misery, being so many and of such abundance, and those things
contrarily so few, and rare to come by, that we need and want: we may justly
account this life woeful, and miserable above all others. For sure far
greater are the greeues and dyspleasures we receive, for one only thing we
want: then the pleasures are great we have for a hundredth others, whereof we
have abundance. Besides that, the familiars of princes cannot think them
selves so mighty and fortunat, that any man may presume to call them blessed or
happy. For if some serve and honor them, others there are that persecute them,
and if in their houses they have that flatter them, and make much of them,
there want not in the court others that murmur at them, and speak ill of them.
And if they have cause some times to rejoice that they are in favor: so have
they likewise continual trouble and fear that they shall fall, and be put out
of favor: And if they glory to have great treasure, they sorrow also to have
many enemies. And if the services and company they have do delight them, the
continual buysines they have do vex them: So that we may say of the^, as of
plaistering of houses, which are never so fair, but they become black with
some spot in time, and woormes and other vermin do eat and wast them. If there
be none that dare once admonish these great men in authority, and tell them
their faults by word of mouth: yet I will take upon me to do yt with my
writing, and say, that they speak nothing but it is noted, their steps they
tread are seen, every morsel of meat they eat is marked, they are accused for
the pleasures they take, and all things that they have are observed, All the
pleasures that is done them is regystred, and all ill that that they know by
them is published: And finally I conclude, that the favored of princes, are a
game at tables, whereat every man plays: not with dyce, nor cards, but only
with serpents tongues. And therefore I have said it, and once again I return
to say: That all those that are accepted of princes must live contynually very
wisely, and aduysedly in all their dooyngs, for it is true, and too true, that
every man's tongue runs of them, and much more if they had time and
opportunity, like as they defame them with their tongues, so would they offend
them with their hands. We do not speak this so much that they should look to
defend their life: but to foresee that they may preserve their honor, and goods
from peril, and to geeue them by this precept a good occasion to look about
them. For to put them in disgrace with the King, all the days of their life
(to their utter vndooyng and overthrow) the king need but only geeue ear to
his enemies.

The aucthor admonishes those that are in favor, and great with the prince,
that they take heed of the deceipts of the world, and learn to live, and dye
honorably, and that they leave the court before age overtake them. Cap. xvi.
When king Alderick kept Seuerine the Romayn consul prisoner, otherwise named
Boethius: that consul complained much of fortune. Saying alas fortune, why have
thou forsaken me in my age, since thou dyddest favor me so much in mine
youth, and that I had served thee so many years, why have thou left me to the
hands of mine enemies. To which complaynts fortune made answer thus. Thou art
unthankful to me O Seuerius, since I have used my things with thee in such
manner, as I never used the like with any other Romayn. And that this is true I
tell thee. Consider, O Seuerius, that I made thee whole, and not sick: a man
and no woman: of excellent wit and understanding, and not gross and rude: rych
and not poor: wise, and not foolysh: free, and not bond: a Senator, and no
plebeyan: noble and valiant, and not cowardly: a Romayn, and no barbarus, or
stranger born: in great, and not mean estate: a grave man, and no light nor
vayn person: fortunat, and not unlucky: worthy of fame, and not obliuyon: to
conclude I say, I gave thee such part in the common weal, that thou had good
cause to have pyty of all others, and all others cause to have spite and envy
at thee. Again replied Seuerius to this answer and said. O cruel and
spightfull fortune, how liberal thou art in the things thou speak, and
resolute in the things thou disposest, since always thou do what thou will
and seldom that thou oughtst. And thou know there is no such myshap, as to
remember a man has once been rich, and fortunat in his time: and to see him
self now brought to extreme mysery. Hear fortune thou oughtst to know yt, if
thou know yt not, that he that never was rich, scant knows his poverty.
But alas for pyty, he that was rych, and had once all pleasures and ease,
does sorrow much for the present extreamyty and bewayleth the forepassed
felycity. And I tell thee also, and thou oughtst to believe me, that we
repute them more happy who^ thou never exaltest nor gave honor to: then we
do those whom thou have called to high honor, and afterward have ouerthrown
them, and brought them lower, and in worse state then before. And as for me,
O fortune, I tell thee truly, I think no man fortunat, but him that never knew
what good fortune meant. And this was the discourse betwixt fortune and the
consul Seuerius. By which we may perceive and comprehend, that truly none may
be thought unfortunate and miserable, but such as have been before in great
honor and reputacion: and he cannot be thought abased of his state, or
countenance, if he were not before in prosperity, and favored of fortune. So
that we may well say, that never no man in this world was so free, as he that
never suffered fortune to enter into his gates. I have been desirous to tell
you of these things, because that such as are in favor and credyt with princes,
should not reckon too much of their favor: neither that those that are not in
favor with them, should be sorry for it a whyt. For the great aucthority and
credyt that a man has by the court, is in this mortal life in the end nothing
else, then as a little woorme in an appell, a wyuell in the corn, and a maggot
in pease: which without seem very good, and within they are all rotten and
eaten. Princes aucthority above all others is most supreme, for they are not
subject to the Censors and judges, to reprove them of their words and
sayings, neither to magistrates, to whom they shoold render any account of
their doings, whereof proceeds, that as they have free will to love, so have
they a free liberty to hate, and absolute power to punysh. Therefore those
that are in favor in court, and that shall read these writings of mine, must
well consider what we mean by all those things we have spoken: whereby they
shall easily know, that princes are no less apt to hate him to day they loved
yesterday: then to love him to morrow, whom they hated ye other day. The first
and cheifest thing the courtier ought to have, is to fear god, and to follow
the profession of a good christyan. For in thend they live in court with more
safty, having a good and pure conscience: then with all the great credit and
favor they can have. And therefore let every courtyer believe me, as well in
favor as out of favor, that it is the best and surest way to get the goods of
this world, as also for the preseruacion of their souls, to esteem and make
account of the scriptures and gods commandments. And if he do otherwise, it
shall happen many times unto him, that in the dispatch of his weightyest
affairs, and needful business, even when he thynks his matter brought to a
good end, and that it is without al doubt of dyspatch: then steps in crooked
fortune with her wonted poison against him and either makes him in manner
beegynne his suyt anew again, or at least utterly overthrows yt quite. For
there are in princes courts many times certain suytes, that have a good and
better end then looked for: and contraryly many others that are at the point of
dispatchyng, and yet by synister accident clean ouerthrown, and succeding
contrary to their assured expectacion. And yet notwithstanding it seems to
the suter, that ye cause hereof comes, either through the soliciters
negligence and default, and little care to follow it, or else through the malice
and ill will of the favored of the court, that took upon him the suite: and
yet neither the one, nor the other was cause of the disorder, but only the
divine prouydence of God, to admonish us that in all our actions and doings it
little preuayleth us to move the king or his officers in all our matters, if
we do not deserve at gods hands to obtein it. And therefore said the divine
Plato in his Timeon, that these that have honor and prosperity in this life,
have as much need of good counsel, as the poor afflicted creatures have, of
help and remedy.

And surely it was wisely and profoundly spoken of him. For as need and misery
in this wretched life brings men to despair: So likewise we see prosperity
induce men, to forgett them selves, and their state. And that that I have
hitherto spoken of, and that I hope yet to speak: none can understand nor
conceive, but such as once in their time, in their navigations had a fortunat
and lucky wynd, and afterward turnyng contrary, even at shore side have cast
them on rocks, and utterly perished them. To thend that those in readyng these
my writings, may yet lament and moorne for pity: where the other can but only
read, and go no further. If we compare and put togeether the rych with the
poor, the sorrowful with the merry, the fortunat with the unfortunate, the
favored with the banyshed, the virtuous and noble, with the vycious and
defamed: we shall find without doubt the number of those far greater, that
coold rise again being down, and had taken a fall: then those that coold keep
them selves in the aucthority and favor, that fortune had brought them to. I
have not said it a few times, but every moment I woold return to say it again,
that this traiterous world in all his doings is so deceiptfull, and Fortune in
all that she promyseth so doubtful, that they make them believe whom they
make rych, beloved, and raise to high estate, that they do it but to honor
them: and afterward contraryly they spinne a thousand deceypts and trumpryes,
to make them sooner fall to the ground. Surely I have seen but few, and I
remember I have read of none, to whom Fortune ever showed herself so benygne
and courteous, that ever putt a man in his cheifest topp of prosperity and
favor, but in few days after she took his life from him, or at least in ye
end of his journey she made him run into some secret disgrace or mishap. And
therefore I woold that the courtier that obtains favor in the court, and
riches in the common wealth, that he shoold reckon and esteem them as lent
him, not geeuen him, and that he shoold so govern the things of fortune, as
he woold that man, whom he trusted not at all. For as Seneca says. No man is
afficted with fortune, but he only yt trusted to her, without fear or suspect
at all of her. For courtiers and those that are in great favor and auctority
ought to know, that like as in the deepest seas, soonest perish the ships:
and as in the highest mountains the Sun has always least force and power,
and as in the greenest bows is soonest hidd the fowlers little nett, to katch
the sely byrds: And as with the fullest bayts of meat the fish are soonest
taken, and that with great force the wynd does blow on highest trees, and as
the most proud and stately buyldings, the earthquake does most hurt, and
soonest overthrow them: even so by this I mean, that Fortune never strove to
throw down any, but such as she had made great in honor and favor. For I do
not take yt for no great good luck, (though all things succeed to be favored
of the court better then he looked for) nor to see them brought by their
friends, to great estate and honor. For albeeit fortune for a time dyssemble
with him, it is not for that she has forgotten him, but afterward to geeue
him a greater punishment. Those that will marvel at that I will speak even
now, it proceeds of nothing else, but wantyng wit, and capacity to understand
yt. There is no greter sickness in this world, then to be in health: No greater
poverty, then never to have need of any thing. And there is no greater
temptation, then to be never tempted: Nor there can be no greater sadness,
then to be always merry: Nor greater danger, then never to be in danger. For
many times it so happens, that where a man thinks to pass over a
dangerous flood safe enough, his horse falls over head and ears, and
drowneth his master, or he escapes hardly.

Socrates being one day demanded which was the most sure and certain thing of
this life: answered thus. There is nothing more certain in this life, then to
account all things uncertain he has: nor among riches any greater, then to
have life and health: But if the life be doubtful and unquiet, what surety or
certeinty may be found in it? Surely none. King Agesilaus being requested of
certain of his Grecian captains, to go see the Olimpiade in mount Olimpus,
where all the Philosophers did assemble to dispute, and where all the rich men
of the country came to bye and sell any thing, he answered them. If in mount
Olimpus they sold and exchaunged sorrow for mirth, sycknes for health, honor for
infamy, and life for death, I woold not only go to see yt, but I woold also
spend all that I am worth, and that I have: But since the byer is mortal, and
the thing also he byeth condemned to death, I will buy nothing in this life,
since I cannot carry yt with me into my grave. Yet is there an other deceit
which the poor courtiers falls into daily, and that is: that in living many
years, they thynk and assuredly believe in thend to light of a time, when they
hope to have ease and rest, which is a mockry to thynk it, and an extreme
madness to hope for yt. For if their years grow by ownce and ownce, their sorows
and troubles increase by pounds. Who can deny, but that mylk that is kept many
days does corrupt and becomes sharp and sower? Yea the garments that are now
very old, and have been long worn, (without that ever moth did touch it)
does in the end also become rags and dust. By this therefore I do infer,
that if it be a most certain thing for young men to dye quicly, much more
shoold old men be assured that they have no long time to live. And there are
many in the court of Princes also, that find them selves so laden with sins
and wickedness, that they think assuredly, that in changing their age, time, and
fortune, they shall not only leave their vices, but shall be discharged also of
many greeues and troubles. Which we see afterward happen contrary to them.
For there is no way so plain in this world, but there is some ascent or descent
for us to go up to the top, or some river for us to pass over, or some
terrible mountayn to fear, or some crooked ill favored way to lose us in, or
some cave or hole to fall into. Those also that thynk certeynly that the sun
cannot lose his light, nor that the moon can be Eclipsed, nor that the
stars may be darkened, and that the earth shall not cease to bring forth,
the seas to flow, the water to run, the fire to burn, and winter to be
cold, let them also be assured, that man cannot be excused to suffer and
abide much. For sure it is impossible he shoold pass one day without some
trouble or sinister happ of Fortune. And the greatest trompery and deceit that
courtiers for the most part are abused in, is, that the more they wax in years,
the more they enter daily into greater affairs and business: with a vayn hope
and assurance they have to dispatch them, and bring them to such end, as they
list or desire. But afterward when they come to look into their matters, it
is the will of god, and their deserts do procure it, that the poor old men
find (when they think to go home to their houses) that they see death approach
near them, and they afterward are carried to be buried in their graves.

O how many are there in court that beecome aged men, by long serving in court,
with a vayn hope afterward in their age to depart from the court, and to
repose their aged years in their own houses, in quiet and tranquillity, which
abuses them very much: So that they may be called Christians in name, and
thoughts, but right wordlings and courtiers in doings. And therefore many
times I reproved diverse old courtiers my friends, for that they did not leave
the court when they might have left it, with honor, and commodity: tellyng them
it was more then time now they shoold depart from the court, since age had
stolen upon them. Which coold not tell how to answer me, nor what to say,
more then that they woold within a short time go home to their houses, with
deliberation and intent to take their ease at home, for the better health of
their persons, which they had not till then: and so to seclude them from all
doings, save only in the morning when he ryseth, to go to the church and
serve god, and from thence to go to the hospitalles, to visit the sick and
diseased, to seek out the poor orphans and wydows amongst his neighbors, to
make peace between neyghbor and neyghbor, and to relieve the poor. And
albeeit they have told me this tale many a time and often, yet I never saw any
of them put it in execution with good will. And I saw once an honorable and
rich courtier, that was so old, that for very age he had never a black hear on
his head, nor any teeth in his mouth, neither any children, sons, or
daughters to inherit his goods, who notwithstanding was of so foolysh and
fantastical oppinion (brought to that madness by his sins) that he swear to
me, that for discharge of his conscience only he woold never leave or geeue
up his office he hadd in court, to change that servile trade of life for
quiet rest at home. Thinking assuredly, that enjoying rest at home in his own
house, he might easily be damned, and abiding the payns and service of court,
he believed undoubtedly he shoold be saved. Surely we may aptly say, that
this old courtier was more then a dotard, and that he had mard the call of his
conscyens, since he believed it was a charge of conscience to depart the court.

The a^bition to do much, and the covetousness to have much, makes ye
miserable courtiers believe that they have yet time enough to live, and to
repent them when they will. So that in the court, thinking to live two years
only in their age good men, they live fifty and three score years wicked and
naughty persons. Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that Eudonius, that was
Captain of the Greeks, seeing Xenocrates reading one day in the university of
Athens, he being not of thage of eyghty five years, asked what that old man
was: and it was answered him, that it was one of the philosophers of Greece,
who followed virtue and serched to know wherein true philosophy consisted.
Whereupon he answered. If Xenocrates ye philosopher tell me, that he being
now eyghty five years old, goes to seek virtue in this age, I woold thou
shooldest also tell me what time he shoold have left him to be virtuous. And
he said more over, in those years that this philosopher is of, it were more
reason we shoold see him do virtuous things, tha^ at this age to go and
seek it. Truly we may say the very like of our new courtier, that Eudonius
said of Xenocrates the philosopher, the which if he did look for other three
score years, or three score years and ten to be good, what time shoold
remain for him to prove and show that goodness. It is no marvel at al, that ye
old courtiers forget their native country and bringing up, their fathers that
begat them, their friends that showed the^ favor, and the servants that served
them: but at that yt I do not only wonder at the^, but also it geeueth me
cause to suspect them, is, that I see they forget them selves. So that they
never know nor consider that they have to do, till they come afterward to
be, that they woold not be. If the courtiers, wc in princes courts have been
rich, noble, and in auctority, woold counsel with me, or at least believe my
writing, they shoold depart from thence in time, to have a long time to
consider before of death, least death unawares and sodeinly came to take
execution of their lives. O happy and thrice happy may we call ye esteemed
courtier, whom god has geeuen so much wit and knowledge to, that of him self
he do depart from ye court, before fortune has once touched him wc dishonor,
or laid her cruel hands upon him. For I never saw courtier but in the end did
complain of ye court, and of their ill life that they lead in court. And yet
did I never know any person yt woold leave it for any scruple of conscience he
had to remain there, but peradventure if any did depart from ye court, it was
for some of these respects or altogether, that is to say. Either that his favor
and credit diminished, or that his money failed him, or that some has done him
displeasure in the court, or that he was driven from the court, or that he
was denied favor, or that his side and faction he held with, had a fall, or for
yt he was sick, to get his health, he went into ye country. So that they may
say he rather went angry and displeased with him self, then he did to lament
his sins. If you ask pryuatly every courtier, you shall find none but will say
he is discontented with the court, either because he is poor, or afflicted,
enuyed or ill willed, or out of favor, and he will swear and reswere again that
he desires nothing more in the world, then to be dismissed of this courtiers
travel and painful life. But if afterward perchance a little wynd of favor
be put stirring in the entry of his cha^berdore, it wilsodeinly blow away all the good and former thoughts from his mind. And yet that, that makes me wonder
more at these unconstant courtiers and unstable brains, is, that I see many
buyld goodly stately houses in their country, and yet they neither dwell in
them, nor keep hospitality there. They graffe and set trees, plant fruits, and
make good gardens, and ortchyards and yet never go to enjoy them: they puchase
great lands and possessions, and never go to see them. And they have offices
and dignities geeuen them in their countries, but they never go to exercise
them. There they have their friends and parents, and yet they never go to talk
with them. So that they had rather be slaves and drudges in the court, then
lords and rulers in their own country. We may justly say that many courtiers
are poor in riches, strangers in their own houses, and pilgrims in their own
country, and banyshed from all their kinreds. So that if we see the most part
of these courtiers, bakbyte, murmr, complayn, and abhor these vices they
see daily committed in court. I dare assure you that this discontentation and
dyslyking proceeds not only of these vices and errors they see committed, as of
the spite and envy they have daily, to see their enemies grow in favor and
credit with the prince. For they pass little of the vices of court, so they may
be in favor as others are. Plutarch in his book de exilio shows, that there
was a law amongst the Thebans, that after a man was fyfty years of age, if he
fell sick, he shoold not be helped with physicians. For they say that after a
man is once aryued to that age, he shoold desire to live no longer, but rather
to have to his journeys end. By these examples we may know that infancy is till
vii. years. Childhood to.xiiii. years: youth, to xxv. years: manhod till.xl.
and age, to three score years. But once passed three score, me think it is
rather time to make clean the nets and to content themselves with ye fish they
have til now, then to go about to put their nets in order again to fish any
more. I grant that in the court of princes all may be saved, and yet no man
can deny me, but that in princes courts there are mo occasions to be damned
then saved. For as Cato the Censor says, the apt occasions bring men a desire
to do ill, though they be good of them selves. And although some do take
upon them and determyne to lead a godly and holy life, or that they show
themselves great hipocrits, yet am I assured notwithstanding that they cannot
keep their tongue from murmuring, nor their heart from envying. And the cause
hereof proceeds, for that there are very few that follow the court long, but
only to enter into credit, and afterward to wax rich, and grow in great
aucthority. Which cannot be without hearing a little secret hate and envy
against those, that do pass them in this favor and auctority, and without
suspect and fear of others, which in this are their equals and companions. It
were a good counsel for those that have lived in ye court of princes til they
be grown old and gray headed, that they shoold determine and live ye rest of
their years as good christians, and not to pass them as courtiers, so that
though they have given ye world the meal, yet they shoold in thend geeue the
bran to Jesus Christ. I know every man desires to live in princes courtz, and
yet they promise they will not dye in court. And since it is so, me thinks it
is a great folly and presu^ption for such men to desire to live long in such
state, where they woold not die for all ye gold in ye world. I have lived in
court many years, and at this present I have forsaken it quite: wherefore I dare
boldly sai, that if once a man come to enjoy a quiet life and reposed rest, I
am assured he woold for ever hate and dislike to be a courtier longer. But
alas, like as these se^celes courtiers remember not the life to come, but only
account of their vain and courtly life present, reputing that the most blessed
and happy of any other: So god seeing their folly and fond addicted mind to the
vanity of court, to plague them with all, and scourge them with their own rodd,
does grant them no other nor better rest, then that they only enjoy in
princes court, and so feeds them with their own humor. And therefore it is
truly said. That rest and contentation never enters into a sinners house. O
you worthy and noble courtiers, O you beloved, and favored courtiers, I will
remember you, yea and again remember you, that you presume not to cut or pull
of ye wings of time, since you neither shall have time nor mean to pluck one
fether from him: much less the least knowledge how to do it. And therefore it
is said. Ill cutteth the knife if the edge be broken: and ill can he gnaw
bones that lacks his teeth. And if it seem good unto you and me also, that
to day it is time to gather the fruit of the vine of our youth, let us go now
again to seek it about by the means of our amendment. And if the pype or
caske wherein we shoold put our wine be fusty, with the malignity and
perverseness of our wicked doings: Let us season them with new and better wine
of good and holy desires. And now to conclude if to sequester them selves from
court, it be a holsom counsel for courtiers: much more wholesome and necessary
it is for such as bear sway and reputation about the prince. For other
courtiers daily live in hope to enlarge their countenance, and credit, and to
grow into favor and auctority: but these darlings, and belyked of princes, are
continually afraid to fall, and utterly to be put out of favor.

Of the continency of favored courtiers, and how they ought to shonne the
company and conversation of dishonest women, and to be careful quickly to
dispatch all such as sue unto them. Cap. xvii.
TItus Liuius and Plutarch writes, that the Romans had in such veneration
those men that lived chaste, and those weomen also that professed virgins life,
that they erected statures of them in the senate house, carrying them thorough
the city in tryumphant chariots, recommending them selves to their devout
prayers, and geeuing them great gifts and presents: and finally adored them as
gods. And this was their reason in that they honored them as gods: for that
they being of flesh, and living in flesh, did leave to use the woorks and
instinct of the flesh: which they held a thing more divine then humayn,
Filostratus says, that Appolonius Thianeus was borne without any pain or grief
to his mother in all her travel. And that the gods spoke to him in his ear,
that he raised the dead to life, healed the sick, knew the thoughts of men,
diuined of things to come, how he was served with princes, honored of the
people, and followed of all the philosophers: and yet they did not make so great
a wonder of all these things spoken of him, as they did for that he was never
married, and more over never detected with the knowledge of any woman living,
much less suspected. Whilst Carthage was environed with seege one each side,
a virgin of Numidia taken prisoner, was presented to Scipio, and she was very
fair: which Scipio notwithstanding woold not only not deflower, but set her at
lyberty, and married her very honorably. Which act of his was more apprised of
the romayn writers, the^ was his conquest of Numidia, the restoring of Rome her
liberty, the destruction of Charthage, the socour and relife geeuen to Asia,
and the enobling of his common wealth. For in all these enterprises, he still
fought against others: but in the effects of the flesh, he fought against him
self. And therefore he must needs be marvelous wise and of good judgment, that
can subdew the desiers and motions of the flesh. For we do as much covet to
follow these carnal desiers, as we are apt to our meat when we are a
hongred. Cruel and bitter are the assauts of the flesh to the spirit, and
wonderful is the pain the spirit abides, to resist the motions of the same,
which by no means can be overcome, but by eschewing the occasions thereof. As
in brideling the desires, punishing the flesh, living with spare diet,
incresing learning, geeuyng him self to tears, and all together shutting the
gates of our desires. O, if this vice of the flesh came of abou^dance of heat,
or rage of blood, we might soon remedy yt with letting our selves blood. If
it were by any sickness of the heart, yt should be cured by interior medecines:
If of the liver, we would refresh it with ointments. If of melancony humor,
we would wash away all the opilations. If of cholex, we would procure esy
purges. But alas it is a disease so far from pity, that it misliketh we
should call for physicians, and cannot abide we should offer it any remedy. It
cannot be denied but that civil war is most grievous and dangerous in a common
wealth: But much more perilous is that at home beetwixt the husband and the
wife: but most ieoperdious of all is, that a man has with him self. For we
cannot reckon any other our enymy, but our own desyers. I remember I saw once
written in a courtiers house these words, which truly deserved to be written
in golden letters: and the words were these.

The dreadful wars, that I alas sustain against my self, perforce my self
does strain where blind desire, becomes my mighty so the wreckfull gods,
vouch save it do not so. Surely he that wrote this for his word, me think
he was no fool, nor evil christian, sith he nether sought for money, nor by
slyght of wytt procured to deceive or begyle, nether he called his friends to
help him to withstand his enemies, but only craved remedy, against his dishonest
and vain desires. And undoubtedly he had reason. For a man may easily absent
him self from his enymys, but to fly from him self, it is an impossible
thing. And therefore me thinks it is a thing more to be lamented then written,
to see that a multitude of corporal enymes, cannot vanquish and overcome us:
and yet notwithstanding when we are alone, and think nothing of it, this only
vice of the flesh does not alone make us stumble, but fall down ryte on the
ground. For nether to become religious a priest, a friar, nor to dwell in
churches, nor to be shut up in cloisters, to sequester our selves from ye
world, nor to change state and condition: For all this I say, I see none of
all these things help us mortal me^, to defend us from this vice and sin,
But the further we seek to fly from yt, the more danger we find to fall in to
it. And albeit to avoid other vices and sins it shall suffice us to be
admonished: yet against that alone of the flesh, it behooves us to be armed.
For there is no sin in ye world but yt there are means for me^ to avoid it:
this only excepted of the flesh, where with all we are overcome, and taken
prisoners. And to prove this true it is aparant, thus. Where rayneth pride, but
amongst the potentates, where envy, but amongst equals? anger, but amongst the
impatient? glotony, but amongst gourmans: avarice, but amongst the rych?
slothe, but amongst the idle? And yet for all these the sin of the flesh
generally reigns in all men. And therefore, for not resisting this abominable
vice, we have seen Kings lose there Kyngdoms, noblemen there lands, and
possessions: the married wives their auowed faith: the religion nonnes, their
professed virginity: so that we may compare this sin, to the nature and
condition of the venomus serpent, which being alive stings us, and after he
is dead, offends us with his noisome stink. Examples by David, who for all
his wisdom could not preuayl against that sin: nor Solomon, for all his great
knowledge: nor Absolon for all his divine bewty: nor Sampson, with his mighty
force: which notwtstanding ye great fame they had for their renowned virtues:
yet thorough this only defect they lost al, acco^paniyng with harlots and
licencious weomen. Into wc shameful fellowship fell also, Holofernes, Annibal,
Ptholomeus, Pirrhus, Julius Caesar, Augustus, Marcus Antonius, Seuerus, and
Theodotius, and many other great princes, with these above recyted: the most
part of the which we have seen deprived of their crowns, and afterward them
selves have come (to their utter shame and dishonor) on their knees to yield
them selves to the mercy of these their infamed lovers, craving pardon and
forgeeuenes. Many grave writers of the Gretians say, yt the imbassadors of
Lidia coming one day into the chamber of Hercules, upon a sode in to speak
with him, they found him lying in his curtesans lap, she pulling his rings of
on his fyngers, he dressed on his head with her womenly attier: and she in
exchange on hers beedect with his royal crown. They write also of Denis ye
Siracusan, that albeeit of nature he was more cruel then the wild beast, yet
he beecame in the end so tractable, and pleasant, by the means of a curtisan
his friend called Mirta, yt she only did confirm all the provisions, and
depeches, of the affairs of the weal public, and he only did but ordein
and appoint them. And if the histories written of ye Goths deceive us not, we
find that Antenaricus the famous king of the Goths, after he had triumphed of
Italy, and that he had made himself lord of all Europe, he beecame so far
in love with a lover of his called Pincia^ that whilst she combo his head, he
made clean her slippers. Also Themistocles, the most famous captain of the
Greeks, was so enamored of a woman he had taken in the wars of Epirus, that
she being afterward very sick: when she purged her self, he woolde also
be purged with her: if she were let blood, he would also be let blood: and
yet that that is woorst to be lyked is, that he washed his face with yt blood
that came out of her arm, so yt they might truly say, though she were his
prisoner, yet he was also her slave and subject. When King Demetrius had taken
Rhodes, there was brought to him a fair gentlewoman of the cyty, which he
made his friend in love, and this love beetwixt them by time grew so great, yt
she showing her selue upon a time to be angry with Demetrius, and refusing to
sit nere him at ye table, and also to ly with him: Demetrius utterly forgetting
him self, and royal estate, did not only on his knees pray her to pardon him,
but also imbrasing her, co^ueighed her in his arms i^to his chamber. Myronides
the Gretian, albeeit he had made subject to him the Kingdom of Boetia, yet
was he notwithstanding made subject with ye love of Numidia his lover. He
enflamed thus with love of her, and she like wise stricken with covetous desire
of his goods, in fine they agreed, that he should geeue her all the spoil he
had won in the wars of Boetia: and yt she shoold let him lie with her in
her house, only one night. Annibal made wars seuenteen years with the
romans, and in all that time he was never vanquished, till that he was
overcome with the love of a young maiden in the City of Capua, which proved a
most bitter love to him, since thereby it happened, that where as he had so
many years kept in subjection all Italy, he now was made a subject at home in
his own country. Plutarke in his book De republica writes, that Phalaris the
tirant woold never grant a man any thing he desired, nether ever denied any
thing yt a dissolute woman requested. No small, but great disorder happened to
the common weal of Rome, by ye occasion of the Emperor Calligula, who gave but
6000. sexterces only to repair the walls of Rome: and gave otherwise for
surring one gown alone of his lemans, a 10000 sexterces. By all these examples
above resyted, we may easily understand, how dangerous a thing it is for the
courtier, to have friendship and acquaintance with weomen of so vyld a faculty.
For the woman is of like quality, that a knot tied of cords is: wc is easily
tied of sundry knots, and very hardly afterward to be undone again.
Heretofore we have beesought courtiers, and ye favored of princes, that they
shoold not be so liberal in commanding: and now once again we pray them to
be ware of fornication and adultry, for albeeit this sin of ye flesh be not
the greatest in faut, yet is it the most dangerous in fame. There is no King,
prelat, nor knight in this world so vicious, and dishonest of life, but woold
be glad to have honest, virtuous, and well condicioned servants, so that it is
impossible therefore for the favored courtier (living dishonestly) to continue
any long time in favor with his prince. For we have seen many in princes courts,
and commonweals also, yt have lost their honor, favor, and riches, not for
any pride they showed in the^ selves, nor for Enui yt they had, nor for any
treasure nor riches that they robbed, nor for any euel words yt they shoold
speak, neither for any treason that they committed: but only thorough ye evil
fame yt went of them for hau^ting the company of naughty weome^. For weomen be
of the right nature of hedgehogges, wc without seeing or knowing what they have
in their heart, do not wtstanding draw blood of us with their pricks. And let
not any man deceive him self, hoping yt if he do commit a fault thorough ye
flesh that it shallbee kept from the princes ears, or that it shall not be
blased abroad in the court. For this sin is of such a quality, that though it
may be hidden within curteins, yet it cannot be kept silent with tongues. How
wise and slye so ever a woman be, yet at all times when she geeueth ear unto
men's requests, even at that present she resolves to impart the whole with some
friend of hers. For these weomen do glory more, to be the friend of a courtier:
then to be a true wife unto their husbands. I have my self seen in princes
courts many weomen, very humble, courteous, piteful, pacient, charitable, wise,
devout, and otherwise marvelous honest, and yet amongst al these I never found
any one secret. And therefore that a man will have published to ye world, let
him hardly tell it a woman in great secret. I marvel how it shoold come to
pass, that we see daily weomen carry upon their heads a forest of hears, a
coyfe, a hood, gimmeus hanging at their ears, partless upon their shoulders,
smocks on their bodies, peticotes, gowns, kertels, hose, clokes, bardingales,
hattes, cheyns, braslets, ryngs, plumes of feathers in their hands, and many
other trinkets not named, all wc they carry lightly upon the^ and think it no
burden: and yet they cannot abide in no case to keep or carry one secret in
their breast. Alas what pity is it to see these affected courtiers, what means
they use to win a ladies favor, what pleasant purposes and discourse they put
forth unto them, what bitter sighs they let fall, what service they offer them,
what jewels they geeue the^, what castles in the air they promise the^, what
sorows they fayn, and what lies they make them believe: and these seely weomen
(by nature proud, and foolish) are wc a few gifts overcome, and with a few
flattering words beguyled. Now let this courtier and his lady continue this
mutual friendship between them, one, two, three, four, or five years, though
perhaps not fully these years complete neither many months also, and you shall
see in the end undoubtedly a marvelous breach, and hate beetwixt them. For this
amorus courtier, yt so dearly seemed to love his lady, will now make court a
fresh to others, and dislyke that heretofore he loved, and fly from her whom
erst he followed, abhorring yt he, once delyted in, mislyking the taste of
those meats that once were sweet and pleasant to him: and cannot abide her
face now, whose Image before he had ingraued in his mind. So if he before had
spent three years service in making her his mistress, he spe^deth now six other
years in ye forgetting of her. And therefore these noble courtiers, and beloved
of princes, must beware they make not these yo^g and dishonest loves common in
every place. For the sweet and fragrant rose wc they seek to gather,
continues scantly one hour: but ye pricks and plagues of the persing thorn,
rests hydden in their flesh, their whole life time after. A man erreth in
nothing more in this world, then in taking to his charge a dishonest woman. For
if he will bring her with him to ye court, she shall shame him, put him to an
unreasonable charge, besides ye burden of his conscience. And if afterward he
woold put her away from him, she will not depart for any thing: and if he
woold co^pel her to it, ere she depart it wilbee al ye court over: so what
things have past betwixt them two alone in secret, shall afterward be known
of every man abroad. And therefore we have not causeles told you, that it must
needs be a marvelous expense to ye courtier, to bring his lover with him to the
court. For he must always be at the charges to keep a page, maid or gentle
woman to weight upon her. He must content ye hostice of his house to lodge her
secretly, please ye marshal to seem not to know of it, the harbinger yt he
prepare him a good lodging, the page that he be dilligent, and at her hand:
and her self also must have to live with al, so yt the expe^ce and charge he
shall be at with her, must needs far exceed all the benefits and commodity
he has by court. Beesids that he may assure him self, that this their lewd
and fond love cannot long e^dure, neither can care also of her self be kept
secret. For either his hosts yt lodged her, or ye bawd that procures their
meeting, or ye page that brings comme^dacions and messenges beetwixt them, or
ye neighbors that sees him frequent ye house, or the servant that shall suspect
him, or the mother that sold her to him, in ye end will beewray their secret
practice and friendship. Whereof springs afterward disdain, and from disdayn,
to defame each other: so yt of extreme lovers they were first, they afterward
beecome mortal enemies. And therefore ye wiuel is not so hurtful to ye corn,
nor the locust to ye otes, nor ye woormes to ye vines, nor maggots to ye fruit,
nor the moth to ye garments, as the woman is to a man, yt once was his friend,
and now become his enemy. For like as in time of her love, she robbed and
spoiled him of al his goods: so likewise in ye time of her hatred, she
deuoureth al his good fame and reputacio^. But what shall we say of yt man yt
co^tenteth not him self with one fre^d alone, but like an insatiable leacher
takes upon him to keep an other. Truly I cannot tell what to say of this man,
but yt it had been better for hi^ he had never been borne, the^ to have kept
company with such vile and common weome^. For he shall never appease ye first
neither with anger, nor flattery: nor humble her with prese^ts nor ca^ expel her
hate with promises, neither please her with cherishing of her and much less shall
ouerco^e her with threttes. The Occean sea is not so dangerous, nor ye sweord of
ye tyra^t so cruel, neither lyghtnyng so sodein, nor earthquakes so horrible,
and fearful, nor serpe^ts so venymus as a harlot: when she does but suspect
her friend loves another beside her self, for she cease not to defa^e him,
and to follow ye other, to raise a sclau^der amongst her neighbors, to
complain to his friends, to bewray ye matter to ye justice, to quarrel with
officers and always to have spies for him in every place, as if he were one
of her mortal enemies. O I woold to god ye courtier would as much esteem of
his co^scie^s, as his lover makes account of his parso^: happy were he. For I
dare assure him if he know it not, yt she spieth out al ye places he goth so,
and cou^ts every morsel of meat he eats, and becomes ielious of al yt he
does, and of all those whose company he freque^teth, yea she deuiseth and
imagines all yt he thinks. So yt he yt seeks a cruel revenge of his
enemy, cannot do better the^ persuade and induce him to love one of these well
co^ditioned women. Now let him think yt he has great wars, yt by his evil
hap has made her his enemy, wc heretofore he so e^tierly loved. For any man
yt exteemeth his honor, and reputacio^, does rather fear ye evil tongue of
such a woman, the^ ye sweord of his enemy. For an honest man to strive, and
co^te^d with a woman of such quality, is eue^ as much, as if he woold take upon
him, to wash an asses head. Therefore he may not set me to make account of
those injuries done him, or euel words she has spoken of him, but rather
seek to remedy it ye best he ca^, that she speak no more of him. For women
naturaly desire to enjoy yt person they love, without let or interruption of any,
and to pursue to ye death those they hate. I woold wysh therefore ye favored of
princes, and such as have office and dignity in ye court, that they beware they
incur not into such like errors. For it is not sitting yt me^ of honor, and
such as are great about ye prince shoold seem to have more lyberty in vice
the^ any other, neither for any respect ought ye beloved of ye prince to dare
to keep company, much less to have friendship with any such common and defamed
women, sith ye least euel yt can come to the^, they cannot be avoided. But at
ye least he must charge his co^scie^s, trouble his friends, wast his goods,
consume his person, and lose his good fame, joining with al these also, his
co^cubine to be his mortal enemy. For there is no woman liui^g yt has any
measure in loui^g, neither end in hati^g. Oh how wareli ought al me^ to live,
and specialy we yt are in ye court of princes, for many women (under ye color
of their authority and office) go often times to seek the^ in their cha^bers, not
only as humble suitors, to sollycyte their causes, but also liberaly to offer
the^ their persons, and so by yt color to conclude their practices and
deuyses. So yt ye decisio^ and co^clusio^ of process wc they fain to solycite,
shall not go with him yt demands there goods of the^, but rather with him yt
desires but their parso^s to spoil the^ of their honor. Now ye princes
officers must seek to be pure, and clean from al these practices of these
common stru^pets, much more from those yt are suitors to the^ and have matters
before the^. For they should highly offend god, and commit great treason to ye
King, if they should send those weome^ from the^ that sued unto the^ rather
dishonored and defamed, the^ honestly dispatched of their business. And therefore
he binds him self to a marvelous inconuenie^ce, yt falls in love with a
woman suter. For even from yt instant he has receued of her ye sweet
delights of love, eue^ at ye present he by^deth him self to dispatch her
quickly, and to end al her suits, and not without great grief I speak these
words. There are many women yt come to ye court of princes to make
unreasonable and dishonest suits, wc in ye end notwtsta^ding obtain there
desire: And not for any right or reason they have to it, save only they have
obtained yt thorough ye favor and credit, they have won of ye favored courtier,
or of one of his beloved. So as we see it happen many times, that ye unjust
fornication, made her suit just and reasonable. I should lie, and do my self
wrong me thinks, if I should pass over with silence a thing yt happened in the
emperors court touching this matter, in the wc I went one day to one of the
princes chief officers, and best beeloued of him to sollycyte a matter of
importau^ce wc an hosts of mine should have before him. And so this favored
courtier and great officer, after he had hard of me ye whole discourse of ye
matter, for full resolution of ye same, he axed me if she were young and
fair: and I au^swered him yt she was reasonable fair and of good favor. Well
than says he bed her com to me, and I will do ye best I can to despatch her
matter with speade: for I will assure you of this, yt there never ca^e fair woman
to my hands, but she had her business quickly dispatched at my hands. I have
known also many women in ye court so dishonest, that not contented to follow
their own matters, would also deal with others affayrs, and gain in soliciting
their causes, so yt they with their fine words and frank offer of there parsons
obtained that, wc many times to men of honor and great autorytye was denied.
Therefore these great officers, and favored of princes ought to have great
respect, not only in ye co^uersatio^ they have with these women, but also in ye
honest order they ought to observe in hering their causes. And yt to be done
in such sort, that what so ever they say unto the^ may be kept secret,
provided also the place where they speak with them, be open for other suitors
in like case.

That the nobles and beloved of princes exceed not in superfluous fare, and
that they be not too su^ptuous in their meats. A notable chapter for those yt
use too much delicacye and superfluity. Chap. xviii.
ONe of the greatest cares and regard ye nature laid upon her self, was, yt men
could not live without sustina^ce: so that so long as we see a man eat (yea if
yt were a thousand years) we might be bold to say that he is certainly
alive. And he has not alone laid this burden upon me^, but on brute bests
also: For we see by experience, that some feeds on ye grass in ye fyelds
some lives in the air eating flies, others upon ye worms in carin, others with
that they find under the water. And finally each beast lives of other, and
afterward ye worms feed of us al. And not only reasonable me^ and brute
beasts live by eating, but ye trees are norrished thereby, and we see it thus
yt they instead of meat, receive into the^ for nutriture ye heat of ye sun,
ye te^perature of ye air, the moisture of the earth, and deaw of heaven. So
that the sustenance for men is called meat, and that of pla^ts and trees,
Increase. This being true therefore that we have spoken, we must needs
confess that to live we must eat: and yet with all, we must understand that
the sin of gluttony consists not in that that we eat for necessity, but
only in that that is eaten with a disordinat appetite and desire. And sure now
adays men use not to eat to content nature, but to please their lycorous and
deinty mouths. He that geeueth him self over to the desire of the throat,
does not only offend his stomach, and distemper his body, but hurts also
his conscience. For all gluttons and dronkards are the children or the brothers
of sin. And I speak but little to say that the mouth and sin are cousin
germayns togethers: for by their effects and operations me thinks them so
knyt and combined together, as the father and the son: Sith burning leachery
acknowlegeth none other for her mother, but only the insatiable and gurmand
throat. And the dyuersity of meats is but a continual and importunat awaking of
dishonest thoughts. Do we not read of saint Iherom, that albeit he remained
in ye wilderness, burned of the sun, his face dried up and wrinckled,
barefooted, and also bare headed, clothed with sackcloth, his body scourged
with bitter stripes, watchinge in the night, and fasting in the day,
continually exercising his pen, and his heart in contemplacion, and yet for
all this grievous penance, him self confessed, that in his sleep he dreamed
and thought he was among the courtisans of Rome. And saint Paul the apostle,
who was a man of rare and exquisite knowledge, and deserved to see the very
secrets of paradise, never heretofore seen, travailing in his vocation more
then any other of the apostels, did not he get his living with his own hands?
and also went a soote preaching through all the world, bringyng infynit
barbarous people to the faith of christ, being beaten in the day time by
others, for yt he was a christian, and in the night time he beat him self for
that he was a sinner, punishing the flesh, to make it subject to the spirit.
And yet nevertheless he says also of him self, that he coold not defend him
self from dishonest thoughts, wc did ever let him to preach and pray with a
quiet mind. Saint Austin recites of him self in his book de confessionibus,
that al ye while he inhabited in the deserts he eat little, wrote much, prayed
often, and sharply chastised his body, with continual fasts, and grievous
disciplines. But yet perceauing that notwithstanding all this his dishonest
thoughts suppressed his holy desires, he began to cry with a loud voice
thorough the deserts, and rocky hills, saying. O lord my god, thou commaundest
me to be chaste, but this frail and accursed flesh can never keep yt. And
therefore I humbly beseech thee first to indue me with thy grace to do that
thou will have me, and then commau^d me what shall please thee: otherwise I
shall never do yt. If therefore these glorious saints with their continual
fasts and contemplations, and extreme punishing of their bodies, could not
defend them selves from the burning motion of the flesh: how shall we believe
that a company of dronkards, and gluttons, can do yt, which never lynne
bibbyng and eating. We may be assured that the less we pamper and feed our
bodies with delicacy and idleness, the more we shall have them obedient, and
subject to our wills. For though we see the fire never so great and flaming,
yet it quickly wastes, and is brought to ashes, if we leave to put more wood
unto yt. Excess is not only unlawful for the boddy but it is also occasion of
a thousand dyseases, both to ye body and ye soul. For to say troth, we have
seen more rych me^ dye through excess, the^ poor me^ of necessity. And in my
opinion, me thynkes ye sin of Gluttony need not to be otherwise punyshed
by divine justice, sith yt of yt self yt bri^geth penance enough. And to
prove this true, let us but require these glutto^s to tell us, upon their
oaths, how they find the^ selves in te^per being full pau^ched: and they will
confess to us yt they are worse at ease the^ if they had fasted: That their
mouth is dry, their body heavy, and ill disposed, yt their head aketh, their
stomach is cold, and that their eyes are slepy, and their bellyes full, but yet
yt they desire to drink still. And therefore Diogenes Cinicus, deryding the
Rodians, said these words. O you dronken and gluttonus Rodians, tell me I
beseech you, what occasion mooues you to go to ye church, to pray to ye gods
to geeue you health, when at al times, keeping sober diet, you may keep yt with
you? And more over he said unto the^ also, and if you wilbee ruled by my
counsel, I tell you, you need not go to ye churches to beseech ye gods to
grant you health, but only to pray to them to pardon you your sins and
iniquities you daily commit. Also Socrates ye philosopher was wo^t to say to
his disciples, of ye vnyuersity of Athens: Remember O you Athenians, yt in ye
well governed pollycies, me^ live not to eat, to glut the body: but do only
eat, to live and sustayn ye body. O grave saying of ye good philosopher, and I
woold to god every good christian would carry this lesson in mind. For if we
woold but let nature alone, and geeue her lyberty and disposition, of her self,
she is so honest, and of such temperau^ce, that she will not leave to eat yt
that shall suffice her, neither will also trouble us with that yt is
superfluous. Yet an other foul offense brings this vice of Gluttony, and
that is, that many put them selves in service to wayt on others, not so much for
the ordinary fare that is commonly used in their house, as for the desire they
have to fill their bellies with dainty and superfluous meats. And in especial
when they know they make any marriages, or feasts for their friends, then they
geeue double attendance, not conse^ted alone with that themselves have eaten,
but further in remembrance of ye worthy feast, commits to the custody of
his trusty cater (his great hose) perhaps a two or three days store of those
rare and dainty dishes, which I am ashamed to write, and much more ought they
to be ashamed to do yt. For that man that professes to be a man, ought to
enforce himself never to engage his liberty for that, that his se^sual appetite
incyteth him to: but only for that that reason byndeth him to. Aristippus the
philosopher, washyng lettyse one day with his own hands for his supper, by
chance Plautus passing by that way, and seeing him said: If thou wooldst have
served King Dionisius, we should not have seen thee eat lettises as thou
do now: Aristippus au^swered him again, O Plautus, if thou were content to
eat of these lettyses that I eat, thou shooldst not serve so great a tyrant as
thou do. The excess of meats is greater in these days, both in quantity,
and in dressing of them, then in times past. For in that golden age, which the
philosophers never cease to beewaile, men had no other houses but natural
caves in the ground, and apparelled only with the leaves of trees, the bare
ground for their shoes, their hands serving them in steed of cups to drink
in, they drank water for wine, eat to^ ^^s for bread, and fruyts for flesh: and
finally for their bed they made the earth, and for their covering the sky,
being lodged always at the sign of the star. When the divine Plato returned
out of Cicill into Greece, he said one day in his college. I do advertise
you my disciples, that I am returned out of Cicill maruelously troubled, and
this is by reason of a monster I saw there. And being asked what mo^ster it
was, he told them that it was Dionisius the tyrant. who is not contented with
one meal a day, but I saw him suppe many times in the night. O divine Plato,
if thou were alive as thou art dead, and present with us in this our pestilent
age, as thou were then in that golden time: how many should thou see, that
do not only dyne and suppe well, but before dinner break their fast with
delycate meats and wynes, and banquet after dynner and supper also before they
go to bed. So that we may say, though Plato saw then but one tyrant suppe,
he might see now every body both dyne and suppe, and scant one that conte^teth
him with one meal a day, in which the brute bests are more moderate, the^
reasonable men. Sith we see that they eat but so much as satisfyeth them: and
men are not contented to eat enough, yea till they be full, but more then
nature will bear. And brute beasts have not also such diversity of meats as men
have, neither servants to wayt on them, beds to lie in, wine to drink, houses
to put their heads in, money to spend, nor phisitio^s to purge them as men
have. And yet for all these commodities, we see men the most part of their time
sick. And by these things recyted, we may perceive, that there is nothing
preserves so much the health of man as labor, and nothing consumes sooner
then rest. And therefore Plato in his time on spoke a notable sentence, and
worthy to be had in mind, and that is this. That in that city where there are
many phisicions, yt must needs follow of necessity that the inhabitaunts there
of, are vicious, and ryotous persons. And truly we have good cause to carry
this saying away. Since we see that physicians commonly enter not into poor
men's houses, ye travel and exercises their body daily: but contrarily into
the rych and welthy men's houses, which live continually idly, and at ease. I
remember I knew once a gentleman (a kynsman of mine, and my very friend) which
having taken physyck, I came to see how he did, supposing he had been syck,
and demanding of him the cause of his purgacion: he told me he took it not
for any sickness he had, but only to make him have a better appetite against
he went to the feast, which should be a two or three days after. And with in
six days after I returned again to see him, and I found him in his bed very
sick, not for that he had fasted too much, but that he had inglutted him self
with the variety of meats he eat at the feast. So it happened, that where he
purged him self once only to have a better stomach to eat, he needed
afterward a douzen purgacions to discharge his laden stomach of that great
surfeit he had taken at the feast, with extreme eating: And for the four
hours he was at ye table where this feast was, he was lodged afterward in
his chamber for two months, to pay vsery for that he had taken, and yet yt
was the great grace of god he escaped with life. For if it be ill to sin,
yt us far worse to seek and procure occasions to sin. And therefore by
consequent, the sin of Gluttony is not only dangerous for the co^sciens,
hurtful to the health of the body, and a displeasing of god: but it is also a
worm that eats, and in fine consumes wholly the goods, and faculties of him
that uses yt. Beesyds that, these gurmands receive not so much pleasure in the
eating of these dainty morsells, as they do afterward grief and displeasure,
to hear the great accounts of their stewards, of their excessyue expensis. Yt
is a sweet delight to be fed daily with dainty dishes, but a sower sauce to
those delicat mouths to put his hand so often to the purse. Which I speak not
with out cause, sith that as we feel great pleasure and felicity in those
meats that enter into our stomach, so do we afterward think that they pluck
out of our heart that money that pays for those knacks. I remember I saw written
in an Inn in Catalogia these words. You that host here must say, when you
sit down to your meat, Salve regina, yea and when you are eating, Vitae dull
cedo, yea and when you reckon with the host, Ad te Suspiramus, yea and when you
come to pay him, Gementes, and flentes. Now if I would go about to describe by
parcells the order and manner of our feasts and banckets, newly invented by our
own nation, there would rather appear matter to you, to lament and bewail,
then to write. And it had been better (by way of speech) to have invented
diverse fashions of tables, forms, and stools, to sit on, the^ such diversity
of meats to set upon the tables, as we do use now a days.

And therefore by good reason did Licurgus (King of Lacedemonia) ordeyne and
comaund, that no stranger coming out of a strange country into his, should so
hardy bring in any new customs upon pain, that if it were known, he should
be straight banished out of the country, and if he did use and practice yt,
he should be put to death. I will tell you no lie. I saw once served in at a
feast xlii. sorts and kinds of meats in several dishes: In an other feast
of diverse sorts of the fish caled Tuny. And in an other feast, being flesh
day, I saw diverse fishes broyled with lard. And at an other feast wheare I saw
no other meat but Troutes, and Lampereis of diverse kinds of dressinge. And at
an other feast, wheare I saw only, vi. persons agree togethers to drink each of
them.iii. pottels of wine apeece, with this condition further, yt they should
be.vi. hours at the table, and he that drank not out his part, should pay
for the whole feast. I saw also an other feast, where they prepared iii.
several tables for the bidden guests, the one board served after the Spanish
manner, the other after the Italian, and the third after the fasshion of
Flaunders: And to every table there was served xxii. sorts of meats. I saw
also at an other feast such kinds of meats eaten, as are wont to be seen,
but not eaten: as a Horse roasted, a Cat in gely, litel Lysars with whot broth,
Frogs fried, and diverse other sorts of meats which I saw them eat, but I
never knew what they wear till they wear eaten. And for gods sake what is he
that shall read our writings, and see that that is commonly eaten in feasts
now adays, that it will not in manner break his heart, and water his plants.
The only spices that have been brought out of Calicut, and the manner of
furnishing of our boords brought out of France, has distroied our nation
utterly. For in the old time, they had no other kinds of spice in Spain, but
Saffron, Common, Garlic, and Onyons, and when one friend inuyted an other, they
had but a piece of beef, and a piece of veale, and no more: and yt was a rare
and dainty matter to add to a hen. Oh mis^^appes of worldly creatures, you
embrace not now the time that was, for now i^ he be an officer, or popular
person of any like condition, and that he inuyte his friend or neighbor, he
will not for shame set before him less then vi. or vii. several disshes,
though he sell his cloak for hit, or fare the worse one whole week after, for
that one supper or dinner. Good lord yt is a wonder to see what sturr there is
in that man's house that makes a dinner or supper. A.ii. or iii. days before,
you shall see such resort of persons, such hurly burly, such flying this way,
such sending that way, some occupied in telling the cooks how many sorts of
meats they will have, other sent out to provide a cater to by their meat, and
to hyer servants to wait on them, and other poor folks to look to the
dressing up of the house: brauling and fyghting with their servants,
commanding their maids to look to the buttry, to rub the tables and
stools, and to see all things set in their order, as sit as may be, and to
taste this kind of wine and that kind of wine: so that I would to god they would
(for the health of their souls) but employ half this care and pains they take
in preparyng one dinner, to make clean their conscienses, and to confess them
selves to allmighty god. I would fayn know, after all these great feasts, what
there remains, more, then as I suppose, the master of the house is trobled,
the stewards and caters weried, the poor cooks broyled in the fire, the house
al foul, and yet that that is worst of al, sometimes the master of the feast
comes short of a piece of plate that is stolen. So that he can not choose
but be sorry for the great charges he has been at, beesyds the loss of his
plate and vessel stolen, and the rest of his implements of house mard, and in
manner spoiled: And peradventure also the invited not satisfied nor contented,
but rather will laugh him to scorn for his cost, and murmr at him beehind
his back. Marcus Tullius Cicero was once bidden to supper of a covetous Roman,
a citizin borne, whose supper agreed with his avarice. So the next day it
cha^ced this covetous citizen to meet with Cicero, and he asked him how he
did with his supper, very well said Cicero, for it was so good a supper, that yt
shall serve me yet for all this day. Meaning to let him understand by these
woodrs, that his supper was so miserable, and he left with such an appetite,
as he should dine the next day with a better stomach at home.

The author continues his purpose.
Yt is now more then time we do bring you apparaunt proofs (as well by
scriptures, as profane autors) that there was never made feast or bancket but
the devil was ever lightly a guest, by whose presence always happens some
mischief. The first Ba^cket that ever was made in the world (...) that the
devil made to Adam and Eve with the fruit of terrestrial paradyse: after which
followed a disobeing of gods commandment, the less that Adam had of his
innocency, and a soden shame and perpetual reproach to our mother Eve, man's
nature presently brought to al sin and vice. So that we may well say they
eat the fruit, that set our teeth an edge. Did not Rebecca like wise make a
feast to her husband Isaac, in wc Esaw lost his heritage, and Jacob succeeded
in the same blessing Isaac (through fraud) whom he took for Esaw, and all
through the counsel of his mother Rebecca, she having her desiere and purpose
as she wished. Absalon, did not he make an other to all his breethern after
which followed the death of Aman one of his brothers, and by one of the other
brethren their sister Thamar was defamed, and their father King David very
sore grieved and afflicted, and all the realm of Israel slaundered? King
Assuetus made an other of so great and foolish expense, that he kept open
house for a hundred and fourscore days, and it followed, that Queen Vasti was
deprived of her crown, and the fair Hester invested in her rome, many noble
men of the city of Hul were murdered and he we^ in pieces, by means whereof the
Ebrues came into great favor and credit, and Aman, the chief in authority and
favor about the prince, deprived of all his lands, and shamefully executed upon
the gallows, and Nardocheus placed in his room, and greatly sublimed and
exalted. Also the xiiii. children of the holy man Job (which were.vii. sons
and so many daughters) being all feasted at their eldest brothers house,
before they rose from ye board, were they not all slain? Also Baltezar son
of King Nabucodonosor made a bancket to all the gentlewomen and his co^cubines
within the city, so sumptuous and rich, that the only vessel he was served
withal, and the cups they drank in, were robbed out of the temple of
Jerusalem by his father: and this followed after his great banquet. The self
same night the King with all his concubines dyed suddenly, and his realm taken
from him, and put into the hands of his enemies. Yt had been better for all
these I have recited, that they had eaten alone at home, then to have dyed so
sodaninly accompanied. Now let al these gourmands and licorous mowthed people
mark what I shall say to them, and carry yt well in mind, and that is this: that
ye sin of Gluttony is nothing else but a displeasure, great peril, and a
marvelous expense. I say that it is a displeasure: for the great care they have
continually to seek out diuersityes of fine and curious meats: great peril,
because they plo^ge their bodies into many diseases: and in unmerciful charge,
for the curiosity and nombers of dishes. So that for a litel pleasure, and
delight, we take in the sweet taste of those deinty meats, being but a
satisfaction to the mind for a short time: we afterward have infinite
greefes, and trobles, with a sower sauce, to our no small pain. And therefore
Aristotell mocking the Epicuriens said, that they upon a time went all into the
temple togethers, beseeching the gods they would geeue them necks as long as
the cranes and herens, that ye pleasure and taste of the meats should be more
long, before yt came into the stomach, to take the greater delight of their
meat, complaining of nature that she had made their necks to short: affirming
that the only pleasure of meats co^sisted in the swallowing of yt down, which
they said was to soon. If we saw a man even upon a sodein throw al his goods
into ye sea or river, would we not imagine he were mad, or a very fool? Yes
undoubtedly. Even such a one is he that prodigally spendith al his goods in
feasting and bancketing. And that this is true: do we not see manifestly that
all these meats that are served to noble men's boordes to day, and to morrow
co^ueighid into the privy from the eaters by their page or servant? Suerly man's
stomach is nothing else but a gutt or tripe forsed with meat, bread, and wine,
a paueme^t fyld with wine lees, and a vessel of stinking oil, a recepit of
corrupt air, a synke of a kitchen, and a secret place, wherinto we cast all
our goods and faculty as into the river. And therefore Esaias said, that all these
noble cities of Sodom, and Gomorra, by this only curse did incur into such
execrable sins, for wc afterward they were distroied: and this was even
through excess of eating, and drinking, and to much ydlenes: and it is no
marvel. For it is an infallible thing, that where ydlenes and glottony
reigns, there must needs come some ill end to that man. The Greeks, the
Romans, the Egiptians, and the Scithes, although they were detected of many
other sins and vices, yet were they alwais sober and temperat in eating and
drinking. Justin that wrote of Trogus Pompeius recites, that among the Scithes
(wc were the rudest and most barbarous that came into Asia) used to reprove
those that let go wind, and to chastise and punish those that vomited, saying
that breaking wynd and vomiting, came only of too much eating and drinking.
Plutarche in his Apothegmes said, that there was a philosopher in Athens called
Hyppomachus, that was so great an enemy to Gluttony, that he used in his
college such and so great an abstinence, that his disciples by that were
known amongst all the other philosophers. And not for no other thing, but to
see them buy their cates and provision to live with all: for they never bought
meats to fatt them and keep them lusty, but only to susteyn nature, and that
but little. The Romans made diverse laws in ye old time to expel out of their
cities dronkards and Gluttons, whereof we will recite some unto you, to thend
that those that shall read our present writings, shall both know, and see what
great care our forfathers took to abolish this horible vice of gluttony. First
there was a law in Rome called Fabian law, so called, because Fabian the consul
made it, in which it was prohibited that no man shoold so hardy in the greatest
feast he made, spend above a hundred sexterses, which might be in value a
hundred pieces of.vi. pence, salets and all other kynds of fruit not comprysed
within the same.

And immediately after that, came out an other law called Messinia, which the
consul Messinius made. By which they were also inhibited in all feasts to
drink no strange wynes, wc only were permitted to be geeuen to those that were
disseased. After which followed also an other law Licinia, made by ye co^sull
Licinius, forbidding in all feasts all kinds of sawces, because they incite
appetit, and are cause of a great expense. An other law Emillia, of Emilius the
consul also, commanding the Romans shoold be served in their bankets but
only with five sorts of diversities of meats, because in them there shoold be
sufficient for honest refection, and no superfluity to fill the belly. And then
was there the law Ancia made by Ancius the consul, charging all the Romans to
endeavor to learn all kind of sciences, except cookry. For according to their
saying, in that house where there was a cook, those of ye house became poor
quickly, their bodies diseased, their mynds vicious, and altogeether geeuen to
Gluttony. After this law there came forth an other called Iulia, of Julius
Caesar, commanding all romans, yt none shoold be so hardy to shut their gates
when they were at dinner, and it was to this end, that the censors of the city
might have easy access into their houses at meal time, to see if their
ordinary were respondent to their ability. And there was also an other law made
afterward called Aristimia, of Aristmius the consul, by which it was enacted
that it shoold be lawful for every man to inuit his friends to dinner to him
at noone, as they liked, provided that they supped not together yt night. And
this was established thus, to cut of the great charge they were at with their
suppers: For the Romans exceeded in superfluity of daynty and fine meats, and
more over they sat to long gulling and eating at their suppers. Of all these
laws heretofore recited, were auctors Aulus Gelius, and Macrobius. And for this
was Caius Gracchus well reputed of, of the Romays, who not withstanding he had
been consul indyuers provinces (and that many times) and was a man of great
gravity and auctority in Rome, yet he woold never keep cook in his house, but
when he was at Rome, his wife was his only cook: and traueling, his hostess
of his house where he lay dressed his meat. Marcus Mantius in times past, made
a book of diverse ways how to dress meat, and an other of the tastes, sawces,
and diverse manners of serving of them in at the bankets, and a third book how to
cover the table, set the stools in order, order ye cubberd, and also how
servants shoold wayt and geeue their attendance at ye table: which three books
were no sooner imprinted and published, but presently and publikly they were
burned by the senate of Rome, and if his aucthor had not quickly voided Rome,
and fled into Asia, he had acco^panyed his books in the fire. The ancient
writers never seized to reprove enough Lentulus, Caesar, Scilla, Sceuola, and
Emilius: For a banquet they made in a gardein of Rome, where they eat no other
meats but black byrds, torteises, mallard, nettles, pigs brayns, and hares in
sauce. But if the Romain writers wrote in these days. I do not believe they
woold reprove so simple a banquet made by so noble and famous persons as they
were. For now a days they do so far exceed in variety of dishes at noble
men's bourds, that neither they have appetite to eat, nor yet they can tell the
names of the dishes. But now retourning to our purpose, I say the intent why
we have laid before you these forepassed examples, was only to this end, to
admonish the favored of princes to look into them selves yt they avoid this
fylthy sin of gluttony, Being a foul blott in a courtier, to be counted a
greedy gutt, and Carmarant at his meat, and being one, whose manners and
behauior every man marketh. For sure it is more sitting for the^ to be moderat
and sober, in eating and drinking then others, and good reason why. For as they
are more noble then others, so have they many that sue unto them, and they have
also ye weightiest matters of government, passing under their charge: by reason
where of if they surcharge them selves with excess, they are then very unapt to
dispatch any matters: for much eating causes sleep, and much drinking
depriueth them of their judgment, and senses both. Is it not to be wondered
at, yea and to be reproved also, to see a magistrate or counceller set in his
chair to here poor men's causes and suits, and ye suter opening his cause unto
him, he sits nodding with his head in his bosom ready to sleep? Even so do I
say like wise, that it is a great reproach to ye beloved of the prince, and
great damage to the common wealth, that it shoold be spoken amongst courtiers
and suitors, that to day he was of this opinion, and to morrow he is of an
other. So that the courtier or suter shoold have hope to dispatch that to
morrow, he coold not do to day. King Phillip, father of Alexander the great,
although he was a prince, noble and fortunat, yet was he noted and rebuked
for drinking of wine, whereof followed that after he had given judgment upon a
time against a poor wydow woman, she answered straight she appealed. The
noble men that were present, heering what was said by the king, asked her to
whom she woold appele, since ye king in person gave sentence of her, and no
other: And this was her answer she made them. I appeal to king Philip wc is
now dronk: that when he is sober, he return to geeue sentence. And as ye
historiographers say, that writes this history, this poor woman was not
deceived in her appellation at all: for after King Philip had reposed and slept
a little, he revoked and repealed that sentence that he had before geeuen
against her. And therefore concerning this matter, I say, that how wyld or tame
so ever a beast be, he still continues a beast in his kind, only man except,
who very often through too much excess of meat and drynk, strayeth so far from
reason, forgetting him self, that neither he him self, nor any other knows
well, whether he be then a man, or a beast. Those that are the favored of
princes must be very circumspect, yt they be not too sumptuous, and
prodigal, in their feasts and bankets, for that they have many eyes attendant
of them. And some will say, that they make not these great feasts of them
selves, but by ye gyfts and presents of others: others will not stick to say yt
they make it with that they have robbed of others. I wish them in this case that
they shoold not hope to excuse themselves by saying that they only feast their
kinsfolks, and familier friends. For the envy that commonly one bears against
ye power and auctority of a man, is so great, and extreme, that it spares not
friends, remembers not kinsfolks, neither makes account of the benefits
received: but rather as soon as ye bidden guests are departed from his house
that bad the^, they go talking among them selves, and murmuring amongst
others, saying many times that it is more worth, that is lost by the vayn and
lavish expenses of the favored courtier: then that yt is como^ly served to ye
princes own board. Also I counsel the belyked of princes, that they take heed
whom they trust, and whom they inuit to their tables. For many times if they
be but four yt are bidden, one of them sure goes to eat and banquet, and the
other three to fleere, and mock, and to mark all that is brought in, and the
manner of the service. And the woorst is yet, that he shall many times bring
such to eat with him, that woold more willingly eat his flesh, then his meat.
These reputed courtiers must be well advised, that though they be too delicat
and superfluous in their meats, yet at least that they bridle their tongues.
For they may be assured, that as their guests they bad go full paunched from
them, so carry they away with them, all the superfluous and vayn words they
hard at the table. Besides that, that what so ever the courtier said at ye
board, reporting it otherwhere, they will not say that he spoke yt of him
self, but that the king him self told it him. And yet is there a far greater
danger and peril then this we have spoken of, and that is: that they will not
simply tell that they hard of ye beloved courtier, but will add to it of their
own heads, what they think best, and what was his meaning in speaking of it. So
that we may say, that there are not so many comments upon the bible, as they
make gloses upon the same reports (by their rash judgments and fond
interpretacions) which they did descant, upon one only word spoken unawares
perhaps, by some at the table of this favored courtier. It is a general custom,
amongst all estates and conditions of people: that where there are sumptuous
tables, and abundance of dishes, there the inuyted sit long at their meat,
and are liberal to speak evil. Which sure such as are in favor with the
prince, neither ought to do, nor suffer it to be done by others at his board.
For the good and honorable feast, ought only to be served, with good and
dainty meats: but in no wise marred with the defaming of his neighbor. O how
many feasts and bankets are made in princes courts, where without all
comparison there are more detractions used of their neighbors, then there are
diversities of dishes to eat. A pernicious thing doubtless, and not to be
suffered nor abidden: For no man hurts the reputation of an other with his
tongue, but with the self same he condemns his own conscience: and therefore
let men be aduysed of their spech, and what they speak of others. For it is
alwais an easy matter to detract and hinder the fame and reputation of a man,
but very hard afterward to satisfy the party. Therefore I council, and
admonish these courtiers, that they do not often feast others: but also that
they do not accept to go to others tables where they are bidden.

For they may be assured, that they are beloved of few, and hated of all: and
besides that it might so happen, that others shoold be at the charge of the
feast, and that they shoold lose their lives. Also let not the favored courtyer
trust those to much, that come ordinarily to his table, and that do rebydd him
again to theirs, yea though they seem even to be wholly his to dispose, and
possible as it were his right hand, and that they be those whom he happily too
has done much for, in dispatching their affairs. For lightly in such like
feasts, treasons and poisonings are not practiced with the master of the feast,
but only with him that waits at ye table to geeue drink, or else by the cooks
that dresseth the meat. Also let not ye courtier trust too much those whom he
has been in company with all at diverse feasts (where he never had hurt) much
less knew any little occasion to suspect ill of them, touching any treso^ment
toward him. For so at a time when he suspecteth least, he may be in most
danger, and find him self deceived. And therefore by my council he shall not
easily be entreated to every man's board, unless he be first well assured of
the company that are bidden as also of the servants that wayt. For the holes
and spaces of the french rydles (with which they dust their corn) sometimes is
even stopped with the very grains of the same corn, and lets the clear
passage of all the rest. One of the greatest troubles (or to term it better)
one of the greatest dangers I see the favored courtiers in, is this: that al
ye courtiers, and in manner all the citizens, desire to see them out of favor,
or dead, by some means. For every man is of this mind, that with ye change of
things, by his fall or death he hops he shall rise, to some better state, or
happily to catch some part of his offices, or lyuings. An other mischief and
inconuenie^ce yet happens to this favored courtier, by haunting others
tables, and that is: that many times it chances, unseemly and dishonest words
are let fall at the table, and perhaps quarrel rise upon it, wc though he be
present, yet he can neither remedy, nor appease it. And because these things
were done and spoken in the presence of the esteemed of the prince, he that
spoke them has credit, and those that hard it discried it. Yet is there an
other disorder that comes by these feasts, that is, that he that makes the
feast, and bids guests, does it not for that they are of his acquayntaunce,
his kinsfolks, or his faithful friends, nor for that he is bound and
beeholding to them, but only to obtayn his desire in his suits that he has in
hand: for they are few that seek to pleasure men, but in hope to be greatly
recompensed.

Therefore those that are in favor and auctority about the prince, and that
accept others bydding, sure one of these two things must happen to them. Either
that he must dispatch his busynes that inuyteth him, yea although it be
unreasonable, and so unjust and damnable, that obtaining it, both he and the
favored courtier go to the devil togeethers for company, for ye wrong and
injury they have done to an other: or on the other side refusing to do it,
the bydder is stricken dead, and repents his cost bestowed upon him. Above
all things, I chiefly admonish the courtiers, and officers of princes, not to
sell change, nor engage their liberties as they do, ye same day that they
begin to follow such feasts, or to receive gyfts or presents, or to lynk them
selves in straight friendship with any, or to deal parcially in any cause. For
by these foresaid occasions, they shall often bynd them selves to do that that
shall not be fit for them, besides the loss of their liberty they had
before, to do that was most honest, and commendable.

That the favored of princes ought not to be dishonest of their tongues, nor
enuyous of their words. Cap. xix.
ANaxagoras the philosopher, disputing one day of the cause why nature had
placed the members of man's body in such order as they are, and of the property
and complexio^ of every one of them, and to what end they had been so orderly
placed by nature, each member in his place: falling in the end to treat of the
tongue, said thus of it. You must understand my good disciples, that not without
art and great mystery nature gave us ii. feet, ii. hands.ii. ears, and ii.
eyes, and yet for all this but one tongue, whereby she showed us, ye in our
going, feeling, smelling, hearing, and seeing, we may be as long as we will:
but in speking we shoold be as sparing, and scant, as coold be: alleging
further that not without great reason also nature suffered us to go open and
bare faced, the eyes, the ears, the hands, the feet, and other parts of the
body bare also, except the tongue, which she has environed with laws, and
inured with teeth, and also shut with lips: wc she did, to geeue us to
understand, that there is nothing in this present life that has more need of
guard, and defense, then has this our unbridled tongue. And therefore said
Pithachus ye philosopher, that a man's tongue is made, like the iron point of a
lance, can but yet that it was more dangerous then that: For the point of ye
lance can but hurt the flesh: but the tongue perseth ye heart. And truly it
was a true saying of this philosopher. For I know not that man how virtuous or
pacient so ever he be, but thinks yt less hurt, the bloody sword shoold
perce his flesh, then that he shoold be touched in honor, with the venomous
point of ye serpentyen tongue. For how cruel so ever the wound be, time does
heal it, and makes it well again: but defame or infamy, neither late nor never
can be amended. We see men refuse to go by water for fear of drowning: not to
come too near the fire, for fear of burning: not to go to the wars, for
fear of killing: to eat no ill meats, for being sick: to clym up a high, for
fear of falling: to go in ye dark, for fear of stumbling: to avoid ye ill
air, and rayn, for fear of rewmes: and yet I see very few, or none, that can
beware of detractors, and ill tongs. And that this is true I tell you, I do
not think that in any thing a man is in such peril and danger, as when he
lives accompanied with men dishonest in their doings, and vile and naught in
their tongues. I have also read touching this matter, that Aformius ye
philosopher, being asked what he meant to go the most part of his time amongst
the desert mountains, in hasard every hour to be devoured of wyld beasts,
answered thus. Wild beasts have no other weapons to hurt me, but their horns
and nayls, and their teeth to devour me: but men never cease to hurt, and
offend me, with all their whole members. And that this is true, behold I pray
you how they look at me with their eyes, spurn me with their feet, torment
me with their hands, hate me with their heart, and defame me with their
tongue. So that we have great reason to say, that a man lives with more
security, amongst wyld beasts: then among malignaunt and envious people.
Plutarche in his book De exilio says, that the Lydians had a law, that as
they sent the condemned murderers to row in the gallyes, so they confyned
those that were detractors, and ill tongued men, into a secret place (far of
from all company) the space of half a year. Inso much as many times these lewd
mates chose rather to row in the galley iii. years, then to be exempt from
company, and speaking with any, but syx months. Much like unto this law did
Tiberius the emperor make an other, and condemned a great talker and rayler of
his tongue, and commanded straightly that he shoold never speak word, the
space of a whole year. And as ye history says, he remained domme, and never
spoke during the whole term: but yet that he did (with his domnes) more hurt
with nods, and signs with his fingers: then many other woold have done with
their ill tongues. By these two exaumples we may see, that since these naughty
tongs are not to be repressed by silence, in secret, nor to entreat them as
friends, nor by doing them good, nor by sending them to galleys, nor to make
them hold their peace, and to be as domme men: by my aduyce, I woold have them
banished (by general counsel) out of al colleges, counsels, chapters, towns
and common wealths. For we see daly by experience, that let an apple have
never so little a broose, that broose is enough to ^ott him quickly, if he be
not eaten in time. Demosthenes the philosopher was of great auctority for his
person, grave in manners, and condition, and very sentencious, and profound in
his words: but with these he was so obstinate, and wylfull, and such a talker
in all his matters, that all Greece quaked for fear of him. Whereupon all the
Athenians one day assembled in their hall, or common house, and there they
appointed him a great stipend of ye goods of the common wealth, telling him
that they gave him this, not that he shoold read, but because he shoold hold
his peace. Also this great and renowned Cicero, that was so valiant and
politic in martial affairs, so great a friend to the common weal of Rome, and
more over a prince of eloquence for ye latin tongue: though he was cruelly put
to death by Mark Antony, it was not for any fact committed against him, neither
for any wrong or injury he had done him, save only for that he enueied
against him, and spoke evil of him. Also the noble poet Salust, and famous
orator of Rome, was not hated of strangers, and not beloved of his own
neighbors for no other cause, but for yt he never took pen in hand to write,
but he ever wrote against the one, and never opened his mouth to speak, but
he alwais spoke evil of ye other. Plutarche touching this mai^er recites in
his books de republica yt amongst the^ of Lidia, in their publik weal it was
holden an inuiolat law, yt they should not put a murderer to death for kylling
of any, but yt they should only execut, and put him to torture, that would
defame his neighbor, or in any one word seem to touch him in honor or
estimation. So that those barbarous nation thought it more execrable so defame
a man, then to kill and murder him. And therefore I say, he that burns my
house, beats my person, and robs me of my goods, must needs do me great
dommage: but he yt takes upon him to touch my honor and reputacio^ with infamy,
I will say he offends me much, and that so greatly, as he may well stand in
fear of his life: For there is not so little an offense ^oon to a man of stout
courage, but he carries it ever after imprinted in his heart, till he have
revenged the villainy done him, even so in princes courts there the more
quarells, and debates, through evil tongues, and dishonest reports, then there
does for any play or shrewd turns yt are done. I know not what reason they
have to strike of his hand, ye first draws sword, and favors and leaves
him unpunished, that draws blood with his ill tongue. O what a happy good turn
were it for the common weal, if (as they have in all towns and well governed
policies penal laws prohibiting to wear or carry weapon) they had like laws
also to punish detractiue and wicked tongues. Surely there ca^ be none so
great a blot or vice in a noble man, knight, or gentleman of honest behauior
and countenance, as to be counted and reputed a tatler of his tongue, and
there wtal a detracter of others. But let not such deceive them selves,
thinking yt for their countenance or estates sake they be priuileged above
others, at their wills and pleasure to enlarge their tongues on whom they list
in such manner, but that their inferiors far, will as liberally speak of
them, yea and as much to their reproach, as they before had done of them:
reputing as much of their honesty and credit for their calling (being
inequiualent in estate or degree to the^) as they do of their dignity and
reputacion. At that time when I was a courtier, and lived in princes court,
there dyed out of the court a worthy knight, who at his noble funerals was
recommended of us all, and praised in his life to be a noble, valiant,
worthy, and wise man, and a good and devout christian, and cheefely above all
his noble and heroycall virtues, he was only landed and renowned, for that
they never hard him speak ill of any man. So one of the company that was
present, hearing this great praise of him, took upon him to say this of him.
If he never spoke ill of any, then did he never know what pleasure those have
that speak ill of their enemies. Which words when we hard, though we passed
them over with silence, yet was there none but was greatly offended at them,
and good cause why. For to say truly, the first degree of malignitie is, for a
man to take a felicyty in speaking ill of his neighbor. King Darius being at
dinner one day, there were put forth of the weighters and standers by, certain
arguments of the acts and doings of Alexander the great: in which dispute, one
Mignus (a Captayn of the king, and greatly in favor with him) was very earnest
against Alexander, and went too far in speech of him. But Darius perceiving
him thus passioned said to him: O Mignus hold thy tongue, for I do not bring
thee into ye wars with me that thou should infame Alexander, (and touch his
honor with thy tongue, but yt thou should with thy sweord overcome him, By
these examples, we may gather, how much we ought to hate detraction, and ill
speaking, syns we see that the very enemies the^ selves can not abide, to here
their enemies ill spoken of in their presence: and this is always observed of
the honorable, grave, and wise men that are of noble mynds. For suer each noble
heart dysdaigneth to be revenged of his enemy with his tongue, for his iniures
done him: if he cannot be revenged on him with his sweord. It is syttyng for
all in generally to be modest, and honest in their speech, but much more yt is
dew for him that embraces the favor and credit of his prince. For it is his
profession to do good, to help every man and to speak ill of no man. They have
such Centinells of spies upon them continually (which are officers in court and
about the prince) to mark what they speak and do, that treading once awry (how
little so ever it be) it is straight blown into the princes ears, and they
perhaps accused of that that they never thought, delyghtyng and taking great
pleasure to tell openly what they hard them say. Such therefore as are daily
courtiers, attendyng upon the prince, and infauor with him, must (if they mean
to continue that favor and credit) be gentle, and courteous in their words,
and bountiful to those that stand in need of them. Also the esteemed courtier
must beeware he do not only speak ill of no man, but also that he be not
too great a talker. For commonly these great talkers besides that they are not
esteemed, be also reputed of small judgment, and of simple counsel. Pithias,
that was the great gouerner, and Duke of the Athenian nation, was a noble
prince, beloved and feared, hardy and valiant, and yet in the end as says
Plutark, the abundance of words, obscured the glory of his heroical deeds.
Although these great talkers, and men too full of words, be of noble birth or
woorship, wealthy in possessions, and otherwise of auctority and estimacion,
yet nevertheless all that time they spend in speaking too much, others that
here them, occupye the same in deriding and scornyng of them. I beseech you
what greater reproach could a courtyer have, then to be called a babbler a
prater of his tongue, and a liar? For when he thynks every man is attentive,
and listening to him, it is quyte contrary: for even at that instant do they
laugh him to scorn, and yet this is nothing to the shame they do him
afterward. For those that talk to him, whilst he is thus babblyng, pots at
him with their mouths behind his back, nodde with their heads, holds down
their eyes, and soothes him in all that he says, and all this not to praise
or commend him: but to be meery afterward at the matter, when they are
togethers. And it is a sport to note, and here one of this great talkers, if
any man talk of war, of the liberal sciences, of hunting, or of husbandry,
he will straight leap into the matter, allthough he be utterly ignorant in
the thing preponed, taking upon him to reason of the matter, as if he were
very skillful, or master of the faculty, And to make the herers believe that,
that is true he says he brings in an example, saying that he has seen
yt, read yt, or hard yt, and all perhaps a stark lie, that he neither saw yt,
read yt, nor hard yt of any, but only devised of his own head, on a sodeyn,
under the color of troth to make a false lie. Acaticus ye philosopher, being
one day at a feast, where he neither spoke, nor offered once to speak: asked
after dinner what was ye occasion of his silence, answered them thus. It is
better for a man to know his time when to speak, then it is to know to speak.
For to speak well, is given us by nature: but to choose time to speak, proceeds
of wisedo^. Epimenides ye painter, after he had dwelt long time in Asia,
returned to Rhodes from whence he first departed, and because none of ye
Rhodians ever hard him speak any thing, either of that he had seen, or done
in Asia, they marueiled very much, and prayed him to discourse unto the^ some
part of that he had seen, and suffered in Asia. To whom he made this
answer. Two years I sulked the seas, abydyng the peril of the water, and
ten other years I was resient in Asia, to learn the perfection of a paynters
ark: syx other years I studied in Greece to accustom my self to be silent,
and now you would I shoold feed you with tales and news. O Rhodians, come to
me no more with any such motion: for you should come to my house to bye
pyctures, and not to here news. Albeit in so many years and in such far and
strange contreis yt could not be but Epimenides had seen many things worthy
to be recounted, and pleasant to here: yet he woold never tell the^ nor show
them: and suer herein he did like a good philosopher, and answered like a
wise and grave person. For in tellyng of strange things, and of diverse
countries, there are few that will believe them, and many that will stand in
doubt whether they be true or no. And therefore touching this matter also,
Pithagoras the philosopher was one day asked upon what occasion he made his
scholars use so great silence in his college, yt in two years after they were
entered, they might not speak. He answered thus. In other philosophers
schools they teach their disciples to speak, but in mine there is taught
nothing but to hold their peace. For in the whole world there is no better nor
higher philosophy, then to know to brydel the tongue. It is a marvelous thing
to see a man, that with time his beard and hears of his head become all white,
his face wythered, his ears deaf, his legs swollen, his breath stynk, his
spleen stopped, and his body faint and feeble with age, and all the parts
thereof consumed, save only the heart, and tongue, which we never see wax old
in manner, how aged or impotent so ever he be, but rather daily become green:
and that that is woorst of all is, that what evil the wretched heart thinks
in that crooked and miserable age, that does the accursed tongue with all
celeritie utter. There is a company of courtiers in the court, that presume to
be eloquent, and well spoken, and of courtly enterteignement, which when they
will talk of some pleasant matter, they must first tell you a lie, and surely
these kind of courtiers we may better call them detracters of others, then
cyuil enterteigners. Accursed be he that to the prejudice of his neighbor,
makes profession to be a courtly interteigner, and you shall hardly see none
of these recyted courtiers jest of any, but they have in secret spunne the
threede, to weaue a great cloth of malice. And yet we do these men great
honor and reverence, not for any good will we bear the^, but for yt we are
afraid of their ill tongs. And although to disse^ble otherwile, it is a grave
and wise man's part, yet for all yt we may not judge il of the^, since we see
ye best man's honor and credit commonly to be no greter nor less, then a
maligna^t person shall seem to use his tongue to speak of him. I remember there
was in the court in my time a noble man, noble of birth and person both, whom I
reproved diverse times (as his familiar friend) of his prodigal living, and ill
speaking. And he made me this answer* Truly sir, those yt report that I
speak ill of the^, it is them selves yt do yt of me: and if I follow them
therein, it is for nothing else, but to be a witness for the^, if any seek to
impugn their saiyngs: but suer of my self I never uttered, or devised word,
yt might be to ye prejudice of any. O what ill causes he, that speaks ill
of an other, he only offends not that begins, but he that assisteth
him, and much more he that hears him, and after publishes it: but above all
he that tells it abroad, and adds more then he hard. The favored of
princes must also think, that though they are prohibited to speak much, yet it
is most fyt and decent for them to be true and faithful secretaries. For there
is no thing ye prince priseth more, then ye secret breast of his favored
courtier. And therefore I say not without cause that they ought to be secret,
but most secret. For the esteemed courtier must have a better consideracion of
his princes secrets committed to him, then of ye benefits he receives of him.
Suer yt is no small, but a great and most necessary virtue in a man, to be
close, and of few words, and so secret in deed, that he make no more
countenance of that was told him privily, then if he had never hard it spoken
of. I know an other manner of people so prone to speak ill, that they cannot
keep secret their own faults, much less others faults, publishing them in
every corner. Cecilius Metellus being asked one day of a Centucion, what he
meant to do the next day followyng: answered thus. Think not Centurion that
those things I am determined to do, my hands shall so lightly discover: for I
am of this mind, if I knew yt my shirt had any knowledge of that I will do to
morrow, I woold put it of, and throw it straight in the fire and see it burned
before my face. It is not a like trust, to put money into one man's hands of
trust, and to commit secrets to ye breast of an other, and this to be true we
see it plainly, that the prince delivers his goods and treasure to the
custody of many, but his secrets he commytteth only to one. The favored of
princes ought to be so secret, that what so ever they see the prince do or
say (be it in the presence of dyners, and that they are told of it by many)
Yet they ought not to be acknowen of it. For in deed the prince speaks many
things commonly for his pleasure, which being reported again of the favored
courtier, wilbee thought true, and most certain. Therefore speaking generally
of this matter I say, that surely friends are greatly bound to keep the
secrets of their friends: For that day I discover my intent to any, the self
same I make him lord of my liberty. Therefore let that man think he has
woonne a marvelous treasure, that has a secret friend. For without doubt it is
no such matter of importance, to keep treasure saflye locked up in a chest, as
it is to commit and trust secrets to the heart of an other. Plutark writes,
that the Athenians having wars with king Phillip because there came certain
letters of king Phillips to their hands (intercepted, by their scouts) directed
and sent unto his wife Olimpa: Which they no sooner understood, but they
presently returned again safely sealed, and untouched of them, as they came
first unto them saying: that sith by their law they were bound to be secret,
they would not reveal the secrets of others, notwithstanding they were their
mortal enemies, as king Phillip was to the^: and therefore they woold neither
see them, nor read the^ openly. Diodorus Siculus says also, that among the
Egiptians it was a criminal act for any man, to bewray the secrets of an
other, which was proved true by thexample of a priest, that in the temple of
the gods Isis had deflowered a virgin, and they both trusting to ye
fydelitie of an other priest, making their love known unto him, even as they
were in Venus sweet delights, he not regarding any longer their secrets, in
ipso facto exclamed and cried out, and thereupon co^uict and apprehended by ye
justice, these poor lovers were myserably executed, and this spightful and
unfortunate priest condignely banished. And this banished priest co^plaining of
thiniust sentence, saying, yt that he reveled, was in favor of ye religion,
and for ye behoof of the common wealth, ye judge au^swered him thus. If thou
had known their offense of thy self, without their notice geeue^ thee, you
had had reason to have complained of our sentence, but since they trusted
thee with their doings, and thou gave the^ thy word and promis to be secret,
if thou had called to mind ye bond thou were bound to them in, and yt thy
self did freely without their co^pulsio^ submit thy self unto, thou wooldst not
once have dared to have published the fact as thou have done. Plutark in his
book de exilio says, yt a man of Athens once demanded an Egiptian (disciple
of a philosopher) what he had under his cloak, au^swered him thus. Truly thou
have studied little, and born away less, although thou art an Athenian born,
sith thou see yt I carry secretly yt thou demaundst, because thou nor no other
should know it, and yet thou ask it of my self, what it is that I carry.
Anasillus yt was a captayn of ye Athenians, was taken of ye Lacedaemonians, and
put to ye torture, because he should tell that he knew, and what the king
Agesilaus his Land master did, to whom he gave this answer. You
Lacedemonia^s have liberty to disme^ber me, and heaw me in pieces: but so have
not I to reuele my lord and masters secrets. For in Athens we use rather to
dye, then to be wray the secrets of our friend. King Lisimachus, entreated the
philosopher Philipides very earnestly, yt he woold come and dwell with him: but
he made them this answer. I woold be very glad to be in your company,
knowi^g you to be a fauorer of philosophy: and if you will go to ye wars I will
follow you: and if you trust me with your goods, I will keep them carefully, and
faithfully: if you have children, I will teach them with al my heart: if you will
use my counsel in your affairs, I will geeue you the best I can. And if you will
also geeue me ye charge of your common wealth. I will govern it with my best
discretion. Only one thing I will request you that you will never command me,
yt is, not to make me partaker of your secrets. For it might happen that what
you had told me in secret, your self unawares at a time might tell it openly,
and yet not think of it: and being afterward told you by some other, you
woold presently enter into suspect yt it came to knowledge by me. This
philosopher woold first indent with the prince (before he woold come to his
service) that he shoold never here any of these things, the knowledge whereof
brings many a man to their end, or at the least to some great mischife: only
to show us ye imminent peril and danger the secretary of a prince stands
in. For our heart is such a friend of news, that every hour it feels a
thousaund temptations to utter that to others, that was delivered to it of
secret. In this our age we do not use to keep secrets so well, as in old
time the Grecians were wont, sith we see by experyence, that if one friend
have to day told his friend a thing in secret, to morrow, yea perhaps the
self same night before, it was told amongst the neighbors.

There are also some kind of men so desirous to here news, that to know it,
they will swear a thousand oaths never to reuele in again to any. But so soon
as they know it, they are like unto the blood hounds, that follow the dear now
here now there smelling with their noses, till they have found the hurt dear,
then they open, and bay for their master. Therefore I counsel, and exhort all
wise and discreet men, that they do not accompany with those whom they know
are not secret. For the hurt that comes by them, consists not only to tell
that they know, see, and here: but with this they tell that they have imagined
of their own wicked and malicious heads. It cannot be otherwise, but being
men, we are also subject to the frailty of a man, as for example. To fall
sometimes into ye sin of the flesh, and in that to forget the sin of
gluttony, and to have small consideracion of that of sloth, to be assured in
that of auaryce or with that to be overcome with passion and rage, or to be
puffed up in the sin of pride. And if perhaps by misfortune any one chance
into such man's company, that has but part, or all these conditions, and such
one as do discover and disclose both his own secrets and others to, what other
can there be hoped of, then a fire enflamed in his good fame and reputacion,
and a co^tagious plague and pestilence in his house. For that that I have hard,
seen, and read, yea and also proved, I say and affirm, that there is no bread
so il spent, as that that is geeuen to the servants which open and reuele their
masters secrets: And sure it may be said, that such are not servants that
serve them, but traitors that betray them, and sell their masters liberty. And
it is of such importance, for the favored of princes, to keep secret, and not
to reuele any part of the princes secrets, that every man must think, that when
the prince tells them any thing in secret, he tells it not alone unto
them, but rather he confesses it to them. Princes being men (as in deed
they are) and much busyed with the cares of the common wealth, yt cannot be,
but when they are withdrawn a part into their privy chamber, they will both
play, talk, sleyt, sygh, laugh, be angry, threaten, and make, much again of
some before others: All which things though they do before their servants in
secret, it is not their pleasure, neither will they like, it should be told
abroad amongst their subjects. And sure they have great reason, for men of
grauyty and authority, do not lose their reputacion for doing things grave,
and of good example: but they are justly noted, when publicly they will show
any lightness or folly, how little so ever it be. Not only those that be in
aucthority and favor about the prince but such other officers of the court, and
servants of household of the prince also, ought not to tell nor reuele any thing
they see their prince do. For they may be well assured, that the prince wilbee
more offended and displeased, to have that he does in his privy chamber told
abroad, by those of the pryuy chamber, or other whom it pleases him to make
familier with him: then he woold be, if his treasorers and receivers should
rob him of his treasure. It was told to Denis the Siracusan on a time, that
Plato the philosopher was at the chamber door to speak with him: and he
presently sent Bias one of his privy chamber (that he loved well) to him, to
know what he would with ye king, and Plato asked Bias what Denis did, and he
au^swered that he lay stark naked upon a table, which when Denis understood,
he was so offended with Bias, that he commanded forthwith he should be
beheaded, saying first these words unto him. I will yt like a traitor yt be
beheaded, since thou have traitorously betrayed me, presuming to disclose ye
secrets of my chamber. For I sent thee not to Plato to tell him what I did, but
to know what he woold of me. Now princes familiars and beloved of them, as
they must be very circumspect and heedeful yt they tell no man ye princes
secrets, so they must be much careful yt they tell it not chiefly to women,
yea though they were their own wives. For as women are very good and
profitable, to look to things of household, and safly to lock up their husbands
goods: so are they on ye other side very dangerous for a man to commit any
secrets to the^. For notwtstanding a woman know, yt in reueling the secrets of
her husband, she puts her life in peril, ye honor of her husband, the
loss of her children, ye reputacion of her house and kynred, and peradventure
ye peace and tra^quility of ye common weal: yet had she rather dye, then she
shoold not utter yt she knows. And many times for no other respect, but to
make these weome^ believe yt hears her, yt she only commands her husband
and al besides in her house. Well, I will enlarge my self no further of this
matter, for if I woold but geeue my pen leave to write yt I know, I shoold find
lyme and sand enough to buyld a tower as high as Babylon. But to end my
purpose, I will speak this one word, and yt is, that I counsel and exhort,
and with al my heart request princes familiars, or servants, yt they commit not
their princes secrets to any, how great a fre^d or near kinsman so ever he
be to the^. For they may be assured, yt since they refuse to keep secret
that ye prince commands the^, yt much less their friend will keep it secret
for any request they make to him. If thou can not keep yt secret, that to open
it, imports ye loss of thy favor and credit, and happily thy life also: how
can you think an other will do it, yt in tellyng it, wins both honor and
credyt.

A comendation of troth, which professed courtiers ought to embrace, and in no
respect to be found defective in the contrary, telling one thing for an other.
Cap. xx.
EPimenides the philosopher, being requested of ye Rhodians to tell the^ what yt
virtue was they called verity, he au^swered the^ thus. Verity my friends, is a
thing wc ye gods above al other profess, and her virtue is such, yt it warmeth
ye heavens, lights ye earth, maintayns justice, and governs ye common weal,
and suffers no ill thing in her, making plain and clear al doutfull and
hidden things. The Corinthians asked ye like question also of Chilo ye
philosopher, what veryty was, who au^swered yt it was a perdurable pillar,
never diminishi^g, nor decresi^g: a buckler or shield impassable, a fair time
yt is never troubled, an army yt never perishes, a flower yt never withers,
a sea yt never fears fortune, and a suer haue^ where never was shipwrak.
Anaxarchus ye philosopher, was also demanded of ye Lacedaemonians, what verity
was, who au^swered that it was a health without sickness, a life without end, a
iuleppe and syrop yt heals al, a sun yt never darkneth, a moon without
eclipse, an herb yt never dries, a gate that is never shut, and a way that
never werieth man. The like was asked of Eschines ye philosopher touching
verity by ye Rhodians. And he said, that it was a virtue without wc al force was
weakened, Justice corrupted, humility fained and disse^bled, patiens
insupportable, chastity vayn, liberty lost, and pyty superfluous. The like was
also demanded of Pharmacus ye philosopher by the Romans. And his answer was,
that veryty was a true center wherein al things reposed, a card to sail by, to
direct ye pylot and mariners, a wisdom to hele and recure every man, and a
present remedy for all evils, a height in ye top whereof every man rests, and a
bright light to lighte^ ye whole world. And surely this makes me think that
these philosophers were great friends and lovers of verity, sins they did so
much enrich, and sublime the same, with so many rare and excellent titles. But
omitting now these philosophers, who have truly spoken that they knew: let us
come speak of him, that above all the world has exalted veryty, which was the
divine word, and that was Ihesus Christ, the only begotten son of god, and
true glass of eternity, who being asked the self same thing of Pylate, said
not to him, I am wisdom, neither Justice, nor chastity, nor paciens,
humility, nor charity: But only said to him, I am verity, to let him
understand, yt every creature might be partaker of yt verity. But our lord
Ihesus Christ, was not partaker of yt verity: but ye sole and only possesser of
ye same, he being ye very truth it self. O, of how many is this virtue
desired, and of how few (yea most few) observed. For in effect it is nothing
else, but a mark whereat all good me^ shoot with their eyes, and al il and wicked
persons lose their sight. The emperor Augustus in ye triumph he made of Mark
Antony, and his love Cleopatra, amongst others brought to Rome an Egiptia^
priest, of 60. years of age, and ye senate being informed of a surety that days
of his life he never told lie, they agreed not only to restore him to liberty
but to make him high priest of their temple, and to erect a stature of him,
among the noble and princely parsons of Rome. Sparthianus writes, that in the
time of Claudian Emperor of Rome, there deceased a citizen of Rome called
Pamphilus, whose doings after his death examined, it was manifestly proved, yt
he never spoke one true word all his life time, but always lied in that he
said. Which related unto the Emperor, he commanded his body should not be
buried, his goods should be confiscate, and his house rased to the foundation,
and his wife and children for ever banished Rome and all her territories, to
the end there should remayn no memory to the common wealth, of so pestiferous
and venomous a beast. At that time when these two things thus happened, the
Romans and Egyptians were mortal enemies, and therefore by these examples we
may see, of what force and power this virtue of veryty is, sith the romans
made a stature to their enemy, only for that he was a true and just man: and
depryued of sepulture their native child, and a Romayn born, for that he was a
liar. A true man may go in any place where he lysteth, freely without
interruptio^, accompanied with all men not fearing to be accused of any, and
may with saftie reprove the vicious and ill persons: and finally to conclude,
he may without the fear of any speak in the face of the world, and show his
face amongst the best. If a man will choose a friend, he need not be
inquisityue if he be wise, just, chaste, careful, courageous, or noble, but
only if he be true of his word. And if that be so, it follows that all
virtues and honesty must abound in him. Helius Sparthianus recyteth of the life
of Traian the Emperor, that being one night at supper, and accompanied with
noble men at his board, they argued of the fydelyty of friends, and infydelity
of enemies, whom Traian answered: That he never had friend in his life but he
was good, true, honest, and faithful: whereupon his lords besought him that yt
woold please him to tell them the occasion of his good hap in this. And he
answered thus. The cause why I have ever been so fortunat herein was this, I
never woold choose to my friend a liar, and covetous man. For in him that
reigns avarice, and lying, there can never dwell perfyt friendship. Those that
are honest, and like so to be reputed, must endeavor them selves to speak well
allways, and ever to say that that is true: and if they will not do this for
conscience sake, let the^ do it yet to avoid ye shame that follows them. For
there can be no greater mockry or dispight done to a man, then openly to make
him know he has lied. We see ye child when he perceives he has told a
lie, he blusheth straight, and is ashamed: much more ought men grown of
years, whose face is covered with hears, not only blush, but shame to tell a
lie. Many times I think what a great greef the merchant suffers every hour
not to be counted a liar, when he utters his ware, and suer he does it
but because he woold not lose his credit. And lo here why they swear commonly
by ye faith of a merchant to be more assured, where to ye contrary we see
many other, that in apparaunce seem to be honest and grave men, that use not
that manner: but rather they will stick no more to tell you a lie, then to lose a
wheat grayn. But here I speak not, neither do mean to touch those that are in
deed virtuous and good men: but I speak of those that thinks them selves
honest, and yet be not god knows. And therefore we may be assertayned,
that a merchant esteems more his goods and marcha^dise, then a lier does
his honor, otherwise honesty. There is nothing that preiudiceth troth so much,
as a tattling tongue that never lies: being in manner impossible, that amongst
many words some lie be not enterlaced. All things consists not in other
more, or less, save only in the use that men have of yt. For if a man do use
to eat little, he always goes from the table: if we use to sleep little, we
also leave our bed: And if we accustom our selves also to lie, we shall
have it in such a continual use, as though we woold we shall never leave it
after. For there are diverse sorts of men, that as they accustom them selves to
eat and drink often times in a day, so do they use to lie every hour. But I ask
what is ye greatest and most parfyt thing in this life, that a man whilst he
lives may enjoy. I dare boldly say, that it is neither nobility, great
parentage, nor favor, neither the great estate, health, nor riches: but rather
that it is the sole honor, wc tatlers and liars may never enjoy, because they
are never credited, nor believed in their words. What fame, credyt, honor,
reputacion, or good can he have, out of whose mouth there comes nothing but
lies? A liar deserves credit of no man, neither that any man shoold deal with
him in any thing, much less commit any matter of trust into his hands, no nor
love him, nor accept of him, but rather as detracter, and defamer of men's good
name, we should banish him our company. Anniball that was ye mighty prince of
ye Carthagians, so valiant in warlick prowes, so hardy to follow yt, and
therewithal so fortunat to overcome his enemies: was yet notwithstanding
blamed of Titus Liuius, and reputed for a malignant and perjured person. For
he never gave that he promised to his friends, neither ever kept any covenant
or agreement made with his enemies. Such was not Gneus Pompeius (son to
Pompeie the great) with whom Octauian and Mark Antony (both, his mortal
enemies) being at supper with him on the sea: Menodorus the captayn of his army
sent him word, if it were his pleasure, he woold so lively have hoyst up the
sails of the ship, that he would soon have peryshed them, or sunked the ship
they were in. To which message Pompeie gave this au^swer. Thou shall tell
Menodorus my captayn, that if I were Menodorus as he is, that never knew what
trothment, I would have followed his advice, and have done that he sends to
me for: but if he were Pompeius as I am, which keeps my word and promise
with all men, such a thought and treason would never have occupied his head.
Words suer worthy of so noble a prince, son of so great and worthy a
father. Herodotus writes also, that when the Egiptians woold make any new
amyty betwixt them selves, or be in league, and confederate them selves with
strangers, they used to bynd their thombs hard to the thombs of those with
whom they woold join in frendshyp, and then with an instrument pricked every
one of their thombs yt the blood spurted out, wc they sucked ye one ye other with
their tongue: inferring thereby, yt they woold rather shead their whole blood,
then in one jot to falsify and break yt friendship promised between the^. Is it
not a goodly thing to hear him yt swears by ye mass, of mine honesty, so
god ketch me, by my good sooth, by cock and pie, and other like nyse oaths,
only under simplicity thereof to make you believe a lie he will tell you, wc in
deed we shoold least then believe, when he is most ruff in his oaths. For
it is most certain, the more a liar enforces his words with abundance of
oaths, ye less he is to be believed. For that is a plain demonstration, yt
it is a prepensed lie he woold make us believe for a truth. It is a sport to
see a true man, and a liar in argument together: for the true man enforces his
words none otherwise but thus. Truly friend, it is even thus as I tell thee,
thou may if thou will believe me. And ye other to defend and maintayn his
lie, he will invoke for witness all the saints in heaven, and as many relics
as are on ye earth, yea and all the devils of hell: so that for defense of the
truth, it suffices to stand fast on his feet: but for defense of a lie, he
must run through ye whole world. If I were a king or prince, to throw the
beloved out of favor, to put my men out of service, to deprive men of their
office and dignity, or to disgrade a knight of his order of knighthood, or to
geeue no more faith nor credit to an other: I woold desire no better occasion
or testimony, then once to take him with a lie. And I woold thynk it less ill,
that the fathers shoold rather pardon a great fault in their children, ye friend
in his friend, and the master in his servant, the^ to bear with them in one lie.
For by time the wings of sin is cut: but to lie is of such condition, the
elder a man waxes, the more force and power it has of him. It is not enough
for a man to be free of this vice, but he must also fly and sequester him
self from the fellowship of those, that are possessed with that foul and
inueterate error. For it is commonly seen, when a man woold bring out a sodein
lie, to geeue it more credit, he will avouch his friend for a witness, saying
he knows yt, and was present with me. Now those that hears this famous
lie, and knows the very troth in deed of the matter as it was, condemns
his friend he avouches (although he be innocent in the matter) for that he
is brought in for testimony, as they do this notorius and shameless liar. I
should ly also for compagny, if I should deny to tell you, that, being in the
court upon a time in a good presence, a friend of mine stuck not to forge a lie
amongst others, and said that he had sailed in a ship made all of the canes of
Synamon, and he avouched me for a witness, affyrmyng that I was likewise
with him in his company in the ship: and I to save his honor (he being my
very friend) being ashamed he should incur the name of a liar, was compelled
seriously to confyrm his tale with him, whereof I repented me after with all
my heart. For thereby I was in secret noted of the hearers, to be as great a
liar as he. Also an other time when I went to preach at ye court, being
diseased of ye gout, I walked up and down with a staff of a reed to stay me with
al, the self same person I told you of before, told amongst ye prelates yt were
in the chapel where I preached, that he had geeuen me a reed or cane to
walk withal, that from one knobb to an other, it woold hold three great pottes
of wine. Lo now by my example you may gather what shame and dishonesty an
honest and virtuous man sustaineth, to be a friend and co^panyon of so
shameless and horrible a liar. For to be plain, I was brought to this pass,
by means of this friend of mine, that I coold not tell what I shoold do, but
when I hard him begin to speak, to fly from him, and leave him, because I
woold not be reputed a like of reputacio^ with him. Howbeit in thend I was
forced to use this pollycy: that what he had openly avouched me a witness in,
secretly again I woold excuse my self, and deny yt. But now returning to our
matter again, I say: That these courtiers, and familiers of princes, ought to
exyle and banish from them this abominable crime of lyeng.

For if a mean gentleman or simple plebeyan happen some times to tell one thing
for an other, it is but taken of the hearers straight for a simple ly. But
being spoken by one of the favored of the court, or other gentleman of
reputation, it is thought a kind of treason. For like as betwixt god, and the
sinner, our savior Ihesus Christ is our only mean and mediator, being called
upon by the priest, even so betwixt the king and his subjects, that are suitors
to his majesty: those that are in favor with the prince, are mediators for
them. Now therefore, if these priests be double in their words, and dissemblers
in that they speak, how shall the sins of the one be pardoned, and the
business of the other dispatched. O woeful and unhappy sinner, that puts his
sins into the hands of a naughty and wicked prist, and like wise unfortunate
and miserable is the poor suter, that commits his affaiers to the trust and
dispatch of a lying and dissembling officer. There are many officers in Princes
courts, that tells the poor suitors still they will dispatch them, but when
it comes to the push to follow the matter, al his fair words are then but
wynd, and in deed they make an art of it, to speak all men fayer, to promis
much, and to perform nothing, weaning with their sweet flattering words to
win the hearts and good wills of all, little regarding the great expense and
loss of time of ye poor suter, much less also respecting their own honor,
honesties, and credyt. Sure it were less dishonor for them, to be counted
rough and churlish, then to be bruted for liars, and breakers of their promys.
The officer of the princes palace, that is a dissembler, and liar in his
words and doings, he may for a time maintain his suits, and go through with
his matters: but in the end, his tretcheries perceived, him self, his fautor,
and all his dealing lie in the dust, and are utterly overthrown. O how many
have I seen rise in court of nothing, to great matters and offices, and this
not through their painful service, but altogeethers by means of their deceit
and flattery they cunningly used: not exalted also for their merits, but only
by a subtle mean and policy they had to draw water to their myll: not for any
good conscience they had, but only for their great diligence used in their
practices. And all this not without ye prejudice of others, but rather to ye great
hurt and utter undoing of their neighbor: and not for any bounty they had to
give liberally, but a gredy and covetous desire to get: not for any needful
business, but to have those yt are superfluous: and not for to reliue ye poor
and needy, but only to satisfy their insatiable apetits: and infyne, their
account cast, we have seen after their death their goods co^fiscated, their
servants dyspersed, and gone away, and their children for ever undone. So yt in
brief there was no more memory of the^ in this world, and god grant also yt in
ye other life their souls were not damned. Courtiers may easily with their
favor and credit attain to great possessions, as the Judges may also in
robbing, the counselors in pleading, and maintaining naughty causes, the
captains in powling the prince of the soldiers wages, the merchants in their
false weights and measures, and their brokers, in telling lies out of all
measure. But in thend of their journey, and pilgrimage, they may be assured
that the souls of the fathers shall not only be damned in hell, but the goods
also shall be taken from their children. And that yt is truly and justly gotten
by ye honest industry and travel of the man, with a good zeal and holy intent,
and to a good and just end: it is written that it shall be of long continuance,
and by the permission of god, and prayer of the people, it shall also prosper,
and increase. For the true gotten goods, achiued by swet and labor of man, god
does always prosper and augment and therefore continuing our matter I say,
that ye princes officers ought to determine with them selves, to be upright in
all their accions and doings, and above all, true and just of their words: wc
doing they shall be sure to be beloved of all, not alone of them that pass
under their lee, but also of those whom they have denied favor. And also they
need not to be afraid to speak boldly in all places where they come, besides
that they shall be reverenced of all men. Where to ye contrary, if he be a
liar, a babbler, and dissembler, there are few that will fear them, much less
love them, and least of all do them reverence, or honor. And although we
cannot deny, but that these officers of the court, and other men of auctority
be waited upon, visited, accompanied, reverenced, and honored of much sort of
men: yet it were a folly for us to believe, yt their trayn and attendants do
them all that honor and reverence, for any desire they have to do them any
service: but only they use all that curtesy, and capping, to get them selves
and their suits quickly dispatched. And this to be true, we see it daily in
experience. For when these suitors have atchiued their suit and desire, they do
not only leave to accompany him, and attend upon him, but more over they get
the^ home, without either thanking of them, or once taking their leave of him. If
all those that have function or office of estate or dignity, (having charge of
the dispatch of great and weighty matters, being also liars and dissemblers in
their doings) knew yt ill reports that go of them, and how they conde^pne
their corrupt and naughty co^scie^ces: me thinks it impossible (if they be
not altogether graceles) but they must needs either change condition and
estate, or else quyte geeue up their rooms and offices. For they are in every
man's mouth called bablers, liers, disse^blers, traitors, periurers, miserable,
auaricious, and vicious. And yet a worser thing then all this, and that is:
whylest they live, a thousand co^playns of him: and after they are dead and
buried, they take up their bones out of the grave to hang the^ up upon a
gybbet. For thus says the proverb. Such life, such end. So that we may say,
that to these officers above recyted, rests nothing but only these goodly
rytles. And heereunto we may add also, that officers of like condition to
them, need not to have any to accuse them, neither yet to punish the^: For a
time will come one day, that they will plunge themselves so deep into a sea of
troubles, that it cannot be chosen, but they must needs at last drown, and
utterly perish, or at the least to be driven into the haven of their greatest
enemies, so that they shall carry the burden of their own wickedness, and be
condingly chastised with their own folly. Therefore I pray all those that shall
read these writings of mine, to observe them in their heart, and imprint them
well in mind: being a matter of such morality and wisdom, that it can hardly
be vnderstandid of any, but of such as first have had some proof thereof.
Helius Spat^hianus writes that there was sometime a senator in Rome called
Lucius Torquatus, who was a tyrant, a dissembler, a great liar, and very
seditious, deuysyng only to set discord between the emperor Tytus, and the
people: who being many times complained upon by the people unto Tytus, he
answered them thus. I pray you good people, let no man seek to reprove him,
persuade him, threaten, nor punish him: for he is so wicked, and perverse in all things, that I trust in the gods one day his own crooked and naughty
condition, shall make revenge and satisfaccion of all the mischiefs he has
done me: wc was a wonderful thing in this prince, that for an injury of such
importance as that was, he woold have no other revenge of him, but refer al
to that he hoped to see by his own ill nature. And sure the matter well
considered, he had good reason to do yt. For a wicked person is of this
condition, that after he has once begone to do evil, he never cease daily
to do worse (if he be not reclaimed by some honest man) until such time as
unawares (not looking to him self) he utterly falls to ruyn and perdition. So
that we may aptly compare an ill man, to a ca^dell, wc after it is once light,
it never leaves burning, till it have made an end of it self. In great and
weighty matters sometimes, such as have the dispatchyng of them, are wont to
speak one word for an other, and also to make some faint promises to their
suitors, not in respect to lie to them nor deceive them: but to prolong them
longer in suit, to increase their gaigne the more. Which I must say they ought
not to do, much less once to think it. When the favored courtier or officer
of the prince is moved in any matter by ye suter, let him consider well if it
be any thing that may displease ye prince, be it never so little: for they
must take great heed that they tell not princes, nor their servants, any thing
yt they know may be displeasant to their years: but only that, yt shall be both
pleasant to ye ear, profitable to ye purse, and there withal, that it be
true and necessary to be told and looked to. For there is no greter
destruccio^ to ye common weal, then to bring false reports unto ye king of his
affairs. It is one of the gretest kinds of treason yt can be, for a prince to
disclose ye secrets of his heart to his favored courtier, and for him again to
tell ye prince nothing but lies, and tales. How great a friend so ever the
prince be to his favored courtier, the beloved courtier ought not to presume to
advance him self to tell, or make his prince believe one thing for an other.
For the matter afterward discovered, and the troth known, it shall not be
enough for him in his excuse to tell the prince yt he made him believe so, only
to satisfy his friend. For the king may justly tell him, that it is but an
excuse, and that he meant no other but to deceive him. For princes ears and
conditions, are so delicate: that I am bold to admonish the^ that are his
familyers, and beloved of him, that they endeavor them selves always to speak
(with all humble duity and reverence) that that is true, yea though in secret
it pleases the prince to be merry with them. This is ever true: he that is a
friend of verity, is also of justice: and he that is a friend of justice, is
also of the common weal: and he that is a friend of the common weal, is ever
endued with a good conscience: and he that has a good conscience,
consequently is of a good life, he that is of a good life, is also of a good
same, and beloved of all. Albeeit we cannot deny, but that his enemies will
ever speak ill of him: yet we may say also, that they can never hurt nor
condemn him: but rather he shoold be counted a fool of all men, that will
go about or seek to be his enemy, who is honest in his doi^gs, true in his
words, modest in his behavior, beloved, and well thought of of al. Therefore
he puts him self into a great peril, that dare make him self a companion,
and fellow in doings, with a wise and virtuous man. For he must think, yt
acco^panying with such a man, he acco^panyeth not his person alone, but also
ye virtues that reign in him: and if he do repugne and gainsay reasonable
things, he shall straight show him self to come of a wicked race, and to be
plunged and rooted in all malice. Now to ye end we may leave nothing beehind,
that may serve to advise and counsel this our favored courtier, I say also:
that there are many other in favor with the prince, that often times do procure
the prince to geeue offices of dignity, and realty of the realm, sometimes to
their kinsfolks, otherwhiles to their friends, and afterward to their servants
also: wc perhaps are so unmeet and unworthy for them, that neither their merits
shall deserve to have them, nor their knowledge and experience also fit, for
so weighty an administration. And they do not procure these offices for them,
for that they are wise, and capable: but only to advance them above others, and
because they are very troublesome and importunat. I am sorry to write it, and
much more to see it, that offices are not geeuen now for ye benefit of the
common wealth, but to recompense those of whom the favored courtier has
received pleasure, or else to satisfy the importunacy of his servants of his own
house. But by process of time it might happen (by means of their skillesse rule)
that ye king woold take from them altogether their offices, or remove them from
one place to an other, although they were never well settled in a town, and
commodiously. And being the princes pleasure to do thus, the wise and beloved
courtier must take heed he do not contrary ye king, much less take upon
him to defend the ill government of those officers, hoping thereby to come to
greater honor. For it were less hurt for him, ye officer lost his estate and
office, then he his credit and reputation. Therefore those in favor and
auctority ought to content them selves with the prince, the servants with their
masters, and the parents and kinsfolks with the princes officers, for that
they procured them these offices at ye kings hands, with the ill wills of many:
without that they further prease, and importune the^, to suborn their faults. For
after that ye doings of these worthy officers be once discovered to be
naught and corupted, it is impossible by any means to make them good before ye
prince, with whom all ye means the parents and kinsfolks of such persons can
make, cannot stead the^ to bring them to their first honor, by their own folly
lost. And now to end this our present volume of the favored courtier, I do
assure al ye beloved courtiers, that if god shall find purity in their souls,
ye common weal justice in their house, and the king troth in their mouths, and
fidelity in their hearts, the good and honest men grace in their favor, and that
the ill and wicked boast them selves no more of their authority and office, and
that ye poor shall praise them for their good woorks, and the king also find
them faithful servants, I will at this present with mine own hand geeue the^
such faith and assurance, that they shall need never to fear that god will
forsake them, nor that men can hurt them, and that they shall never be detected
of any infamy, overthrown by any misfortune, neither put out of favor and
credit with their prince at any time.

Finis.
Here follows certain other letters written by Marcus Aurelius, Selected
out of the Spanishe copy, not written in the French tongue.
Of the huge monstre seen in Scicily in the time of Marcus Aurelius: And of
the letters he wrote with blood upon a gate. Cap. i.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome.720. and.xlii. of the age of Marcus
Aurelius, and two years before he took possession of the Empire, the twenty
day of August, about the going down of the Sun, in the Realm of Sicill in
the City of Palermo (a port of the Sea) there chanced a thing perilous to
them that saw it then, and no less dread full to those which shall hear it
now. Whiles they of Palermo were celebrating a great feast with much joy,
that they had vanquished the navy of the Numidians, the pirates dividing their
booty, were prevented by the magistrates of the city, who commanded the
whole spoil to be laid up till the wars were finished: for such was the
law of the I Will. And truly it was a just law, for oftentimes the only let why
the peace is not made, between princes, is because there wants riches to
satisfy the domages done in wars. When all the people were returned home
unto their houses to supper (for it was in the Summer) there appeared an hughe
monster in the city in this form. He seamed to be of the length of three
cubits, his head was balde, so that his scull did appear. He had no ears,
save only two holes in his neck, whereby men judged that he heard: he had
two wrythen horns like a goat, his right arm was longer then his left, his
hands were like the feet of horses, without throat, his shoulders and his head
were both of one height, his shoulders shone as does the scales of fishes, his
breast was all rough of here, his face in all things was like unto a man, save
that it had but one eye which was in the midst of his forehead. In his nose
there was but one nosethril. From the middle downwarde there was nothing
seen, because it was all covered, he satte on a chariot with four wheles,
which was drawn with four beasts, that is, two Lions before, and two Bears
behind. No man could tell of what wood the chariot was made. In fashion it
differed nothing from those which other men do accustomably use. Within the
chariot stood a great chauldron with ears, wherein the monstre was, wherefore
it could not be seen but from the middle upward. It wandered a great space in
the city from one gate to an other, castinge out sparks of fire. The fear
was so great throughout all the city, that some women with child were with
great danger delivered, and others being faynte hearted fell down dead. And
all the people both men and women great and small ran to the temples of
Jupiter, Mars, and Februa, with doleful clamoures and cries making their
importunate prayers. At the same time, all these rouers were lodged in the
governors palace of the city, whose name was Solyno, borne at Capua, where
also the riches was kept. After the monstre had been in all parts of the
city (or in the most part thereof) it came to the palace where the pirates
were, and cut one of the Lions ears of, and with the blood thereof wrote
these letters upon the palace gate which was shut R. A. S. P. I. P. These
letters were of diverse men diversely interpreted so that the interpretations
were mo then the letters. And in the end, a woman prophetess greatly esteamed
for her science, (to whom God had given this secret knowledge) opened the true
meaning of these letters, saying R. signifies Reddite, A. aliena, S. si
vultis. P. propria, I. in pace, P. possidere. Which altogethers is to say.
Render unto other that which is theirs, if you in quiet will possess your
own. Truly the pirates were wonderfully afraid of this sudden commandment,
and the woman was highly commended for her exposition. This being done, the
monstre went the same night out of the City unto a high hill called Iamicia,
and there stood for the space of three days in the sight of the city, the
Lions with terrible voices roaring, the Bears with no less fearful cries
ragyng, and finally the monstre most dreadful flames casting. During all this
time there was neither bird seen in the air, nor beast in the fields. And
the people offered such great sacrifices unto their Gods, that they brake the
veins of their hands and feet, and offered the blood thereof to see if they
could appease their wrathes. These three days being passed, there appeared in
the element a marvelous dark cloud, which seamed to darken the whole earth,
and there with it began to thunder and lighten so terriblye, that sundry
houses fell to the ground, and infinite men ended their lives. And last of
all there came such a flame of fire from the monstre, that it brent both the
palace where the rouers were, and all other things that were therein, so that
all was consumed with fire: yea the very stones them selves. The tempest was
so great, that there fell above two thousand houses, and there died more then
ten thousand persons. In this place where this monstre was on the top of the
hill, the emperor edified a sumptuous temple to the god Jupiter in perpetual
memory of the same. Whereof afterward Alexander emperor, having war with
the people of that Isle made a strong castle.

Of that which chanced unto Antigonus a citezen of Rome, in the time of
Marcus Aurelius. Cap. ii.
AT the same time when this woeful chance happened in the Isle, there dwelled a
Roman in the same city called Antigonus, a man of a noble blood, and well
stricken in age, who with his wife and daughter were banished two years before
from Rome. The cause of his banishment was this. There was an old laudable
custom in Rome instituted, by Quintus Cincinatus the dictatour, that two of
the most ancient senators should ^o with ye censour newly created (in the
month of December) to visit al Rome and to examine severally every Romain,
declaring unto him the.xii. tables, and also the particular decrees of the
senate, demanding of them, if they knew any man that had not observed these
laws: and if they did, they should enfourme the senate thereof. And so every
man should receive condign punishment according to his offense. But they never
punished before they warned, for they used the one year to admonish them of
their faults, and the next year if they did not amend to punyshe them, or
else to banyshe them. These were the words of the law in the fifth table,
and third chapter.

The sacret senate does ordeyne, the happy people do consent, and the ancient
colonies do allow, that if men as men in one year do trespass, that men as
men for that year do wynke at them: but if they as evil men do not amend,
that then the good as good do punish them. Moreover the law said, the first
faults are dissembled withal, because they are committed through weak
ignorance: but the second shall be punished, because they proceade of
negligence and malice. This inquiry was made in the month of December, because
in the month of January following the officers of Rome were elected. And it
was reason the good from the evil should be known, to thentent they might
know who merited to have them, and who deserved to go without them. The chief
cause why this Antigonus, his wife, and his daughter were banished was this. It
was ordained by the eleventh emperor of Rome Augustus, that no man should be
so hardy as to piss nere the doors of any temple. And Caligula the fourth
emperor commanded, that no woman should give, or sell any letters of
witchecrafts to hang about the peoples necks, to deliver them from the fever
quartaine. And Cato the censour made a law, that neither young man nor maid
should talk togethers at the conduictes where they used to fetch water, nor
at the river where they washed their clothes, nor at ye bakehouse where they
baked their bread: because all the wanton youth of Rome ordinarely haunted one
of these two places. It chanced when the censours and consulles visited the
ward of mount Celio, Antigonus, who dwelled thereby, was accused to have
pissed against the walls of the temple of Mars: and his wife likewise was
complained of for selling wrytinges to cure the fevers: and his daughter was
noted for one that commonly haunted the conduictes, rivers, and bakehouses to
talk with young men, the which in those days was a great shame to maids of
Rome. The censours therefore saying the evil president which they found in
the house of Antigonus at that time, registered also before, and that he had
been gently thereof admonished: banished him into the Isle of Scicilly, for as
long time as it should please the senate. And like as in sumptuous and goodly
buyldinges one stone falls not without shaking of an other, so it chances
likewise to men. For commonly one mischaunce comes not alone but that another
immediately follows. I speak it for this purpose, for that Antigonus was not
only deprived of his honor, goods, and country, but also by an earth
quake, his house fell down to the ground, and slew his dearest beloved
daughter. Whiles both these great mischaunces happened, I mean of the monstre
of Scicily, and of the banishement of Antigonus from Rome: Mark the emperor
was in the wars against the Argonautes where he received a letter from
Antigonus of his banishemente, whereof the emperor was marvelous sorry: as it
appears by the answer which he sent to comfort him.

How Marcus Aurelius sought the wealth of his people, and how his people
loved him. Cap. iii.
IN the second year that Mark was elected emperor the.xlv. of his age, when
he returned from the conquest of the Germans, and the Argonautes, (from
whence he brought great riches, and treasures, to the Roman empire) he to
rest him self, and to appointe his men, lay at Salon until such time as the
Romans had prepared all things convenient for such a glorious triumph:
There was one thing done which never was seen in Rome, for yt same day of his
triumph his son Comodus by the assent of the whole people of Rome, was
chosen emperor after the death of his father. He was not chosen at the request
of his father, for he was against it: saying that the empire ought not to be
given for the merits of those which are dead, but he should be chosen for his
own good works being alive. This emperor said oftentimes that then Rome
should be undone, when the election shall be taken from the senate, and when the
emperor shall enherite the empire by patrimony. Now to come to our matter:
the emperor being at Salon trauayled much to bring his men into Rome in good
order: and Rome was more careful for to receive him triumphantly, as it
appertained to such a great conqueste. He was marueilously well beloved of all the empire, and he always studied the wealth of his people, and they were
always most faithful in his services. So that sundry times there was a
question moved in the senate, which of these two things was better beloved,
Either the emperor of his people, or the people of their emperor. So that one
day they appointed two judges in this case, the one was the Ambassador of the
Parthes, and the other was the Ambassador of the Rhodes, and the information
was given on both parts in writing. The emperor alleged the great profit
that he had done to the common wealth, and the many evils which he had
delivered it from. On the other part the senators declared ye good deeds they
had done in his absence, and the great love they bare him always in his
presence. So likewise the emperor an other day moved an other question to the
senate, affirming that it was more glory for him to have such subjects, then
for them to have such an emperor. The senate denied it, affirming that the
comfort was greater that they had of him: then that which he could have of
them. And in this wise the emperor gave the glory to his people, and the
people gave the glory to their emperor. Thus merrily this matter was reasoned
of again. It was a pleasant thing to hear the reasons wherewith each part
proved his purpose. For the good emperor attributed the whole laud for a
perpetual memory unto the people, because of the great obedience, diligent
service, and faithful love which he had found in them. And on the other part
the fortunat people gave the glory unto the emperor, for his clemency, and
mercifulnes, for his vprightuous gouerninge, for his honesty of living, and
for his stout courage in conquering. It was a thing worthy of noting, to se how
the people gave the honor to their emperor, and how the emperor attributed
ye praise to his people. These matters were delivered in trust to the strange
Ambassadors, to thend that all people might learn to obey their princes, and
also princes learn to love their people: to the end that by such examples (as
it was reason) the good should be encouraged, and the evil discomforted. Thus
the emperor prepared al things ready with his capitaines and captives for his
entering, and the people of Rome made as great preparation for to receive him.
It was a marvelous thing to see what people came forth of Rome to mete him,
and what an infinite number were at Salon to behold him. They that were at
Salon had their eyes there, and their hearts at Rome: and they that were at
Rome, had their hearts at Salon, in such sort that their eyes daseled with
that they saw, and their hearts also rejoiced for that they hoped to see. For
there is no greater tormente to the heart, then when it is deferred from that
which it greatly desires.

How at the intercession of many which the Empress had sent, the Emperor
granted his daughter Lucilla license to sport her self at the feasts. Cap.
lxi.
YOu shall understand, that the Romans used always, in the month of
January, to permit that their emperoures should triumph. And it chanced that
at that time when they prepared for the triumph, Faustine the empress caused
diverse noble barons to demand license of the emperor, that her daughter
might come from her mistres where she was taught, to ye feasts. Her name was
Lucilla: who was elder then the prince Comodus her brother. She had a goodly
gesture, she was well made in the body, and derely beloved of her mother, whom
she resembled not only in beauty, but also in living. Though the request seemed
to be reasonable, and those that made it his counselors and great about him,
and though him whom they asked was the father, and she that demanded it was
the mother, and she for whom this request was made was the daughter: yet the
emperor would not grant it, but half against his will. Faustine when she had
obtained license was exceading glad, and so sone as she might possible, she
brought her daughter home unto the palace. And when the day of the great
feast and solemn triumph came: the young damoisel perceiving her self at
large without any governor, trusting in the innocence of her self, esteemed
not the malice of any other man: but rejoiced with those that rejoiced, talked
with them that talked, beheld them that beheld her, and she thought because
she mente evil to no man, that no man wylled evil to her. In those days it
was as great an offense for a maid of Rome, to laughe in the company of men:
as it was for a woman of Grecia to be taken in adultery with a priest. So
greatly was the honesty at that time of the Roman Matrones regarded, and the
lyghtnes of the maidens was so detested, that they gave more sharper
punishment for one offense done openly, then for two other which were
committed in secreat. Among all other things, from these seven the Roman
Matrones did marueilously refrain, that is to wete: from talkyng much at
feasts, from gready eating among strangers: From drynkyng wine whiles they
were whole: From talkyng in secreate with any man: From lifting up their eyes
in the temples: From gasyng much out at the wyndowes. And from wandryng
abroad without their husbands. For the woman that was apprehended in any of
these things, was always after counted as one defamed. There are many things
suffered in persons of mean estate, which can not be endured in those of
higher degree: For Ladies of high renown, can not keep the reputation of
their estates, unless they are marvelous circumspecte in all their doings.
All things that degenerate from their kind deserve blame: but the dishonest
woman meriteth infamy. If ladies wylbe counted ladies in deed, let them know
how much they excel others in riches, so much less license have they then
other to go gaddinge in the streates. For of a surety the abundance of
their riches, and the liberty of their persons, should not be a spur to
provoke them to gadde abroad, but rather a bridle to keape them within. All
this is spoken for this cause that Lucilla, as a maid tender and young, and
Faustine her mother, as one not very old: sometimes on foot, and sometimes
ryding: sometimes openly, and now and then secreatly: Sometimes with company,
and at other times alone: Sometimes by day, and ofttymes by night: used to
foot the streates of Rome, to view the fields of Vulcane: To sport them by
the river of Tiber: to gather the fruits in the Ortechardes of Saturn: to
suppe at the conduites of Nero, and such other vagaries they used. The which
things though their age did desire, and their idleness allure them unto: yet
the gravity of such ladies ought to have withdrawn them from it. I will
speak one thing, to the end that other ladies and gentlewomen may take warning
thereby: which is, that I can not tell which was greater, either the small
discretion which moved Faustine, and Lucilla, to wander in such sort about
the streates: or the audacitie that evil men took thereby to talk of their
persons, and doubt of their honesties. The keaping of women in their houses,
is like unto a bridle to hold still evil men's tongues. The woman that is a
strayer abroad, puts her good name in much danger. Of troth it were
better for a woman never to be borne: then to live with an evil name. Among
all the families of the ancient Romans, that of the Cornelians was counted
most fortunate, for among the men there was never any found a cowarde, nor
among the women any that was defamed. The historiographers say, that there was
one woman of that lynage, only for being light in her behavior, was by the
hands of her own parents executed and put to death. Surely it was well done
of the Romans, to the intent that the lightness of one woman alone, should not
defame the whole family. Where as is noblenes, and honesty: there the matters
that touch the honor, ought not to tarry whiles they be remedied by justice:
but from that man or woman which among al has lost his good name, from the
nombre of the living he also ought to be taken. It is not sufficient for one to
him self to be good: but it is requisite that he give no occasion to others to
judge him to be evil. All the losses of temporal goods that chance unto men in
this life, ought not to be compared with a little blemishe of a man's good name.
The man that hasardeth for a trifle his good name in this world, shall at a
hundredth shootes scarsly shoot one right. And co^trariwyse, the man that has
lost his honesty, and that estemeth not the reputation of his person: truly
from him we shall never see any good thing proceade. Now the emperor like unto
a wise shipmaister, fearing after the great calmes some tempestuous storm:
seeing the lightness of his daughter and vanity of the mother (I mean in the
time of this great mirth and gladness) feared lest any infamy should ensewe unto
these two ladies. And for a surety he doubted not without a cause for it is an
infallible rule of envious fortune, to give us in many years a little
prosperity, to thinte^t that afterward suddenly she may bring us into some
great adversity. By experience we see, yt the sea is seldom times calm: but
immediately follows some perilous tempest. The extreme heat of ye day does
prognosticate, yt terrible tho^der in ye euentide. I mean, when fortune does
flatter us with her golden pills, it is a token that she entendeth to catch us
in her snares. The mylner before the banks broken repareth the dammes. The
husbandman before it raineth, thacketh his house, fearing the snow and rain
that is to come. So likewise the sage man ought to consider, that during this
life he has prosperity but by leave, and adversity as by patrimony. Marcus
Aurelius among al other men was he that knew how to enjoy prosperity, and also
to prevail of adversity. Though fortune gave him much prosperity: yet he never
trusted therein, nor for any troubles that ever he received in this life, he was
at any time abashed,

Of the sharp words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to his wife, and to his
daughter. Cap. v.
WHen the tryumphes before named were finyshed, this good Emperor being
willing to vnbourden his heart and to advise Faustine, and to teach the youg
damosel his daughter, and to the end that no man should hear it, he called them
a part, and said unto them these words. I am not content Faustine with that
thy daughter did, nor yet with that which thou have done being her mother. The
daughters if they will be counted good children, must learn to obey their
fathers: and the mothers if they will be counted good mothers, must learn to
bring up their daughters well. When the mother is honest, and the daughter
shamefast, the father is excused in geuyng council. It is great shame to the
father being a man, that the mother being a woman should chastise his son.
And it is a great reproach to the mother, that the daughter should be chastised
by the hands of any man. There was a law enacted among the Rhodiens, that
neither the father should have to do with the daughters, nor the mothers with
the sons, but the men used to bring up the men, and the women the women. And
in such wise, that they abiding al in one house, it seems unto the fathers
that they had no daughters, and unto the mothers that they had no sons. O
Rome, Rome, I bewail the not for to se the streates vnpauid, nor to se the
houses so decayed, nor to se the battlements so fallen down, nor the timber
hewed down, nor for the dyminishing of the habytaunts, for all this time
brings, and time takes away, but I weep for the, and weep for the again,
to se the unpeopled of good fathers, and unprovided in the nourishing of their
children. Rome began to decay, when the disciplyne of sons and daughters was
enlarged, and that their bridle was let at lybertye. For there is now such
boldness in boys, and so little shamefastnes in girls, with dishonesty of the
mothers, yt where as one father suffised for.xx. sons, and one mother for xx.
daughters: now xx. fathers dare scarcely undertake to bring up well one son,
and xxx, mothers one daughter. I say this to you Faustine, you remember not how
you are a mother, for you give more liberty to your dougher then ought to be
suffered. And now Lucilla remember not how you are a daughter: for you show to
have more liberty then requires for a young maiden. The greatest gift that the
gods have given to the Matrons of Rome is: because that they are women, they
keep them selves close and secret, and because they are Romans, they are
shamefast. The day when the women want the fearre of the gods secretly, and
shame of men openly, believe me they shall either fail the world, or the world
them.

The common wealth requires it of great necessity, that the women which therein
enhabyte should be as honest, as the captains valiant: for the captains
going to war defend them, and the women which abide at home conserve them. As
now.iiii. years passed ye saw this great pestilence: and I demand then to
have account of the people, and I found that of C. and xl.M. honest
women.lxxx.M. dyed: and of.x.M. dyshonest women in manner they escaped al. I
cannot tell for which I should weep, either for the lack that we have of the
good and virtuous women in our common wealth, or else for the great hurt and
domages that these evil and wicked women do to the youth of Rome. The fire that
brenneth in mount Ethna does not so much endomage those that dwell in Scicil, as
one evil woman does with in the walls of Rome. A fyerse beast, and a perilous
ennemy to the common wealth is an evil woman for she is of power to commyt all
euyls, and nothing apt to do any good O how many realms and kingdoms read
we of, which by the evil behauiours of one woman have been lost, and to resist
against them, there has been need both of wisdom, perils, money, and force
of many men.

The vices in a woman is as a grene read that boweth every way: but the
lightness and dyshonesty is as a dry kyxe that breaks, in such wise that the
more evil they utter, the more unlikely is the amendment thereof.

Behold Faustine, there is no creature that more desires honor and worse
keeps it, then a woman, and that this is true, we se by justice, by orations,
by writing, and other travails, man gets fame and renown: but without it
be by flattering, and fair speaking, this hour by ancient writers we ca^
read of few women or none, which either by writing, redyng, workyng with nedle,
spinning, or by weauing, have gotten them any great renown. But as I say of
one, I say of an other, certaynely of diverse we read, by keeping them close in
their houses, being well occupied in their business, temperate in their words,
faithful to their husbands, well ordered in their persons, peasable with their
neighbors, and finally for being honest among their own family, and
shamefast amongst strangers, they have obtained great renown in their life,
and left a perpetual memory of them after their death. I will tell you an
ancient history as profitable to restrain our vices, as it did then augment
virtues, which is this. The realm of the Lacedemoniens as Plato says, was a
long time as dissolute through the unthriftiness of women, as infamed by the
vices of men, so that of al nations they were called barbarous, what time
Greece of the philosophers, was called the mother of philosophers, Licurgus a
wise philosophers in knowledge, and a right just king in governance, partly
with his doctrine very profitable, and partly with his life most pure, ordained
laws in the said realm, whereby he expelled all vices, and planted al virtues.
I cannot tell which of these two were most happiest, the king having so
obedyent people, or else the realm to have so worthy a king. Among other
laws for women he enacted one worthy of high commendacion, the which
commanded, that the father which dyed should give nothing to his daughter:
and another, that neither living nor dieng he should give any money to mary her
with, to the intent that none should take her for her goods, but al only for
her virtues: and not for her beautye but for her qualyties: where as now some
be forsaken because where as now some be forsaken because they are poor, so
then they abode unmarried because they were vicious, O time worthy to be
desired, when maidens hoped not to be married with their fathers goods, but by
the virtuous works of their own persons, this was the time called the golden
world, when neither ye daughter feared to be disherited by the father in his
life, nor the father to dye sorrowful for leuynge her without dowrye at his
death. O Rome, cursed be he yt first brought gold into thy house, and cursed be
he that first began to horde up treasour. Who have made Rome to be so rich of
treasure, and so poor of virtues? who has caused noble men to mary the
Plebeians, and leave the daughters of Senators unmarried? what has made that
the rich man's daughter is demanded unwilling, and the daughters of a poor
man none will desire? What has caused that one marieth a fool with five hundredth
marks, rather then a wise woman with ten thousand virtues? then I will not say
that in this case ye flesh vanquished ye flesh, but I say that vanity is
overcome of malice. For a covetous person will sooner now a days take a wife
that is rich and foul, then one that is poor and fair: O unhappy woman that
bring forth children, and more unhappy be the daughters that are borne: the
which to take in marriage no man desires, neither for the blood of their
predecessors, nor the favor of their friends, nor the worthynes of their
persons, nor for the purity of their lives. O wicked world, where the daughter
of a good man without money shall have no marriage: but it was not wont to be
so. For in the old time when they treated of marriages, first they spoke of the
persons, and after of the goods, not as they do at this present in this
unhappy time: for now they speak first of the goods and last of al of ye
persons. In ye said golden world, first they spoke of the virtues that the
person was endewed with: and when they were married, as it were in sport they
would speak of the goods. When Camillus triumphed over the Gauls, he had then
but one son, and he was such one that his deserts meryted great praise, and
for the renown of his father, diverse kings desired to have him to their
sons, and diverse senators desired to have him to their son in law. This
young man being of the age of xxx. years, and the father at lx. was
importunately stirred by his natural friends, and desires of strange kings, for
to marie him, but always the old Camille withstode ye concel of his friends and
the importunity of the strangers. When it was demanded why he determined not
upon some marriage for his son, sith thereby should ensue the quiet life of
the man, and the joy of himself in his age, he answered. I will not mary my
son, because some offer me rich daughters, some noble of lineage, some young,
and some fair. But there is none has said to me, I give you my virtuous
daughter. Certainly Camil merited triumph for yt he did, and deserved eternal
memory for that he said. I spoke to you Faustine, all these words, because I
se you lead your daughter to theaters, and plays, and bring her into the
capitolle, you put her to the keaping of the sword plaiers, you suffer her to
see the tumblers, and yet do you not remember that she is young, and you not to
aged, you go into the streates without license, and sport you by the ryuers:
I find no vyllannye therein, nor think that your daughter is evil, but I say
it, because you give occasion that she should not be good.

Beware, beware Faustine, never trust to the race of flesh of young people, nor
have no confidens in old folks: for there is no better way, then to fly the
occasion of al things.

For this intent the virgins vestalles are closed up between the walls, to
eschew the occasions of open places, not to be more light and folyshe, but to
be more sad and virtuous flieng occasions. The young shall not say, I am young and
virtuous: nor the old shall not say, I am old and broken. For of necessity the
dry flax will bren in the fire, and the grene flagge smoke in the flame.

I say though a man be a dyamond set among men, yet of necessity he ought to
be quick, and to melt as wax in the heat among women, we cannot deny that
though the wood be taken from the fire and the Imbers quenched: yet
nevertheless the stones oftentime remain hot. In likewise the flesh, though
it be chastised with hot and dry disseases, consumed by many years with
travail, yet concupiscens abides still in the bones.

What need is it to blase the virtues, and deny our naturalyties? certainly
there is not so old a horse, but if he se a mare will ney once or twice: there is
no man so young nor old but let him se fair young damsels, either he will give a
sigh, or a wish. In all voluntary things I deny not, but that one may be
virtuous: but in natural things, I confess every man to be weak. When you
take the wood from the fire, it leaves burning: when summer comes the cold
winter cease: when the sea is calm, the waves leave their vehement mocions:
when the son is set, it lightneth not the world. I will say, that then, and
not before, the flesh will cease to trouble us, when it is laid in the grave, of
the flesh we are borne, in the flesh we live, and in the flesh we shall die: and
thereby it follows, that our good life shall sooner end, then our fleshly desires
forsake us, oftentimes some wholesome flesh corrupts in an evil vessel, and
good wine sometime favors of the foist. I say, though that the works of our
life be virtuous: yet shall we feel the stench of the weak flesh. I spoke this
Faustine, since that age cannot resist these hot appitites, how can the tender
members of youth resist them? unless you that are the mother go the right way,
how should the daughter that follows you find it? the Roman matrons, if they
will bring up their daughters well, ought to keep these rules, when they se
that they would wander abroad, that they break their legs: and if they
should be gasing: then put out their eyes: and if they will lysten, stop their
ears: if they will give or take, cut of their hands: if they dare speak, sow
up their mouths: if they will pretend any lightness, burye them quycke: death
ought to be given to an evil daughter, instead of her dowry: for gifts, give
her worms, and for her house, a grave.

Take heed Faustine, if you will have much joy of your daughter take from her
the occasions whereby she shall be evil. To underset a house behooves diverse
proppes: and if the principalles be taken away, it will fall down, I say you
women are so frail, that with kepers, with great pain they can keape them
self, and for a small occasion they will lose altogether. O how many evil has
there been, not because they would be so, but because they followed such
occasions, the which they ought to have eschewed. It is at my pleasure to enter
into this battle, but yet it is not in my power to attain the vyctorie, it
is for me to enter into the sea, yet it lies not in my hands to escape the
peril: it is in the hands of a woman to enter into the occasion, and after yt
she is therein, it is not in her power to escape from evil, to deliver her from
tongues. Peradventure Faustine, thou will say to me, none can speak to your
daughter Lucil, unless thou hear it: nor se her, but thou see him: nor
convey her, but thou know where: nor make any appointment, without thy
consent: and yet thou know, that those which will her evil, seek with their
tongues to dishonor her: and those that with their hearts love her, speak
only in their hearts. We love in young blood, in the springing time and
floryshing youth is a poison, that forthwith spreads into every vain, it is
a herb that enters into the entrayles, a swowning that incontinently
mortyfieth all the members, and a pestilence that sleeth the hearts, and finallye
it makes an end of al virtues. I know not what I say, but I feel yt which I
would say, for I would never blase love with my tongue, except I were sore
wounded therewith in my heart. Ouide says in his book of the art of love, love
is I wot not what, it comes I know not from whence, who sent it I wot not, it
engenders I know not how, it is satisfied I wot not wherewith, it is felt, and
I wot not how, often it sleeth, I wot not wherefore, and finally without breakyng
the flesh outwardly, love takes root, and molesteth the heart inwardly. I know
not what Ouide means hereby, but I trow when he said these words, he was as
far banyshed from him self, as I am at this time from my self. O Faustine,
they that love together, utter the secrets of their hearts by diverse ways, and
in sleaping they reason and speak and by signs they understand each other. The
many words outwardly, declare small love inwardly: and the fervent inward love,
keeps silence outward.

The entrayles within embraced with love, cause the tongue outward to be mute:
he that passes his life in love. ought to keep his mouth close. And to
the intent that ye shall not think yt I speak fables, I will prove this by
ancient histories, we find aunciently, that in the year.cclxx. after the
foundation of Rome. Etrasco a young Roman that was dombe, and Verona a fair
Lady of the Latins which was dombe also, these two saw each other on ye mount
Cel^o at the feasts, and there fell in love togethers, and their hearts were as
sore fixed in love, as their tongues were tide from speech. It was a maruailous
thing to se then, and fearful to note now that this young lady came from Salon
to Rome: and he went from Rome to Salon sundry times by the space of 30. years,
without the knowledge of any parson, and never spoke together. It chanced at
the last that the husband of the lady Verona died, and the wife of Etrasco
also, and then they discovered their love, and treated a marriage between them.
And these two dombe parsons had issue a son of whom descended ye noble lineage
of our Scipions, which were more famous in the feats of arms, then their
father and mother were troubled for want of words.

Then Faustine mark this thing, it had little auailed to have cut out the
tongues of the two dombe persons to have remedyed their love, and not to have
cut out their hearts. And I shall tell you of Masinissa a worthy knight of
Numidie, and Sophonissa a famous lady of Carthage, al only by one sight as
they saw each other on a ladder, he declares his desire unto her and she
knowing his lust breaking the oores of fear, and lyftyng up the ankers of
shame, incontinente raised the sails of their hearts, and with the ships of
their persons they joined each to other, here may we see, how the first sight
of their eyes, the knowledge of their parsons, the consent of their hearts, the
copulacion of their bodies, the decay of their estates, and the loss of their
names, in one day, in one hour, in one moment, and in one step of a ladder
were lost, what will you that I say more to this purpose? do you not know what
Heleyne the Greek, and Paris the Troyan, of two strange nations, and of far
countries, with one only sight in a temple their wills were so knit together,
that he took her as his captive, and she abode his prisoner. In Paris appeared
but small force, and in Heleyne but little resistance, so that in manner those two
young persons, the one procuring to vanquyshe, and the other suffering to be
vanquished: Paris was cause of his fathers death, and they both of their own
deaths, loss to their realms, and scaunder to all the world. All this love grew
of one only sight. When great king Alexander would have given battle to
the Amosones, the queen (captain of them) no less fair then strong and
virtuous, came to a river side, and the space of an hour each of them beheld
an other with their eyes, without vtteringe of any word.

And when they returned to their tents, their fiersnes was turned into sweet
wanton amorous words. When Pirius the faithful defender of the Tharrentines,
and renowned king of Epirotes was in Italy, he came into Naples, and had not
been there but one day, but he was enamoured of a fair lady named Gemelicia,
of a high lignage, and greatly esteamed of her beauty, and the very same day
she was gotten with child, and shamed throughoute al Italy, and cast out of the
city: and after that she was delivered of child, she was slain by one of her
own brethren. Also Cleopatra in the province of Bithiny, in the wood Sechin
made a goodly banquet of Marcus Anthonius her lover, and though she was not very
honest, yet had she with her chaste women And thus the banquet endured a great
part of the night. And the wood being thick, young damsels were not so wily to
hide them, but the young men Romans found them: so that of.60. daughters of
the senators, 55. were gotten with child among the thick bushes, which thing
made a great sclander in the people, and augmented the infamy of Marcus
Anthonius. Thus as I have showed of a small number, I could say of many other.
Al men are not men, nor al women are not women. I speak it, because I would it
should be said, let it touch them that it touches, and let them that come
understand me. There are some ships which are so light, that they will sail
with a little wind. And there be other some mils that will grind with a little
water. I say there be some women so brickle, that as a glass with a phylyppe
will break, and will slyppe with a little mire.

Tell me Faustine, have you suffered your daughter to speak but with her uncles,
and keep company but with her cousins? I say in this case that the mother is in
as much blame, as the daughter in peril. Do you not know that the hot fire
does not forbear the wood, be it wete or dry: but in likewise it consumes
the hard stones? Do you not know, that the extreme hunger causes beasts to
devour with their own teeth, the thing that was bread in their entrayles? Do
you not know, that the gods made a law over al things, except over lovers,
because they may not abide it? and doubtless it was right wisely done. Rome
condempneth not these foolyshe innocents, because they have no understanding.
The gods give no pain to amorous people, because they are deprived from
reason. Ye know when I was censour, there was a young woman which had a child
by her own father, and another had a child by her son, and a niece by her
proper uncle: and there was sentence given on them, that the father should be
given to the lions, and the children buried quycke, and the mothers were burnt
in the camp of Mars. The matter was so horrible to here, that I might not
endure to se the cursed men, and I commanded by my decrees, that none should
be so bold to speak in such a case any more.

And if this case were fearful to men, then certaynlye the Roman Matrones
ought to live chastlye. Then if the fire of the father do chafe the daughter,
inflameth kinsefolke, and burns them self: ye may be sure if he find
either cousin, or fair sister, the flames of his concupisence will not leave to
take hold on her, for any parentage. If this riotous flesh will obey reason,
then it may be that your daughter may speak lyberally with her cosins, but
since that passion repugneth so much at reason, I counsel you, trust not to
much in her brethren. You se by experience, that the worm that is bred in the
timbre, and the mothes which are bred in the clothes, eats that same cloth. I
say that sometime a man brings him up in his house, which afterward takes
his honor and life from him.

Faustine, take this that I have said for a warnyng, and these last words I
give you counsel. If you will keep your self from thought, and your
daughter from peril, let your daughter be always occupied with some good
works: for when the hands are occupied with any good exercise, then the heart
is void from many idle and vain thoughts. Every lightness done in youth,
breaks down a lompe of our life: but idleness whereby our envy enters, is
it which opens ye gate of al vices. Know thou Faustine, from whence
proceeds the undoing of the young Roman daughters? I will tell the: for as soon as they be borne, they presume to be amorous, they as unmindful (with the
rechelesnes of the father, and wantonness of the mothers) despise the honest
travails, and embrace the pleasant ydlenes. Of idle mocions, and outrageous
thoughts, the eyes take license without leave, the mind alters, and the will
is hurt. And finally, thinking to be the white that amorous men shoot at, they
remain as a but full of al vices. And in conclusion, there is nothing that more
chaseth the bal of the thought in this play then the hand set a work therewith.

The Emperor causes his wife to take away al occasions of evil from her
daughter, wherein is declared the frayltye of the tender flesh. Cap. vi.
THen the good Emperor Marcus, having a clear understanding, and a quiet
mind, took right great head of all things that were past, prudently waying
things present, and things to come. Seeing that the perdicion of princes
depend al in will wholly, either geuinge them selves to strange things,
forgetting their own, or else to entend to their own only, nothing regardyng
strange things: His heart was so agreeable to him, that neither the great
business of them, nor for all the affairs of his house he would leave him the
empire vndispatched. I speak this, because this emperor Marcus had iiii.
daughters, whose names were Lucilla, Porsenna, Matrina, and Domicia. All
resembled their mother in excellent beauty, but they resembled not their
father in honesty nor virtue. And though they were in governance under their
masters out of his presence, yet he had them always in memory, and the elder
they were, the more study and thought he took for them. And when they came to
lawful age, he studied to make prouysion for them. It was a lawdable custom,
that the daughters of the officers of the senate should not mary without
license, nor the Emperors daughters without the consent of the senate. Then it
is so, that one of the said princesses his daughter being of age, and of will to
be married, her father seeing her importunity, to accomplish her desire: because
he was sick, he sent for Faustine, that she should go and talk in the senate:
the which with all her power she with stood, because yt secretly she had treated
for an other marriage for her daughter, and openly she excused her self, saying
that her daughter was to young and tender of age. And as the gods had given
age sufficient to the father, so had not the daughter of years. When the emperor
understood this, he called Faustine to his bed side whereas he lay, and said:
diverse things are dissimuled in particular persons, the least of them is not to
be suffered in them which are governors of other, the prince is never well
obeyed, onelesse he has good crede^ce among his people. I say this Faustine,
because you do one thing in secret, and say another openly: herein fails the
credence of so high a lady, and puts in suspect the auctority of so great an
empire. If you suppose my good desires be sinister in your heart, for ye wealth
of your own children: how should we hope then in any of your good works, for
the children of strangers? It seems to you better to give your daughter to
them, that demand her of the mother, and refuse them that the father does
chose. Certainly because you are a woman you desire pardon, but in that you are
a mother you augment your fault. Do you not know that marriages are guyded some
by fortune, and some by virtues and wisdom? Such as demand the daughters of
the fathers, believe me, their eyes be more upon their own proper vtility, then
upon the wealth of another. I know well you bring forth the children, but the
gods will mary them, sith they have endewed them with so marvelous beauty.
Do you not know that the beautye of women sets strangers, on desire, and
puts neighbors in suspection? to great men it gives fear, to mean men
envy: to the parents infamy, and peril to the persons them selves? with great
pain it is kept, that is desired of many. Of truth I say, the beauty of women
is nothing but a sign for idle folk, and an early waking for them yt be
light, whereas of straung desires lies ye renown of themselves, and I deny
not, but that a light person sercheth sooner a woman with a fair face, then one
of an honest life. But I say that a woman that is married, only for her beauty,
may hope in her age to have an evil life. It is an infallyble rule, yt she
that was married for her fayrenesse, shall be despised for her foulness.

O what trouble he offers himself unto, which marieth a fair woman It
behooves him to suffer her pride: for beauty, and folly, always go together.

Also he must suffer her expenses, for follye in the head, and beauty in the
face, be two worms which freate the life, and wast the goods.

Also he must suffer her riots, for a fair woman will that none but she have
her commandments in the house. Also he must suffer her nice minions, for many
fair women will pass their lives in pleasure. Also he must suffer her
presumption, for every fair woman will have prehemenence before al other.
Finally he that marieth with a fair woman, puts himself in great ieopardy.
And I shall tell you wherefore, surely Carthage was never so enuyroned with
Scipions, as the house of a fair woman is with light persons.

O unhappy husband when his spirit is at rest, and the body sleping, then
those light persons run about the house, sleying his body with ielosye,
casting their eyes at the windows, scalyng the walls with ladders, singing
sweet songs, playing on diverse instruments, watching at the gates, treating
with bands, vncoueringe the house, and waytinge at every corner thereof.

Al these things in case they shoot at the prick of woman's beauty, they
leave not to shoot at the butte of the sorrowful husbands good name: and
whether this be true or not, let them ask my self that am married with your
beauty, and let them wite of my renown that go so about the city.

I say much, but truly I feel more: no man complayneth of the gods, for
geuyng him a foul wife among his destinies, white silver is not wrought, but
in black pitche: and the tender tree is not preserved but by the hard bark.
I say a man that marieth a foul wife, leads a sure life, let every man
chose as he lysteth: and I say a man that marieth a fair wife: casts his
good name at hasard, and puts his life in peril. All the infamy of our
predecessors stood in exercising of deeds of arms, and now all the pastime of
the Roman youth, is to serve Ladies. When a woman is bruted to be fair,
then every man goes thither, and takes great pain to serve her, and the
woman will be seen. I say Faustine, you never saw a damosel Roman greatly
renowned in beauty, but either in deed, or in suspicion, there went some evil
report of her name. In that little that I have red, I have herd of diverse fair
women, both of Greece, Italy, Parth, and Rome, and they be not in memory
because they were fair, but for the great perils and misaduentures which
through their beautyes chanced in the world. For by reason of their excellent
beautyes they were vysited in their own lands, and for their infamy shamed
through all the world. When the realm of Carthage flourished in riches, and was
fortunate in arms, they ruled the common wealth by wise philosophers, and that
they repulsed their enemies by strong arms. Arminius the philosopher was as
greatly esteamed among the Carthagians as Homere was among the Greeks, or
Cicero among the Romans. He lived in this world.122 years.80. of the which
good years he lived most quyetly, he was as much turned from women, as given
to his books. Then the senate seeing he had such experience in the affairs of
the weal publyke, and so withdrawn from al natural recreations, they desired
him with great instaunce to be married, to the intent the memory might be had of
so excellent a wise man in time to come, and the more importune they were, the
more he resisted, and said.

I will not be married: for if she be foul, I shall abhor her. If she be rich
I must suffer her. If she be poor, I must maintain her. If she be fair, I
must take heed of her. If she be a shrew I cannot suffer her. And the lest
pestilence of al those is sufficient to slay a.M. men. With such words this
wise man excused himself. But in the end through great study in his age, he
lost his sight, whereby the solytarines of his sweet lybertye, constrained him
to take the company of a woman, by whom he had a daughter, of the which
descended the noble Amilears of Carthage, competitours of the Scipions, of
Rome. The which showed no less worthiness in the defense of Carthage, the^
ours did courage in the amplifiyng of Rome. Tell me Faustine, may not such
suspicion fall upon your daughter, though her virtue succor her in the peril,
and her honesty assure her person? I will discover a secret thing to you. There
is nothing that can chance evil to a woman, if she be environed with feminine
shamefastnes. Greatly they desire, and with much importunytie they procure
those things which highly may be attained. There is nothing so certain as
this, that the wealth of an other, is the cause of his own evil. And Faustine,
ye know, that the most honest women, by our malice are most desired. Certainly
their shamefastnes, and keeping close, be arrows in defense of our honesty. We
read not that the blood, riches, nor beauty of the unhappy matrone Lucrece,
were the cause that she was desired: but the beauty of her vysage, the
grauytie of her person, the honesty of her living, the keeping of her self
close in her house, the spendyng of her time and credit among her neighbors,
and the great renown yt she had among strangers, provoked the folish Tarquine
to commit with her adultrye by force. What think you? whereof came this? I shall
show you. We that be evil, are so evil, that we use evil the goodness of them
that be good. The fault hereof is not in the Ladies of Rome, but rather in the
immortal gods. Their clean honestye, declares our cruel malice. Faustine,
you say your daughter is to young to be married. Do you not know, that the good
father ought to endoctrine his sons from their age: and to provide for his
daughters whiles they be young? Of a troth, if the fathers be fathers, and the
mothers mothers: as soon as the gods have given them a daughter, forthwith
they ought to be myndfull thereof, and never forget it, til they have provided
her a husband. The fathers ought not to tarry for riches, nor the mother for her
lineage, the better to mary them: so what with the one and the other, the time
passes, and the daughter waxes aged: and in this manner they be to old to be
married, and to live alone they cannot, so that they themselves live in pain,
the fathers in thought, and the parents in suspection least they should be
cast away. O what great ladies have I known, ye daughters of great senators,
which not for fault of richs, nor of virtues in their persons, but al only for
differring of time, and driuyng from one hour to an other, so that at last
sudden death come to the fathers, and no provision was made for the daughters.
So that some were covered under ye earth, after their death, and others buried
with forgetfulness, being alive. Either I lie, or else I have red in the laws of
the Rhodians these words.

We command the father in maryinge ten sons, to travail but one day: but
to mary one virtuous daughter let him travail ten years, yea and hazard his
body in the water up to the chinne, sweat drops of of blood, alter the
stomach, disherite all his sons, lose his goods, and adventure his person.
These words in this law were pitiful for the daughters, and no less grave for
the sons. For.x. sons by the law of men, are bound to go over all the world:
but the daughter by this good law, ought not to go out of the house. I say
moreover, that as things unstable thret falling, so likewise it chances to
young damsels, which thinks al their time lost and superfluous, unto the day
of their marriage. Homere says, it was the custom of ladies of Greece to count
the years of their life, not from the time of their birth, but from the time of
their marriage. As if one demanded a Grecian her age, she would answer.20.
years, if it were.20. sith she was married: though it were.60. years since she
was borne. Affirming after they had a house to govern and to command, that
day she begins to live. The Melon after it is ripe, and abides still in the
gardeine, cannot escape, but either it must be gathered, or else it rotteth. I
say the maiden that tarieth long till she be married, can not escape either to
be taken, or infamed. I will say no more As soon as the grapes be ripe, it
behooves that they be gathered: so it is necessary that the woman that is come
to perfect age be married. And the father that does this, casts peril out of
his house, brings himself out of care, and gets much contentacion of his
daughter.

Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to Piramon his especial
friend, to comfort him in his troubles. Cap. vii.
Mark orator Roman, borne at mount Celio, to Piramon of Lion, my great
friend, desires health to thy person, and strength and virtue against thy
sinister fortune. In the third kalendes of Ianuarye I received thy letter,
whereby I perceive thou have received one of mine. I regard not much thy words,
but I esteame greatly thy meaning. So that without declaring thereof, I have
gathered the sentence. Reason would, because I have written so often to the,
that thou shouldeste the better understand me: but thou art so slouthful, yt
though I call the, thou will not hear: nor though I strike the, thou will not
feel. But now to come to the purpose. Thou know Piramon how nere we be in
parentage, ancient in friendship, steadfast in love, and tender of herts, and
how faithful in all things, wherein one true friend might prove another. Thou
remembrest well, when we were at Rhodes, that we dwelled together in one house,
and did eat at one table: and all that thou thoughtest, I did it in effect: and
that I said, thou never gainesaydest. Certainly thou were in my heart, and I in
thine entrails. I was thine, and thou were mine. We being together, it seemed
to al other that we were but one, and of one will. What a matter is this? Thou
writest how thou art heavy, and yet thou do not tell the cause why. Thou
complaynest yt thou art almost dead, and thou show me not who takes from
the thy life. If thou will not show to me thy troubles, since thou art my
friend, I will thou know that I demand it of right. If thou will not, I will
that thou know, that the piteful gods have determined, that al pleasures and
joy shall depart from my house: and that al heuines and sorrows shall be lodged
in my person. Since I am prince of al honor in tribulacion, if thou would,
thou can not escape out of my siegnory. For if thou complain that thou art
unhappy in fortune, then I esteem my self to be happy in unhappiness. I
demand one thing of the: when have thou seen me have sufficient, and thou
need? when have thou seen me sleep, and thou wake? and when have thou
travailed, and I rested? Of troth since the goods and persons are their own
proper, the travails and evil adventures are always common One thing thou
ought to know, if in mine amytie thou will persevere, that all my goods are
thine, and al thine euyls are mine, since thou was borne to pleasure, and I to
trouble. I say not this fainyngly: for thou haste had experience of me that
when Maria thy sister died (who was no less virtuous then fair) thou
perceiuedst well when she was with earth covered dead, I was with sorrows
overwhelmed alive, and at the sown of my tears thine eyes daunced. Sithe thou
have such confidence in my person, surely thou may discover to me thy pain.
Yet as often as I have demanded, there has no famed excuses wanted. I require
the, and desire the again, and in the name of the Gods I pray the, and in
their names I conjure the, that thou power al thy sorrows into mine entrails.
For from that way that thou go, I will not depart one jot: if thou go, I
will go: if thou rest, I will rest: if thou work I will work: if thou leave of,
I will do the same: if thou will die, know thou I will not live, Look friend what
thou will do: For thy troubles and mine, torment both one heart. If thou have
displeasure, al things dysplease me: if thou weep, I swer fro henceforth never
to laugh: if thou discharge ye of thy pain, fro henceforth I shall take it for
mine: if thou go alone, I will forsake company, and forthwith live solytarilie.
What will thou that I should desire? For all that ever thou wylt I will. Thou
complainest that in all thy trauayles thou can find no parent to remedy the
nor friend to council the. I swear to the friend Piramon, that of these, ii.
things I have as great need in my house, as thou have sorrow in thine. I know
well the remedy should come by riches, and by council, and consolacion of them
that be wise. And by reason of my heavy destinyes, slou^h has taken from me
the knowledge of wisdom: and fortune will not permyt me to have great riches.
Certainly I weep for my myserie, and yet there is but small remedy in me.

Thou say in thy letter, that thy neighbors and friends in promysinge have
behight the many things: but in performyng it they do nothing. Hereof I
marvel not, for the virtuous hand is not bound to make the tongue a fool.
Truly our fete dance, our hands should work at the sown of the tongue: our
life ends in few days, and our renown in fewer.

Promise is an ancient custom among the children of vanytie, and of custom
the tongue speaks hastily, and the hands work at leisure. Now let us speak
more particularly. Thou ought not to complain, in that thou find not but
in few, that diverse have found in the alone: it have been a custom to receive
merelye, and willyngly, but to give slowly, and with evil will. They that be
presumptuous do the one, and they which be the slouthful do the other. The
Greeks say, that he that promyseth, and is long in fulfillynge, is but a
slack friend.

We Romans say, that he is much better that denies forth with, because he
does not deceive him that asks. In this case I say, he that may give and
gives not, is an open enemy: and he that promyseth forthwith, and is long
before he perform it, it is but a suspicious friend What need words to our
friends, when we may succor the^ with works? It is not right, to whom we give
our hearts, which is the best thing of our hearts: that we give him our
tongue, which is the worst thing of our lives. In good so the the gods will not
suffer in the place of amity, to desire any thing of our friend in haste, and
to be driven of with long delaying. Plato in his laws says, we command
that in our governing, politic counsel be given to them that be in
prosperity, to the intent that they decaie not: and to succor them that be in
heuines and trouble, to the intent that they despair not. Certainly under
these words are comprised diverse great sentences. Thou know well, my friend
Piramon, that sweet words comfort the heart but little, that is in tribulation,
unless there be some good works therewith. I will not deny, but that they to
whom we have given our good wylles in the time of our prosperity, be bound
to give us of their goods, and to show us favor in our adversity. I
demand one thing of thee, wherefore hold thou a presumptuous license to
demand, and reprouest on the other part the liberty of denyinge? Truly as
the shamefast man should not have denay, in any of his requests being honest:
so the shameless and importunate man should be denayed, what so ever he
demands.

Thou may know, if thou know it not my friend Piramon: that to attain to
every thing that is demanded, belongs only to the Gods. To give all thing
that is demanded, is the sign of a servant: and to deny any thing, is a
token of liberty. To weep for that is denied, is the condition of tyrauntes:
to be unthankful for that is given, is the condition of Barbarians. And to
have a stout heart, though things are denied, is the guise of the Romans.
One of the things wherein Caius Caesar showed him self to be of high courage
was, that he had most greatest joy, when the senate denayed any thing desired
by him. Oftentimes he said. There is nothing where in Rome gives more glory
nor renown to my person, then when I show my self most hasty to demand,
and she most stiff to denay: to the intent that after she should know how
great my will is to desire, and how that my strength is to acquire. Me
thinks it is better to have recourse to the gods with virtue, then to
displease them with vices. And to give contentation to thy reposed will, when
thou see thy self in tribulation: and that thy demaundes of the gods and of
men be frustrate, thou ought to measure it with a right measure, and to wey
it in a right balaunce, the many things which they have given thee, and the few
things which they have denied thee. O how discourteous be we to the gods, and
ungracious to men, when we minish with forgetfulness that we have received of
them: and that little that has been denied us, we augmente with complaints?
Friend Piramon, I am beguiled, if thou be not fifty years of age, and all that
season thou haste done nothing but received gifts: and yet for all that, I
have not seen thee do one days service. Certainly it is no reason to
complain of eight days of evil fortune, being fifty years of age. Thou
say in thy letter how thou haste much pain: because thou know all thy
neighbors to be enuyous. In good sothe I have pain for thy pain, and of thy
marueylyng, I have great marueyle. For all admyration proceadeth of abundance
of ignorance, and fault of experience.

Does the quick understanding of men rule the life of them that be mortal,
that they neade not to think of the travail to come, having in their hands
present remedy? If they be hungry, they may eat: when they are cold, they may
warm them: if they be drowsy, they may sleep: when they be weary, they may
rest: when they are sick, they may be healed: and when they are heavy, they
may rejoice In such manner, that the careful life passes, some to make tiltes
and listes, some to make armoure and scaffolds, some to inuente new ginnes,
and some to repair bulwarks. I say the world and the flleshe do naught else
but fight against us, and we have need at all times to defend us from them.
All these remedies are against the travail of the fleashe. But what shall we
do, that the cursednesse of envy ends not among all these? Cursed is that
wealth, that every man enuieth. Certainly against envy is no fortress, nor
cave to hyde, nor high hill to mount on, nor thick wood to shadow in, nor
ship to escape in, nor horse to bear away, nor money to redeem us. Envy is so
venomous a serpente, that there was never mortal man among mortalles, that
could escape from the biting of her toothe, scratching of her nails, defyling
of her feet, and the castinge of her poison. I swear to thee my friend
Piramon, that such as fortune lifts up with great riches, she full of
cruelty sonest overthrows. Envy is so envious, that to them which of her
are most denied, and set farthest of: she gives most cruel strokes with her
feet. This unhappy envy prepares poison secretly for them that enjoy great
pleasures.

I have red diverse books of Hebrewe, Greek, Latin, and Caldei. And also I
have spoken with many excellent wise men, to see if there might be found any
remedy against an envious man. I confess the truth: read all that can be
read, and imagen all that can be, demand all that can be demanded: and ye
shall find none other cure against this cursed envy, but to banishe us fro all
the prosperity, and to dwell in the house of adversity. O how unhappy are
they that be in prosperity? for justly they that be set up in high estate,
cannot fly from the peril of Scilla, without falling into the danger of
Caribdis. They cannot escape the peril, without casting their treasures into
the sea. I say yt the malady of envy will not suffer them to escape from death,
and the medecin that is applied to them, will not assure their life. I cannot
determine which is the best, or to say more properly the worste: extreme
misery without the danger of fortune, or extreme prosperity that is always
threatened to fall. In this case to be so extreme I will not determine, sith in
the one is a perilous life, and in the other renoume is sure. I shall tell thee
what wise Cicero said, when he was pursued with many at Rome. Behold you
Romans, I hold you not for so good, nor my self so evil, to say the
troth always, nor always to make lies. I am certain that ye bear me no
envy, for that I am not as ye be: but it is, because ye can not be as I am. In
this case I had rather that my enemies had envy at my prosperity, then my
friends at my poverty.

This Orator spoke after the appetite of them that be in prosperity, leaving
to give remedy to them that be sorowefull. And after this Cicero had seen the
fields of Farsale, he took other council and remedy, such as pleased him in
Rome. For though Caesar had granted him his goods, yet that turned not his
credence and renown. Surely friend Piramon, I know no remedy to give thee
against envy, since thou see all the world full thereof. We see how we be the
sons of envy, and we live with envy, and die with envy, and he that leueth
most riches, leueth the greatest envy. The ancient wise men counseled rich
men, that they should have poor folks nere them: and they admonished the
poor, that they should not dwell nere to the rich. And truly it is good
reason. For the riches of rich me^, is the seed of envy to the poor. And
because the poor man lacks, and the rich has to much, causes discord
among the people. I swear by the gods immortal, friend Piramon, though they
that be evil would that I swear falsely, as much as riches with thought
nourishes couetise, so much the envious nourishes envy thereby. I tell the one
thing, and that is, that it is no good council to fly envy, and to avoid the
virtue contrary to the same. Homer says, that in his time there were two
Greeks extreme in all extremities: the one was extreme in riches, and
therefore he was persecuted by envy, and that was Achilles: and the other was
sore noted of malice, but no man had envy at him, and that was Thiestes.
Certainly I had rather be Achilles with his envy, then Thiestes without it.
Thou know well, that we Romans search not but for rest in our life, and
for honor after death. And since it is so, it is not possible but the man that
every man enuieth his renown, ought to be exalted in the rest of his life.
And sith I see those two things in thee, such as be my friends takes little
thought, for that thine enemies murmr against thee. Thou wrytest to me how
they of Lions do well, and are merry: except thy self, that art heavy, and full
of pensiuenes. And since they show not to have pleasure at thy displeasure, show
not thy self displeased with their pleasure. For it may chance one day they
shall be sorrowful, when that thou art merry: and so thou shall be quite with
them. In an evil person there can be no greater evil, nor in a good man a
greater fault, then to be displeased with another man's wealth, and to take
pleasure af another man's harm. And in case that all do us damage with envy,
yet much more a friend, then the enemy. For of mine enemy I will beware, and for
fear I will withdraw: but my friend with his amity may beguile me, and I by
my fidelity shall not perceive. Among all mortal enemies there is none worse,
then a friend that is envious of my felicity. Piramon my friend, I will
conclude, if thou will withdraw thy self fro enemies, then keep company with
thine own familiar friends. I wot not what to write more to thee, but with all
my heart I lament thy heuines. Thou know how thy niece Brusia slew with a
dagger her own husband. I was very sorry for her death, and for the renown
that she left behind her. Flauius Priscus thine uncle is newly made censoure.
The process between thy brother Formio and Britio is determined by the senate,
and it pleases me right well, that they be friends, and every man well
contented. The book entitled the consolation of heaviness I have ended, and
laid it in the capitol. I have written it in Greek, and that is the cause that
I sent it not to thee. But I do send thee a rich sword, and a fair girdle.
Faustine my wife does salute thee, and sends thy wife two sclaues. The gods
be my kepers, and comfort thee in thy present heuines.

Mark the man fortunate, to Piramon sore discomforted.

A letter sent by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to Catullus Censorius, that was
so sorowefull for the death of Verissimus the Emperoures son, worthy to be
red and noted. Cap. viii.
Mark the young, and new Censour, saluteth thee, old and aunciente
Catullus. I have written two letters to thee, and thou have made answer to
none of them. If it be because thou could not, I hold my peace: if it be
because thou would not, then I complain me: if it be for forgetfulness, the^
I accuse thee: if it be because thou set little by me, then I do appeal
thee: if thou have dreamed that thou have written, I say believe not in
dreams: and if thou wylt not it should avail to glorify me, as a friend,
yet thou might write it, aduertising and repreuing me as the father to the
son: young virtuous persons are bound to honor ancient wise men, and no
less old wise men ought to endoctrine the young people, and very young as I
am. A just thing it is, that the new forces of youth, supply and serve them
that are worn by age. For their long experience instructs our tender age,
and natural ignorance. Youth is evil applied, when it abounds in force of
the body, and wants the virtues of the mind: and age is honored, wherein the
force dies outward, whereby virtues quickens the more inward. We may see
the tree, when the fruit is gathered, the leaves fall, and when flowers dry,
then more grene and perfect are the roots. I mean, that when the first
season of youth is passed, which is the Summer time: then comes age called
Winter, and purifieth the fruit of the flesh, and the leaves of favor fall,
the flowers of delight wither, and the vynes of hope dry outward, then it is
right, that much better are the roots of good works within. They that be old
and ancient, ought to praise their good works, rather then their white
hears. For honor ought to be given for the good life, and not for the white
head. Glorious is that common wealth, and fortunate is that prince, that is
lord of young men to travail, and ancient persons to council. As to regard
the sustaininge of the naturalitie of the life, in likewise ought to be
considered the policy of governance, the which is: that all the fruits come
nor dry not al at once, but when one begins, another fails. And in this
manner, ye that be ancient teaching us, and we be obedient, as old fathers and
young pullettes, being in the neste of the Senate: Of some their feathers
fallinge, and other young fethered: and where as the old fathers can not
fly, their trauayles are maintained by their tender children. Friend Catullus,
I purposed not to write one line this year, because my pen was troubled with
thy slouthe: but the weakness of my spirit, and the great peril of mine
offices, always called on me to demand thy council. This privilege the
old wise men hold in their houses where they dwell. They are always lords
over them that be simple, and are sclaues to them that be wise. I think thou
have forgotten me, thinking that sith the death of my dear son Verissimus,
the time has been so long, that I should forget it. Thou have occasion to
think so, for many things are cured in time, which reason can not help. But
in this case I can not tell which is the greatest, thy tru^pery, or my dolor.
I swear to thee by the gods immortal, that the hungry worms are not so
puissaunt in the entrales of the unhappy child: as the bitter sorrows are in
the heavy heart of the woeful father. And it is no comparison, for the son is
dead but one time, and the heavy father dies every momente. What wylt thou
more that I should say? But that one ought to have envy of his death, and
compassion of my life, because in dyeng he lives, and in the living I dye. In
the mischaunces of life, and in the great inconstancy of fortune, whereas her
gyles profits but little, and her strength less, I think the best remedy is
to feel it as a man, and dissimule it as discrete and wise. If all things as
they be felt at heart, should be showed outward with the tongue, I think that
the wyndes should break the heart with syghinges, and water all the earth
with weping. O if the corporal eyes saw the sorrow of the heart, I swear to
thee, they should see more of a drop of blood sweatinge within, then all the
weeping that appears without. There is no comparyson of the great dolours of
the body, to the least grief of the mind. For all travail of the body, men
may find some remedy: but if the heavy heart speak, it is not heard: if it
weep, it is not seen: if it complain, it is not believed. What shall the poor
heart do? Abhor the life, wherewith it dies: and desire death, wherewith it
lives. The high virtues among noble virtuous people, consiste not all only
to suffer the passions of the body, but also to dissimule them of the soul.
They be such, that alter the humors, and show it not outward: they bring a
fever without altering of the poulce, they alter the stomach, they make us to
knele to the earth, to suffer the water up to the mouth, and to take death
without leaving of the life: and finally they length our life, to the intent
that we should have no more travail, and denies us our grave, to the intent
that we should not rest. But considering, as I am troubled with sorrows, so am
I void of consolations: for when I have either desire of the one, or werynes
of the other, I use always this remedy: to dissimule with the tongue, to weep
with the eyes, and to feel it with my heart. I pass my life, as he that hoped
to lose all that he has, and never to recover that that is lost. I say this,
though ye see me not now make funeral wepinges and waylinges, as I did at the
death of my son: yet think not but it does bren my heart, so that with the
great heat inward, is consumed the humiditie of the eyes, for it brenneth al
my spirits within. Thou may know what an honorable father suffers, to
lose a good child: in all things the gods be liberal, except in giving us
virtuous children. Where there is abou^daunce of great estates, there is
greatest scarsitie of good inheritours. It is a doleful thing to hear, and
greater pity to see, how these fathers clime to have richesse, and to see
their children descend to have viciousnes. To see the fathers honor their
children, and the children to infame their fathers: yea and the fathers to give
rest to the children, and the children to give trouble to their fathers: yea
and sometime the fathers die for sorrow that their children die so sone, and we
see their children weep, because their fathers die so late. What should I say
more, but that the honor and riches that the fathers have procured with great
thought, the children consume with little care. I am certain of one thing, that
the fathers may gather riches with strength and craft to sustain their
children, but the Gods will not have durable, that that is begone with evil
intention: as that is, which is won to the prejudice of other, and possessed
with an evil heir.

And though the heavy destinies of the father permit, that the riches be left
to their children, to serve them in all their vices for their pastime: at last
yet according to their merits, the Gods will that the heir and heritage
should perish. Mark what I say, I had two sons, Comodus, and the prince
Verissimus, the younger is dead, that was greatest in virtue. Always I imagined,
that while the good lived, I should be poor: and now that the evil
remains, I think to be rich. I will tell thee the cause, the Gods are so
pitiful, that to a poor father they never give evil child: and to a rich
father they never give a good child. And as in all prosperity there chances
always some sinister fortune, either sone or late: so therewith fortune does
arm and apparel us, wherein she sees we shall fall to our greatest hurt.
And therefore the Gods permit, that the covetous fathers, in gathering with
great travail, should die with that hurt, to leave their riches to their
vicious children. I weep as much for my child that the Gods have left me, as
for him that they have taken from me. For the small estimation of him that
lives, makes immortal memory of him that is dead. The ill rest and
conversation of them that live, cause us to sighe for the company of them that
be dead. The ill is always desired for his illness to be dead, and the good
always meriteth to have his death bewailed. I say my friend Catullus, I
thought to have lost wy wit, when I saw my son Verissimus die: but I took
comfort again: for either he of me, or I of him must see the end,
considering that the Gods did but lend him to me, and gave him not, and how
they be inheritours, I to have the use of the fruit. For all things is
measured by the just will of the Gods, and not by our inordinate wylles and
appetites. I think when they took away from me my child, I restored him to
another, and not that they have taken mine. But sith it is the will of the
Gods to give rest to the good child, and hurt the father because he is evil:
I yield thanks to them for the season that they have suffered me to enjoy
his life, and for the patience that I have taken for his death. I desire them
to mitigate therewith the chasticement of their ire. And I desire, since they
have taken away the life from this child: to plant good customs in the
prince mine other son. I know what heaviness thou haste taken in Rome for
my sorrow. I pray the Gods to send thee joy of thy children, and that I may
reward thee with some good pleasure, for that thou have wept for my pain. My
wife Faustine saluteth thee, and truly thou would have had compassion to see
her, for she wepeth with her eyes, and sigheth with her heart, and with her
hands hurts her self, and curses with her tongue. She eats nothing on
the day, nor sleapeth in the night. She loves darkness, and abhors light,
and thereof I have no marueyle: for it is reason that for that was nourished in
her entrayles, she should feel sorrow at her heart. And the love of the mother
is so strong, that though her child be dead, and laid in grave, yet always
she has him quick in her heart. It is a general rule, that the person that
is entierly beloved, causes ever great grief at his death. And as for me, I
pass the life right sorowfully, though I show a joyful face, yet I want mirth
at my heart. And among wise men being sorrowful, and showing their faces mercy,
is none other thing but burying the quick, having no sepulture. And I swear
by the Gods immortal, I feel much more than I have said. And diverse times
me think I should fall down, because I dare not weep with mine eyes, yet I
feel it inwardly in my heart. I would feign common with thee in diverse things.
Come I pray thee to Briette, to the intent that we may speak together. And
sith it has pleased the Gods to take my child fro me, that I loved so well,
I would counsel with thee, that art my loving friend. But few days passed,
there came thither an Ambassador fro the Rhodes, to whom I gave the most
part of my horses: and fro the farthest part of Spain, there were brought me
eight, of the which I send the four. I would they were such as might please
ye. The gods be thy saulfegard, and send me and my wife some comfort.

Marcus Aurelius right sorrowful, has written this with his own hand.

A letter sent by Marcus Aurelius Emperor to Catullus Censo^ius, of the news
which at that time were at Rome. Cap. ix.
MArcus the new Censore, to thee Catullus now aged, sends salutations. There
are ten days paste, that in the temple of God Ianus I received thy letter. And
I take that same God to witness, that I had rather have seen thy person. Thou
desire that my letters may be long, but the sshortnes of time makes me to
answer thee more briefly, than I would. Thou wyllest me to give thee
knowledge of the news here. Thereto I anwere: that it were better to demand,
if there were any thing remaining here in Rome, or Italy, that is old. For
now by our evil destinies, all that is good and old, is ended: and new
things, which be evil, now begin. The Emperor, the Consul, the Tribune,
the Senators, the Ediles, the Flamines, the Pretours, the Centurions, all
things be new, save the veretues which be old. We pass the time in making
new officers, in deuisinge new counsels, and in raising new subsidies. In
such wise, that there has been now mo novelties within these four years,
the^ in time passed in.400. years. We now assemble together.300. to counsel in
the capitol, and there we brag and boste, swear and promise, that we will
exalte the virtuous, and subdue the vicious, favor the right, and not wink at
the wrong, punish the evil, and reward the good, repair old, and edefie
new, pluck vices up by the roots, and to plant virtues to amend the old, and
follow the good, reprove tyrauntes, and assist the poor: and when that we are
gone from thence they that spoke best words, are often taken with the worst
deeds. Oh wicked Rome, that now a days has such senators, which in saying
we will do, we will do, pass their life: and so every man seking his own
profit, forgets the weal publyke. Oftentimes I am in the senate to behold
others as they regard me: and I marvel much to hear the eloquence of their
words, the zeal of justice, and the justification of their persons: and after
that I come thence, I am ashamed to see their secret extortions, their damnable
thoughts, and their il works. And yet there is an other thing of more
marvel, and not to be suffered: that such persons as are most defamed, and
use most wicked vices, with their most damnable incencio^s, make their auowes
to do most extreme justice. It is an infallible rule, and of humain malice
most used: that he that is most hardy to commit greatest crimes, is most cruel
to give sentence against an other for the same offense.

Me think that we behold our own faults, as through small nets, which
cause things to seame the lesser: but we behold the faults of other in the
water, that causes them to seame greater. O how many have I seen condemned by
the Senate, for one small fault done in all their life, and yet they them
selves commit the same fault every hour. I have red, that in the time of
Alexander the great, there was a renowned pirate on the sea, called Dionides,
which robbed and drowned all ships that he could get: and by commandment of
this good king Alexander, there was an army sent forth to take him. And when he
was taken and presented to Alexander, the king said unto him: show me
Dionides, why do thou spoil on the sea, that no ship can sail out of the
east into the west for thee? The pirate answered and said: if I spoil the
sea, why do thou Alexander rob both the sea and land also? O Alexander,
because I fight with one ship in the sea, I am called a thief: and because thou
robbest with two hundred ships on the sea, and troublest all the world
with.200000. men, thou art called an Emperor.

I swear to thee Alexander, if fortune were as favorable to me, and the gods
as extreme against thee: they would give me thine empire, and give thee my
little ship, and then peradventure I should be a better king then thou art,
and thou a worse thief than I am. These were high words, and well received of
Alexander: and of troth to see if his words were correspondent to his
promises, he made him of a pirate a great captain of an army, and he was more
virtuous on land, than he was cruel on the sea. I promise thee Catullus,
Alexander did right well therein, and Dionides was to be praised greatly for that
he had said. Now adays in Italy, they that rob openly, are called lords:
and they that rob privily, are called thieves. In the annals of Liuius I have
red, that in the second troublous war punike, between the Romans and
Carthagians, there came an Ambassador Lusitain sent from Spain, to treat of
accord of peace. When he came to Rome, he proved before the senate, that sith
he entered into Italy, he had been ten times robbed of his goods: and whiles he
was at Rome, he had seen one of them that robbed him, hang up another that had
defended him. He seeing so evil a deed, and how the thief was saved without
justice: as a desperate man took a cole, and wrote upon the gibet as follows.
O gibet, thou art planted among thieves, norished among thieves, squared of
thieves, wrought of thieves, made of thieves, set among thieves, and hanged full of
innocents, with innocents. The original of these words are in the history
of Liuius, where the whole Decade was written with black ink, and these words
with red vermilion. I can not tell what other news I should send thee, but
that every thing is so new and so tender, and is joined with so evil sement,
that I fear me, all will fall suddenly to the ground. I tell thee, that some
are suddenly risen within Rome unto honor, whose fall I dare rather assure,
then life. For all buildinges hastily made, can not be sure. The longer a tree
is kept in his kind, the longer it will be ere it be old. The trees, whose
fruit we eat in summer, do warm us in winter. O how many have we seen
whereof we have marueyled of their rising, and been abashed of their falls.
They have grown as a whole piece, and suddenly wasted as a skumme. Their
felicity has been but a short moment, and their infortune as a long life.

Finally they have made a mylle, and laid on the stones of increase, and after
a little grinding, left it unoccupied all the whole year after. Thou know
well my friend Catullus, that we have seen Cincius Fuluius in one year made
consul, and his children tribunes, his wife a matrone for young maidens, and
beside that, made keeper of the capitol: and after that, not in one year but the
same day we saw Cincius beheaded in the place, his children drowned in Tiber,
his wife banished fro Rome, his house raced down to ye ground, and all his
goods confisked to the common treasury. This rigorous example we have not red
in any book, to take a copy of it, but we have seen it with our eyes, to keep
it in our minds. As the nations of people are variable, so are the conditions
of men diverse. And me thinks this is true, seeing that some love, some hate,
and that some seek, some eschew: and that some set little by, other make much
store. In such wise, that al can not be content with one thing, nor some with all things can not be satisfied. Let every man chose as him list, and embrace
the world when he will, I had rather mount a soft pace to the falling, and if I
can not come thereto, I will abide by the way, rather then with the sweat to
mount hastily, and then to tumble down headlong. In this case sith men's
hearts understand it, we need not to write further with pens. And of this
matter mark not the little that I do say, but the great deal that I will say.
And since I have begone, and that thou art in strange lands, I will write thee
all the news from hence. This year the.xxv. day of May, there came an
Ambassador out of Asia, saiynge he was of the Isle of Cetin, a baron right
propre of body, ruddy of aspect, and hardy of courage. He considered being at
Rome, though the summers days were long, yet winter would draw on, and then
would it be dangerous sailyng into this Isle, and saw that his business was
not dispatched: On a day being at the gate of the senate, seeing all the
senators enter into the Capitol, without any armor upon them, he as a man of
good spirit, and zelatour of his country, in the presence of us all, said
these words. O fathers conscript. O happy people. I am come from a strange
country to Rome, only to see Rome: and I have found Rome, without Rome. The
walls wherewith it is enclosed, has not brought me hither, but the fame of
them that govern it. I am not come to see the treasoury, wherein is the
treasure of all Realms: but I am come to see the sacred senate, out of the
which issues counsel for all men. I came not to see ye, because ye
vanquishe all other: but because I thought you more virtuous then all other. I
dare well say one thing, except the Gods make me blind, and trouble mine
understanding, ye be not Romans of Rome, nor this is not Rome of the Romans
your predecessors. We have heard in our Isle, that diverse Realms have been
won by the valiantnes of one, and conserved by the wisdom of all the Senate:
and at this hour ye are more like to lose, then to win as your fathers did.
All their exercise was in goodness, and ye that are their children, pass all
your time in ceremonies. I say this, ye Romans, because ye have almost
killed me with laughing at you, to see how ye do all as much your diligence,
to leave your armure without the gate of the Senate, as your predecessors did
take to them to defend the Empire. What profit is it to you, to leave of
these armours which hurt the bodies, and to put on them those which slay all the world: What profits it to ye careful suitor, that the senator enters
unarmed into ye senate without sweard or dagger: and his heart enters into ye
senate armed with malice? O Romans, I will ye know, that in our ysle we esteem
you not as armed captains, but as malicious senators. You fear us not with
sharp grounden swoordes, and daggers, but with hard hearts and venomous
tongues. If ye should in the senate put on harneis, and therewith take away your
lives, it were but a small loss: seeing that ye sustain not the innocents,
nor dispatche not the business of suitors. I can not suffer it. I can not tell
in what state ye stand here at Rome: for in our isle we take armoure from
fools, whether your armoures are taken away as from fools or mad folks, I
wot not. If it be done for ambitiousnes, it comes not of Romans, but of
tyrauntes: that wranglers and ireful folk should be judges over the peacible,
and the ambicions over the meke, and the malicious over the simple? If it be
done because ye be fools, it is not in the laws of the gods, that three
hundred fools should govern three hundred thousand wise men. It is a long
season that I have tarried for mine answer and license, and by your delays I
am now farther of, then I was the first day. We bring oil, honey, saffron,
wood, and timber, salt, silver. And sold out of our ysle into Rome, and ye will
that we go else where to seek justice. Ye will have one law to gather your
rentes, and another to determine our justice. Ye will that we pay our tributes
in one day, and ye will not discharge one of our errandes in a whole year. I
require you Romans, determine your selves to take away our lives, and so we
shall end: or else hear our co^plaintes, to the intent that we may serve you.
For in another manner it may be, that ye know by hearing with your ears, which
peradventure ye would not see with your eyes. And if ye think my words be out
of measure, so that ye will remedy my country, I set not by my life. And thus I
make an end. Verily friend Catullus, these be the words that he spoke to the
senate which I gate in writing. I say of troth, that the hardiness that the
Romans were wont to have in other countries, the same (as now) strangers
have in Rome. There were that said that this Ambassador should be punished,
but God forbid, that for saying troth in my presence, he should have been
corrected. It is enough, and to much to, to suffer these evils, though we slay
not, and persecute those that advertise and warn us of them. The sheep are not
in sucrtie of the wolf, but if the shepehearde have his dog with him. I
mean, dogs ought not to leave barkinge, for to awake the shepeherdes. There
is no God commands, nor law counsayleth, nor common wealth suffers, that
they which are committed to chastise liars, should hang them that say
truth. And sith the senators show them selves men in their living, and
sometime more human than other that be Sclaues, who else should deliver them
from chasticement? Oh Rome, and no Rome, having nothing but the name of Rome:
where is now become the nobleness of thy triumphs, the glory of thy
children, the rectitude of thy justice, and the honor of thy temples? For as
now they chastise him more that murmureth against one only senator, tha^ they
do them yt blaspheme al ye gods at once. For it greueth me more to se a
senator, or ce^sore to be worst of al other: than it displeases me yt it
should be said, yt he is the best of all other. For of a troth I say to thee
my friend Catullus, that as now we need not to seek to the Gods in the
temples, for the Senators are made gods in our hands. There is difference
between them that be immortal, and they that be mortal. For the Gods never
do thing that is evil, and the Senators do never any thing well. The Gods
never lie, and they never say truth. The gods pardon often, and they never
forgive. The gods are content to be honored five times in the year, and the
Senators would be honored ten times a day. What will thou that I say more?
but what so ever the Gods do, they ought to be praised: and the Senators in
all their works deserve to be reproved. Finally I conclude, that the Gods are
constant in every thing, and err and fail in nothing: and the Senators
assure nothing, but err in all thing. Only in one thing the Senators are not
of reason to be chasticed, and that is: when they intend not to amend their
faults, they will not suffer the Orators to wast their time to show them the
troth. Be it as may be, I am of the opinion, that what man or woman
withdraws their ears from hearing of troth, impossible it is for them to
apply their hearts to love any virtues: be it Censore that judges, or
Senanatour that ordeineth, or Emperor that commands, or Consul that
executes, or Orator that preaches. No mortal man, take he never so good
heed to his works, nor reason so well in his desires, but that he deserves
some chasticement for some cause, or counsel in his doings. And sith I have
written to thee thus of others, I will somewhat speak of my self, because of
the words of thy letter I have gathered, that thou desire to know of my
person. Know thou for certain, that in the kalendes of January, I was made
Censore in the senate, the which office I desired not, nor I have not deserved
it. The opinion of al wise men is, that no man, without he lack wit, or
surmounteth in folly, will gladly take on him the burdein and charges of other
men. A greater case it is, for a shamefast man to take on him an office to
please every man: for he must show a countenance outward, contrary to that
he thinks inward. Thou will say, that the good are ordained to take the
charge of offices. O unhappy Rome, that has willed to take me in such wise, as
to be the best in it. Grievous pestilence ought to come for the^ that be good,
sith I am escaped as good among the evil. I have accepted this office, not
for that I had need thereof, but to fulfill the commandment of Antonius my
graundfather. Have no marvel of any thing that I do, but of that I leave to
be done. For every man that is wedded to Faustine, there is no villainy but he
shall do it. I swear to thee, that sith the day we were wedded, me seameth
that I have no wit. I leave wedding for this time, and return to speak of
offices. Surely a peacible man ought to be in offices, though it be painful:
for as the offices are assured among them that be virtuous, so perillously
goes the virtuous folk among offices. And for the troth hereof, reckon what
they win, and then thou shall see what they loose. Say that is good, if thou
know it, and hear the evil, if thou desire to know it. He that will take the
charge to govern other, seeks thought and trouble for him self, envy for his
neighbors, spurs for his enemies, poverty for his rychessee, a waking of
thieves, peril for his body, end of his days, and torment for his great
renoume. Finally he seeks a way to reiecte his friends, and a repeal to
recover his enemies. O an unhappy man is he, that takes on him the charge of
children of many mothers, for he shall be always charged with thoughts how he
should content them all: full of sighs, because one has to give him: fear
that one should take from him, weping if he lose: and fear that they infame
him. He that knows this, without long tariing ought to set a bridle in his
head. But I say of one, as I say of another. For I will swear, and thou will
not deny it, that we may find some now a days, that had rather be in the
park to fight against the bulls, than be in suertie upon the scaffold.
Oftentimes I have heard say: Go we to the Theaters to run at the Bulls: go
we to chase the Hearts and wild Bores: and when they come there, they run
away, not the beasts from them, but they from the beasts. In such wise as
they went running, they return again fleing. I say, these ambicious
persons procure to govern, and are governed: they command, and are
commanded, they rule, and are ruled: and finally thinking to have diverse
under their hands, these wretches put them selves under every man's foot. For
ye remedy of al these perilles, my thought is comforted with one thing, and
that is, without procuring or offering my self, the senate of their own will
has commanded me. In the.viii. table of our ancient laws be these words.
We command that in our sacred senate, charge of justice be never given to him
that willingly offreth him self to it, but to such as by great deliberation
are chosen. This is certainly a just law. For men now be not so virtuous, nor
so loving to the common wealth, that they will forget their own quietness and
rest, doing damage to them self, to procure another man's profit. There is
none so folish that will leave his wife children, and his own sweet country, to
go into strange countries: but if he see him self among strange people,
thinking under the color of justice to seek for his own vtilite. I say not
this without weping: that the princes with their small study and thought, and
the judges with their couetise, have undermined and shaken down the high
walls of the policy of Rome. O my friend Catullus, what will thou that I
should say, but that our credence so minisheth, our couetise so largely
stretches, our hardines so boldeth, our shamefastnes so shameless, that we
provide for judges to go and rob our neighbors, as captains against our
enemies: I let thee to wit, where as Rome was beloved for chastising the evil,
now it is as much hated for spoiling the good. I do remember that I red, in the
time of Dennis Siracusan, that rules al Sicile, there came an Ambassador fro
Rhodes to Rome, being of a good age, well learned, and valiant in arms, and
right curious to note al things. He came to Rome to se the majesty of the
sacret senate, the height of the high Capitol enuironned with the Colliset: the
multitude of senators, the wisdom of ye counsailours, the glory of
triumphs, the correction of the evil, the peace of the inhabitauntes, the
diversity of nations, the aboudaunce of the maintenance, the order of the
offices: and finally seeing that Rome was Rome, he was demanded how he thought
thereby. He answered and said. O Rome, at this present world thou art full
of virtues and wise men, hereafter thou shall be furnished with fools. Lo
what high and very high words were these. Rome was seven hundred years
without any house of fools, and now it has been three hundred years
without one wise or virtuous man. Look what I say, it is no mockery, but of
troth, if the pitiful Gods now a days did reise our predecessors from death
to life, either they would not know us for their children, or else they would
attached us for fools. These be things used in Rome, but thou sendest no word
of that is used in Agripine. I will write nothing to the to put the to pain:
write to me some thing to rejoice me, if thy wife Dinisila chanced well of the
flote that came out of Cetin with salt, oil, and honey, I have well provided for
her. Will thou know that Flodius our uncle was cast down by the rage of his
horse, and is deceassed. Laercia and Colliodorus are friends together, by
occasion of a marriage, I do send the a goune, I pray to the gods to send the
joy thereof. My wife Faustine saluteth the. Recomend me to Iamiro thy son. The
gods have the in keeping, and sinister fortune be fro me.

Marcus, thy friend, to thee Catullus his own.

Marcus Aurelius writes to the amorous ladies of Rome. Chap. x.
Mark orator, Reading in Rhodes the art of humanity, to you amorous Ladies of
Rome, wishes health to your parsons, and amendmente of your desired lives. It
was written to me that at ye feast of the mother Berecinthia al you being
present together, made a play of me, in which you laid my life for an example,
and slaundered my renown. It is told me, that Auilina composed it, Lucia
Fuluta wrote it, and thou Toringua did sing it, and you altogether into the
Threatre did present it. You brought me forth painted in sundry forms, with a
book in my hand turned contrary, as a fained philosopher: with a long
tongue, as a bold speaker with our measure: with a horn in my head as a common
cuckold: with a nettel in my hand, as a tremblying lover: with a banner fallen
down, as a cowarde captain: with my berd half shaven, as a feminate man:
with a cloth before my eyes, as a condemned fool: and yet not content with
this, another day ye brought me forth portracted with another new deuyse. Ye
made a figure of mine, with feet of straw, the legs of amber, the knees of
wood, the thighs of brass, the belly of horn, the arms of pitche, the hands
of mace, the head of Iron, ye ears of an ass, the eyes of a serpent, the
here is of rotes iagged, ye teeth of a cat, the tongue of a scorpion, and the
forhead of lead, in which was written in two lines these letters. M. N. S. N. I,
S. V, S. which in my opinyo^ signifies this. This picture has not so many
metalles, as his life has chaunges. This done, ye went to the river and tied
it with the head douneward a hole day, and if it had not been for the good Lady
Messelyne. I think it had been tied there till now.

And now ye amorous Ladies have written me a letter, by Fuluius Fabricius, which
grieved me nothing, but as an amorous man from ye hands of ladies I accept it as
a mockery. And to ye intent I should have no laysure to think thereon, ye send
to demand a question of me, yt is: if I have found in my books, of what, for
what, from whence, when, for whom, and how women were first made. Because my
condition is to take mockes, for mockes, and since you do desire it, I will show
it you. Your friends and mine have written to me, but especially your imbassadour
Fuluius has instantly required me so to do. I am agreued with nothing and will
hold my peace, save to your letter only I will make answer. And sith there
has been none to ask the question, I protest to none but to you, amorous
ladies of Rome, I send my answer. And if any honest lady will take the
demand of you it is a token that she does envy the office that ye be of. For
of troth, that Lady which shows her self annoyed with your pain openly,
from henceforth I condemn her that she has some fault in secret. They that be
on the stage, fear not the roaring of the bull: they that be in the dongeon
fear not the shot of the cannon. I will say, the woman of good life, fears no
man's slanderous tongue The good matrons may keep me for their perpetual
servant, and the evil, for their chief enemy: I answer. It is expedyent you
know of what the first women were made. I say, that according to the
adversities of nations that are in the world, I find diverse opinyons in this
case. The Egiptians say, that when the river Nilus brake, and over ran the
earth, there abode certain pieces of earth which cleued together, and the son
coming to them, created many wild beasts, amongst whom was found the first
woman, Note ladies, it was necessary that the flood Nilus should break out,
so that the first woman might be made of earth. Al creatures are nourished and
bred in the intrayles of their mothers, except the woman, which was bred
without a mother. And it seems most true, that without mothers ye were borne,
for without rule ye live, and with order ye dye. Truly he takes upon him a
great thing, and has many cares in his mind, much to muse upon, neadeth much
council, neadeth long experience, and ought to chose amongst many women, that
thinks to rule one only wife by reason. Be the beasts never so wild, at
length the Lion is ruled by his keaper, the bull is enclosed in his park, the
horse ruled by the brydel, the little hoke catches the fysh, the Ox contented
to yealde to the yoke: only a woman is a beast which will never be tamed, she
never loses her boldness of commaundyng, nor by any bridel will be commanded.
The gods have made men as men, and beasts as beasts, and man's understanding
very high, and his strength of great force: yet there is nothing, be it of never
so great power, that can escape a woman, either with slight or might. But I
say to you amorous ladies, there is neither spur can make you go, rain that
can hold you back, bridel that can refrain you, neither fish hoke, ne net
that can take you: to conclude, there is no law can subdue you: nor shame
restrain you, nor fear abashe you, nor chastisement amend you. O to what
great peril puts he himsselfe unto, ye thinks to rule and correct you. For
if you take an opinyon, ye whole world cannot remove you: who warns you of
any thing, ye never believe him If they give you good council, you take it not:
if one threaten you, strait you complain. If one pray you, then are ye
proud: if they rejoice not in you, then are you spiteful. If one forbear you,
the^ are ye bold: if one chastise you strait you become serpents. Finally a
woman will never forget an injury, nor be thankeful for a benefit received.
Now a days the most symplyst of al women will swear, that they know less then
they do: but I swear, which of them that knows least, knows more evil then
al men, and of troth yt wisest man shall fail in their wisdom, Will ye know my
ladies how little you understand, and how much you be ingnoraunt? that is, in
matters of importance ye determine rashly, as if ye had studied on it a
thousand years: if any resist your council, ye hold him for a mortal ennemy,
hardy is that woman that dare give council to a man, and he more bold that
takes it of a woman? but I return and say, that he is a fool which takes
it, and he more fool that asks it, but he most fool that fulfilleth it. My
opinyon is, that he which will not stomble amongst so hard stones, not prick
himself amongst such thorns, nor styng him with so many nettels, let him
hark what I will say and do as he shall se, speak well, and work evil. In
promysing avow much: but in perfourmyng, accomplish little. Finally allow your
words, and condemn your counsels. If we could demand of famous me^ which are
dead, how they liked in their life the council of women. I am sure they would
not now rise again to believe them, nor be revived to here them. How was king
Philippe with Olimpia, Paris with Hellen: Alexander with Rofana, Aneas with
Dido, Hercules with Deanyrya, Anibal with Tamira, Antony with Cleopatra, Julius
with Domitian, Nero with Agrippina: and if you will not believe what they
suffered with them, ask of me unhappy man what I suffer amongst you. O ye
women, when I remember that I was borne of you, I loath my life: and thinking
how I live with you. I wish and desire my death. For there is no such death to
tormente, as to have to do with you: and contrary no such life, as to fly from
you. It is a common saying among women, that men be very unthankful, because
we were bred in your entrails, We order you as servants. Ye say for that ye
brought us forth with peril, and norished us with travail, it is reason that
we should always employ us to serve you I have thought diverse times with my
self, from whence the desire that man has to women comes. There are no eyes
but ought to weep, nor heart but should break, nor spirit but ought to wayle,
to se a wise man lost by a foolish woman. The foolyshe lover passes the day to
content his eyes, and the dark night in tormenting himself with sond
thoughts, one day in hearing tidings, another day in doing seruyces, sometime
liking darkness, sometime lothing light, being in company, and solitary lives:
and finally the poor lover may that he will not, and would that he may not.
More over the counsel of his friends avails him nothing, nor the infamy of his
enemies, not the loss of goods, the adventure of honor, the losing of, his
life, nor the sekyng of death, neither coming near, nor flyeng far, nor
seeing with his eyes, ne hearing with his ears, nor tasting with his mouth, nor
fealing with his hand: and to conclude, to get vyctory he is always at war with
him self. Then I would ye lovers knew, from whence your love does come, it is
this. The entrayles whereof we are bread be flesh, the breasts that we sucked
are flesh, the arms wherein we be fastened be of flesh, the thoughts which we
think be fleshly, the works which we do are fleshly, the men with whom we
live are of flesh, and the wonder for whom we dye are flesh: by which occasion
comes, the reuerting of our flesh to flesh, many fre hearts are entangled with
the snares of love. It seems well my ladies ye were gendered in puddels as
before is mentioned of the Egiptians: ye puddels have no clear water to
drink, nor fruit to eat, nor fish to be taken, nor ship to sail in.

I mean, that in your lives ye be filthy, your persons without shame, in
aduersitye weak and feeble, in prosperity full of deceit and guyle, false in
your words, and doubteful in your doings, in hatynge without measure, in
love extreme, in gifts covetous, in taking unshamefast: and finally, I say ye
are the ground of fear, in whom the wise men find peril, and the simple men
suffer injury. In you, the wise men hold their renown slaundered, and the
simple men their life in penury. Let us omit the opinion of the Egiptians, and
come to ye Greeks, which say, that in the deserts of Arabia, the son shines
hottest: and at the beginning there was found one woman, with one bird called
the Phoenix, which bird was created on the water, and the woman engendered by
the great heat of the son, and of the powder of trees in this wise. There was
a tree sore eaten with worms and upon a time a blast of lightning set it on fire
and burnt it, so as amongst the ashes of that rotten tree, the first woman was
made and found. Although I be a Roman philosopher, yet can I not disalow the
opinion of the greek philosopher. Of troth ye amorous dames, ye have your
tongues of the nature of fire, and your conditions like the powder of a rotten
tree. According to the dyuersity of beasts, so nature has in diverse parts of
the body placed their strength: as the Eagle in her byl, ye Unicorn in the
horn, the serpent in the tail, the bull in the head, the bear in his paws,
the horse in the breast, the dog in the teath, the bore in the tuske, the
doves in the wings, and the women in their tongues. For of troth the flight
of the dove is not so high, as the fantasy of your folyshnes is vain: the cat
scratcheth not so sore with her nails, as ye scratch the folish men with your
importunities. The dog hurts not him so much that he runs after, as ye
do ye sorrowful lover that serves you: the life of him is not in so much
danger that catches the bull by the horns, as the same of him that falls in
your hands. To conclude, the serpent has not so much poison in his tail: as
ye have in your tongues. I accept the Roman ladies a part, for there are many
very noble, whose lives are not touched with complaint, nor good fames had in
suspect. Of such, neither my letter speaks ought, nor my pen writes: but
of those women I speak that be such, as all the venomous beasts in ye world
have not so much poison in their bodies, as one of those has in their tongues.
And since the gods have commanded, and our fate does permit, yt the life of men
cannot pass without women: I advise the youth, and beseech the aged, I wake the
wise, and instruc^ ^^mple, to shonne women of evil name, more then the common
pestilence. R^^^^ng the ancient laws of Plato, I find written this. We
comaund that al women openly defamed, be openly banished the city, to
thintente that others seeing the sin punished, may abhor the same, for fear
to fall in the like pain. The same law said further, we comaund yt they pardon
a woman for all her faults she commits bodily, in case ye se amendment
likewise in her: but we will that no fault be pardoned, committed by the tongue.
For actual sin done, is the frailety of nature, the tongue, only of malice. O
deuyne Plato, master and measure of al knowledge and science, and prince of al
philosophers. When thou in the golden world maydst such laws, in which time
there was such scarsitye of those women which were evil, and so great plenty of
them that were good: what should we do now in Rome, where there be so many evil
openly, and none good in secret? women naturally ought to be shamefast in
their face, temperate in words, wise of wit, sober in going, honest in
conversation, pitiful in correction, ware in their living, avoiding companyes,
faithful in their promise, constant in love. Finally she that will be counted
honest, let her not trust to the wisdom of the wise, nor commit her fame to
the wanton youth: let every wise woman take heed what he is yt promyseth her
ought. For after that the flames of Venus be set on fire, and Cupide shot his
arrows, the rich offers all that he has, and the poor all that he may. The
wise man will ever be her friend, and the simple man for ever her servant. The
wise man will lose his life for her, and the simple will accept his death for
her. The old men say, they will be friends to their friends: and the young man
will say, he will be enemy to their enemies. The aged promysing to pay her debtes,
the other to revenge her injuries. Finally the one because to hide their
poverty, and the other to publyshe their beauty, lead these fools losing
their lives, and bringinge their fame to end. I will leave to speak of the
good women, for I mind not to charge them with ought. I ask you amorous ladies
if Plato was amongst you when ye made a play of my life, and drew my picture
about Rome? no surely, for that I se in your act now, I do suspect that to be
true which has been said of others, for there are few in Rome that execute
the pain of Platoes law. One thing ye cannot deny, if I were the worst of al
men, at the last ye se the end of my vylanies: but this you cannot deny, that
she which is least evil of al you, ye naughtines of her life, I could not
sufficiently set out in my life. Yt is great peril to wise women to be
neighbored with foles, it is great peril to ye shamefast to be with the shameless,
it is great peril to the chaste to be with the adulterers, great peril it is for
the honorable to be with the defamed, for there is no slaundered woman but
thinks every one defamed, or at the least desires to have them so, procures
to have them slaundered, or says they be infamed. And in the end to hide their
infamy, they slander all the good. It is long sith I knew you amorous ladies,
and you me. If ye speak, I speak, if you know I know. If ye hold your peace,
I am still: if ye speak openly, I will not talk in secret. Thou know well
Auilma yt did compass yt jest of me, that Eumedes sold caulfes dearer in
the butcherie, then thou did innocent virgins in thy house. And thou
Toringa know well yt before me thou could not count all thy lovers on thy
fingers, but did desire to have a bushel of peason. Thou wottest well Liuia
Fuluia, when thou were thou wottest with whom) at Bretus, we made agreement with
thy husband, thou tokest him aside and said, unless I may lie out of my house
one night in a weke, thou ^hal not lie quietly in thy house, thou know well
Rotoria, yt in thy youth thou were two years on the sea, and did co^pound
with the pirate yt no woman should serve the hundred soldiers but thou alone
in a galy. Thou know right well Enna curtia that when the censor came to take
the, he found.v. men's apparel, the which thou warest in the night season, and
but one womans attire wherewith thou was clothed in the day time. Thou know
well Pesilana Fabricia yt Alluines, Metelles, and thou being married, demanded
openly what thou had gotten in his house with thy friends in secret thou
know well Camilla, not being content with thy own country folks, thou
had such resort and haunte of strangers to the, that thou can speak al
languages.

I will mark them that have marked me, hurt them that have hurted me, persecute
them yt have persecuted me, defame them that have slaundered me, al other my
pen pardons, for yt they pardoned me in their play. Because my letter begone
with that ye did to my parson, therefore I will end it, with that it knows of
your good names. And thus I conclude, yt a man may escape from al dangers in
shonning them: but from women, there is no way but to fly from them. Thus I end,
and beseech the gods that I may se of you that which you would se of me: and
since ye be lovers, I counsel you, as ye have sent me the play in a mockery,
even so to receive my answer.

Mark now the Rhodian, to the amorous Ladies of Rome.

Of a letter sent by Marcus Aurelius to his love Boemia, for that she desired
to go with him to the wars. Cap. xi.
MArcus the Roman praetor, being in the wars of Dacia: sends health to his
loving Boemia, remainyng in the pleasours of Rome. Escapinge from a cruel
battle thy few lines I red, and understood thy large informacion. I let the
know thou have astonyed me more, then mine enemies have feared me: and taking
thy letter in my hands, the herb of malice entered into my heart. When I temper
my body with ye delights, I think my heart fre fro the venyme of thy amors:
since I of my will, and thou for want of power have given us to be fre of our
pleasures, I think as well to make a deuorce of our sorrows. But ye be such, ye
such I say, as are ye banishmentes of love: and the treasour of grefes. The
love of you al ought to be digested with pills, but the passion of one of you
will not be oppressed, with all the rubarbe, in Alexandria. Ye show your selves
cruel to pardon an enemy: and ever lightly you change your friends. I have
curiously made search, whylest delight governed my youth: yet could I never se
in a woman stedfastnes, nor reason in their love, nor end in their hate. The
present wantones quarelleth with my youth passed, because thou see not in me
the ancient good will toward the, nor ye present service. And certainly hearing
thy accusacion, and not my iustificacion: thou myghtest pay me as justly with
death, as I pay the with forgetfulness. The which forgetfulness ought to be as
strange in him that serves as ingratitude in the lady that is served.
Think thou yt I have forgotten the law of Venus? when I commanded that the
curious lovers should exercise their strength in chiualry, and occupy their
hearts in love? and more it wills a man to wear his gear cleanly, their
feet right, their bodies constant, their voice soft and humble, demure and
modeste of there: they ought to have eyes open always loking up to the
wyndowes, and their hearts ready to fly into the air. For a troth my friend
Boemia, he is a gross lover that has his will in captivity: and his judgment
fre. The judgment is of no value, where the will is in thraldom. This I say,
yt thou may know, though my age has left the exercise: yet my understanding
has not forget the art, Thou complainest because I give my self to much
quiet, and that I have forgotten the, I will not deny the truth, the day of my
forgetting makes the pryuy of my thoughts. And reason the ouerseer declares,
that it is not requysite for my grauytie to permyt I should love: nor in thy
age to suffer to be beloved. The world does dissemble many things in youth:
which in age meriteth grievous corrections. The wanton toys of youth proceed of
ignorance, but the vylanies done in age grow of malice.

When I walked in nyghtes I ietted the streates, I sange ballades: I gased to
the wyndowes, I played on the gittornes: I scaled the walls, I wakened ye
youth. Think thou I wiste what I did in my youth? but since I se my self
bereued of all my wonted wanton toys, and polished with so many white hears,
clad with so many sorrows: either I think now I was not then, or else I dream
now, not knowing the way I straye in, nor seeing that stony way ready to
stumble in. Unwittingly I have fallen into ye stairs, not foreseing the
wherilpole: guidles I entered, in the rashenes of my youth I lost me: for the
which I ask pardon. And now that I am out of ye briers, thou would have me
further in then ever I was. Now that I can not take the purgations, thou
offerest to me the siroppes. I have waked all night, and now thou geuest me a
fresh alarm. By our ancient friendship I pray thee, and by the gods I conjure
thee: that since my heart is rebel to thy will, that thy doubtful will do
suffer, and let alone, my will out of doubt. And because thou should not
think any ingratitude in my white heeres as I may in thy young wanton person,
I will that we account that we have gotten, and that we hope to get. Tell me
what comes of these vain pleasures? the time evil spent, the fame in way of
perdition, the goods consumed, the credit lost, the gods offends, the
virtues sclaundered: from whence we get the names of brute beasts, and sir
names of shame. Such be ye, and others. Thou writest in thy letter how thou
would willingly leave Rome, and come to see me in the wars of Dacia.
Considering thy folly I laugh, but knowing thy boldness I believe thee. And when
I think on this, I turn to my bosom, and peruse thy seal: doubting whether
the letter were thine or not. The veins of my heart do change, my color does
turn, imagening that either shame has utterly forsaken thee, or else gravity
has wholly abandoned me: for such lightness should not be believed, but of the
like persons. Thou know well he that does evil, deserves punishment sooner,
then he that does infamy. I would ask the whether thou will go? thou
suffredest to be cut as sower grape, and now thou would be sold for good
wine? thou came in with cheries, and yet would remain as quinces. We have
eaten the in blossoms, and thou will be like the fruit? the nuttes be
pleasant, but the shelles be hard. By dong thou were made ripe in thy youth,
and thou wenest to be in still. Thou art naught else but rotten. And if thou be
rotten, you art to be abhorred. Thou art not content with.xl. years which you
have, whereof xxv. thou did pass in taste, like to swear wine that is sold,
or like the melo^s that be ripe and melow. Art not thou that Boemia which
lacks two teethe before? are not thine eyes sonken into thy head? thy hears
whiter, thy fleashe wryncled, and thy hand perished with the gout, and one
ribbee marred with child bearing? Whether do thou desire to go? put thy
self then in a barel, and cast it into the river, so shall thou become pure
and white. We have eaten the fresh fish, and now thou would bring hither the
stinking salt fish. O Boemia, Boemia, in this case I see no trust in youth,
nor hope in age. For under this thy hored age there is hid, the panges of
frail youth. Thou co^plainest that thou have nothing, it is an old quarrel of
the ancient amorous ladies in Rome that taking all things, they say they have
left them nothing. The cause thereof is, where you do lack credit, there ye
would have it accomplished with money. Believe me loving friend, the folish
estate of unlawful gaming both gives an unsure state, and also an evil fame
to the person. I know not how thou art so wastful, for if I pulled of my
ringes with ye one hand, thou pickedst my purse with the other: greater wars
had thou then with my coffers, then I have now with my enemies. I never had
jewel, but thou demaundedst of me, and thou never askedst me thing that I
denied thee. I find and bewail now in my age, the high parts of my youth. Of
travel and poverty thou complainest. I am he that has great need of the
medicine for this opilation, and plasters for the son, and cold water for
such a burning fever. Do thou not well remember, how I did banish my
necessity into the land of forgetfulness, and placed thy good will, for the
request of my service? in the winter I went naked, and in the summer loded with
clothes. In the mire I went on foot, and rode in a fair way. When I was sad I
laughed, when I was glad I wept. Being afraid, I drew out my strength, and out
of strength cowardnes. The night with sighs, and days in wayling I consumed.
When thou hadest need of any thing, I robbed my father for it. Tell me Boemia,
with whom did thou fulfill thine open follies, but with the misorders that I
did in secret? wot ye what I think of the amorous ladies in Rome? that ye be
mootes in old garments, a pastime for light persons, a treasure of fools,
and the sepulcres of vices. This that seems to me is, that in thy youth every
man gave to thee, for that thou should give to every one: now thou geuest
thy self to every man, because every one should give them to thee. Thou
tellest me yt you have two sons, and lackest help for the^. Give thanks to
ye gods for ye mercy they have showed thee. To.xv. children of Fabritius my
neighbor, they gave but one father: and to thine only two sons, they have
given.xv. fathers. Wherefore divide them to their fathers, and every one shall be
well provided. Lucia thy daughter in deed, and mine by suspect, remember that I
have done more in marieng of her, then thou did, bringing her forth. For in
the getting of her, thou call many: but to mary her, I did it alone. Very
little I write to the, in respect of that I would write. Butrio Cornely has
spoken much to me on thy behalf, and he shall say as much to the in my part. It
is long ago sith I knew thy impacience, I know well thou will send me another
more malicious. I pray the, sense I write to the in secret, discover me not
openly: and when thou read this, remember what occasion thou have given me
to write thus. Although we be fallen out, yet I will send the money. I send
the a gown, and the gods be with thee Boemia, and send me from this war with
peace.

Mark pretour in Daci, to Boemia his lover and ancient friend in Rome.

The answer of Boemia to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Wherein is expressed
the great malice, and little patience of an evil woman. Cap. xii.
BOemia thine ancient lover, to thee Mark of mount Celio her natural enemy,
desires vengeance of thy person: and evil fortune during thy life. I have
received thy letter: and thereby perceive thy spiteful inte^tes, and thy cruel
malices. Such naughty persons as you art, have this privilege: yt since one does
suffer your villainies in secret, you will hurt the^ openly: but you shall not do
so with me Mark. Although I am not treasoresse of thy good: yet at ye least I am
of thy naughtines. Al yt I cannot revenge with my person: I will not spare to do
it with my tongue. And though we women for weakness sake, ar easily ouercom in
person: yet know you that our hearts are invincible. Thou say, escaping
from a battle, thou receiuedst my letter: whereof thou wast sore agaste.

It is a common thing to them that be slothful to speak of love, for fools
to treat of books, and for cowards to blase of arms. I say it, because the
answer of a letter was not nedeful, to rehearse to a woman whether it was
before the battle, or after. I think well thou have escaped it, for thou were
not the first that fought, nor the last that fled. I never saw yt go to the
war in thy youth, that ever I was fearful of thy life: for knowing thy
cowardlines, I never took care for thy absence, I always judged thy person
safe. The^ tell me Mark, what do thou now in thy age, I think thou carieste
thy lance, not to serve thy turn in thy war: but to lean on, when the gout
takes the, Thy head piece I judge, thou have not to defend the from stroks of
swords: but to drink withal in tauernes. I never saw the strike any man with
thy sword: but I have seen the kill a thousand women with thy tongue. O
malicious Mark, if thou were as valiaunte, as thou art spiteful: thou
should be no less feared among the barbarous nations, then thou art
abhorred (with good reason) amongst the Romans. Tell me what thou list, but
thou can not deny? but both thou have been, and art a slack lover, a
cowardly knight, an unknown friend, auaricious, infamed, an ennemy to all men:
and friend to none. Moreover we yt knew the a light young man, condemn the now
for an old doting fool. Thou say, yt taking my letter into thy hands,
forthwith thy heart received the herb of malice. I believe the well unsworn:
for any thing touching malice, does straight find harber in thy breast. The
beasts corrupted do take poison, which the sound, and of good complexion,
refuses. Of one thing I am sure, thou shall not die of poison. For seldom
times one poison hurts another: but it drives out the other. O malicious
Mark: if al they in Rome knew the, as well as the unhappy Boemia does: they
should se how much the words that thou speak, differ from the intencion of
thy heart. And as by the books thou make, thou meritest ye name of a
philosopher: even so for the ilnes thou inuentest, thou do deserve the name
of a tiraunt. Thou say, thou saw never constancy in a woman's love, nor end
in her hate. I joy not a little, that other ladies in Rome as well as I, do know
thy small wisdom. Behold Mark, I will not mock the: For thou art such a one,
as never deserved that one should begin to love, nor end to hate Will thou have
stabilite in love, and thou unthankful of thy service? will thou serve in
mockery, and be beloved faithfully? will thou enjoy the parson, without
spending any of the goods? will thou have no complaints on the, and thou
ceasest not thy malice? Thou know the il of women: I will thou know that we
be not so folishe as ye wene us: nor thou so wise as thou praisest thy self to
be. Hitherto we have seen mo men follow the desire of women, then women have
liked to follow men. I have seen a thousand times, yea and thou thy self, that
one man has not so mighty a heart, as to overcome three wise women: and one
woman holds her self strong enough, to subdue.iii. C. light persons. Thou
say thou art ashamed of my lightness, to se me forsake Rome, and come to the
into the wars. Great is the love of the country, and many leave much goods
which they have in strange lands, to live poorly in their own: but greater
is thy love, since I would leave Rome with the delites therein, and come to seek
the in straung lands among the rude soldiers. O malicious Mark, O strange
friend. If I leave Rome, it were to go seek my heart, which is with thee in
the wars. And certainly oftentimes when I think, of thy absence, I fall into
a swoune, as one that had no heart: but I never find remedy. I think our
love is not like to these beasts, which have their minds only upon sensual
pleasures, without the co^ioyning of the loving hearts. I swear to the by the
goddess Vestal, and the mother Berecinthia: that thou owe more to me for the
love I have borne to thee in one day, then for the service I have done to thee
in.xxii. years. Behold unhappy Mark, how much and dearly I loved thee. In thy
presence I always beheld thee, and absent I always thought of thee: sleping
I dreamed on thee, I have wept for thy sorrows, and laughed at thy pleasures:
and finally al my wealth I wished thee, and al thy misfortunes I took as mine.
I ensure thee of one thing: that I feel not so much the persecution thou have
done to me, as I do the wayling forgetfulness thou show to me. It is a great
grief to a covetous man to lose his goods: but without comparison it is a
greater torment for the lover, to see his love evil bestowed. It is a hurt
that is always sore, and a pain always paynefull, a sorrow always sorrowful,
and it is a death that never ends. O if men knew how dearly and faithfully
women do love, when they are bent to love: and with what malicious heart they
hate, being set to hate: I swear to you, ye would never company with them in
love: or if ye did love them, ye would never leave for fear of their hate. And
as there is never great hate, but where there was first much love: even so thou
shall never be greatly hated, for that thou were never truly beloved of the
ladies. The sorrowful Boeme has loved thee xxii. years of her life: and now
she only hates thee till after her death.

Thou say I may be eaten for veriuyce: and yet would be sold for wine. I
know I have erred, as one both young and light: and when I found me to straye
out of the way I was to far gone, and my mishappe could no other way, nor
remedy. It is a great loss of all losses when there is no remedy. I have
offended as a weak and frail woman, but thou as a man strong. I erred by
simple ignorance, but thou of a purposed and wilful malice. I sinned not,
knowing that I did amiss: but thou knew what thou did. I did credit
thy words as a faithful knighte: and thou betraidest me with a.1000. lies, as
a common lier. Tell me, did not thou seek occasion to come into my mothers
house Getulia, to entise me her daughter Boemia to thy mind? did not thou
promise my father, to teach me to read in one year: and read me Ouide of
the act of love? did not thou swear to mary me, and after withdrewe thy
hand as a false adulterer? do thou not know that thou never foundest in my
person any vyllany, nor in thy mouth any truth? At the least thou can not
deny, but thou have offended the gods, thou art defamed amongst me^, odious to
the Romans, a sclaunderer of the good folks, an example to the ill, and
finally a traitor to my father, a breaker of thy faith to my mother, and to me
the unhappy Boemia an unkind lover. O malicious Mark, have thou not cut me in
leaves, offering to my father to keep his vines safe? Evil may the chicken
trust the Kyte, or the Lambs the Wolf, or the Doves the Faucon, but thou
art worse to bring up the daughters of good men. O cursed Mark, a hurtful
keaper of vines has the Matrone of Rome found thee, in keapyng their
daughters. I swear, that there was neither grape nor cluster, but it was
either eaten, or gathered by the. Thou did eat me grene, for the which I
promise the it has set thy teeth on edge. Thou say I was riped by power of
heat and straw. It greueth me not so much that thou say it, as that thou
geuest me occasion to say to the, thy shame is so shameless, and thy evil so
malicious, yt I cannot make answer to thy purpose, unless I rub the on the
quycke. I ask the when thou mariedst Faustine: whether thou foundest them
grene or ripe? thou know well, and so do I also, that other gaged the vessel,
and thou drankest the lyees: other had the meat, and thou the husks: other
did eat them being grene, and with the refuge set thy teath on edge. O cursed
Mark: behold how great thy euels are, and how the gods have justly punished
the, that being young, thou could not deserve to be beloved of thy lovers,
nor yet now in thy age, thy wife keep her faith to the. For me to be revenged
of thy parson, I need no more but to se the married to Faustine. By the mother
Berecinthia I promise the, that if thy small wisdom might attain to know at
the full, what they say of the, and her in Rome: thou would weep both day and
night for the life of Faustine, and not leave the woeful Boemia. O Mark, little
care is taken for the, and how far is our understanding uncoupled from thy
thoughts. For through thy great learning, thy house in the day time is a
schole of philosophers, and the wantonness of thy wife Faustine in the night
makes it a receite of ruffians. It is a just judgment of the gods, since
that thy malice only suffices to poison many that be good, the euilnes only
of one woman, shall be enough to spoil, and take away thy good renowm. One
difference there is between the and me, and thy Faustine, which is, that my
facts are in suspect, and yours done in deed, mine be in secret, but yours
known openly. I have but stombled, but you have fallen. For one only fault I
deserve punishment: but you deserve pardon for none. My dishonor dyed with my
fact, and is buried with my amendme^t: but your infamy is borne with your
desires, nourished with your malices, and still with your works. Finally your
infamy shall never dye, for you lived never well. O Mark malicious, with all that
thou know, do not thou know yt to dye well, does cover an evil fame, and
to make an end of an evil life, does begin a good fame? Thou ceasest not to say
evil only of suspect, which thy false judgments gives: and yet would thou
we should conceal that, we se with our eyes? Of one thing I am sure, that
neither of the, nor of Faustine there are has been any false witness. For there
are so many true euilles, yt there neadeth no lies to be invented. Thou say
it is an old custom, with the amorous ladies in Rome, though they take of
many, yet they are the porest of al: because we want credit, we are honored
for silver. It is most certain, yt of holly we look for pricks, of acorns
husks, of nettels stinginge, and of thy mouth malices. I have seriously noted:
I never heard ye say well of any, nor I never knew any that would the good. What
greater punishment can I desire for thy wickedness, nor more vengeance for my
injuries, then to se all the amorous ladies of Rome discontented with thy life,
and joy to think on thy death, cursed is the man whose life many do bewail,
and in whose death every one does rejoice. It is the property of such
unthankful wretches as thou art, to forget the great good done to them, and to
repent yt little they give. How much the noble hearts do rejoice in giving to
other: so much they are ashamed to take service unrewarded. For in giving they
are lords, and in taking they become sclaues. I ask what it is thou have given
me, or what you have received of me? I have adventured my good fame, and given
thee possession of my person: I have made thee lord of me and mine: I banished
me from my country, I have put in peril my life. In recompense of this, thou
do detect me of misery. Thou never gave me ought with thy heart, nor I took
it with good will, nor it ever did me profit. As all things recover a name,
not for the work we openly see: but for the secret intention with which we
work. Even so thou unhappy man desire me, not to enjoy my parsonne, but
rather to have my money. We ought not to call thee a clear lover, but rather a
thief, and a wily person. I had a little ring of thine, I mind to throw it
into the river: and a gown thou gave me, which I have burnt. And if I
thought my body were increased with ye bread I did eat of thine, I would cut
my flesh being whole, and let out my blood without fear. O malicious Mark,
thy obscured malice will not suffer thee to understand my clear letter. For I
sent not to thee to ask money, to relieve my poverty and solitarines: but
only to acknowledge and satisfy my willing heart. Such vain and covetous men
as thou, are contented with gifts, but the hearts incarnate in love, are not
satisfied with a little money. For love is rewarded always with love. The man
that loves not as a man of reason, but like a brute beast, and the woman that
loves not where she is beloved, but only for the gain of her body: such
ought not to be credited in words, nor their persons to be honored. For the
love of her ends when goods fails: and his love when her beauty decaieth.
If the beauty of my face did procure thy love, and they riches only allured my
good will: it is right, that we should not be called wise lovers, but rather
folishe persons. O cursed Mark, I never loved thee for thy goods, although
thou likedst me for that I was fair. Then I loved with my heart, and now I
abhor thee with all my heart. Thou say the gods used great pity on me, to
give me few children, and them many fathers. The greatest fault in women is
shameless, and the greatest villainy in men is to be evil sayers. Diverse things
ought to be borne in the weakness of women, which in the wisdom of men are
not permitted. I say this, for that I never saw in the te^perance to cloak
thine own maliciousnes, nor wisdom to shadow the debilitie of others. Thou
say my children have many fathers: but I swear to thee, that the children
of Faustine shall not be fatherles, although you die. And if the gods as thou
say have been pitiful to my children, no less art thou to strange
children. For Faustine keeps the but to excuse her faults, and to be tutor to
her children. O cursed Mark, thou nedest not take thought, for thy children
have no need to be married. For one thing we are bound to thee, that is: the
example of thy patience, for since thou suffrest Faustine in so many open
infamies, it is no great need we suffer any secrets in thee. For this present
I say no more, I end my letter, desiring to se shortly the end of thy life.

Marcus Aurelius writes to the lady Macrine the Roman, of whom (beholding
her at the wyndowe) he became enamoured. Which declares what force the beauty
of a fair woman has in a weak man. Cap. xiii.
Mark the very desirous, to the lady Macrine greatly desired. I know not
whether by my evil adventure, or by hap of my good adventure: not long ago I
saw the at a window, where thou had thy arms as close, as I my eyes
displayed, that cursed be they for ever: for in beholding thy face, forthwith my
heart abode with the as prisoner. The beginning of thy knowledge, is the end of
my reason, and falling in: shonnyng one evil, come infinite trauayles to men. I
say it for this, if I had not been ydel, I had not gone out of my house: and
not gone out of my house, I had not passed by the streat. And not going through
the streate, I had not seen yt at the window: and not seeing the at the window,
I had not desired thy person. And not desiringe thy person, I had not put thy
fame in so great peril, nor my life in doubt: nor we had given no occasion to
Rome to speak of us. For of troth lady Macrine, in this case I condemn my
self. For willyngly I did behold the. I did not salute the, although thou
desiredst to be seen. Since thou were set up as a white, it is no merueile
though I shot with the arrows of my eyes, at the but of thy beauty, with
rollyng eyes, with brows bent, well colored face, incarnate teth, ruddy lips,
courled here, hands set with ringes, clothed with a thousand manner of
colors, having purses full of sweet sauoures, the bracelettes and earinges
full of pearls and stones. Tell me what this means? The most that I can think
of this is, since you show us your bodies openly, ye would we should know your
desires in secret. And if it be so, as I believe it is, it seems to me lady
Macrine, thou oughteste to love him that lyketh the, to enfourme him that
seeks the, to answer him that calls the, to feale him that fealeth the,
and to understand him that understands the: and since thou understand me, I
do understand the, and understand that thou know not. I do well remember as I
went by the streat solitarily to se ii. thieves put to death, my eyes saw the at
a window: on whom depends al my desires. More justice thou do to me, then I
to the theaues: for I being at justice, thou have iusticed the justice, and
none dare pain the. The gallows is not so cruel to them, which never knew but
doing evil: as thou art to me, which never thought other but to serve the. They
suffer but one death, but thou make me suffer a thousand. They in one day
and one hour end their lives, and I each minute do feel the pa^ges of death.
They died gilty, but I innocently. They die openly, and I in secret. What will thou I say more to thee, they wept for that they died, and I weep tears of
blood from my heart for that I live. This is the difference, their torments
spreads abrod through al their body, and I keep mine together in my heart. O
cruel Macrine, I know not what justice this is, yt they kill men for robbing and
stealing of money, and suffer women to live, which steal men's hearts. If they
take the lives from them yt pick purses, why then do they suffer ladies which
rob our entrails? By thy noblenes I pray the, and by the goddess Venus I
conjure the, either satisfye my desire, or restore to me my heart which thou
have robbed from me. I would thou knew lady Macrine, ye clear intencion of my
heart, rather then this letter written with my hand. If my hap were so good, as
thy love would permit me to speak with the, I would hope by sight and speech to
win that, which I am in suspect by my letter to lose. The reason whereof is,
because thou shall read my rude reasons in this leter, and if you saw me,
thou should se ye bitter tears which I would offer to thee, in this my
unhappy life. O yt my mouth could publishe my cruel peines, as my heart fealeth
the^. I swear to thee lady Macrine, yt my woeful plaintes would stir up thy
small care, and as thy beauty has made thee thine own, so the knowledge of my
grief should make the mine. I desire thou would regard the beginning and
therewith note the end.

For of truth, the same day that thou imprisonest my heart at the window, in ye
dungeon of my desires, I had no less weakness to overcome, then thou had
strength to enforce me: and greater was thy power to take me from my self,
then my reason was to put me from the. Now lady Macrine, I do not ask other
mercy of the, but that we may declare our minds together. But in this case what
will thou I say unto the? but that thou have so much power over me, and I so
little of my liberty: that though I would not, my heart must needs be thine, and
that being thine, thou will show thy self to be mine. And since it may not be,
but that my life must be condemned in thy service: be thou as sure of my faith,
as I am doubtful of thy good will. For I shall have a greater honor to be lost
for thy sake, the^ to win any other treasure I have no more to say to the
now, but yt thou have respect to my perdicion, and draw life out of my death,
and turn my tears to joy. And because I hold my faith, and will never
despair in thy hope, I send the x. little ringes of gold, with x. ringes of
Alexandria, and by the immortal gods I co^niure the, yt when thou put the^
on thy finger, thou receiuest my love into thy heart.

Marcus thy lover, wrote this with his own hand.

Of an other letter which the emperor sent to the Lady Macrine, wherein he
expresses the fiery flames which consume sonest the gentle hearts. Cap. xiiii.
Mark thy neighbor at Rome, to the Macrine his sweet enemy. I call the sweet
for it is just I die for the: and enemy, because thou ceasest not to kill me. I
cannot tell how it is, but sith the feast of Ianus hitherto, I have written three
letters unto the, in the answer whereof I would have been contented to have
received but ii. from the. If I wuld serve the, thou will not be served: if I
speak to the, thou will not answer me. If I behold the, thou will not look
at me: if I call the, thou will not answer me. If I visit ye, thou will not se
me: if I write to the, thou will make no answer. And ye worst of al is, if
others do show the of my grefes, thou take it as a mockery. O yt I had so
much knowledge where to complain to the, as thou have power to cease my plaint:
then my wisdom should be no less praised among the wise, then thy beauty
amongst the foles. I beseech the heartily not to have respect to the rudenes of
my reasons, but regard ye faith of my tears, which I offer to yt as a witness
of my will. I know not what profit may come by my harm, nor what gain of my
loss thou may hope to have, nor what surety of my peril thou may attain,
nor what pleasure of my pain thou maiste have. I had answer by my messenger,
that without reading my letters, with thy own hands thou did rent them in
pieces, it ought to suffice to think how many parsons is tormented. If it had
pleased you lady Macrine to have red those few lines, you should have perceived
how I am inwardly tormented Ye women be very extreme, and for the misaduenture
of one man, a woman will complain of al me^ in general, So ye al show cruelty
for one particular cause, openly ye pardon all men's lives, and secretly ye
procure death to al. I account it nothing lady Macrine that thou haste done,
but I lament yt which thou causest thy neighbor Valerius to say to me. One
thing I would thou sholdest remember, and not forget, that is. Since my liberty
is so small and thy power so great, that being wholly mine, am turned to be
thine: the more injury thou do to me, the more thou hurtest thy self, since
by the I die, as thou by me do live. In this peruers opinion abide not, so
may thou hasarde the life of us both. Thou hurtest thy good name, and
destroyest my health, in the end thou must come to the same physic. Pardone
me lady Macrine, if I say ought that may offend thee. I know ye women desire
one thing greatly, that is, to have soueraintie of us, and yet not seame so
much as by thought to wyshe the same. Thou had the same of a gentle nature,
though in deed thou were not so: yet thou had the same thereof, and an
ancient good name ought not to be lost with a new unkindness. Thou know
how contrary ingratitude is, to virtue in a virtuous house. Thou can not be
called virtuous, but if thou be courteous. There is no greater ingratitude, then
not to love again. Though I visit the, and thou not me, it is nothing: though
I remember thee, and thou forgettest me, it is nothing: though I weep, and thou
laugh, it is nothing: though I crave of thee, and thou deny me, it is nothing:
though thou owe me, and pay me not, it is nothing. But if I love thee, and
thou not me, this is a great thing: which the eyes can neither dissimule, nor
the heart suffer. All the vices in mortal men are to be pardoned, because they
offend naturally: save only this discourtesy in women, and ungentleness in
me^, which are counted of malice. Diverse services by me done to thee, and all
the good wills I have heretofore borne to thee, thou only lady Macrine with
one thing reward me. I pray thee be not slack to help me, for I was not so
to offer me into peril. If thou say that Patroclus thy husband has the
property in thee, at the least yet receive me upon proof, and I will pretend
a possession of thee: and in this wise the vain glory in being thine, shall
hyde the hurt being mine. thou make me maruayle not a little, that for so
small a reward, thou will suffer so great an importunity. For certainly we
grant many things to an importunate man, which we deny to a temperate man.
If thou lady Macrine hopest to overcome me: behold I yield me as vanquished.
If thou will lose me, I hold me lost: if thou wylt kill me, I hold me dead.

For by the gestures which I make before thy gate, and the secreate sighs
which I fetch in my house, thou may know how greatly I mind to rest:
but thy brave assaults, are rather buyldinges to nouryshe death, then to
comfort the life. If thou wylt I escape this danger, deny me not remedy. For
it shall be a greater dishonor for to slay me, then shame to save me. It is no
just thing for so small again, to lose so faithful a friend. I wot not how
to make thee my detter, nor how to make thee pay me, and the worste of all
is, I know not what to say, nor how to determine. For I was not borne to
mine own wealth, but to be faithful in thy services. And sithe thou know
whom thou haste trusted with thy message, the same I do trust with this open
letter, and my answer in secret. I do send to thee a jewel of pearl, and
a piece of gold, I pray the gods make thee receive them as willingly, as I do
freely send them.

Mark Orator to the inexorable Macrine.

Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to the beautiful lady
Liuia, wherein he proves that love is natural, and that the most part of
the philosophers and wise men, have been by love overcome. Cap. xv.
Mark full of sorrow, to thee careless Lyuia. If thy little care did lodge in
me, and my sorrows were harbored in thee, thou should then see how little
the quarrel is that I make to thee, in respect to the torment I suffer. If the
flambes issued out, as the fire does burn me within, the heavens should
perish with smoke, and the earth should make imbers. If thou do well
remember, the first time I saw thee in the temple of the virgin Vestals, thou
being there did always pray to the gods for thy self, and I upon my
knees prayed to thee for me. Thou know, and so do I, that thou did
offer oil and honey to the gods, but I did offer to thee tears and sighs.
It is just thou give more to him that offered his heart, then to him which
draws money out of his purse. I have determined to write to thee this letter,
whereby thou majesty perceive how thou art served with the arrows of my
eyes, which were shot at the white of thy service, O unhappy that I am, I
fear least this present calm, does threaten me with a tempest to come. I will
say, that discourtesy in thee, causes doubtful hope in me. Behold my
misaduenture, I had lost a letter, and tourning to the temple to seek it, I
found the letter which was of some importance: and had almost lost my
self, which is the greatest thing. Considering my small reward, I see my
eyes (the ladders of my hope) set on so high a wall, that no less certain is
my fall, then my climming was doubtful. Thou bending down thy harnes of thy
high deserts, and putting me to the point of continual service, suffrest me
to enjoy the fruit, and give to whom thou will the leaves. By the immortal
gods I swear, that I marvel not a little, for I thought that in the temple of
the virgin Vestalles no temptation could have come to man. But now by
experience I find, that that woman is easelier overcome, which is most
watched: then the other that has honest liberty. All bodily diseases be first
had or they be known, and known or they be seen, and seen or they be felt,
and felt or they be tasted: and so in all things except this darte of love
whom they first feale the stroke thereof, before they know the way how it
comes. The lightning comes not so sudden, but it is known before by the
thonder. The wall falls not sodeinly, but first some stones fall down. The
cold comes not so fast, but some small shiuering is seen before: only love
is not felt, until he has had power in the entrails. Let them know that are
ignorant, and thou lady Liuia if thou will know. Love sleapeth when we wake,
and waketh when we sleep, laugheth when we weape, and wepeth when we laugh. It
assures in taking, and takes in assuring: it speaks when we be still, and
is still when we speak. And finally it has such a condition, that to give us
our desire, it causes us to live in pain. I swear unto the, when my will
became thy servant, and thy beauty made the my mistres, when I was at the
temple, and there found thee, neither you in thy prayer did mind me, nor I
unhappy man did think on thee. O unhappy heart of mine, that being whole thou
art divided, being in health thou art hurt, being alive thou art killed, being
mine thou art stolen, and the worst of al is, that thou not helping to my life,
consentest that death shall assault me. Considering many times lady Liuia with
my self my thoughts to be high, and my fortunes base, I would have separated
my self from thee: but knowing my travail to be well employed in thy service,
I say though I might, I would not be separated from thee. I will not deny one
thing, that is: the cursed love takes away the taste of al things, and in
those things only it gives us pleasure, which are greatly against our profit.
This is the proof of him that loves heartily, that one frown of her that he
loves, does more grieve him, then all the delights of the rest of his life ca^
please. I deem lady Lyuia, thou art abashed to se me openly as a philopher,
and to know me secretly as a lover. I beseech thee heartily discover me not. For
if the gods grant me long life, I am now a young fool, yet in age I will be
wise. The gods know what I desire, and the force which does enforce me
thereunto. And as the flesh is weak, and the heart tender, the occasions many,
the virtues few, the world deceitful, the people malicious: so I pass this
spring time with flowers, in hope that in harvest I shall have some fruit.
Think thou lady Liuia, that philosophers be they never so wise, are not
touched with the sharp darts of love? and that under their course clothes,
there is not soft flesh and white? Certainly among hard bones, is nourished
soft flesh: and within the pricking husks, grow the chesse nut. I say,
that under simple attire, is the faithful love. I do not deny but our frail
nature does withstand our virtues. Nor I deny not but that the wanton
desires, are repressed with virtuous minds. Nor I deny not but that the
rashenes of youth are restrained with the reins of reason. I deny not but many
times wisdom does withstand that that the flesh procures: and yet I
confess, yt he that is not amorous, is a fool. And do not thou know,
although we be wise, we leave not therefore to be men? do not thou know, all
that ever we learn in our life, suffiseth not to govern the flesh one hour?
do not thou know, that to wise men in this case has fallen many errors?
do not thou know that there has been, and are many masters of virtues: and
much more there are and has been folowers of vices? then why do thou make
such a wonder only of me? I will not say it without a troth, that I never had
my judgment so good and perfect, as when Cupide blewe wind on me with his
wings. There was never man until my time accounted wise, but first he was
entangled with Cupides snares. Gratian was in love with Tamira, Solon
Salaminus, the geuer of the laws, was enamored with one Gretian. Pittacus
Mitelenus left his own wife, and was in love with a bond woman yt he brought
from the war. Cleobulus when he was.lxxx. year old, and had red philosophy
lxv. years, climming up a ladder to scale his neighbors house, fell, and of the
bruise died. Periander prince of Achaia, and chief philosopher of Greece, at the
instaunce of his lovers, slew his own wife. Anacharsis a Philosopher, a
Sithian by his father, and a Greek by the mother side, loved so dearly a
woman of Thebes, that he taught her all that he knew: in so much that he being
sick on his bed, she red for him in the schools Epimenides of Crete, that
slept.xv. years without waking, Although he was agreat worshipper of the Gods,
yet was he bannished Athens.x. years for the loving of women. Architus
Tarentinus, the master of Plato, and scholar of Pithagoras, occupied his mind
more to inue^t new kinds of love, then to employ his mind to virtues and
learning. Gorgias Leontinus, borne in Scycil, had mo co^cubines in his house,
then books in his study. Al these were wise men, and we knew them wise, yet at
thend they were overcome with the flesh. Therefore blame me not alone, for as I
have told thee of these few, so could I of a whole army. For of troth he ought
to have many things, yt will be accounted a curious lover. He must have his eyes
displayed on her that he loves, his understanding much altered in that he
thinks, his tongue troubled in that he should speak: so yt in seeing he be
blind, in thinking dismayed, in speaking troubled. O lady Liuia, the loving in
mockery, passes by mockery: but whereas true love is, there is grefe and no
mockery: there love spitteth his poison, and cruel Cupide fixes his arrows
up to the feathers. The eyes weep, the heart sigheth, the flesh trembles, the
senewes do shrink, the understanding is gross, reason fails, and so al
falls to the earth. Finally the heavy lover abiding in himself, holds
nothing of himself. All this I say, because if I want knowledge to make me a
lover, yet am I sure that the works fail not in me to work thy service. And
though by mishap I saw the, yet by good chance I knew thee. I ask nothing of
thee but that you love me faithfully, since I love the unfeignedly. And if thou
hear that I am sick from my heart, I desire the to do me some good. Since it
is only in the to help me, it is reason thou only do seek for remedy. I was
greatly comforted when Fulius Carlinus desired me in thy behalf to do a
pleasure, which I did incontinent al yt thou desiredst, to the intent that thou
another day should do frankly that I desire thee. And behold lady Liuia,
the woman that is served with services, it is reason within a while she be sued
unto by prayer. And though my strength cannot open the gates of the purpose, or
not agreing to thy demand, yet al my labors slake not to uphold thy renown.
I pray the discover not the one, nor beguile me with the other. For thou see
in granting is remedy, and in hoping is comfort. But promise is deceiuable,
and delayeng is perylous, and the entertaining byndeth. I se well that the hearty
demand, requires a long answer: but I would not thou should do so. But
as I love the, so love me: as I desire of the, so grant thou me. I will say
once again I am all thine, and nothing mine own. And note lady Liuia, that it
is as much honor to thee, as profitable for me, that thou change these thy
desires, and put in order thy disordered will. For thou see it is much
better to heal shortly, then to late, with failing thy purpose. All women
observe one evil opinion, that is: ye never receive council, although it be
given you in never so weighty a case. And if it be not so, then because thou
art esteemed beautiful, be likewise honored for taking of good counsel. In
this sort, though my loss be much, and thy patience little, yet shall they
account me wise in giving counsel, and the most happy to follow it. One thing I
will say to thee, and pardon me therein. Women be much defamed in that they will
take no council, and such as do assure their renown so much on the judgment
of others, as they condemn well doing before. I think good if it so like thee,
and would if thou will, that thou should do in all points as I have
counsayled thee. I will say no more lady Liuia, but that I do present to thee
all my unfortunate troubles, my sighs as a desperate man, my service as thy
servant my troubled griefs, my words of philosophy, and my tears as a
lover. I send thee here a girdle of gold, on condition that thou always fix
thy eyes on that, and thy heart on me. I pray the gods give me to thee, and
thee to me.

Mark the open Philosopher wrote this in great secreate.

FINIS.

